[Congressional Bills 108th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1637 Engrossed in Senate (ES)]

108th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 1637

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to comply with the World 
 Trade Organization rulings on the FSC/ETI benefit in a manner that 
 preserves jobs and production activities in the United States, to 
 reform and simplify the international taxation rules of the United 
 States, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Jumpstart Our 
Business Strength (JOBS) Act''.
 (b) Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly 
provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in 
terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, 
the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (c) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; amendment of 1986 Code; table of contents.
 TITLE I--PROVISIONS RELATING TO REPEAL OF EXCLUSION FOR 
 EXTRATERRITORIAL INCOME

Sec. 101. Repeal of exclusion for extraterritorial income.
Sec. 102. Deduction relating to income attributable to United States 
 production activities.
Sec. 103. Deduction for United States production activities includes 
 income related to certain architectural and 
 engineering services.
 TITLE II--INTERNATIONAL TAX PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--International Tax Reform

Sec. 201. 20-year foreign tax credit carryover; 1-year foreign tax 
 credit carryback.
Sec. 202. Look-thru rules to apply to dividends from noncontrolled 
 section 902 corporations.
Sec. 203. Foreign tax credit under alternative minimum tax.
Sec. 204. Recharacterization of overall domestic loss.
Sec. 205. Interest expense allocation rules.
Sec. 206. Determination of foreign personal holding company income with 
 respect to transactions in commodities.
 Subtitle B--International Tax Simplification

Sec. 211. Repeal of foreign personal holding company rules and foreign 
 investment company rules.
Sec. 212. Expansion of de minimis rule under subpart F.
Sec. 213. Attribution of stock ownership through partnerships to apply 
 in determining section 902 and 960 credits.
Sec. 214. Application of uniform capitalization rules to foreign 
 persons.
Sec. 215. Repeal of withholding tax on dividends from certain foreign 
 corporations.
Sec. 216. Repeal of special capital gains tax on aliens present in the 
 United States for 183 days or more.
 Subtitle C--Additional International Tax Provisions

Sec. 221. Active leasing income from aircraft and vessels.
Sec. 222. Look-thru treatment of payments between related controlled 
 foreign corporations under foreign personal 
 holding company income rules.
Sec. 223. Look-thru treatment for sales of partnership interests.
Sec. 224. Election not to use average exchange rate for foreign tax 
 paid other than in functional currency.
Sec. 225. Treatment of income tax base differences.
Sec. 226. Modification of exceptions under subpart F for active 
 financing.
Sec. 227. United States property not to include certain assets of 
 controlled foreign corporation.
Sec. 228. Provide equal treatment for interest paid by foreign 
 partnerships and foreign corporations.
Sec. 229. Clarification of treatment of certain transfers of intangible 
 property.
Sec. 230. Modification of the treatment of certain REIT distributions 
 attributable to gain from sales or 
 exchanges of United States real property 
 interests.
Sec. 231. Toll tax on excess qualified foreign distribution amount.
Sec. 232. Exclusion of income derived from certain wagers on horse 
 races and dog races from gross income of 
 nonresident alien individuals.
Sec. 233. Limitation of withholding tax for Puerto Rico corporations.
Sec. 234. Report on WTO dispute settlement panels and the appellate 
 body.
Sec. 235. Study of impact of international tax laws on taxpayers other 
 than large corporations.
Sec. 236. Delay in effective date of final regulations governing 
 exclusion of income from international 
 operation of ships or aircraft.
Sec. 237. Interest payments deductible where disqualified guarantee has 
 no economic effect.
 TITLE III--DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING AND BUSINESS PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

Sec. 301. Expansion of qualified small-issue bond program.
Sec. 302. Expensing of broadband Internet access expenditures.
Sec. 303. Exemption of natural aging process in determination of 
 production period for distilled spirits 
 under section 263A.
Sec. 304. Modification of active business definition under section 355.
Sec. 305. Modified taxation of imported archery products.
Sec. 306. Modification to cooperative marketing rules to include value 
 added processing involving animals.
Sec. 307. Extension of declaratory judgment procedures to farmers' 
 cooperative organizations.
Sec. 308. Temporary suspension of personal holding company tax.
Sec. 309. Increase in section 179 expensing.
Sec. 310. Five-year carryback of net operating losses.
Sec. 311. Extension and modification of research credit.
Sec. 312. Expansion of research credit.
Sec. 313. Manufacturer's jobs credit.
Sec. 314. Brownfields Demonstration Program for qualified green 
 building and sustainable design projects.
 Subtitle B--Manufacturing Relating to Films

Sec. 321. Special rules for certain film and television productions.
Sec. 322. Modification of application of income forecast method of 
 depreciation.
 Subtitle C--Manufacturing Relating to Timber

Sec. 331. Expensing of certain reforestation expenditures.
Sec. 332. Election to treat cutting of timber as a sale or exchange.
Sec. 333. Capital gain treatment under section 631(b) to apply to 
 outright sales by landowners.
Sec. 334. Modification of safe harbor rules for timber REITS.
 TITLE IV--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Provisions Designed To Curtail Tax Shelters

Sec. 401. Clarification of economic substance doctrine.
Sec. 402. Penalty for failing to disclose reportable transaction.
Sec. 403. Accuracy-related penalty for listed transactions and other 
 reportable transactions having a 
 significant tax avoidance purpose.
Sec. 404. Penalty for understatements attributable to transactions 
 lacking economic substance, etc.
Sec. 405. Modifications of substantial understatement penalty for 
 nonreportable transactions.
Sec. 406. Tax shelter exception to confidentiality privileges relating 
 to taxpayer communications.
Sec. 407. Disclosure of reportable transactions.
Sec. 408. Modifications to penalty for failure to register tax 
 shelters.
Sec. 409. Modification of penalty for failure to maintain lists of 
 investors.
Sec. 410. Modification of actions to enjoin certain conduct related to 
 tax shelters and reportable transactions.
Sec. 411. Understatement of taxpayer's liability by income tax return 
 preparer.
Sec. 412. Penalty on failure to report interests in foreign financial 
 accounts.
Sec. 413. Frivolous tax submissions.
Sec. 414. Regulation of individuals practicing before the Department of 
 Treasury.
Sec. 415. Penalty for promoting abusive tax shelters.
Sec. 416. Statute of limitations for taxable years for which required 
 listed transactions not reported.
Sec. 417. Denial of deduction for interest on underpayments 
 attributable to nondisclosed reportable and 
 noneconomic substance transactions.
Sec. 418. Authorization of appropriations for tax law enforcement.
Sec. 419. Penalty for aiding and abetting the understatement of tax 
 liability.
Sec. 420. Study on information sharing among law enforcement agencies.
 Subtitle B--Other Corporate Governance Provisions

Sec. 421. Affirmation of consolidated return regulation authority.
Sec. 422. Declaration by chief executive officer relating to Federal 
 annual income tax return of a corporation.
Sec. 423. Denial of deduction for certain fines, penalties, and other 
 amounts.
Sec. 424. Disallowance of deduction for punitive damages.
Sec. 425. Increase in criminal monetary penalty limitation for the 
 underpayment or overpayment of tax due to 
 fraud.
 Subtitle C--Enron-Related Tax Shelter Provisions

Sec. 431. Limitation on transfer or importation of built-in losses.
Sec. 432. No reduction of basis under section 734 in stock held by 
 partnership in corporate partner.
Sec. 433. Repeal of special rules for FASITs.
Sec. 434. Expanded disallowance of deduction for interest on 
 convertible debt.
Sec. 435. Expanded authority to disallow tax benefits under section 
 269.
Sec. 436. Modification of interaction between subpart F and passive 
 foreign investment company rules.
 Subtitle D--Provisions To Discourage Expatriation

Sec. 441. Tax treatment of inverted corporate entities.
Sec. 442. Imposition of mark-to-market tax on individuals who 
 expatriate.
Sec. 443. Excise tax on stock compensation of insiders of inverted 
 corporations.
Sec. 444. Reinsurance of United States risks in foreign jurisdictions.
Sec. 445. Reporting of taxable mergers and acquisitions.
 Subtitle E--International Tax

Sec. 451. Clarification of banking business for purposes of determining 
 investment of earnings in United States 
 property.
Sec. 452. Prohibition on nonrecognition of gain through complete 
 liquidation of holding company.
Sec. 453. Prevention of mismatching of interest and original issue 
 discount deductions and income inclusions 
 in transactions with related foreign 
 persons.
Sec. 454. Effectively connected income to include certain foreign 
 source income.
Sec. 455. Recapture of overall foreign losses on sale of controlled 
 foreign corporation.
Sec. 456. Minimum holding period for foreign tax credit on withholding 
 taxes on income other than dividends.
 Subtitle F--Other Revenue Provisions

 Part I--Financial Instruments

Sec. 461. Treatment of stripped interests in bond and preferred stock 
 funds, etc.
Sec. 462. Application of earnings stripping rules to partners which are 
 C corporations.
Sec. 463. Recognition of cancellation of indebtedness income realized 
 on satisfaction of debt with partnership 
 interest.
Sec. 464. Modification of straddle rules.
Sec. 465. Denial of installment sale treatment for all readily 
 tradeable debt.
 Part II--Corporations and Partnerships

Sec. 466. Modification of treatment of transfers to creditors in 
 divisive reorganizations.
Sec. 467. Clarification of definition of nonqualified preferred stock.
Sec. 468. Modification of definition of controlled group of 
 corporations.
Sec. 469. Mandatory basis adjustments in connection with partnership 
 distributions and transfers of partnership 
 interests.
 Part III--Depreciation and Amortization

Sec. 471. Extension of amortization of intangibles to sports 
 franchises.
Sec. 472. Class lives for utility grading costs.
Sec. 473. Expansion of limitation on depreciation of certain passenger 
 automobiles.
Sec. 474. Consistent amortization of periods for intangibles.
Sec. 475. Reform of tax treatment of leasing operations.
Sec. 476. Limitation on deductions allocable to property used by 
 governments or other tax-exempt entities.
 Part IV--Administrative Provisions

Sec. 481. Clarification of rules for payment of estimated tax for 
 certain deemed asset sales.
Sec. 482. Extension of IRS user fees.
Sec. 483. Doubling of certain penalties, fines, and interest on 
 underpayments related to certain offshore 
 financial arrangement.
Sec. 484. Partial payment of tax liability in installment agreements.
Sec. 485. Extension of customs user fees.
Sec. 486. Deposits made to suspend running of interest on potential 
 underpayments.
Sec. 487. Qualified tax collection contracts.
Sec. 488. Whistleblower reforms.
Sec. 489. Protection of overtime pay.
Sec. 490. Protection of overtime pay.
 Part V--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 491. Addition of vaccines against hepatitis A to list of taxable 
 vaccines.
Sec. 492. Recognition of gain from the sale of a principal residence 
 acquired in a like-kind exchange within 5 
 years of sale.
Sec. 493. Modification of exemption from tax for small property and 
 casualty insurance companies.
Sec. 494. Treatment of charitable contributions of patents and similar 
 property.
Sec. 495. Increase in age of minor children whose unearned income is 
 taxed as if parent's income.
Sec. 496. Holding period for preferred stock.
Sec. 497. Substantial presence test required to determine bona fide 
 residence in United States possessions.
 TITLE V--PROTECTION OF UNITED STATES WORKERS FROM COMPETITION OF 
 FOREIGN WORKFORCES

Sec. 501. Limitations on off-shore performance of contracts.
Sec. 502. Repeal of superseded law.
Sec. 503. Effective date and applicability.
 TITLE VI--OTHER PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Provisions Relating to Housing

Sec. 601. Treatment of qualified mortgage bonds.
Sec. 602. Premiums for mortgage insurance.
Sec. 603. Increase in historic rehabilitation credit for certain low-
 income housing for the elderly.
 Subtitle B--Provisions Relating to Bonds

Sec. 611. Expansion of New York Liberty Zone tax benefits.
Sec. 612. Modifications of treatment of qualified zone academy bonds.
Sec. 613. Modifications of authority of Indian tribal governments to 
 issue tax-exempt bonds.
Sec. 614. Definition of manufacturing facility for small issue bonds.
Sec. 615. Conservation bonds.
Sec. 616. Indian school construction.
 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Depreciation

Sec. 621. Special placed in service rule for bonus depreciation 
 property.
Sec. 622. Modification of depreciation allowance for aircraft.
Sec. 623. Modification of class life for certain track facilities.
Sec. 624. Minimum tax relief for certain taxpayers.
 Subtitle D--Expansion of Business Credit

Sec. 631. New markets tax credit for Native American reservations.
Sec. 632. Ready Reserve-National Guard employee credit and Ready 
 Reserve-National Guard replacement employee 
 credit.
Sec. 633. Rural investment tax credit.
Sec. 634. Qualified rural small business investment credit.
Sec. 635. Credit for maintenance of railroad track.
Sec. 636. Railroad revitalization and security investment credit.
Sec. 637. Modification of targeted areas designated for new markets tax 
 credit.
Sec. 638. Modification of income requirement for census tracts within 
 high migration rural counties.
Sec. 639. Credit for investment in technology to make motion pictures 
 more accessible to the deaf and hard of 
 hearing.
 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 641. Exclusion of gain or loss on sale or exchange of certain 
 brownfield sites from unrelated business 
 taxable income.
Sec. 642. Modification of unrelated business income limitation on 
 investment in certain debt-financed 
 properties.
Sec. 643. Civil rights tax relief.
Sec. 644. Exclusion for payments to individuals under National Health 
 Service Corps loan repayment program and 
 certain State loan repayment programs.
Sec. 645. Certain expenses of rural letter carriers.
Sec. 646. Method of accounting for naval shipbuilders.
Sec. 647. Suspension of policyholders surplus account provisions.
Sec. 648. Payment of dividends on stock of cooperatives without 
 reducing patronage dividends.
Sec. 649. Special rules for livestock sold on account of weather-
 related conditions.
Sec. 650. Motor vehicle dealer transitional assistance.
Sec. 651. Expansion of designated renewal community area based on 2000 
 census data.
Sec. 652. Reduction of holding period to 12 months for purposes of 
 determining whether horses are section 1231 
 assets.
Sec. 653. Blue Ribbon Commission on Comprehensive Tax Reform.
Sec. 654. Treatment of distributions by ESOPs with respect to S 
 corporation stock.
Sec. 655. Clarification of working capital for reasonably anticipated 
 needs of a business for purposes of 
 accumulated earnings tax.
Sec. 656. Tax treatment of State ownership of railroad real estate 
 investment trust.
Sec. 657. Clarification of contribution in aid of construction for 
 water and sewerage disposal utilities.
Sec. 658. Credit for purchase and installation of agricultural water 
 conservation systems.
Sec. 659. Modification of involuntary conversion rules for businesses 
 affected by the September 11th terrorist 
 attacks.
Sec. 660. Repeal of application of below-market loan rules to amounts 
 paid to certain continuing care facilities.
Sec. 661. Gold, silver, platinum, and palladium treated in the same 
 manner as stocks and bonds for maximum 
 capital gains rate for individuals.
Sec. 662. Inclusion of primary and secondary medical strategies for 
 children and adults with sickle cell 
 disease as medical assistance under the 
 Medicaid program.
 Subtitle F--Revenue Provisions

 Part I--General Revenue Provisions

Sec. 661A. Treasury regulations on foreign tax credit.
Sec. 662B. Freeze of provisions regarding suspension of interest where 
 Secretary fails to contact taxpayer.
 Part II--Pension and Deferred Compensation

Sec. 671. Treatment of nonqualified deferred compensation plans.
Sec. 672. Prohibition on deferral of gain from the exercise of stock 
 options and restricted stock gains through 
 deferred compensation arrangements.
Sec. 673. Increase in withholding from supplemental wage payments in 
 excess of $1,000,000.
Sec. 674. Treatment of sale of stock acquired pursuant to exercise of 
 stock options to comply with conflict-of-
 interest requirements.
Sec. 675. Application of basis rules to employer and employee 
 contributions on behalf of nonresident 
 aliens.
 TITLE VII--EXTENSIONS OF CERTAIN EXPIRING PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Extensions

Sec. 701. Parity in the application of certain limits to mental health 
 benefits.
Sec. 702. Modifications to work opportunity credit and welfare-to-work 
 credit.
Sec. 703. Consolidation of work opportunity credit with welfare-to-work 
 credit.
Sec. 704. Qualified zone academy bonds.
Sec. 705. Cover over of tax on distilled spirits.
Sec. 706. Deduction for corporate donations of scientific property and 
 computer technology.
Sec. 707. Deduction for certain expenses of school teachers.
Sec. 708. Expensing of environmental remediation costs.
Sec. 709. Expansion of certain New York Liberty Zone benefits.
Sec. 710. Repeal of reduction of deductions for mutual life insurance 
 companies.
Sec. 711. Tax incentives for investment in the District of Columbia.
Sec. 712.Disclosure of tax information to facilitate combined 
 employment tax reporting.
Sec. 713. Allowance of nonrefundable personal credits against regular 
 and minimum tax liability.
Sec. 714. Credit for electricity produced from certain renewable 
 resources.
Sec. 715. Taxable income limit on percentage depletion for oil and 
 natural gas produced from marginal 
 properties.
Sec. 716. Indian employment tax credit.
Sec. 717. Accelerated depreciation for business property on Indian 
 reservation.
Sec. 718. Disclosure of return information relating to student loans.
Sec. 719. Extension of transfers of excess pension assets to retiree 
 health accounts.
Sec. 720. Elimination of phaseout of credit for qualified electric 
 vehicles.
Sec. 721. Elimination of phaseout for deduction for clean-fuel vehicle 
 property.
 Subtitle B--Revenue Provisions

Sec. 731. Donations of motor vehicles, boats, and airplanes. 
Sec. 732. Addition of vaccines against influenza to list of taxable 
 vaccines.
Sec. 733. Treatment of contingent payment convertible debt instruments.
Sec. 734. Modification of continuing levy on payments to Federal 
 venders.
 TITLE VIII--ENERGY TAX INCENTIVES

Sec. 800. Short title.
 Subtitle A--Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit

Sec. 801. Extension and expansion of credit for electricity produced 
 from certain renewable resources.
 Subtitle B--Alternative Motor Vehicles and Fuels Incentives

Sec. 811. Alternative motor vehicle credit.
Sec. 812. Modification of credit for qualified electric vehicles.
Sec. 813. Credit for installation of alternative fueling stations.
Sec. 814. Credit for retail sale of alternative fuels as motor vehicle 
 fuel.
Sec. 815. Small ethanol producer credit.
 Subtitle C--Conservation and Energy Efficiency Provisions

Sec. 821. Credit for construction of new energy efficient home.
Sec. 822. Credit for energy efficient appliances.
Sec. 823. Credit for residential energy efficient property.
Sec. 824. Credit for business installation of qualified fuel cells and 
 stationary microturbine power plants.
Sec. 825. Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction.
Sec. 826. Three-year applicable recovery period for depreciation of 
 qualified energy management devices.
Sec. 827. Three-year applicable recovery period for depreciation of 
 qualified water submetering devices.
Sec. 828. Energy credit for combined heat and power system property.
Sec. 829. Credit for energy efficiency improvements to existing homes.
 Subtitle D--Clean Coal Incentives

 Part I--Credit for Emission Reductions and Efficiency Improvements in 
 Existing Coal-Based Electricity Generation Facilities

Sec. 831. Credit for production from a qualifying clean coal technology 
 unit.
Part II--Incentives for Early Commercial Applications of Advanced Clean 
 Coal Technologies

Sec. 832. Credit for investment in qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology.
Sec. 833. Credit for production from a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit.
 Part III--Treatment of Persons Not Able To Use Entire Credit

Sec. 834. Treatment of persons not able to use entire credit.
 Subtitle E--Oil and Gas Provisions

Sec. 841. Oil and gas from marginal wells.
Sec. 842. Natural gas gathering lines treated as 7-year property.
Sec. 843. Expensing of capital costs incurred in complying with 
 Environmental Protection Agency sulfur 
 regulations.
Sec. 844. Credit for production of low sulfur diesel fuel.
Sec. 845. Determination of small refiner exception to oil depletion 
 deduction.
Sec. 846. Marginal production income limit extension.
Sec. 847. Amortization of delay rental payments.
Sec. 848. Amortization of geological and geophysical expenditures.
Sec. 849. Extension and modification of credit for producing fuel from 
 a nonconventional source.
Sec. 850. Natural gas distribution lines treated as 15-year property.
Sec. 851. Credit for Alaska natural gas.
Sec. 852. Certain Alaska natural gas pipeline property treated as 7-
 year property.
Sec. 853. Extension of enhanced oil recovery credit to certain Alaska 
 facilities.
Sec. 854. Arbitrage rules not to apply to prepayments for natural gas.
 Subtitle F--Electric Utility Restructuring Provisions

Sec. 855. Modifications to special rules for nuclear decommissioning 
 costs.
Sec. 856. Treatment of certain income of cooperatives.
Sec. 857. Sales or dispositions to implement Federal Energy Regulatory 
 Commission or State electric restructuring 
 policy.
 Subtitle G--Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit

Sec. 860. Short title.
Sec. 861. Alcohol and biodiesel excise tax credit and extension of 
 alcohol fuels income tax credit.
Sec. 862. Biodiesel income tax credit.
 Subtitle H--Fuel Fraud Prevention

Sec. 870. Short title.
 Part I--Aviation Jet Fuel

Sec. 871. Taxation of aviation-grade kerosene.
Sec. 872. Transfer of certain amounts from the Airport and Airway Trust 
 Fund to the Highway Trust Fund to reflect 
 highway use of jet fuel.
 Part II--Dyed Fuel

Sec. 873. Dye injection equipment.
Sec. 874. Elimination of administrative review for taxable use of dyed 
 fuel.
Sec. 875. Penalty on untaxed chemically altered dyed fuel mixtures.
Sec. 876. Termination of dyed diesel use by intercity buses.
 Part III--Modification of Inspection of Records Provisions

Sec. 877. Authority to inspect on-site records.
Sec. 878. Assessable penalty for refusal of entry.
 Part IV--Registration and Reporting Requirements

Sec. 879. Registration of pipeline or vessel operators required for 
 exemption of bulk transfers to registered 
 terminals or refineries.
Sec. 880. Display of registration.
Sec. 881. Registration of persons within foreign trade zones.
Sec. 882. Penalties for failure to register and failure to report.
Sec. 883. Information reporting for persons claiming certain tax 
 benefits.
 Part V--Imports

Sec. 884. Tax at point of entry where importer not registered.
Sec. 885. Reconciliation of on-loaded cargo to entered cargo.
 Part VI--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 886. Tax on sale of diesel fuel whether suitable for use or not in 
 a diesel-powered vehicle or train.
Sec. 887. Modification of ultimate vendor refund claims with respect to 
 farming.
Sec. 888. Taxable fuel refunds for certain ultimate vendors.
Sec. 889. Two-party exchanges.
Sec. 890. Modifications of tax on use of certain vehicles.
Sec. 891. Dedication of revenues from certain penalties to the Highway 
 Trust Fund.
Sec. 892. Nonapplication of export exemption to delivery of fuel to 
 motor vehicles removed from United States.
 Part VII--Total Accountability

Sec. 893. Total accountability.
Sec. 894. Excise tax reporting.
Sec. 895. Information reporting.
 Subtitle I--Mobile Machinery

Sec. 896. Treatment of mobile machinery.
 Subtitle J--Additional Provisions

Sec. 897. Study of effectiveness of certain provisions by GAO.
Sec. 898. Repeal of 4.3-cent motor fuel excise taxes on railroads and 
 inland waterway transportation which remain 
 in general fund.
Sec. 899. Distributions from publicly traded partnerships treated as 
 qualifying income of regulated investment 
 companies.
Sec. 899A. Certain business related credits allowed against regular and 
 minimum tax.
Sec. 899B. Credit for qualifying pollution control equipment.
Sec. 899C. Electric transmission property treated as 15-year property.
 TITLE IX--HOMESTEAD PRESERVATION ACT

Sec. 901. Short Title.
Sec. 902. Mortgage payment assistance.
 TITLE X--OFFICE OF FEDERAL PROCUREMENT POLICY ACT IMPROVEMENTS

Sec. 1001. Report on acquisitions of goods from foreign sources.

 TITLE I--PROVISIONS RELATING TO REPEAL OF EXCLUSION FOR 
 EXTRATERRITORIAL INCOME

SEC. 101. REPEAL OF EXCLUSION FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Section 114 is hereby repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1)(A) Subpart E of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 
 (relating to qualifying foreign trade income) is hereby 
 repealed.
 (B) The table of subparts for such part III is amended by 
 striking the item relating to subpart E.
 (2) The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of 
 chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 
 114.
 (3) The second sentence of section 56(g)(4)(B)(i) is 
 amended by striking ``114 or''.
 (4) Section 275(a) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``or'' at the end of paragraph 
 (4)(A), by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph 
 (4)(B) and inserting a period, and by striking 
 subparagraph (C), and
 (B) by striking the last sentence.
 (5) Paragraph (3) of section 864(e) is amended--
 (A) by striking:
 ``(3) Tax-exempt assets not taken into account.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of''; and 
 inserting:
 ``(3) Tax-exempt assets not taken into account.--For 
 purposes of'', and
 (B) by striking subparagraph (B).
 (6) Section 903 is amended by striking ``114, 164(a),'' and 
 inserting ``164(a)''.
 (7) Section 999(c)(1) is amended by striking 
 ``941(a)(5),''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to transactions occurring after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act.
 (2) Binding contracts.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall not apply to any transaction in the ordinary course of a 
 trade or business which occurs pursuant to a binding contract--
 (A) which is between the taxpayer and a person who 
 is not a related person (as defined in section 
 943(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as in 
 effect on the day before the date of the enactment of 
 this Act), and
 (B) which is in effect on September 17, 2003, and 
 at all times thereafter.
 (d) Revocation of Section 943(e) Elections.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a corporation that elected 
 to be treated as a domestic corporation under section 943(e) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day 
 before the date of the enactment of this Act)--
 (A) the corporation may, during the 1-year period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 revoke such election, effective as of such date of 
 enactment, and
 (B) if the corporation does revoke such election--
 (i) such corporation shall be treated as a 
 domestic corporation transferring (as of such 
 date of enactment) all of its property to a 
 foreign corporation in connection with an 
 exchange described in section 354 of such Code, 
 and
 (ii) no gain or loss shall be recognized on 
 such transfer.
 (2) Exception.--Subparagraph (B)(ii) of paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply to gain on any asset held by the revoking corporation 
 if--
 (A) the basis of such asset is determined in whole 
 or in part by reference to the basis of such asset in 
 the hands of the person from whom the revoking 
 corporation acquired such asset,
 (B) the asset was acquired by transfer (not as a 
 result of the election under section 943(e) of such 
 Code) occurring on or after the 1st day on which its 
 election under section 943(e) of such Code was 
 effective, and
 (C) a principal purpose of the acquisition was the 
 reduction or avoidance of tax (other than a reduction 
 in tax under section 114 of such Code, as in effect on 
 the day before the date of the enactment of this Act).
 (e) General Transition.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a taxable year ending after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act and beginning before 
 January 1, 2007, for purposes of chapter 1 of such Code, a 
 current FSC/ETI beneficiary shall be allowed a deduction equal 
 to the transition amount determined under this subsection with 
 respect to such beneficiary for such year.
 (2) Current fsc/eti beneficiary.--The term ``current FSC/
 ETI beneficiary'' means any corporation which entered into one 
 or more transactions during its taxable year beginning in 
 calendar year 2002 with respect to which FSC/ETI benefits were 
 allowable.
 (3) Transition amount.--For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) In general.--The transition amount applicable 
 to any current FSC/ETI beneficiary for any taxable year 
 is the phaseout percentage of the base period amount.
 (B) Phaseout percentage.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of a taxpayer 
 using the calendar year as its taxable year, 
 the phaseout percentage shall be determined 
 under the following table:

 The phaseout
 Years: percentage is:
 2005...............
 80 
 2006...............
 60.
 (ii) Special rule for 2004.--The phaseout 
 percentage for 2004 shall be the amount that 
 bears the same ratio to 80 percent as the 
 number of days after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act bears to 366.
 (iii) Special rule for fiscal year 
 taxpayers.--In the case of a taxpayer not using 
 the calendar year as its taxable year, the 
 phaseout percentage is the weighted average of 
 the phaseout percentages determined under the 
 preceding provisions of this paragraph with 
 respect to calendar years any portion of which 
 is included in the taxpayer's taxable year. The 
 weighted average shall be determined on the 
 basis of the respective portions of the taxable 
 year in each calendar year.
 (C) Short taxable year.--The Secretary shall 
 prescribe guidance for the computation of the 
 transition amount in the case of a short taxable year.
 (4) Base period amount.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the base period amount is the average FSC/ETI benefit for the 
 taxpayer's taxable years beginning in calendar years 2000, 
 2001, and 2002.
 (5) FSC/ETI benefit.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 term ``FSC/ETI benefit'' means--
 (A) amounts excludable from gross income under 
 section 114 of such Code, and
 (B) the exempt foreign trade income of related 
 foreign sales corporations from property acquired from 
 the taxpayer (determined without regard to section 
 923(a)(5) of such Code (relating to special rule for 
 military property), as in effect on the day before the 
 date of the enactment of the FSC Repeal and 
 Extraterritorial Income Exclusion Act of 2000).
 In determining the FSC/ETI benefit there shall be excluded any 
 amount attributable to a transaction with respect to which the 
 taxpayer is the lessor unless the leased property was 
 manufactured or produced in whole or in significant part by the 
 taxpayer.
 (6) Special rule for agricultural and horticultural 
 cooperatives.--Determinations under this subsection with 
 respect to an organization described in section 943(g)(1) of 
 such Code, as in effect on the day before the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, shall be made at the cooperative level 
 and the purposes of this subsection shall be carried out in a 
 manner similar to section 199(h)(2) of such Code, as added by 
 this Act. Such determinations shall be in accordance with such 
 requirements and procedures as the Secretary may prescribe.
 (7) Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 section 41(f) of such Code shall apply for purposes of this 
 subsection.
 (8) Coordination with binding contract rule.--The deduction 
 determined under paragraph (1) for any taxable year shall be 
 reduced by the phaseout percentage of any FSC/ETI benefit 
 realized for the taxable year by reason of subsection (c)(2) or 
 section 5(c)(1)(B) of the FSC Repeal and Extraterritorial 
 Income Exclusion Act of 2000, except that for purposes of this 
 paragraph the phaseout percentage for 2004 shall be treated as 
 being equal to 100 percent.
 (9) Special rule for taxable year which includes date of 
 enactment.--In the case of a taxable year which includes the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the deduction allowed under 
 this subsection to any current FSC/ETI beneficiary shall in no 
 event exceed--
 (A) 100 percent of such beneficiary's base period 
 amount for calendar year 2004, reduced by
 (B) the FSC/ETI benefit of such beneficiary with 
 respect to transactions occurring during the portion of 
 the taxable year ending on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.

SEC. 102. DEDUCTION RELATING TO INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO UNITED STATES 
 PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES.

 (a) In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to 
itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 199. INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO DOMESTIC PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Allowance of Deduction.--
 ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a deduction an 
 amount equal to 9 percent of the qualified production 
 activities income of the taxpayer for the taxable year.
 ``(2) Phasein.--In the case of taxable years beginning in 
 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, or 2008, paragraph (1) shall be applied 
 by substituting for the percentage contained therein the 
 transition percentage determined under the following table:

 ``Taxable years The transition
 beginning in: percentage is:
 2004, 2005, or 2006
 5 
 2007...............
 6 
 2008...............
 7.
 ``(b) Deduction Limited to Wages Paid.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of the deduction allowable 
 under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed 50 
 percent of the W-2 wages of the employer for the taxable year.
 ``(2) W-2 wages.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term 
 `W-2 wages' means the sum of the aggregate amounts the taxpayer 
 is required to include on statements under paragraphs (3) and 
 (8) of section 6051(a) with respect to employment of employees 
 of the taxpayer during the taxpayer's taxable year.
 ``(3) Special rules.--
 ``(A) Pass-thru entities.--In the case of an S 
 corporation, partnership, estate or trust, or other 
 pass-thru entity, the limitation under this subsection 
 shall apply at the entity level. The preceding sentence 
 shall not apply to any entity all of the ownership 
 interests of which are held directly or indirectly by 
 members of the same expanded affiliated group.
 ``(B) Acquisitions and dispositions.--The Secretary 
 shall provide for the application of this subsection in 
 cases where the taxpayer acquires, or disposes of, the 
 major portion of a trade or business or the major 
 portion of a separate unit of a trade or business 
 during the taxable year.
 ``(c) Qualified Production Activities Income.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified production 
 activities income' means an amount equal to the portion of the 
 modified taxable income of the taxpayer which is attributable 
 to domestic production activities.
 ``(2) Reduction for taxable years beginning before 2013.--
 The amount otherwise determined under paragraph (1) (the 
 `unreduced amount') shall not exceed--
 ``(A) in the case of taxable years beginning before 
 2010, the product of the unreduced amount and the 
 domestic/worldwide fraction, and
 ``(B) in the case of taxable years beginning in 
 2010, 2011, or 2012, an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(i) the product of the unreduced amount 
 and the domestic/worldwide fraction, plus
 ``(ii) the applicable percentage of an 
 amount equal to the unreduced amount minus the 
 amount determined under clause (i).
 For purposes of subparagraph (B)(ii), the applicable percentage 
 is 25 percent for 2010, 50 percent for 2011, and 75 percent for 
 2012.
 ``(d) Determination of Income Attributable to Domestic Production 
Activities.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The portion of the modified taxable 
 income which is attributable to domestic production activities 
 is so much of the modified taxable income for the taxable year 
 as does not exceed--
 ``(A) the taxpayer's domestic production gross 
 receipts for such taxable year, reduced by
 ``(B) the sum of--
 ``(i) the costs of goods sold that are 
 allocable to such receipts,
 ``(ii) other deductions, expenses, or 
 losses directly allocable to such receipts, and
 ``(iii) a proper share of other deductions, 
 expenses, and losses that are not directly 
 allocable to such receipts or another class of 
 income.
 ``(2) Allocation method.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 rules for the proper allocation of items of income, deduction, 
 expense, and loss for purposes of determining income 
 attributable to domestic production activities.
 ``(3) Special rules for determining costs.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of determining 
 costs under clause (i) of paragraph (1)(B), any item or 
 service brought into the United States shall be treated 
 as acquired by purchase, and its cost shall be treated 
 as not less than its fair market value immediately 
 after it entered the United States. A similar rule 
 shall apply in determining the adjusted basis of leased 
 or rented property where the lease or rental gives rise 
 to domestic production gross receipts.
 ``(B) Exports for further manufacture.--In the case 
 of any property described in subparagraph (A) that had 
 been exported by the taxpayer for further manufacture, 
 the increase in cost or adjusted basis under 
 subparagraph (A) shall not exceed the difference 
 between the value of the property when exported and the 
 value of the property when brought back into the United 
 States after the further manufacture.
 ``(4) Modified taxable income.--The term `modified taxable 
 income' means taxable income computed without regard to the 
 deduction allowable under this section.
 ``(e) Domestic Production Gross Receipts.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `domestic production gross 
 receipts' means the gross receipts of the taxpayer which are 
 derived from--
 ``(A) any sale, exchange, or other disposition of, 
 or
 ``(B) any lease, rental, or license of,
 qualifying production property which was manufactured, 
 produced, grown, or extracted in whole or in significant part 
 by the taxpayer within the United States.
 ``(2) Special rules for certain property.--In the case of 
 any qualifying production property described in subsection 
 (f)(1)(C)--
 ``(A) such property shall be treated for purposes 
 of paragraph (1) as produced in significant part by the 
 taxpayer within the United States if more than 50 
 percent of the aggregate development and production 
 costs are incurred by the taxpayer within the United 
 States, and
 ``(B) if a taxpayer acquires such property before 
 such property begins to generate substantial gross 
 receipts, any development or production costs incurred 
 before the acquisition shall be treated as incurred by 
 the taxpayer for purposes of subparagraph (A) and 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Gross receipts from use of films and video tape.--In 
 the case of any qualifying production property which is 
 property described in section 168(f)(3) produced in whole or in 
 significant part by the taxpayer within the United States 
 (determined after application of paragraph (2)), domestic 
 production gross receipts shall include gross receipts derived 
 by the taxpayer from the use of the property by the taxpayer.
 ``(f) Qualifying Production Property.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 paragraph, the term `qualifying production property' means--
 ``(A) any tangible personal property,
 ``(B) any computer software, and
 ``(C) any property described in section 168(f) (3) 
 or (4), including any underlying copyright or 
 trademark.
 ``(2) Exclusions from qualifying production property.--The 
 term `qualifying production property' shall not include--
 ``(A) consumable property that is sold, leased, or 
 licensed by the taxpayer as an integral part of the 
 provision of services,
 ``(B) oil or gas,
 ``(C) electricity,
 ``(D) water supplied by pipeline to the consumer,
 ``(E) utility services, or
 ``(F) any film, tape, recording, book, magazine, 
 newspaper, or similar property the market for which is 
 primarily topical or otherwise essentially transitory 
 in nature.
Subparagraph (F) shall not apply to property described in section 
168(f)(3) to the extent of the gross receipts from the use of the 
property to which subsection (e)(3) applies (determined after 
application of this sentence).
 ``(g) Domestic/Worldwide Fraction.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `domestic/worldwide fraction' 
 means a fraction (not greater than 1)--
 ``(A) the numerator of which is the value of the 
 domestic production of the taxpayer, and
 ``(B) the denominator of which is the value of the 
 worldwide production of the taxpayer.
 ``(2) Value of domestic production.--The value of domestic 
 production is the excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the domestic production gross receipts, over
 ``(B) the cost of purchased inputs allocable to 
 such receipts that are deductible under this chapter 
 for the taxable year.
 ``(3) Purchased inputs.--
 ``(A) In general.--Purchased inputs are any of the 
 following items acquired by purchase:
 ``(i) Services (other than services of 
 employees) used in manufacture, production, 
 growth, or extraction activities.
 ``(ii) Items consumed in connection with 
 such activities.
 ``(iii) Items incorporated as part of the 
 property being manufactured, produced, grown, 
 or extracted.
 ``(B) Special rule.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 subsection (d)(3) shall apply for purposes of this 
 subsection.
 ``(4) Value of worldwide production.--
 ``(A) In general.--The value of worldwide 
 production shall be determined under the principles of 
 paragraph (2), except that--
 ``(i) worldwide production gross receipts 
 shall be taken into account, and
 ``(ii) paragraph (3)(B) shall not apply.
 ``(B) Worldwide production gross receipts.--The 
 worldwide production gross receipts is the amount that 
 would be determined under subsection (e) if such 
 subsection were applied without any reference to the 
 United States.
 ``(h) Definitions and Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Application of section to pass-thru entities.--In the 
 case of an S corporation, partnership, estate or trust, or 
 other pass-thru entity--
 ``(A) subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) 
 and subsection (b)(3)(A), this section shall be applied 
 at the shareholder, partner, or similar level, and
 ``(B) the Secretary shall prescribe rules for the 
 application of this section, including rules relating 
 to--
 ``(i) restrictions on the allocation of the 
 deduction to taxpayers at the partner or 
 similar level, and
 ``(ii) additional reporting requirements.
 ``(2) Patrons of agricultural and horticultural 
 cooperatives.--
 ``(A) In general.--If any amount described in 
 paragraph (1) or (3) of section 1385 (a)--
 ``(i) is received by a person from an 
 organization to which part I of subchapter T 
 applies which is engaged--
 ``(I) in the manufacturing, 
 production, growth, or extraction in 
 whole or significant part of any 
 agricultural or horticultural product, 
 or
 ``(II) in the marketing of 
 agricultural or horticultural products, 
 and
 ``(ii) is allocable to the portion of the 
 qualified production activities income of the 
 organization which, but for this paragraph, 
 would be deductible under subsection (a) by the 
 organization and is designated as such by the 
 organization in a written notice mailed to its 
 patrons during the payment period described in 
 section 1382(d),
 then such person shall be allowed a deduction under 
 subsection (a) with respect to such amount. The taxable 
 income of the organization shall not be reduced under 
 section 1382 by reason of any amount to which the 
 preceding sentence applies.
 ``(B) Special rules.--For purposes of applying 
 subparagraph (A), in determining the qualified 
 production activities income of the organization under 
 this section--
 ``(i) there shall not be taken into account 
 in computing the organization's modified 
 taxable income any deduction allowable under 
 subsection (b) or (c) of section 1382 (relating 
 to patronage dividends, per-unit retain 
 allocations, and nonpatronage distributions), 
 and
 ``(ii) in the case of an organization 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i)(II), the 
 organization shall be treated as having 
 manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in 
 whole or significant part any qualifying 
 production property marketed by the 
 organization which its patrons have so 
 manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted.
 ``(3) Special rule for affiliated groups.--
 ``(A) In general.--All members of an expanded 
 affiliated group shall be treated as a single 
 corporation for purposes of this section.
 ``(B) Expanded affiliated group.--The term 
 `expanded affiliated group' means an affiliated group 
 as defined in section 1504(a), determined--
 ``(i) by substituting `50 percent' for `80 
 percent' each place it appears, and
 ``(ii) without regard to paragraphs (2) and 
 (4) of section 1504(b).
 For purposes of determining the domestic/worldwide 
 fraction under subsection (g), clause (ii) shall be 
 applied by also disregarding paragraphs (3) and (8) of 
 section 1504(b).
 ``(4) Coordination with minimum tax.--The deduction under 
 this section shall be allowed for purposes of the tax imposed 
 by section 55; except that for purposes of section 55, 
 alternative minimum taxable income shall be taken into account 
 in determining the deduction under this section.
 ``(5) Ordering rule.--The amount of any other deduction 
 allowable under this chapter shall be determined as if this 
 section had not been enacted.
 ``(6) Trade or business requirement.--This section shall be 
 applied by only taking into account items which are 
 attributable to the actual conduct of a trade or business.
 ``(7) Possessions, etc.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsections (d) 
 and (e), the term `United States' includes the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the 
 Virgin Islands of the United States.
 ``(B) Special rules for applying wage limitation.--
 For purposes of applying the limitation under 
 subsection (b) for any taxable year--
 ``(i) the determination of W-2 wages of a 
 taxpayer shall be made without regard to any 
 exclusion under section 3401(a)(8) for 
 remuneration paid for services performed in a 
 jurisdiction described in subparagraph (A), and
 ``(ii) in determining the amount of any 
 credit allowable under section 30A or 936 for 
 the taxable year, there shall not be taken into 
 account any wages which are taken into account 
 in applying such limitation.
 ``(8) Coordination with transition rules.--For purposes of 
 this section--
 ``(A) domestic production gross receipts shall not 
 include gross receipts from any transaction if the 
 binding contract transition relief of section 101(c)(2) 
 of the Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act 
 applies to such transaction, and
 ``(B) any deduction allowed under section 101(e) of 
 such Act shall be disregarded in determining the 
 portion of the taxable income which is attributable to 
 domestic production gross receipts.
 ``(9) Separate application to films and videotape.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of qualifying 
 production property described in section 168(f)(3), the 
 deduction under this section shall be determined 
 separately with respect to qualified production 
 activities income of the taxpayer allocable to each of 
 the following markets with respect to such property:
 ``(i) Theatrical.
 ``(ii) Broadcast television (including 
 cable, foreign, pay-per-view, and syndication).
 ``(iii) Home video.
 ``(B) Rules for separate determination.--Except as 
 provided in subparagraph (C)--
 ``(i) any computation required to determine 
 the amount of the deduction with respect to any 
 of the markets described in subparagraph (A) 
 shall be made by only taking into account items 
 properly allocable to such market, including 
 the computation of qualified production 
 activities income, modified taxable income, and 
 the domestic/worldwide fraction, and
 ``(ii) such items shall not be taken into 
 account in determining the deduction with 
 respect to either of the other 2 markets or 
 with respect to qualified production activities 
 income of the taxpayer not allocable to any of 
 such markets.
 ``(C) Wage limitation.--This paragraph shall not 
 apply for purposes of subsection (b) and subsection (b) 
 shall be applied after the application of this 
 paragraph.''
 (b) Minimum Tax.--Section 56(g)(4)(C) (relating to disallowance of 
items not deductible in computing earnings and profits) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) Deduction for domestic production.--
 Clause (i) shall not apply to any amount 
 allowable as a deduction under section 199.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VI of 
subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following 
new item:

 ``Sec. 199. Income attributable to 
 domestic production 
 activities.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act.
 (2) Application of section 15.--Section 15 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply to the amendments made by this 
 section as if they were changes in a rate of tax.

SEC. 103. DEDUCTION FOR UNITED STATES PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES INCLUDES 
 INCOME RELATED TO CERTAIN ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING 
 SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 199(e) (relating to 
domestic production gross receipts), as added by section 102, is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Receipts from qualifying production 
 property.--The term `domestic production gross 
 receipts' means the gross receipts of the taxpayer 
 which are derived from--
 ``(i) any sale, exchange, or other 
 disposition of, or
 ``(ii) any lease, rental, or license of,
 qualifying production property which was manufactured, 
 produced, grown, or extracted in whole or in 
 significant part by the taxpayer within the United 
 States.
 ``(B) Receipts from certain services.--
 ``(i) In general.--Such term also includes 
 the applicable percentage of gross receipts of 
 the taxpayer which are derived from any 
 engineering or architectural services performed 
 in the United States for construction projects 
 in the United States.
 ``(ii) Applicable percentage.--For purposes 
 of clause (i), the applicable percentage shall 
 be determined under the following table:

``In the case of any taxable year The applicable percentage is--
 beginning in--
 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, or 2008............... 25 
 2009, 2010, 2011, or 2012..................... 50 
 2013 or thereafter............................ 100.

 (b) Limitation of Employer Deduction for Certain Entertainment 
Expenses with Respect to Covered Employees.--Paragraph (2) of section 
274(e) (relating to expenses treated as compensation) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(2) Expenses treated as compensation.--Expenses for 
 goods, services, and facilities--
 ``(A) in the case of a covered employee (within the 
 meaning of section 162(m)(3)), to the extent that the 
 expenses do not exceed the amount of the expenses 
 treated by the taxpayer, with respect to the recipient 
 of the entertainment, amusement, or recreation, as 
 compensation to such covered employee on the taxpayer's 
 return of tax under this chapter and as wages to such 
 covered employee for purposes of chapter 24 (relating 
 to withholding of income tax at source on wages), and
 ``(B) in the case of any other employee, to the 
 extent that the expenses are treated by the taxpayer, 
 with respect to the recipient of the entertainment, 
 amusement, or recreation, as compensation to such 
 employee on the taxpayer's return of tax under this 
 chapter and as wages to such employee for purposes of 
 chapter 24 (relating to withholding of income tax at 
 source on wages).''.
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Subsection (a).--The amendment made by subsection (a) 
 shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and section 15 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 shall apply to the amendment made by this 
 subsection as if it were a change in the rate of tax.
 (2) Subsection (b).--The amendment made by subsection (b) 
 shall apply to expenses incurred after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act and before January 1, 2006.

 TITLE II--INTERNATIONAL TAX PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--International Tax Reform

SEC. 201. 20-YEAR FOREIGN TAX CREDIT CARRYOVER; 1-YEAR FOREIGN TAX 
 CREDIT CARRYBACK.

 (a) General Rule.--Section 904(c) (relating to carryback and 
carryover of excess tax paid) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``in the second preceding taxable year,'', 
 and
 (2) by striking ``, and in the first, second, third, 
 fourth, or fifth'' and inserting ``and in any of the first 
 20''.
 (b) Excess Extraction Taxes.--Paragraph (1) of section 907(f) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``in the second preceding taxable year,'',
 (2) by striking ``, and in the first, second, third, 
 fourth, or fifth'' and inserting ``and in any of the first 
 20'', and
 (3) by striking the last sentence.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) Carryback.--The amendments made by subsections (a)(1) 
 and (b)(1) shall apply to excess foreign taxes arising in 
 taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) Carryover.--The amendments made by subsections (a)(2) 
 and (b)(2) shall apply to excess foreign taxes which (without 
 regard to the amendments made by this section) may be carried 
 to any taxable year ending after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.

SEC. 202. LOOK-THRU RULES TO APPLY TO DIVIDENDS FROM NONCONTROLLED 
 SECTION 902 CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 904(d)(4) (relating to look-thru rules 
apply to dividends from noncontrolled section 902 corporations) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Look-thru applies to dividends from noncontrolled 
 section 902 corporations.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 any dividend from a noncontrolled section 902 
 corporation with respect to the taxpayer shall be 
 treated as income described in a subparagraph of 
 paragraph (1) in proportion to the ratio of--
 ``(i) the portion of earnings and profits 
 attributable to income described in such 
 subparagraph, to
 ``(ii) the total amount of earnings and 
 profits.
 ``(B) Earnings and profits of controlled foreign 
 corporations.--In the case of any distribution from a 
 controlled foreign corporation to a United States 
 shareholder, rules similar to the rules of subparagraph 
 (A) shall apply in determining the extent to which 
 earnings and profits of the controlled foreign 
 corporation which are attributable to dividends 
 received from a noncontrolled section 902 corporation 
 may be treated as income in a separate category.
 ``(C) Special rules.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph--
 ``(i) Earnings and profits.--
 ``(I) In general.--The rules of 
 section 316 shall apply.
 ``(II) Regulations.--The Secretary 
 may prescribe regulations regarding the 
 treatment of distributions out of 
 earnings and profits for periods before 
 the taxpayer's acquisition of the stock 
 to which the distributions relate.
 ``(ii) Inadequate substantiation.--If the 
 Secretary determines that the proper 
 subparagraph of paragraph (1) in which a 
 dividend is described has not been 
 substantiated, such dividend shall be treated 
 as income described in paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(iii) Coordination with high-taxed income 
 provisions.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 paragraph (3)(F) shall apply for purposes of 
 this paragraph.
 ``(iv) Look-thru with respect to carryover 
 of credit.--Rules similar to subparagraph (A) 
 also shall apply to any carryforward under 
 subsection (c) from a taxable year beginning 
 before January 1, 2003, of tax allocable to a 
 dividend from a noncontrolled section 902 
 corporation with respect to the taxpayer. The 
 Secretary may by regulations provide for the 
 allocation of any carryback of tax allocable to 
 a dividend from a noncontrolled section 902 
 corporation to such a taxable year for purposes 
 of allocating such dividend among the separate 
 categories in effect for such taxable year.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subparagraph (E) of section 904(d)(1) is hereby 
 repealed.
 (2) Section 904(d)(2)(C)(iii) is amended by adding ``and'' 
 at the end of subclause (I), by striking subclause (II), and by 
 redesignating subclause (III) as subclause (II).
 (3) The last sentence of section 904(d)(2)(D) is amended to 
 read as follows: ``Such term does not include any financial 
 services income.''.
 (4) Section 904(d)(2)(E) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``or (4)'' after ``paragraph (3)'' 
 in clause (i), and
 (B) by striking clauses (ii) and (iv) and by 
 redesignating clause (iii) as clause (ii).
 (5) Section 904(d)(3)(F) is amended by striking ``(D), or 
 (E)'' and inserting ``or (D)''.
 (6) Section 864(d)(5)(A)(i) is amended by striking 
 ``(C)(iii)(III)'' and inserting ``(C)(iii)(II)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.

SEC. 203. FOREIGN TAX CREDIT UNDER ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Subsection (a) of section 59 is amended by striking 
 paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as 
 paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
 (2) Section 53(d)(1)(B)(i)(II) is amended by striking ``and 
 if section 59(a)(2) did not apply''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 204. RECHARACTERIZATION OF OVERALL DOMESTIC LOSS.

 (a) General Rule.--Section 904 is amended by redesignating 
subsections (g), (h), (i), (j), and (k) as subsections (h), (i), (j), 
(k), and (l) respectively, and by inserting after subsection (f) the 
following new subsection:
 ``(g) Recharacterization of Overall Domestic Loss.--
 ``(1) General rule.--For purposes of this subpart and 
 section 936, in the case of any taxpayer who sustains an 
 overall domestic loss for any taxable year beginning after 
 December 31, 2006, that portion of the taxpayer's taxable 
 income from sources within the United States for each 
 succeeding taxable year which is equal to the lesser of--
 ``(A) the amount of such loss (to the extent not 
 used under this paragraph in prior taxable years), or
 ``(B) 50 percent of the taxpayer's taxable income 
 from sources within the United States for such 
 succeeding taxable year,
 shall be treated as income from sources without the United 
 States (and not as income from sources within the United 
 States).
 ``(2) Overall domestic loss defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `overall domestic loss' 
 means any domestic loss to the extent such loss offsets 
 taxable income from sources without the United States 
 for the taxable year or for any preceding taxable year 
 by reason of a carryback. For purposes of the preceding 
 sentence, the term `domestic loss' means the amount by 
 which the gross income for the taxable year from 
 sources within the United States is exceeded by the sum 
 of the deductions properly apportioned or allocated 
 thereto (determined without regard to any carryback 
 from a subsequent taxable year).
 ``(B) Taxpayer must have elected foreign tax credit 
 for year of loss.--The term `overall domestic loss' 
 shall not include any loss for any taxable year unless 
 the taxpayer chose the benefits of this subpart for 
 such taxable year.
 ``(3) Characterization of subsequent income.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any income from sources within 
 the United States that is treated as income from 
 sources without the United States under paragraph (1) 
 shall be allocated among and increase the income 
 categories in proportion to the loss from sources 
 within the United States previously allocated to those 
 income categories.
 ``(B) Income category.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `income category' has the meaning 
 given such term by subsection (f)(5)(E)(i).
 ``(4) Coordination with subsection (f).--The Secretary 
 shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to 
 coordinate the provisions of this subsection with the 
 provisions of subsection (f).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 535(d)(2) is amended by striking ``section 
 904(g)(6)'' and inserting ``section 904(h)(6)''.
 (2) Subparagraph (A) of section 936(a)(2) is amended by 
 striking ``section 904(f)'' and inserting ``subsections (f) and 
 (g) of section 904''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to losses for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2006.

SEC. 205. INTEREST EXPENSE ALLOCATION RULES.

 (a) Election To Allocate on Worldwide Basis.--Section 864 is 
amended by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g) and by 
inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Election To Allocate Interest, etc. on Worldwide Basis.--For 
purposes of this subchapter, at the election of the worldwide 
affiliated group--
 ``(1) Allocation and apportionment of interest expense.--
 ``(A) In general.--The taxable income of each 
 domestic corporation which is a member of a worldwide 
 affiliated group shall be determined by allocating and 
 apportioning interest expense of each member as if all 
 members of such group were a single corporation.
 ``(B) Treatment of worldwide affiliated group.--The 
 taxable income of the domestic members of a worldwide 
 affiliated group from sources outside the United States 
 shall be determined by allocating and apportioning the 
 interest expense of such domestic members to such 
 income in an amount equal to the excess (if any) of--
 ``(i) the total interest expense of the 
 worldwide affiliated group multiplied by the 
 ratio which the foreign assets of the worldwide 
 affiliated group bears to all the assets of the 
 worldwide affiliated group, over
 ``(ii) the interest expense of all foreign 
 corporations which are members of the worldwide 
 affiliated group to the extent such interest 
 expense of such foreign corporations would have 
 been allocated and apportioned to foreign 
 source income if this subsection were applied 
 to a group consisting of all the foreign 
 corporations in such worldwide affiliated 
 group.
 ``(C) Worldwide affiliated group.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `worldwide affiliated group' 
 means a group consisting of--
 ``(i) the includible members of an 
 affiliated group (as defined in section 
 1504(a), determined without regard to 
 paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 1504(b)), and
 ``(ii) all controlled foreign corporations 
 in which such members in the aggregate meet the 
 ownership requirements of section 1504(a)(2) 
 either directly or indirectly through applying 
 paragraph (2) of section 958(a) or through 
 applying rules similar to the rules of such 
 paragraph to stock owned directly or indirectly 
 by domestic partnerships, trusts, or estates.
 ``(2) Allocation and apportionment of other expenses.--
 Expenses other than interest which are not directly allocable 
 or apportioned to any specific income producing activity shall 
 be allocated and apportioned as if all members of the 
 affiliated group were a single corporation. For purposes of the 
 preceding sentence, the term `affiliated group' has the meaning 
 given such term by section 1504 (determined without regard to 
 paragraph (4) of section 1504(b)).
 ``(3) Treatment of tax-exempt assets; basis of stock in 
 nonaffiliated 10-percent owned corporations.--The rules of 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (e) shall apply for 
 purposes of this subsection, except that paragraph (4) shall be 
 applied on a worldwide affiliated group basis.
 ``(4) Treatment of certain financial institutions.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 any corporation described in subparagraph (B) shall be 
 treated as an includible corporation for purposes of 
 section 1504 only for purposes of applying this 
 subsection separately to corporations so described.
 ``(B) Description.--A corporation is described in 
 this subparagraph if--
 ``(i) such corporation is a financial 
 institution described in section 581 or 591,
 ``(ii) the business of such financial 
 institution is predominantly with persons other 
 than related persons (within the meaning of 
 subsection (d)(4)) or their customers, and
 ``(iii) such financial institution is 
 required by State or Federal law to be operated 
 separately from any other entity which is not 
 such an institution.
 ``(C) Treatment of bank and financial holding 
 companies.--To the extent provided in regulations--
 ``(i) a bank holding company (within the 
 meaning of section 2(a) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(a)),
 ``(ii) a financial holding company (within 
 the meaning of section 2(p) of the Bank Holding 
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(p)), and
 ``(iii) any subsidiary of a financial 
 institution described in section 581 or 591, or 
 of any such bank or financial holding company, 
 if such subsidiary is predominantly engaged 
 (directly or indirectly) in the active conduct 
 of a banking, financing, or similar business,
 shall be treated as a corporation described in 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(5) Election to expand financial institution group of 
 worldwide group.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a worldwide affiliated group 
 elects the application of this subsection, all 
 financial corporations which--
 ``(i) are members of such worldwide 
 affiliated group, but
 ``(ii) are not corporations described in 
 paragraph (4)(B),
 shall be treated as described in paragraph (4)(B) for 
 purposes of applying paragraph (4)(A). This subsection 
 (other than this paragraph) shall apply to any such 
 group in the same manner as this subsection (other than 
 this paragraph) applies to the pre-election worldwide 
 affiliated group of which such group is a part.
 ``(B) Financial corporation.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `financial corporation' means any 
 corporation if at least 80 percent of its gross income 
 is income described in section 904(d)(2)(C)(ii) and the 
 regulations thereunder which is derived from 
 transactions with persons who are not related (within 
 the meaning of section 267(b) or 707(b)(1)) to the 
 corporation. For purposes of the preceding sentence, 
 there shall be disregarded any item of income or gain 
 from a transaction or series of transactions a 
 principal purpose of which is the qualification of any 
 corporation as a financial corporation.
 ``(C) Antiabuse rules.--In the case of a 
 corporation which is a member of an electing financial 
 institution group, to the extent that such 
 corporation--
 ``(i) distributes dividends or makes other 
 distributions with respect to its stock after 
 the date of the enactment of this paragraph to 
 any member of the pre-election worldwide 
 affiliated group (other than to a member of the 
 electing financial institution group) in excess 
 of the greater of--
 ``(I) its average annual dividend 
 (expressed as a percentage of current 
 earnings and profits) during the 5-
 taxable-year period ending with the 
 taxable year preceding the taxable 
 year, or
 ``(II) 25 percent of its average 
 annual earnings and profits for such 5-
 taxable-year period, or
 ``(ii) deals with any person in any manner 
 not clearly reflecting the income of the 
 corporation (as determined under principles 
 similar to the principles of section 482),
 an amount of indebtedness of the electing financial 
 institution group equal to the excess distribution or 
 the understatement or overstatement of income, as the 
 case may be, shall be recharacterized (for the taxable 
 year and subsequent taxable years) for purposes of this 
 paragraph as indebtedness of the worldwide affiliated 
 group (excluding the electing financial institution 
 group). If a corporation has not been in existence for 
 5 taxable years, this subparagraph shall be applied 
 with respect to the period it was in existence.
 ``(D) Election.--An election under this paragraph 
 with respect to any financial institution group may be 
 made only by the common parent of the pre-election 
 worldwide affiliated group and may be made only for the 
 first taxable year beginning after December 31, 2008, 
 in which such affiliated group includes 1 or more 
 financial corporations. Such an election, once made, 
 shall apply to all financial corporations which are 
 members of the electing financial institution group for 
 such taxable year and all subsequent years unless 
 revoked with the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(E) Definitions relating to groups.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph--
 ``(i) Pre-election worldwide affiliated 
 group.--The term `pre-election worldwide 
 affiliated group' means, with respect to a 
 corporation, the worldwide affiliated group of 
 which such corporation would (but for an 
 election under this paragraph) be a member for 
 purposes of applying paragraph (1).
 ``(ii) Electing financial institution 
 group.--The term `electing financial 
 institution group' means the group of 
 corporations to which this subsection applies 
 separately by reason of the application of 
 paragraph (4)(A) and which includes financial 
 corporations by reason of an election under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(F) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out 
 this subsection, including regulations--
 ``(i) providing for the direct allocation 
 of interest expense in other circumstances 
 where such allocation would be appropriate to 
 carry out the purposes of this subsection,
 ``(ii) preventing assets or interest 
 expense from being taken into account more than 
 once, and
 ``(iii) dealing with changes in members of 
 any group (through acquisitions or otherwise) 
 treated under this paragraph as an affiliated 
 group for purposes of this subsection.
 ``(6) Election.--An election to have this subsection apply 
 with respect to any worldwide affiliated group may be made only 
 by the common parent of the domestic affiliated group referred 
 to in paragraph (1)(C) and may be made only for the first 
 taxable year beginning after December 31, 2008, in which a 
 worldwide affiliated group exists which includes such 
 affiliated group and at least 1 foreign corporation. Such an 
 election, once made, shall apply to such common parent and all 
 other corporations which are members of such worldwide 
 affiliated group for such taxable year and all subsequent years 
 unless revoked with the consent of the Secretary.''.
 (b) Expansion of Regulatory Authority.--Paragraph (7) of section 
864(e) is amended--
 (1) by inserting before the comma at the end of 
 subparagraph (B) ``and in other circumstances where such 
 allocation would be appropriate to carry out the purposes of 
 this subsection'', and
 (2) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E), by 
 redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G), and by 
 inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) preventing assets or interest expense from 
 being taken into account more than once, and''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.

SEC. 206. DETERMINATION OF FOREIGN PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY INCOME WITH 
 RESPECT TO TRANSACTIONS IN COMMODITIES.

 (a) In General.--Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 954(c)(1)(C) 
(relating to commodity transactions) are amended to read as follows:
 ``(i) arise out of commodity hedging 
 transactions (as defined in paragraph (4)(A)),
 ``(ii) are active business gains or losses 
 from the sale of commodities, but only if 
 substantially all of the controlled foreign 
 corporation's commodities are property 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), or (8) of 
 section 1221(a), or''.
 (b) Definition and Special Rules.--Subsection (c) of section 954 is 
amended by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Definition and special rules relating to commodity 
 transactions.--
 ``(A) Commodity hedging transactions.--For purposes 
 of paragraph (1)(C)(i), the term `commodity hedging 
 transaction' means any transaction with respect to a 
 commodity if such transaction--
 ``(i) is a hedging transaction as defined 
 in section 1221(b)(2), determined--
 ``(I) without regard to 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) thereof,
 ``(II) by applying subparagraph 
 (A)(i) thereof by substituting 
 `ordinary property or property 
 described in section 1231(b)' for 
 `ordinary property', and
 ``(III) by substituting `controlled 
 foreign corporation' for `taxpayer' 
 each place it appears, and
 ``(ii) is clearly identified as such in 
 accordance with section 1221(a)(7).
 ``(B) Treatment of dealer activities under 
 paragraph (1)(C).--Commodities with respect to which 
 gains and losses are not taken into account under 
 paragraph (2)(C) in computing a controlled foreign 
 corporation's foreign personal holding company income 
 shall not be taken into account in applying the 
 substantially all test under paragraph (1)(C)(ii) to 
 such corporation.
 ``(C) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 such regulations as are appropriate to carry out the 
 purposes of paragraph (1)(C) in the case of 
 transactions involving related parties.''.
 (c) Modification of Exception for Dealers.--Clause (i) of section 
954(c)(2)(C) is amended by inserting ``and transactions involving 
physical settlement'' after ``(including hedging transactions''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to transactions entered into after December 31, 2004.

 Subtitle B--International Tax Simplification

SEC. 211. REPEAL OF FOREIGN PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY RULES AND FOREIGN 
 INVESTMENT COMPANY RULES.

 (a) General Rule.--The following provisions are hereby repealed:
 (1) Part III of subchapter G of chapter 1 (relating to 
 foreign personal holding companies).
 (2) Section 1246 (relating to gain on foreign investment 
 company stock).
 (3) Section 1247 (relating to election by foreign 
 investment companies to distribute income currently).
 (b) Exemption of Foreign Corporations From Personal Holding Company 
Rules.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 542 (relating to 
 exceptions) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(5) a foreign corporation,'',
 (B) by striking paragraphs (7) and (10) and by 
 redesignating paragraphs (8) and (9) as paragraphs (7) 
 and (8), respectively,
 (C) by inserting ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (7) (as so redesignated), and
 (D) by striking ``; and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (8) (as so redesignated) and inserting a period.
 (2) Treatment of income from personal service contracts.--
 Paragraph (1) of section 954(c) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) Personal service contracts.--
 ``(i) Amounts received under a contract 
 under which the corporation is to furnish 
 personal services if--
 ``(I) some person other than the 
 corporation has the right to designate 
 (by name or by description) the 
 individual who is to perform the 
 services, or
 ``(II) the individual who is to 
 perform the services is designated (by 
 name or by description) in the 
 contract, and
 ``(ii) amounts received from the sale or 
 other disposition of such a contract.
 This subparagraph shall apply with respect to amounts 
 received for services under a particular contract only 
 if at some time during the taxable year 25 percent or 
 more in value of the outstanding stock of the 
 corporation is owned, directly or indirectly, by or for 
 the individual who has performed, is to perform, or may 
 be designated (by name or by description) as the one to 
 perform, such services.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1(h) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (10), by inserting ``and'' at the 
 end of subparagraph (F), by striking subparagraph (G), 
 and by redesignating subparagraph (H) as subparagraph 
 (G), and
 (B) by striking ``a foreign personal holding 
 company (as defined in section 552), a foreign 
 investment company (as defined in section 1246(b)), 
 or'' in paragraph (11)(C)(iii).
 (2) Section 163(e)(3)(B), as amended by section 453(a) of 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``which is a foreign personal 
 holding company (as defined in section 552), a controlled 
 foreign corporation (as defined in section 957), or'' and 
 inserting ``which is a controlled foreign corporation (as 
 defined in section 957) or''.
 (3) Paragraph (2) of section 171(c) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``, or by a foreign personal 
 holding company, as defined in section 552'', and
 (B) by striking ``, or foreign personal holding 
 company''.
 (4) Paragraph (2) of section 245(a) is amended by striking 
 ``foreign personal holding company or''.
 (5) Section 267(a)(3)(B), as amended by section 453(a) of 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``to a foreign personal 
 holding company (as defined in section 552), a controlled 
 foreign corporation (as defined in section 957), or'' and 
 inserting ``to a controlled foreign corporation (as defined in 
 section 957) or''.
 (6) Section 312 is amended by striking subsection (j).
 (7) Subsection (m) of section 312 is amended by striking 
 ``, a foreign investment company (within the meaning of section 
 1246(b)), or a foreign personal holding company (within the 
 meaning of section 552)''.
 (8) Subsection (e) of section 443 is amended by striking 
 paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively.
 (9) Subparagraph (B) of section 465(c)(7) is amended by 
 adding ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by striking clause 
 (ii), and by redesignating clause (iii) as clause (ii).
 (10) Paragraph (1) of section 543(b) is amended by 
 inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``, and'' at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting a 
 period, and by striking subparagraph (C).
 (11) Paragraph (1) of section 562(b) is amended by striking 
 ``or a foreign personal holding company described in section 
 552''.
 (12) Section 563 is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (c),
 (B) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection 
 (c), and
 (C) by striking ``subsection (a), (b), or (c)'' in 
 subsection (c) (as so redesignated) and inserting 
 ``subsection (a) or (b)''.
 (13) Subsection (d) of section 751 is amended by adding 
 ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking paragraph (3), 
 by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3), and by 
 striking ``paragraph (1), (2), or (3)'' in paragraph (3) (as so 
 redesignated) and inserting ``paragraph (1) or (2)''.
 (14) Paragraph (2) of section 864(d) is amended by striking 
 subparagraph (A) and by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) 
 as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively.
 (15)(A) Subparagraph (A) of section 898(b)(1) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(A) which is treated as a controlled foreign 
 corporation for any purpose under subpart F of part III 
 of this subchapter, and''.
 (B) Subparagraph (B) of section 898(b)(2) is amended by 
 striking ``and sections 551(f) and 554, whichever are 
 applicable,''.
 (C) Paragraph (3) of section 898(b) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(3) United states shareholder.--The term `United States 
 shareholder' has the meaning given to such term by section 
 951(b), except that, in the case of a foreign corporation 
 having related person insurance income (as defined in section 
 953(c)(2)), the Secretary may treat any person as a United 
 States shareholder for purposes of this section if such person 
 is treated as a United States shareholder under section 
 953(c)(1).''.
 (D) Subsection (c) of section 898 is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(c) Determination of Required Year.--
 ``(1) In general.--The required year is--
 ``(A) the majority U.S. shareholder year, or
 ``(B) if there is no majority U.S. shareholder 
 year, the taxable year prescribed under regulations.
 ``(2) 1-month deferral allowed.--A specified foreign 
 corporation may elect, in lieu of the taxable year under 
 paragraph (1)(A), a taxable year beginning 1 month earlier than 
 the majority U.S. shareholder year.
 ``(3) Majority u.s. shareholder year.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `majority U.S. shareholder year' means the 
 taxable year (if any) which, on each testing day, 
 constituted the taxable year of--
 ``(i) each United States shareholder 
 described in subsection (b)(2)(A), and
 ``(ii) each United States shareholder not 
 described in clause (i) whose stock was treated 
 as owned under subsection (b)(2)(B) by any 
 shareholder described in such clause.
 ``(B) Testing day.--The testing days shall be--
 ``(i) the first day of the corporation's 
 taxable year (determined without regard to this 
 section), or
 ``(ii) the days during such representative 
 period as the Secretary may prescribe.''.
 (16) Clause (ii) of section 904(d)(2)(A) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(ii) Certain amounts included.--Except as 
 provided in clause (iii), the term `passive 
 income' includes, except as provided in 
 subparagraph (E)(iii) or paragraph (3)(I), any 
 amount includible in gross income under section 
 1293 (relating to certain passive foreign 
 investment companies).''.
 (17)(A) Subparagraph (A) of section 904(g)(1), as 
 redesignated by section 204, is amended by adding ``or'' at the 
 end of clause (i), by striking clause (ii), and by 
 redesignating clause (iii) as clause (ii).
 (B) The paragraph heading of paragraph (2) of section 
 904(g), as so redesignated, is amended by striking ``foreign 
 personal holding or''.
 (18) Section 951 is amended by striking subsections (c) and 
 (d) and by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections 
 (c) and (d), respectively.
 (19) Paragraph (3) of section 989(b) is amended by striking 
 ``, 551(a),''.
 (20) Paragraph (5) of section 1014(b) is amended by 
 inserting ``and before January 1, 2005,'' after ``August 26, 
 1937,''.
 (21) Subsection (a) of section 1016 is amended by striking 
 paragraph (13).
 (22)(A) Paragraph (3) of section 1212(a) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(3) Special rules on carrybacks.--A net capital loss of a 
 corporation shall not be carried back under paragraph (1)(A) to 
 a taxable year--
 ``(A) for which it is a regulated investment 
 company (as defined in section 851), or
 ``(B) for which it is a real estate investment 
 trust (as defined in section 856).''.
 (B) The amendment made by subparagraph (A) shall apply to 
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.
 (23) Section 1223 is amended by striking paragraph (10) and 
 by redesignating the following paragraphs accordingly.
 (24) Subsection (d) of section 1248 is amended by striking 
 paragraph (5) and by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as 
 paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively.
 (25) Paragraph (2) of section 1260(c) is amended by 
 striking subparagraphs (H) and (I) and by redesignating 
 subparagraph (J) as subparagraph (H).
 (26)(A) Subparagraph (F) of section 1291(b)(3) is amended 
 by striking ``551(d), 959(a),'' and inserting ``959(a)''.
 (B) Subsection (e) of section 1291 is amended by inserting 
 ``(as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of 
 the Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act)'' after 
 ``section 1246''.
 (27) Paragraph (2) of section 1294(a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Election not permitted where amounts otherwise 
 includible under section 951.--The taxpayer may not make an 
 election under paragraph (1) with respect to the undistributed 
 PFIC earnings tax liability attributable to a qualified 
 electing fund for the taxable year if any amount is includible 
 in the gross income of the taxpayer under section 951 with 
 respect to such fund for such taxable year.''.
 (28) Section 6035 is hereby repealed.
 (29) Subparagraph (D) of section 6103(e)(1) is amended by 
 striking clause (iv) and redesignating clauses (v) and (vi) as 
 clauses (iv) and (v), respectively.
 (30) Subparagraph (B) of section 6501(e)(1) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(B) Constructive dividends.--If the taxpayer 
 omits from gross income an amount properly includible 
 therein under section 951(a), the tax may be assessed, 
 or a proceeding in court for the collection of such tax 
 may be done without assessing, at any time within 6 
 years after the return was filed.''.
 (31) Subsection (a) of section 6679 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``6035, 6046, and 6046A'' in 
 paragraph (1) and inserting ``6046 and 6046A'', and
 (B) by striking paragraph (3).
 (32) Sections 170(f)(10)(A), 508(d), 4947, and 4948(c)(4) 
 are each amended by striking ``556(b)(2),'' each place it 
 appears.
 (33) The table of parts for subchapter G of chapter 1 is 
 amended by striking the item relating to part III.
 (34) The table of sections for part IV of subchapter P of 
 chapter 1 is amended by striking the items relating to sections 
 1246 and 1247.
 (35) The table of sections for subpart A of part III of 
 subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended by striking the item 
 relating to section 6035.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of 
 foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 2004, and to 
 taxable years of United States shareholders with or within 
 which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.
 (2) Subsection (c)(29).--The amendments made by subsection 
 (c)(29) shall apply to disclosures of return or return 
 information with respect to taxable years beginning after 
 December 31, 2004.

SEC. 212. EXPANSION OF DE MINIMIS RULE UNDER SUBPART F.

 (a) In General.--Clause (ii) of section 954(b)(3)(A) (relating to 
de minimis, etc., rules) is amended by striking ``$1,000,000'' and 
inserting ``$5,000,000''.
 (b) Technical Amendments.--
 (1) Clause (ii) of section 864(d)(5)(A) is amended by 
 striking ``$1,000,000'' and inserting ``$5,000,000''.
 (2) Clause (i) of section 881(c)(5)(A) is amended by 
 striking ``$1,000,000'' and inserting ``$5,000,000''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 
31, 2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or 
within which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.

SEC. 213. ATTRIBUTION OF STOCK OWNERSHIP THROUGH PARTNERSHIPS TO APPLY 
 IN DETERMINING SECTION 902 AND 960 CREDITS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (c) of section 902 is amended by 
redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8) and by inserting after 
paragraph (6) the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Constructive ownership through partnerships.--Stock 
 owned, directly or indirectly, by or for a partnership shall be 
 considered as being owned proportionately by its partners. 
 Stock considered to be owned by a person by reason of the 
 preceding sentence shall, for purposes of applying such 
 sentence, be treated as actually owned by such person. The 
 Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to 
 carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including rules to 
 account for special partnership allocations of dividends, 
 credits, and other incidents of ownership of stock in 
 determining proportionate ownership.''.
 (b) Clarification of Comparable Attribution Under Section 
901(b)(5).--Paragraph (5) of section 901(b) is amended by striking 
``any individual'' and inserting ``any person''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxes of foreign corporations for taxable years of such 
corporations beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 214. APPLICATION OF UNIFORM CAPITALIZATION RULES TO FOREIGN 
 PERSONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 263A(c) (relating to exceptions) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Foreign persons.--Except for purposes of applying 
 sections 871(b)(1) and 882(a)(1), this section shall not apply 
 to any taxpayer who is not a United States person if such 
 taxpayer capitalizes costs of produced property or property 
 acquired for resale by applying the method used to ascertain 
 the income, profit, or loss for purposes of reports or 
 statements to shareholders, partners, other proprietors, or 
 beneficiaries, or for credit purposes.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
 apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.
 (2) Change in method of accounting.--In the case of any 
 taxpayer required by the amendment made by this section to 
 change its method of accounting for its first taxable year 
 beginning after December 31, 2004--
 (A) such change shall be treated as initiated by 
 the taxpayer,
 (B) such change shall be treated as made with the 
 consent of the Secretary of the Treasury, and
 (C) the net amount of the adjustments required to 
 be taken into account by the taxpayer under section 481 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be taken 
 into account in such first year.

SEC. 215. REPEAL OF WITHHOLDING TAX ON DIVIDENDS FROM CERTAIN FOREIGN 
 CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 871(i) (relating to tax 
not to apply to certain interest and dividends) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Dividends paid by a foreign corporation which 
 are treated under section 861(a)(2)(B) as income from 
 sources within the United States.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to payments made after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 216. REPEAL OF SPECIAL CAPITAL GAINS TAX ON ALIENS PRESENT IN THE 
 UNITED STATES FOR 183 DAYS OR MORE.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 871 is amended by 
striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
(2).
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1441(g) is amended is amended by 
striking ``section 871(a)(3)'' and inserting ``section 871(a)(2)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

 Subtitle C--Additional International Tax Provisions

SEC. 221. ACTIVE LEASING INCOME FROM AIRCRAFT AND VESSELS.

 (a) In General.--Section 954(c)(2) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Certain rents, etc.--
 ``(i) In general.--Foreign personal holding 
 company income shall not include qualified 
 leasing income derived from or in connection 
 with the leasing or rental of any aircraft or 
 vessel.
 ``(ii) Qualified leasing income.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `qualified leasing income' means rents and 
 gains derived in the active conduct of a trade 
 or business of leasing with respect to which 
 the controlled foreign corporation conducts 
 substantial activity, but only if--
 ``(I) the leased property is used 
 by the lessee or other end-user in 
 foreign commerce and predominantly 
 outside the United States, and
 ``(II) the lessee or other end-user 
 is not a related person (as defined in 
 subsection (d)(3)).
 Any amount not treated as foreign personal 
 holding income under this subparagraph shall 
 not be treated as foreign base company shipping 
 income.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 954(c)(1)(B) is amended by 
inserting ``or (2)(D)'' after ``paragraph (2)(A)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 
31, 2005, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or 
within which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.

SEC. 222. LOOK-THRU TREATMENT OF PAYMENTS BETWEEN RELATED CONTROLLED 
 FOREIGN CORPORATIONS UNDER FOREIGN PERSONAL HOLDING 
 COMPANY INCOME RULES.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (c) of section 954, as amended by this 
Act, is amended by adding after paragraph (4) the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(5) Look-thru in the case of related controlled foreign 
 corporations.--For purposes of this subsection, dividends, 
 interest, rents, and royalties received or accrued from a 
 controlled foreign corporation which is a related person (as 
 defined in subsection (b)(9)) shall not be treated as foreign 
 personal holding company income to the extent attributable or 
 properly allocable (determined under rules similar to the rules 
 of subparagraphs (C) and (D) of section 904(d)(3)) to income of 
 the related person which is not subpart F income (as defined in 
 section 952). For purposes of this paragraph, interest shall 
 include factoring income which is treated as income equivalent 
 to interest for purposes of paragraph (1)(E). The Secretary 
 shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to 
 prevent the abuse of the purposes of this paragraph.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 
2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or within 
which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.

SEC. 223. LOOK-THRU TREATMENT FOR SALES OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 954(c) (defining foreign personal holding 
company income), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding after 
paragraph (5) the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Look-thru rule for certain partnership sales.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any sale by a 
 controlled foreign corporation of an interest in a 
 partnership with respect to which such corporation is a 
 25-percent owner, such corporation shall be treated for 
 purposes of this subsection as selling the 
 proportionate share of the assets of the partnership 
 attributable to such interest. The Secretary shall 
 prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to 
 prevent abuse of the purposes of this paragraph, 
 including regulations providing for coordination of 
 this paragraph with the provisions of subchapter K.
 ``(B) 25-percent owner.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `25-percent owner' means a 
 controlled foreign corporation which owns directly 25 
 percent or more of the capital or profits interest in a 
 partnership. For purposes of the preceding sentence, if 
 a controlled foreign corporation is a shareholder or 
 partner of a corporation or partnership, the controlled 
 foreign corporation shall be treated as owning directly 
 its proportionate share of any such capital or profits 
 interest held directly or indirectly by such 
 corporation or partnership''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 
2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or within 
which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.

SEC. 224. ELECTION NOT TO USE AVERAGE EXCHANGE RATE FOR FOREIGN TAX 
 PAID OTHER THAN IN FUNCTIONAL CURRENCY.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 986(a) (relating to 
determination of foreign taxes and foreign corporation's earnings and 
profits) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph 
(E) and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(D) Elective exception for taxes paid other than 
 in functional currency.--
 ``(i) In general.--At the election of the 
 taxpayer, subparagraph (A) shall not apply to 
 any foreign income taxes the liability for 
 which is denominated in any currency other than 
 in the taxpayer's functional currency.
 ``(ii) Application to qualified business 
 units.--An election under this subparagraph may 
 apply to foreign income taxes attributable to a 
 qualified business unit in accordance with 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(iii) Election.--Any such election shall 
 apply to the taxable year for which made and 
 all subsequent taxable years unless revoked 
 with the consent of the Secretary.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 225. TREATMENT OF INCOME TAX BASE DIFFERENCES.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 904(d) is amended by 
redesignating subparagraphs (H) and (I) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), 
respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(H) Treatment of income tax base differences.--
 ``(i) In general.--A taxpayer may elect to 
 treat tax imposed under the law of a foreign 
 country or possession of the United States on 
 an amount which does not constitute income 
 under United States tax principles as tax 
 imposed on income described in subparagraph (C) 
 or (I) of paragraph (1).
 ``(ii) Election irrevocable.--Any such 
 election shall apply to the taxable year for 
 which made and all subsequent taxable years 
 unless revoked with the consent of the 
 Secretary.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 226. MODIFICATION OF EXCEPTIONS UNDER SUBPART F FOR ACTIVE 
 FINANCING.

 (a) In General.--Section 954(h)(3) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(E) Direct conduct of activities.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), an activity shall be 
 treated as conducted directly by an eligible controlled 
 foreign corporation or qualified business unit in its 
 home country if the activity is performed by employees 
 of a related person and--
 ``(i) the related person is an eligible 
 controlled foreign corporation the home country 
 of which is the same as the home country of the 
 corporation or unit to which subparagraph 
 (A)(ii)(II) is being applied,
 ``(ii) the activity is performed in the 
 home country of the related person, and
 ``(iii) the related person is compensated 
 on an arm's-length basis for the performance of 
 the activity by its employees and such 
 compensation is treated as earned by such 
 person in its home country for purposes of the 
 home country's tax laws.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years of such foreign corporations beginning after December 
31, 2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or 
within which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.

SEC. 227. UNITED STATES PROPERTY NOT TO INCLUDE CERTAIN ASSETS OF 
 CONTROLLED FOREIGN CORPORATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 956(c)(2) (relating to exceptions from 
property treated as United States property) is amended by striking 
``and'' at the end of subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the 
end of subparagraph (K) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding at the 
end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(L) securities acquired and held by a controlled 
 foreign corporation in the ordinary course of its 
 business as a dealer in securities if--
 ``(i) the dealer accounts for the 
 securities as securities held primarily for 
 sale to customers in the ordinary course of 
 business, and
 ``(ii) the dealer disposes of the 
 securities (or such securities mature while 
 held by the dealer) within a period consistent 
 with the holding of securities for sale to 
 customers in the ordinary course of business; 
 and
 ``(M) an obligation of a United States person 
 which--
 ``(i) is not a domestic corporation, and
 ``(ii) is not--
 ``(I) a United States shareholder 
 (as defined in section 951(b)) of the 
 controlled foreign corporation, or
 ``(II) a partnership, estate, or 
 trust in which the controlled foreign 
 corporation, or any related person (as 
 defined in section 954(d)(3)), is a 
 partner, beneficiary, or trustee 
 immediately after the acquisition of 
 any obligation of such partnership, 
 estate, or trust by the controlled 
 foreign corporation.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 956(c)(2) is amended by striking 
``and (K)'' in the last sentence and inserting ``, (K), and (L)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 
31, 2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or 
within which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.

SEC. 228. PROVIDE EQUAL TREATMENT FOR INTEREST PAID BY FOREIGN 
 PARTNERSHIPS AND FOREIGN CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 861(a) is amended by 
striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period 
at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding 
at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) in the case of a foreign partnership, which 
 is predominantly engaged in the active conduct of a 
 trade or business outside the United States, any 
 interest not paid by a trade or business engaged in by 
 the partnership in the United States and not allocable 
 to income which is effectively connected (or treated as 
 effectively connected) with the conduct of a trade or 
 business in the United States.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 229. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF CERTAIN TRANSFERS OF INTANGIBLE 
 PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (C) of section 367(d)(2) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of 
applying section 904(d), any such amount shall be treated in the same 
manner as if such amount were a royalty.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to amounts treated as received pursuant to section 367(d)(2) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on or after August 5, 1997.

SEC. 230. MODIFICATION OF THE TREATMENT OF CERTAIN REIT DISTRIBUTIONS 
 ATTRIBUTABLE TO GAIN FROM SALES OR EXCHANGES OF UNITED 
 STATES REAL PROPERTY INTERESTS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 897(h) (relating to look-
through of distributions) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new sentence: ``Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any 
distribution by a REIT with respect to any class of stock which is 
regularly traded on an established securities market located in the 
United States shall not be treated as gain recognized from the sale or 
exchange of a United States real property interest if the shareholder 
did not own more than 5 percent of such class of stock at any time 
during the taxable year.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (3) of section 857(b) 
(relating to capital gains) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) Certain distributions.--In the case of a 
 shareholder of a real estate investment trust to whom 
 section 897 does not apply by reason of the second 
 sentence of section 897(h)(1), the amount which would 
 be included in computing long-term capital gains for 
 such shareholder under subparagraph (B) or (D) (without 
 regard to this subparagraph)--
 ``(i) shall not be included in computing 
 such shareholder's long-term capital gains, and
 ``(ii) shall be included in such 
 shareholder's gross income as a dividend from 
 the real estate investment trust.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 231. TOLL TAX ON EXCESS QUALIFIED FOREIGN DISTRIBUTION AMOUNT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart F of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 
is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 965. TOLL TAX IMPOSED ON EXCESS QUALIFIED FOREIGN DISTRIBUTION 
 AMOUNT.

 ``(a) Toll Tax Imposed on Excess Qualified Foreign Distribution 
Amount.--If a corporation elects the application of this section, a tax 
shall be imposed on the taxpayer in an amount equal to 5.25 percent 
of--
 ``(1) the taxpayer's excess qualified foreign distribution 
 amount, and
 ``(2) the amount determined under section 78 which is 
 attributable to such excess qualified foreign distribution 
 amount.
Such tax shall be imposed in lieu of the tax imposed under section 11 
or 55 on the amounts described in paragraphs (1) and (2) for the 
taxable year.
 ``(b) Excess Qualified Foreign Distribution Amount.--For purposes 
of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `excess qualified foreign 
 distribution amount' means the excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the aggregate dividends received by the 
 taxpayer during the taxable year which are--
 ``(i) from 1 or more corporations which are 
 controlled foreign corporations in which the 
 taxpayer is a United States shareholder on the 
 date such dividends are paid, and
 ``(ii) described in a domestic reinvestment 
 plan which--
 ``(I) is approved by the taxpayer's 
 president, chief executive officer, or 
 comparable official before the payment 
 of such dividends and subsequently 
 approved by the taxpayer's board of 
 directors, management committee, 
 executive committee, or similar body, 
 and
 ``(II) provides for the 
 reinvestment of such dividends in the 
 United States (other than as payment 
 for executive compensation), including 
 as a source for the funding of worker 
 hiring and training, infrastructure, 
 research and development, capital 
 investments, or the financial 
 stabilization of the corporation for 
 the purposes of job retention or 
 creation, over
 ``(B) the base dividend amount.
 ``(2) Base dividend amount.--The term `base dividend 
 amount' means an amount designated under subsection (c)(7), but 
 not less than the average amount of dividends received during 
 the fixed base period from 1 or more corporations which are 
 controlled foreign corporations in which the taxpayer is a 
 United States shareholder on the date such dividends are paid.
 ``(3) Fixed base period.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `fixed base period' 
 means each of 3 taxable years which are among the 5 
 most recent taxable years of the taxpayer ending on or 
 before December 31, 2002, determined by disregarding--
 ``(i) the 1 taxable year for which the 
 taxpayer had the highest amount of dividends 
 from 1 or more corporations which are 
 controlled foreign corporations relative to the 
 other 4 taxable years, and
 ``(ii) the 1 taxable year for which the 
 taxpayer had the lowest amount of dividends 
 from such corporations relative to the other 4 
 taxable years.
 ``(B) Shorter period.--If the taxpayer has fewer 
 than 5 taxable years ending on or before December 31, 
 2002, then in lieu of applying subparagraph (A), the 
 fixed base period shall include all the taxable years 
 of the taxpayer ending on or before December 31, 2002.
 ``(c) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Dividends.--The term `dividend' has the meaning given 
 such term by section 316, except that the term shall include 
 amounts described in section 951(a)(1)(B), but shall not 
 include amounts described in sections 78 and 959.
 ``(2) Controlled foreign corporations and united states 
 shareholders.--The term `controlled foreign corporation' has 
 the meaning given such term by section 957(a) and the term 
 `United States shareholder' has the meaning given such term by 
 section 951(b).
 ``(3) Foreign tax credits.--The amount of any income, war, 
 profits, or excess profit taxes paid (or deemed paid under 
 sections 902 and 960) or accrued by the taxpayer with respect 
 to the excess qualified foreign distribution amount for which a 
 credit would be allowable under section 901 in the absence of 
 this section, shall be reduced by 85 percent. No deduction 
 shall be allowed under this chapter for the portion of any tax 
 for which credit is not allowable by reason of the preceding 
 sentence.
 ``(4) Foreign tax credit limitation.--For purposes of 
 section 904, there shall be disregarded 85 percent of--
 ``(A) the excess qualified foreign distribution 
 amount,
 ``(B) the amount determined under section 78 which 
 is attributable to such excess qualified foreign 
 distribution amount, and
 ``(C) the amounts (including assets, gross income, 
 and other relevant bases of apportionment) which are 
 attributable to the excess qualified foreign 
 distribution amount which would, determined without 
 regard to this section, be used to apportion the 
 expenses, losses, and deductions of the taxpayer under 
 section 861 and 864 in determining its taxable income 
 from sources without the United States.
 For purposes of applying subparagraph (C), the principles of 
 section 864(e)(3)(A) shall apply.
 ``(5) Treatment of acquisitions and dispositions.--Rules 
 similar to the rules of section 41(f)(3) shall apply in the 
 case of acquisitions or dispositions of controlled foreign 
 corporations occurring on or after the first day of the 
 earliest taxable year taken into account in determining the 
 fixed base period.
 ``(6) Treatment of consolidated groups.--Members of an 
 affiliated group of corporations filing a consolidated return 
 under section 1501 shall be treated as a single taxpayer for 
 purposes of this section.
 ``(7) Designation of dividends.--Subject to subsection 
 (b)(2), the taxpayer shall designate the particular dividends 
 received during the taxable year from 1 or more corporations 
 which are controlled foreign corporations in which it is a 
 United States shareholder which are dividends excluded from the 
 excess qualified foreign distribution amount. The total amount 
 of such designated dividends shall equal the base dividend 
 amount.
 ``(8) Treatment of expenses, losses, and deductions.--Any 
 expenses, losses, or deductions of the taxpayer allowable under 
 subchapter B--
 ``(A) shall not be applied to reduce the amounts 
 described in subsection (a)(1), and
 ``(B) shall be applied to reduce other income of 
 the taxpayer (determined without regard to the amounts 
 described in subsection (a)(1)).
 ``(d) Election.--
 ``(1) In general.--An election under this section shall be 
 made on the taxpayer's timely filed income tax return for the 
 first taxable year (determined by taking extensions into 
 account) ending 120 days or more after the date of the 
 enactment of this section, and, once made, may be revoked only 
 with the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(2) All controlled foreign corporations.--The election 
 shall apply to all corporations which are controlled foreign 
 corporations in which the taxpayer is a United States 
 shareholder during the taxable year.
 ``(3) Consolidated groups.--If a taxpayer is a member of an 
 affiliated group of corporations filing a consolidated return 
 under section 1501 for the taxable year, an election under this 
 section shall be made by the common parent of the affiliated 
 group which includes the taxpayer and shall apply to all 
 members of the affiliated group.
 ``(e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary and appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section, including regulations under section 55 and regulations 
addressing corporations which, during the fixed base period or 
thereafter, join or leave an affiliated group of corporations filing a 
consolidated return.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart F of 
part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new item:

 ``Sec. 965. Toll tax imposed on excess 
 qualified foreign distribution 
 amount.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply only to the first taxable year of the electing taxpayer ending 
120 days or more after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 232. EXCLUSION OF INCOME DERIVED FROM CERTAIN WAGERS ON HORSE 
 RACES AND DOG RACES FROM GROSS INCOME OF NONRESIDENT 
 ALIEN INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (b) of section 872 (relating to 
exclusions) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (5), (6), and (7) as 
paragraphs (6), (7), and (8), respectively, and inserting after 
paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Income derived from wagering transactions in certain 
 parimutuel pools.--Gross income derived by a nonresident alien 
 individual from a legal wagering transaction initiated outside 
 the United States in a parimutuel pool with respect to a live 
 horse race or dog race in the United States.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 883(a)(4) is amended by striking 
``(5), (6), and (7)'' and inserting ``(6), (7), and (8)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to wagers made after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 233. LIMITATION OF WITHHOLDING TAX FOR PUERTO RICO CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (b) of section 881 is amended by 
redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after 
paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Commonwealth of puerto rico.--If dividends are 
 received during a taxable year by a corporation--
 ``(A) created or organized in, or under the law of, 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and
 ``(B) with respect to which the requirements of 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (1) are 
 met for the taxable year,
 subsection (a) shall be applied for such taxable year by 
 substituting `10 percent' for `30 percent'.''.
 (b) Withholding.--Subsection (c) of section 1442 (relating to 
withholding of tax on foreign corporations) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``For purposes'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Guam, american samoa, the northern mariana islands, 
 and the virgin islands.--For purposes'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Commonwealth of puerto rico.--If dividends are 
 received during a taxable year by a corporation--
 ``(A) created or organized in, or under the law of, 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and
 ``(B) with respect to which the requirements of 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 881(b)(1) 
 are met for the taxable year,
 subsection (a) shall be applied for such taxable year by 
 substituting `10 percent' for `30 percent'.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subsection (b) of section 881 is amended by striking 
 ``Guam and Virgin Islands Corporations'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``Possessions''.
 (2) Paragraph (1) of section 881(b) is amended by striking 
 ``In general'' in the heading and inserting ``Guam, american 
 samoa, the northern mariana islands, and the virgin islands''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to dividends paid after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 234. REPORT ON WTO DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PANELS AND THE APPELLATE 
 BODY.

 Not later than March 31, 2004, the Secretary of Commerce, in 
consultation with the United States Trade Representative, shall 
transmit a report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the 
Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, regarding 
whether dispute settlement panels and the Appellate Body of the World 
Trade Organization have--
 (1) added to or diminished the rights of the United States 
 by imposing obligations or restrictions on the use of 
 antidumping, countervailing, and safeguard measures not agreed 
 to under the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the 
 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, the Agreement 
 on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, and the Agreement on 
 Safeguards;
 (2) appropriately applied the standard of review contained 
 in Article 17.6 of the Agreement on Implementation of Article 
 VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994; or
 (3) exceeded their authority or terms of reference under 
 the Agreements referred to in paragraph (1).

SEC. 235. STUDY OF IMPACT OF INTERNATIONAL TAX LAWS ON TAXPAYERS OTHER 
 THAN LARGE CORPORATIONS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's 
delegate shall conduct a study of the impact of Federal international 
tax rules on taxpayers other than large corporations, including the 
burdens placed on such taxpayers in complying with such rules.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on 
Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House 
of Representatives the results of the study conducted under subsection 
(a), including any recommendations for legislative or administrative 
changes to reduce the compliance burden on taxpayers other than large 
corporations and for such other purposes as the Secretary determines 
appropriate.

SEC. 236. DELAY IN EFFECTIVE DATE OF FINAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING 
 EXCLUSION OF INCOME FROM INTERNATIONAL OPERATION OF SHIPS 
 OR AIRCRAFT.

 Notwithstanding the provisions of Treasury regulation Sec. 1.883-5, 
the final regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury relating 
to income derived by foreign corporations from the international 
operation of ships or aircraft (Treasury regulations Sec. 1.883-1 
through Sec. 1.883-5) shall apply to taxable years of a foreign 
corporation seeking qualified foreign corporation status beginning 
after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 237. INTEREST PAYMENTS DEDUCTIBLE WHERE DISQUALIFIED GUARANTEE HAS 
 NO ECONOMIC EFFECT.

 (a) In General.--Section 163(j)(6)(D)(ii) (relating to exceptions 
to disqualified guarantee) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause (I),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subclause (II) and 
 inserting ``, or'',
 (3) by inserting after subclause (II) the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(III) in the case of a guarantee 
 by a foreign person, to the extent of 
 the amount that the taxpayer 
 establishes to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that the taxpayer could have 
 borrowed from an unrelated person 
 without the guarantee.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to guarantees issued on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 TITLE III--DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING AND BUSINESS PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

SEC. 301. EXPANSION OF QUALIFIED SMALL-ISSUE BOND PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (F) of section 144(a)(4) (relating to 
$10,000,000 limit in certain cases) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(F) Additional capital expenditures not taken 
 into account.--With respect to any issue, in addition 
 to any capital expenditure described in subparagraph 
 (C), capital expenditures of not to exceed $10,000,000 
 shall not be taken into account for purposes of 
 applying subparagraph (A)(ii).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to bonds issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 302. EXPENSING OF BROADBAND INTERNET ACCESS EXPENDITURES.

 (a) In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to 
itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by 
inserting after section 190 the following new section:

``SEC. 191. BROADBAND EXPENDITURES.

 ``(a) Treatment of Expenditures.--
 ``(1) In general.--A taxpayer may elect to treat any 
 qualified broadband expenditure which is paid or incurred by 
 the taxpayer as an expense which is not chargeable to capital 
 account. Any expenditure which is so treated shall be allowed 
 as a deduction.
 ``(2) Election.--An election under paragraph (1) shall be 
 made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may 
 prescribe by regulation.
 ``(b) Qualified Broadband Expenditures.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified broadband 
 expenditure' means, with respect to any taxable year, any 
 direct or indirect costs incurred and properly taken into 
 account with respect to--
 ``(A) the purchase or installation of qualified 
 equipment (including any upgrades thereto), and
 ``(B) the connection of such qualified equipment to 
 any qualified subscriber.
 ``(2) Certain satellite expenditures excluded.--Such term 
 shall not include any costs incurred with respect to the 
 launching of any satellite equipment.
 ``(3) Leased equipment.--Such term shall include so much of 
 the purchase price paid by the lessor of qualified equipment 
 subject to a lease described in subsection (c)(2)(B) as is 
 attributable to expenditures incurred by the lessee which would 
 otherwise be described in paragraph (1).
 ``(c) When Expenditures Taken Into Account.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--Qualified broadband expenditures with 
 respect to qualified equipment shall be taken into account with 
 respect to the first taxable year in which--
 ``(A) current generation broadband services are 
 provided through such equipment to qualified 
 subscribers, or
 ``(B) next generation broadband services are 
 provided through such equipment to qualified 
 subscribers.
 ``(2) Limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Qualified expenditures shall be 
 taken into account under paragraph (1) only with 
 respect to qualified equipment--
 ``(i) the original use of which commences 
 with the taxpayer, and
 ``(ii) which is placed in service, after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 ``(B) Sale-leasebacks.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), if property--
 ``(i) is originally placed in service after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act by any 
 person, and
 ``(ii) sold and leased back by such person 
 within 3 months after the date such property 
 was originally placed in service,
 such property shall be treated as originally placed in 
 service not earlier than the date on which such 
 property is used under the leaseback referred to in 
 clause (ii).
 ``(d) Special Allocation Rules.--
 ``(1) Current generation broadband services.--For purposes 
 of determining the amount of qualified broadband expenditures 
 under subsection (a)(1) with respect to qualified equipment 
 through which current generation broadband services are 
 provided, if the qualified equipment is capable of serving both 
 qualified subscribers and other subscribers, the qualified 
 broadband expenditures shall be multiplied by a fraction--
 ``(A) the numerator of which is the sum of the 
 number of potential qualified subscribers within the 
 rural areas and the underserved areas which the 
 equipment is capable of serving with current generation 
 broadband services, and
 ``(B) the denominator of which is the total 
 potential subscriber population of the area which the 
 equipment is capable of serving with current generation 
 broadband services.
 ``(2) Next generation broadband services.--For purposes of 
 determining the amount of qualified broadband expenditures 
 under subsection (a)(1) with respect to qualified equipment 
 through which next generation broadband services are provided, 
 if the qualified equipment is capable of serving both qualified 
 subscribers and other subscribers, the qualified expenditures 
 shall be multiplied by a fraction--
 ``(A) the numerator of which is the sum of--
 ``(i) the number of potential qualified 
 subscribers within the rural areas and 
 underserved areas, plus
 ``(ii) the number of potential qualified 
 subscribers within the area consisting only of 
 residential subscribers not described in clause 
 (i),
 which the equipment is capable of serving with next 
 generation broadband services, and
 ``(B) the denominator of which is the total 
 potential subscriber population of the area which the 
 equipment is capable of serving with next generation 
 broadband services.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Antenna.--The term `antenna' means any device used to 
 transmit or receive signals through the electromagnetic 
 spectrum, including satellite equipment.
 ``(2) Cable operator.--The term `cable operator' has the 
 meaning given such term by section 602(5) of the Communications 
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 522(5)).
 ``(3) Commercial mobile service carrier.--The term 
 `commercial mobile service carrier' means any person authorized 
 to provide commercial mobile radio service as defined in 
 section 20.3 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations.
 ``(4) Current generation broadband service.--The term 
 `current generation broadband service' means the transmission 
 of signals at a rate of at least 1,000,000 bits per second to 
 the subscriber and at least 128,000 bits per second from the 
 subscriber.
 ``(5) Multiplexing or demultiplexing.--The term 
 `multiplexing' means the transmission of 2 or more signals over 
 a single channel, and the term `demultiplexing' means the 
 separation of 2 or more signals previously combined by 
 compatible multiplexing equipment.
 ``(6) Next generation broadband service.--The term `next 
 generation broadband service' means the transmission of signals 
 at a rate of at least 22,000,000 bits per second to the 
 subscriber and at least 5,000,000 bits per second from the 
 subscriber.
 ``(7) Nonresidential subscriber.--The term `nonresidential 
 subscriber' means any person who purchases broadband services 
 which are delivered to the permanent place of business of such 
 person.
 ``(8) Open video system operator.--The term `open video 
 system operator' means any person authorized to provide service 
 under section 653 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
 573).
 ``(9) Other wireless carrier.--The term `other wireless 
 carrier' means any person (other than a telecommunications 
 carrier, commercial mobile service carrier, cable operator, 
 open video system operator, or satellite carrier) providing 
 current generation broadband services or next generation 
 broadband service to subscribers through the radio transmission 
 of energy.
 ``(10) Packet switching.--The term `packet switching' means 
 controlling or routing the path of any digitized transmission 
 signal which is assembled into packets or cells.
 ``(11) Provider.--The term `provider' means, with respect 
 to any qualified equipment--
 ``(A) a cable operator,
 ``(B) a commercial mobile service carrier,
 ``(C) an open video system operator,
 ``(D) a satellite carrier,
 ``(E) a telecommunications carrier, or
 ``(F) any other wireless carrier,
 providing current generation broadband services or next 
 generation broadband services to subscribers through such 
 qualified equipment.
 ``(12) Provision of services.--A provider shall be treated 
 as providing services to 1 or more subscribers if--
 ``(A) such a subscriber has been passed by the 
 provider's equipment and can be connected to such 
 equipment for a standard connection fee,
 ``(B) the provider is physically able to deliver 
 current generation broadband services or next 
 generation broadband services, as applicable, to such a 
 subscriber without making more than an insignificant 
 investment with respect to such subscriber,
 ``(C) the provider has made reasonable efforts to 
 make such subscribers aware of the availability of such 
 services,
 ``(D) such services have been purchased by 1 or 
 more such subscribers, and
 ``(E) such services are made available to such 
 subscribers at average prices comparable to those at 
 which the provider makes available similar services in 
 any areas in which the provider makes available such 
 services.
 ``(13) Qualified equipment.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified equipment' 
 means equipment which provides current generation 
 broadband services or next generation broadband 
 services--
 ``(i) at least a majority of the time 
 during periods of maximum demand to each 
 subscriber who is utilizing such services, and
 ``(ii) in a manner substantially the same 
 as such services are provided by the provider 
 to subscribers through equipment with respect 
 to which no deduction is allowed under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 ``(B) Only certain investment taken into account.--
 Except as provided in subparagraph (C) or (D), 
 equipment shall be taken into account under 
 subparagraph (A) only to the extent it--
 ``(i) extends from the last point of 
 switching to the outside of the unit, building, 
 dwelling, or office owned or leased by a 
 subscriber in the case of a telecommunications 
 carrier,
 ``(ii) extends from the customer side of 
 the mobile telephone switching office to a 
 transmission/receive antenna (including such 
 antenna) owned or leased by a subscriber in the 
 case of a commercial mobile service carrier,
 ``(iii) extends from the customer side of 
 the headend to the outside of the unit, 
 building, dwelling, or office owned or leased 
 by a subscriber in the case of a cable operator 
 or open video system operator, or
 ``(iv) extends from a transmission/receive 
 antenna (including such antenna) which 
 transmits and receives signals to or from 
 multiple subscribers, to a transmission/receive 
 antenna (including such antenna) on the outside 
 of the unit, building, dwelling, or office 
 owned or leased by a subscriber in the case of 
 a satellite carrier or other wireless carrier, 
 unless such other wireless carrier is also a 
 telecommunications carrier.
 ``(C) Packet switching equipment.--Packet switching 
 equipment, regardless of location, shall be taken into 
 account under subparagraph (A) only if it is deployed 
 in connection with equipment described in subparagraph 
 (B) and is uniquely designed to perform the function of 
 packet switching for current generation broadband 
 services or next generation broadband services, but 
 only if such packet switching is the last in a series 
 of such functions performed in the transmission of a 
 signal to a subscriber or the first in a series of such 
 functions performed in the transmission of a signal 
 from a subscriber.
 ``(D) Multiplexing and demultiplexing equipment.--
 Multiplexing and demultiplexing equipment shall be 
 taken into account under subparagraph (A) only to the 
 extent it is deployed in connection with equipment 
 described in subparagraph (B) and is uniquely designed 
 to perform the function of multiplexing and 
 demultiplexing packets or cells of data and making 
 associated application adaptions, but only if such 
 multiplexing or demultiplexing equipment is located 
 between packet switching equipment described in 
 subparagraph (C) and the subscriber's premises.
 ``(14) Qualified subscriber.--The term `qualified 
 subscriber' means--
 ``(A) with respect to the provision of current 
 generation broadband services--
 ``(i) any nonresidential subscriber 
 maintaining a permanent place of business in a 
 rural area or underserved area, or
 ``(ii) any residential subscriber residing 
 in a dwelling located in a rural area or 
 underserved area which is not a saturated 
 market, and
 ``(B) with respect to the provision of next 
 generation broadband services--
 ``(i) any nonresidential subscriber 
 maintaining a permanent place of business in a 
 rural area or underserved area, or
 ``(ii) any residential subscriber.
 ``(15) Residential subscriber.--The term `residential 
 subscriber' means any individual who purchases broadband 
 services which are delivered to such individual's dwelling.
 ``(16) Rural area.--The term `rural area' means any census 
 tract which--
 ``(A) is not within 10 miles of any incorporated or 
 census designated place containing more than 25,000 
 people, and
 ``(B) is not within a county or county equivalent 
 which has an overall population density of more than 
 500 people per square mile of land.
 ``(17) Rural subscriber.--The term `rural subscriber' means 
 any residential subscriber residing in a dwelling located in a 
 rural area or nonresidential subscriber maintaining a permanent 
 place of business located in a rural area.
 ``(18) Satellite carrier.--The term `satellite carrier' 
 means any person using the facilities of a satellite or 
 satellite service licensed by the Federal Communications 
 Commission and operating in the Fixed-Satellite Service under 
 part 25 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations or the 
 Direct Broadcast Satellite Service under part 100 of title 47 
 of such Code to establish and operate a channel of 
 communications for distribution of signals, and owning or 
 leasing a capacity or service on a satellite in order to 
 provide such point-to-multipoint distribution.
 ``(19) Saturated market.--The term `saturated market' means 
 any census tract in which, as of the date of the enactment of 
 this section--
 ``(A) current generation broadband services have 
 been provided by a single provider to 85 percent or 
 more of the total number of potential residential 
 subscribers residing in dwellings located within such 
 census tract, and
 ``(B) such services can be utilized--
 ``(i) at least a majority of the time 
 during periods of maximum demand by each such 
 subscriber who is utilizing such services, and
 ``(ii) in a manner substantially the same 
 as such services are provided by the provider 
 to subscribers through equipment with respect 
 to which no deduction is allowed under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 ``(20) Subscriber.--The term `subscriber' means any person 
 who purchases current generation broadband services or next 
 generation broadband services.
 ``(21) Telecommunications carrier.--The term 
 `telecommunications carrier' has the meaning given such term by 
 section 3(44) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
 153(44)), but--
 ``(A) includes all members of an affiliated group 
 of which a telecommunications carrier is a member, and
 ``(B) does not include a commercial mobile service 
 carrier.
 ``(22) Total potential subscriber population.--The term 
 `total potential subscriber population' means, with respect to 
 any area and based on the most recent census data, the total 
 number of potential residential subscribers residing in 
 dwellings located in such area and potential nonresidential 
 subscribers maintaining permanent places of business located in 
 such area.
 ``(23) Underserved area.--The term `underserved area' 
 means--
 ``(A) any census tract which is located in--
 ``(i) an empowerment zone or enterprise 
 community designated under section 1391, or
 ``(ii) the District of Columbia Enterprise 
 Zone established under section 1400, or
 ``(B) any census tract--
 ``(i) the poverty level of which is at 
 least 30 percent (based on the most recent 
 census data), and
 ``(ii) the median family income of which 
 does not exceed--
 ``(I) in the case of a census tract 
 located in a metropolitan statistical 
 area, 70 percent of the greater of the 
 metropolitan area median family income 
 or the statewide median family income, 
 and
 ``(II) in the case of a census 
 tract located in a nonmetropolitan 
 statistical area, 70 percent of the 
 nonmetropolitan statewide median family 
 income.
 ``(24) Underserved subscriber.--The term `underserved 
 subscriber' means any residential subscriber residing in a 
 dwelling located in an underserved area or nonresidential 
 subscriber maintaining a permanent place of business located in 
 an underserved area.
 ``(f) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Property used outside the united states, etc., not 
 qualified.--No expenditures shall be taken into account under 
 subsection (a)(1) with respect to the portion of the cost of 
 any property referred to in section 50(b) or with respect to 
 the portion of the cost of any property specified in an 
 election under section 179.
 ``(2) Basis reduction.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this title, the 
 basis of any property shall be reduced by the portion 
 of the cost of such property taken into account under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 ``(B) Ordinary income recapture.--For purposes of 
 section 1245, the amount of the deduction allowable 
 under subsection (a)(1) with respect to any property 
 which is of a character subject to the allowance for 
 depreciation shall be treated as a deduction allowed 
 for depreciation under section 167.
 ``(3) Coordination with section 38.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under section 38 with respect to any amount for which a 
 deduction is allowed under subsection (a)(1).''.
 (b) Special Rule for Mutual or Cooperative Telephone Companies.--
Section 512(b) (relating to modifications) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(18) Special rule for mutual or cooperative telephone 
 companies.--A mutual or cooperative telephone company which for 
 the taxable year satisfies the requirements of section 
 501(c)(12)(A) may elect to reduce its unrelated business 
 taxable income for such year, if any, by an amount that does 
 not exceed the qualified broadband expenditures which would be 
 taken into account under section 191 for such year by such 
 company if such company was not exempt from taxation. Any 
 amount which is allowed as a deduction under this paragraph 
 shall not be allowed as a deduction under section 191 and the 
 basis of any property to which this paragraph applies shall be 
 reduced under section 1016(a)(29).''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 263(a)(1) (relating to capital expenditures) is 
 amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by 
 striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and 
 inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(I) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed 
 under section 191.''.
 (2) Section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at 
 the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(29) to the extent provided in section 191(f)(2).''.
 (3) The table of sections for part VI of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item 
 relating to section 190 the following new item:

``Sec. 191. Broadband expenditures.''.
 (d) Designation of Census Tracts.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, not 
 later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 designate and publish those census tracts meeting the criteria 
 described in paragraphs (16), (22), and (23) of section 191(e) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this 
 section). In making such designations, the Secretary of the 
 Treasury shall consult with such other departments and agencies 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (2) Saturated market.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of designating and 
 publishing those census tracts meeting the criteria 
 described in subsection (e)(19) of such section 191--
 (i) the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 prescribe not later than 30 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act the form upon 
 which any provider which takes the position 
 that it meets such criteria with respect to any 
 census tract shall submit a list of such census 
 tracts (and any other information required by 
 the Secretary) not later than 60 days after the 
 date of the publication of such form, and
 (ii) the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 publish an aggregate list of such census tracts 
 and the applicable providers not later than 30 
 days after the last date such submissions are 
 allowed under clause (i).
 (B) No subsequent lists required.--The Secretary of 
 the Treasury shall not be required to publish any list 
 of census tracts meeting such criteria subsequent to 
 the list described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
 (e) Other Regulatory Matters.--
 (1) Prohibition.--No Federal or State agency or 
 instrumentality shall adopt regulations or ratemaking 
 procedures that would have the effect of eliminating or 
 reducing any deduction or portion thereof allowed under section 
 191 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this 
 section) or otherwise subverting the purpose of this section.
 (2) Treasury regulatory authority.--It is the intent of 
 Congress in providing the election to deduct qualified 
 broadband expenditures under section 191 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section) to provide 
 incentives for the purchase, installation, and connection of 
 equipment and facilities offering expanded broadband access to 
 the Internet for users in certain low income and rural areas of 
 the United States, as well as to residential users nationwide, 
 in a manner that maintains competitive neutrality among the 
 various classes of providers of broadband services. 
 Accordingly, the Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe such 
 regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the 
 purposes of section 191 of such Code, including--
 (A) regulations to determine how and when a 
 taxpayer that incurs qualified broadband expenditures 
 satisfies the requirements of section 191 of such Code 
 to provide broadband services, and
 (B) regulations describing the information, 
 records, and data taxpayers are required to provide the 
 Secretary to substantiate compliance with the 
 requirements of section 191 of such Code.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to expenditures incurred after the date of the enactment of this 
Act and before the date which is 12 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 303. EXEMPTION OF NATURAL AGING PROCESS IN DETERMINATION OF 
 PRODUCTION PERIOD FOR DISTILLED SPIRITS UNDER SECTION 
 263A.

 (a) In General.--Section 263A(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (relating to general exceptions) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Exemption of natural aging process in determination 
 of production period for distilled spirits.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the production period for distilled spirits 
 shall be determined without regard to any period allocated to 
 the natural aging process.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to production periods beginning after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 304. MODIFICATION OF ACTIVE BUSINESS DEFINITION UNDER SECTION 355.

 (a) In General.--Section 355(b) (defining active conduct of a trade 
or business) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(3) Special rules relating to active business 
 requirement.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of determining 
 whether a corporation meets the requirement of 
 paragraph (2)(A), all members of such corporation's 
 separate affiliated group shall be treated as one 
 corporation. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a 
 corporation's separate affiliated group is the 
 affiliated group which would be determined under 
 section 1504(a) if such corporation were the common 
 parent and section 1504(b) did not apply.
 ``(B) Control.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(D), 
 all distributee corporations which are members of the 
 same affiliated group (as defined in section 1504(a) 
 without regard to section 1504(b)) shall be treated as 
 one distributee corporation.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 355(b)(2) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(A) it is engaged in the active conduct of a 
 trade or business,''.
 (2) Section 355(b)(2) is amended by striking the last 
 sentence.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply--
 (A) to distributions after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and
 (B) for purposes of determining the continued 
 qualification under section 355(b)(2)(A) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by subsection 
 (b)(1)) of distributions made before such date, as a 
 result of an acquisition, disposition, or other 
 restructuring after such date.
 (2) Transition rule.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall not apply to any distribution pursuant to a transaction 
 which is--
 (A) made pursuant to an agreement which was binding 
 on such date of enactment and at all times thereafter,
 (B) described in a ruling request submitted to the 
 Internal Revenue Service on or before such date, or
 (C) described on or before such date in a public 
 announcement or in a filing with the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission.
 (3) Election to have amendments apply.--Paragraph (2) shall 
 not apply if the distributing corporation elects not to have 
 such paragraph apply to distributions of such corporation. Any 
 such election, once made, shall be irrevocable.

SEC. 305. MODIFIED TAXATION OF IMPORTED ARCHERY PRODUCTS.

 (a) Bows.--Paragraph (1) of section 4161(b) (relating to bows) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) Bows.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is hereby imposed on the 
 sale by the manufacturer, producer, or importer of any 
 bow which has a peak draw weight of 30 pounds or more, 
 a tax equal to 11 percent of the price for which so 
 sold.
 ``(B) Archery equipment.--There is hereby imposed 
 on the sale by the manufacturer, producer, or 
 importer--
 ``(i) of any part or accessory suitable for 
 inclusion in or attachment to a bow described 
 in subparagraph (A), and
 ``(ii) of any quiver or broadhead suitable 
 for use with an arrow described in paragraph 
 (2),
 a tax equal to 11 percent of the price for which so 
 sold.''.
 (b) Arrows.--Subsection (b) of section 4161 (relating to bows and 
arrows, etc.) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
(4) and inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) Arrows.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is hereby imposed on the 
 sale by the manufacturer, producer, or importer of any 
 arrow, a tax equal to 12 percent of the price for which 
 so sold.
 ``(B) Exception.--In the case of any arrow of which 
 the shaft or any other component has been previously 
 taxed under paragraph (1) or (2)--
 ``(i) section 6416(b)(3) shall not apply, 
 and
 ``(ii) the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) 
 shall be an amount equal to the excess (if any) 
 of--
 ``(I) the amount of tax imposed by 
 this paragraph (determined without 
 regard to this subparagraph), over
 ``(II) the amount of tax paid with 
 respect to the tax imposed under 
 paragraph (1) or (2) on such shaft or 
 component.
 ``(C) Arrow.--For purposes of this paragraph, the 
 term `arrow' means any shaft described in paragraph (2) 
 to which additional components are attached.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Section 4161(b)(2) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(other than broadheads)'' after 
 ``point'', and
 (2) by striking ``Arrows.--'' in the heading and inserting 
 ``Arrow components.--''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to articles sold by the manufacturer, producer, or importer after 
the date which is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 306. MODIFICATION TO COOPERATIVE MARKETING RULES TO INCLUDE VALUE 
 ADDED PROCESSING INVOLVING ANIMALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1388 (relating to definitions and special 
rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(k) Cooperative Marketing Includes Value-Added Processing 
Involving Animals.--For purposes of section 521 and this subchapter, 
the marketing of the products of members or other producers shall 
include the feeding of such products to cattle, hogs, fish, chickens, 
or other animals and the sale of the resulting animals or animal 
products.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 521(b) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Cross Reference.--

 ``For treatment of value-added 
processing involving animals, see section 1388(k).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 307. EXTENSION OF DECLARATORY JUDGMENT PROCEDURES TO FARMERS' 
 COOPERATIVE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 7428(a)(1) (relating to declaratory 
judgments of tax exempt organizations) is amended by striking ``or'' at 
the end of subparagraph (B) and by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(D) with respect to the initial classification or 
 continuing classification of a cooperative as an 
 organization described in section 521(b) which is 
 exempt from tax under section 521(a), or''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to pleadings filed after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 308. TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY TAX.

 (a) In General.--Section 541 (relating to imposition of personal 
holding company tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply with respect to any 
taxable year to which section 1(h)(11) (as in effect on the date of the 
enactment of this sentence) applies.''.
 (b) Coordination With Accumulated Earnings Tax.--Section 532(b) is 
amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence:
``Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any taxable year to which section 
541 does not apply.''
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 309. INCREASE IN SECTION 179 EXPENSING.

 (a) In General.--Section 179(b)(2) (relating to reduction in 
limitation) is amended by inserting ``50 percent of'' before ``the 
amount''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.

SEC. 310. FIVE-YEAR CARRYBACK OF NET OPERATING LOSSES.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (H) of section 172(b)(1) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``5-year carryback of certain losses.--'' 
 after ``(H)'', and
 (2) by striking ``or 2002'' and inserting ``, 2002, or 
 2003''.
 (b) Rules Relating to Certain Extended Net Operating Losses.--
Section 172 is amended by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection 
(l) and by inserting after subsection (j) the following new subsection:
 ``(k) Rules Relating to Certain Extended Net Operating Losses.--In 
the case of a taxpayer which has a net operating loss for any taxable 
year ending during 2003 and does not make an election under subsection 
(j), such taxpayer shall be treated as having made an election under 
paragraphs (4)(E) and (2)(C)(iii) of section 168(k) with respect to all 
classes of property for such taxable year.
 (c) Temporary Suspension of 90 Percent Limit on Certain NOL 
Carryovers.--Section 56(d)(1)(A)(ii)(I) (relating to general rule 
defining alternative tax net operating loss deduction) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or 2002'' and inserting ``, 2002, or 
 2003'', and
 (2) by striking ``and 2002'' and inserting ``, 2002, and 
 2003''.
 (d) Technical Corrections.--
 (1) Subparagraph (H) of section 172(b)(1) is amended by 
 striking ``a taxpayer which has''.
 (2) Section 102(c)(2) of the Job Creation and Worker 
 Assistance Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147) is amended by 
 striking ``before January 1, 2003'' and inserting ``after 
 December 31, 1990''.
 (3)(A) Subclause (I) of section 56(d)(1)(A)(i) is amended 
 by striking ``attributable to carryovers''.
 (B) Subclause (I) of section 56(d)(1)(A)(ii) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``for taxable years'' and inserting 
 ``from taxable years'', and
 (ii) by striking ``carryforwards'' and inserting 
 ``carryovers''.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to net operating 
 losses for taxable years ending after December 31, 2002.
 (2) Technical corrections.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (d) shall take effect as if included in the 
 amendments made by section 102 of the Job Creation and Worker 
 Assistance Act of 2002.
 (3) Election.--In the case of a net operating loss for a 
 taxable year ending during 2003--
 (A) any election made under section 172(b)(3) of 
 such Code may (notwithstanding such section) be revoked 
 before November 15, 2004, and
 (B) any election made under section 172(j) of such 
 Code shall (notwithstanding such section) be treated as 
 timely made if made before November 15, 2004.
 (4) Special rule for taxpayers with taxable years ending 
 during january.--Any taxpayer which has a taxable year ending 
 during January may elect under this paragraph to apply section 
 172(b)(1)(H) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended 
 by this section) to its taxable year ending in 2004 rather than 
 its taxable year ending in 2003. If such election is made, then 
 section 172(k) of such Code (as added by this section) shall be 
 applied to the taxpayer's taxable year ending in 2004. Such 
 election shall be made in such manner and at such time as may 
 be prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. Such election, 
 once made, shall be irrevocable.

SEC. 311. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.

 (a) Extension.--
 (1) In general.--Section 41(h)(1)(B) (relating to 
 termination) is amended by striking ``June 30, 2004'' and 
 inserting ``December 31, 2005''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 45C(b)(1)(D) is amended 
 by striking ``June 30, 2004'' and inserting ``December 31, 
 2005''.
 (b) Increase in Rates of Alternative Incremental Credit.--
Subparagraph (A) of section 41(c)(4) (relating to election of 
alternative incremental credit) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``2.65 percent'' and inserting ``3 
 percent'',
 (2) by striking ``3.2 percent'' and inserting ``4 
 percent'', and
 (3) by striking ``3.75 percent'' and inserting ``5 
 percent''.
 (c) Alternative Simplified Credit for Qualified Research 
Expenses.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 41 (relating to 
 base amount) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) 
 as paragraphs (6) and (7), respectively, and by inserting after 
 paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Election of alternative simplified credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--At the election of the taxpayer, 
 the credit determined under subsection (a)(1) shall be 
 equal to 12 percent of so much of the qualified 
 research expenses for the taxable year as exceeds 50 
 percent of the average qualified research expenses for 
 the 3 taxable years preceding the taxable year for 
 which the credit is being determined.
 ``(B) Special rule in case of no qualified research 
 expenses in any of 3 preceding taxable years.--
 ``(i) Taxpayers to which subparagraph 
 applies.--The credit under this paragraph shall 
 be determined under this subparagraph if the 
 taxpayer has no qualified research expenses in 
 any 1 of the 3 taxable years preceding the 
 taxable year for which the credit is being 
 determined.
 ``(ii) Credit rate.--The credit determined 
 under this subparagraph shall be equal to 6 
 percent of the qualified research expenses for 
 the taxable year.
 ``(C) Election.--An election under this paragraph 
 shall apply to the taxable year for which made and all 
 succeeding taxable years unless revoked with the 
 consent of the Secretary. An election under this 
 paragraph may not be made for any taxable year to which 
 an election under paragraph (4) applies.''
 (2) Coordination with election of alternative incremental 
 credit.--
 (A) In general.--Section 41(c)(4)(B) (relating to 
 election) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following: ``An election under this paragraph may not 
 be made for any taxable year to which an election under 
 paragraph (5) applies.''
 (B) Transition rule.--In the case of an election 
 under section 41(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 which applies to the taxable year which includes 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, such election 
 shall be treated as revoked with the consent of the 
 Secretary of the Treasury if the taxpayer makes an 
 election under section 41(c)(5) of such Code (as added 
 by paragraph (1)) for such year.
 (f) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Subsection (a).--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Subsections (b) and (c).--The amendments made by 
 subsections (b) and (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning 
 after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 312. EXPANSION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.

 (a) Credit for Expenses Attributable to Certain Collaborative 
Research Consortia.--
 (1) In general.--Section 41(a) (relating to credit for 
 increasing research activities) is amended by striking ``and'' 
 at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end 
 of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the 
 end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) 20 percent of the amounts paid or incurred by the 
 taxpayer in carrying on any trade or business of the taxpayer 
 during the taxable year (including as contributions) to a 
 research consortium.''.
 (2) Research consortium defined.--Section 41(f) (relating 
 to special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) Research consortium.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `research consortium' 
 means any organization--
 ``(i) which is--
 ``(I) described in section 
 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) and is exempt 
 from tax under section 501(a) and is 
 organized and operated primarily to 
 conduct research, or
 ``(II) organized and operated 
 primarily to conduct research in the 
 public interest (within the meaning of 
 section 501(c)(3)),
 ``(ii) which is not a private foundation,
 ``(iii) to which at least 5 unrelated 
 persons paid or incurred during the calendar 
 year in which the taxable year of the 
 organization begins amounts (including as 
 contributions) to such organization for 
 research, and
 ``(iv) to which no single person paid or 
 incurred (including as contributions) during 
 such calendar year an amount equal to more than 
 50 percent of the total amounts received by 
 such organization during such calendar year for 
 research.
 ``(B) Treatment of persons.--All persons treated as 
 a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of 
 section 52 shall be treated as related persons for 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(iii) and as a single 
 person for purposes of subparagraph (A)(iv).''.
 (3) Conforming amendment.--Section 41(b)(3)(C) is amended 
 by inserting ``(other than a research consortium)'' after 
 ``organization''.
 (b) Repeal of Limitation on Contract Research Expenses Paid to 
Small Businesses, Universities, and Federal Laboratories.--Section 
41(b)(3) (relating to contract research expenses) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Amounts paid to eligible small businesses, 
 universities, and federal laboratories.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of amounts 
 paid by the taxpayer to--
 ``(I) an eligible small business,
 ``(II) an institution of higher 
 education (as defined in section 
 3304(f)), or
 ``(III) an organization which is a 
 Federal laboratory,
 for qualified research, subparagraph (A) shall 
 be applied by substituting `100 percent' for 
 `65 percent'.
 ``(ii) Eligible small business.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `eligible small business' means a small 
 business with respect to which the taxpayer 
 does not own (within the meaning of section 
 318) 50 percent or more of--
 ``(I) in the case of a corporation, 
 the outstanding stock of the 
 corporation (either by vote or value), 
 and
 ``(II) in the case of a small 
 business which is not a corporation, 
 the capital and profits interests of 
 the small business.
 ``(iii) Small business.--For purposes of 
 this subparagraph--
 ``(I) In general.--The term `small 
 business' means, with respect to any 
 calendar year, any person if the annual 
 average number of employees employed by 
 such person during either of the 2 
 preceding calendar years was 500 or 
 fewer. For purposes of the preceding 
 sentence, a preceding calendar year may 
 be taken into account only if the 
 person was in existence throughout the 
 year.
 ``(II) Startups, controlled groups, 
 and predecessors.--Rules similar to the 
 rules of subparagraphs (B) and (D) of 
 section 220(c)(4) shall apply for 
 purposes of this clause.
 ``(iv) Federal laboratory.--For purposes of 
 this subparagraph, the term `Federal 
 laboratory' has the meaning given such term by 
 section 4(6) of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology 
 Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3703(6)), as 
 in effect on the date of the enactment of the 
 Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 313. MANUFACTURER'S JOBS CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business-related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 45S. MANUFACTURER'S JOBS CREDIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an 
eligible taxpayer, the manufacturer's jobs credit determined under this 
section is an amount equal to 50 percent of the lesser of the 
following:
 ``(1) The excess of the W-2 wages paid by the taxpayer 
 during the taxable year over the W-2 wages paid by the taxpayer 
 during the preceding taxable year.
 ``(2) The W-2 wages paid by the taxpayer during the taxable 
 year to any employee who is an eligible TAA recipient (as 
 defined in section 35(c)(2)) for any month during such taxable 
 year.
 ``(3) 22.4 percent of the W-2 wages paid by the taxpayer 
 during the taxable year.
 ``(b) Limitation.--
 ``(1) In general.--If there is an excess described in 
 paragraph (2)(A) for any taxable year, the amount of credit 
 determined under subsection (a) (without regard to this 
 subsection)--
 ``(A) if the value of domestic production 
 determined under section 199(g)(2) for the taxable year 
 does not exceed such value for the preceding taxable 
 year, shall be zero, and
 ``(B) if subparagraph (A) does not apply, shall be 
 reduced (but not below zero) by the applicable 
 percentage of such amount.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the term `applicable percentage' means, with respect to 
 any taxable year, the percentage equal to a fraction--
 ``(A) the numerator of which is the excess (if any) 
 of the modified value of worldwide production of the 
 taxpayer for the taxable year over such modified value 
 for the preceding taxable year, and
 ``(B) the denominator of which is the excess (if 
 any) of the value of worldwide production of the 
 taxpayer for the taxable year over such value for the 
 preceding taxable year.
 ``(3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Value of worldwide production.--The value of 
 worldwide production for any taxable year shall be 
 determined under section 199(g)(4).
 ``(B) Modified value.--The term `modified value of 
 worldwide production' means the value of worldwide 
 production determined by not taking into account any 
 item taken into account in determining the value of 
 domestic production under section 199(g)(2).
 ``(c) Eligible Taxpayer.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`eligible taxpayer' means any taxpayer--
 ``(1) which has domestic production gross receipts for the 
 taxable year and the preceding taxable year, and
 ``(2) which is not treated at any time during the taxable 
 year as an inverted domestic corporation under section 7874.
 ``(d) Definitions and Special Rule.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--Any term used in this section which is 
 also used in section 199 shall have the meaning given such term 
 by section 199.
 ``(2) Special rule for w-2 wages.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1), the amount of W-2 wages taken into account with 
 respect to any employee for any taxable year shall not exceed 
 $50,000.
 ``(e) Certain Rules Made Applicable.--For purposes of this section, 
rules similar to the rules of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(f) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 2005.''.
 (b) Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) 
(relating to current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (29), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (30) and inserting ``, plus'', and 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(31) the manufacturer's jobs credit determined under 
 section 45S.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Sec. 45S. Manufacturer's jobs 
 credit.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 314. BROWNFIELDS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM FOR QUALIFIED GREEN 
 BUILDING AND SUSTAINABLE DESIGN PROJECTS.

 (a) Treatment as Exempt Facility Bond.--Subsection (a) of section 
142 (relating to the definition of exempt facility bond) is amended by 
striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at 
the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(14) qualified green building and sustainable design 
 projects.''.
 (b) Qualified Green Building and Sustainable Design Projects.--
Section 142 (relating to exempt facility bonds) is amended by adding at 
the end thereof the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Qualified Green Building and Sustainable Design Projects.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(14), the 
 term `qualified green building and sustainable design project' 
 means any project which is designated by the Secretary, after 
 consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, as a qualified green building and 
 sustainable design project and which meets the requirements of 
 clauses (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) of paragraph (4)(A).
 ``(2) Designations.--
 ``(A) In general.--Within 60 days after the end of 
 the application period described in paragraph (3)(A), 
 the Secretary, after consultation with the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, 
 shall designate qualified green building and 
 sustainable design projects. At least one of the 
 projects designated shall be located in, or within a 
 10-mile radius of, an empowerment zone as designated 
 pursuant to section 1391, and at least one of the 
 projects designated shall be located in a rural State. 
 No more than one project shall be designated in a 
 State. A project shall not be designated if such 
 project includes a stadium or arena for professional 
 sports exhibitions or games.
 ``(B) Minimum conservation and technology 
 innovation objectives.--The Secretary, after 
 consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, shall ensure that, in 
 the aggregate, the projects designated shall--
 ``(i) reduce electric consumption by more 
 than 150 megawatts annually as compared to 
 conventional generation,
 ``(ii) reduce daily sulfur dioxide 
 emissions by at least 10 tons compared to coal 
 generation power,
 ``(iii) expand by 75 percent the domestic 
 solar photovoltaic market in the United States 
 (measured in megawatts) as compared to the 
 expansion of that market from 2001 to 2002, and
 ``(iv) use at least 25 megawatts of fuel 
 cell energy generation.
 ``(3) Limited designations.--A project may not be 
 designated under this subsection unless--
 ``(A) the project is nominated by a State or local 
 government within 180 days of the enactment of this 
 subsection, and
 ``(B) such State or local government provides 
 written assurances that the project will satisfy the 
 eligibility criteria described in paragraph (4).
 ``(4) Application.--
 ``(A) In general.--A project may not be designated 
 under this subsection unless the application for such 
 designation includes a project proposal which describes 
 the energy efficiency, renewable energy, and 
 sustainable design features of the project and 
 demonstrates that the project satisfies the following 
 eligibility criteria:
 ``(i) Green building and sustainable 
 design.--At least 75 percent of the square 
 footage of commercial buildings which are part 
 of the project is registered for United States 
 Green Building Council's LEED certification and 
 is reasonably expected (at the time of the 
 designation) to receive such certification. For 
 purposes of determining LEED certification as 
 required under this clause, points shall be 
 credited by using the following:
 ``(I) For wood products, 
 certification under the Sustainable 
 Forestry Initiative Program and the 
 American Tree Farm System.
 ``(II) For renewable wood products, 
 as credited for recycled content 
 otherwise provided under LEED 
 certification.
 ``(III) For composite wood 
 products, certification under standards 
 established by the American National 
 Standards Institute, or such other 
 voluntary standards as published in the 
 Federal Register by the Administrator 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 ``(ii) Brownfield redevelopment.--The 
 project includes a brownfield site as defined 
 by section 101(39) of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601), 
 including a site described in subparagraph 
 (D)(ii)(II)(aa) thereof.
 ``(iii) State and local support.--The 
 project receives specific State or local 
 government resources which will support the 
 project in an amount equal to at least 
 $5,000,000. For purposes of the preceding 
 sentence, the term `resources' includes tax 
 abatement benefits and contributions in kind.
 ``(iv) Size.--The project includes at least 
 one of the following:
 ``(I) At least 1,000,000 square 
 feet of building.
 ``(II) At least 20 acres.
 ``(v) Use of tax benefit.--The project 
 proposal includes a description of the net 
 benefit of the tax-exempt financing provided 
 under this subsection which will be allocated 
 for financing of one or more of the following:
 ``(I) The purchase, construction, 
 integration, or other use of energy 
 efficiency, renewable energy, and 
 sustainable design features of the 
 project.
 ``(II) Compliance with 
 certification standards cited under 
 clause (i).
 ``(III) The purchase, remediation, 
 and foundation construction and 
 preparation of the brownfields site.
 ``(vi) Prohibited facilities.--An issue 
 shall not be treated as an issue described in 
 subsection (a)(14) if any proceeds of such 
 issue are used to provide any facility the 
 principal business of which is the sale of food 
 or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the 
 premises.
 ``(vii) Employment.--The project is 
 projected to provide permanent employment of at 
 least 1,500 full time equivalents (150 full 
 time equivalents in rural States) when 
 completed and construction employment of at 
 least 1,000 full time equivalents (100 full 
 time equivalents in rural States).
 The application shall include an independent analysis 
 which describes the project's economic impact, 
 including the amount of projected employment.
 ``(B) Project description.--Each application 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall contain for each 
 project a description of--
 ``(i) the amount of electric consumption 
 reduced as compared to conventional 
 construction,
 ``(ii) the amount of sulfur dioxide daily 
 emissions reduced compared to coal generation,
 ``(iii) the amount of the gross installed 
 capacity of the project's solar photovoltaic 
 capacity measured in megawatts, and
 ``(iv) the amount, in megawatts, of the 
 project's fuel cell energy generation.
 ``(5) Certification of use of tax benefit.--No later than 
 30 days after the completion of the project, each project must 
 certify to the Secretary that the net benefit of the tax-exempt 
 financing was used for the purposes described in paragraph (4).
 ``(6) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Rural state.--The term `rural State' means 
 any State which has--
 ``(i) a population of less than 4,500,000 
 according to the 2000 census,
 ``(ii) a population density of less than 
 150 people per square mile according to the 
 2000 census, and
 ``(iii) increased in population by less 
 than half the rate of the national increase 
 between the 1990 and 2000 censuses.
 ``(B) Local government.--The term `local 
 government' has the meaning given such term by section 
 1393(a)(5).
 ``(C) Net benefit of tax-exempt financing.--The 
 term `net benefit of tax-exempt financing' means the 
 present value of the interest savings (determined by a 
 calculation established by the Secretary) which result 
 from the tax-exempt status of the bonds.
 ``(7) Aggregate face amount of tax-exempt financing.--
 ``(A) In general.--An issue shall not be treated as 
 an issue described in subsection (a)(14) if the 
 aggregate face amount of bonds issued by the State or 
 local government pursuant thereto for a project (when 
 added to the aggregate face amount of bonds previously 
 so issued for such project) exceeds an amount 
 designated by the Secretary as part of the designation.
 ``(B) Limitation on amount of bonds.--The Secretary 
 may not allocate authority to issue qualified green 
 building and sustainable design project bonds in an 
 aggregate face amount exceeding $2,000,000,000.
 ``(8) Termination.--Subsection (a)(14) shall not apply with 
 respect to any bond issued after September 30, 2009.
 ``(9) Treatment of current refunding bonds.--Paragraphs 
 (7)(B) and (8) shall not apply to any bond (or series of bonds) 
 issued to refund a bond issued under subsection (a)(14) before 
 October 1, 2009, if--
 ``(A) the average maturity date of the issue of 
 which the refunding bond is a part is not later than 
 the average maturity date of the bonds to be refunded 
 by such issue,
 ``(B) the amount of the refunding bond does not 
 exceed the outstanding amount of the refunded bond, and
 ``(C) the net proceeds of the refunding bond are 
 used to redeem the refunded bond not later than 90 days 
 after the date of the issuance of the refunding bond.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), average maturity shall be determined 
in accordance with section 147(b)(2)(A).''.
 (c) Exemption From General State Volume Caps.--Paragraph (3) of 
section 146(g) (relating to exception for certain bonds) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or (13)'' and inserting ``(13), or 
 (14)'', and
 (2) by striking ``and qualified public educational 
 facilities'' and inserting ``qualified public educational 
 facilities, and qualified green building and sustainable design 
 projects''.
 (d) Accountability.--Each issuer shall maintain, on behalf of each 
project, an interest bearing reserve account equal to 1 percent of the 
net proceeds of any bond issued under this section for such project. 
Not later than 5 years after the date of issuance, the Secretary of the 
Treasury, after consultation with the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, shall determine whether the project 
financed with such bonds has substantially complied with the terms and 
conditions described in section 142(l)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 (as added by this section). If the Secretary, after such 
consultation, certifies that the project has substantially complied 
with such terms and conditions and meets the commitments set forth in 
the application for such project described in section 142(l)(4) of such 
Code, amounts in the reserve account, including all interest, shall be 
released to the project. If the Secretary determines that the project 
has not substantially complied with such terms and conditions, amounts 
in the reserve account, including all interest, shall be paid to the 
United States Treasury.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to bonds issued after December 31, 2004.

 Subtitle B--Manufacturing Relating to Films

SEC. 321. SPECIAL RULES FOR CERTAIN FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by 
inserting after section 180 the following new section:

``SEC. 181. TREATMENT OF QUALIFIED FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS.

 ``(a) Election To Treat Certain Costs of Qualified Film and 
Television Productions as Expenses.--
 ``(1) In general.--A taxpayer may elect to treat the cost 
 of any qualified film or television production as an expense 
 which is not chargeable to capital account. Any cost so treated 
 shall be allowed as a deduction.
 ``(2) Dollar limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--The aggregate cost which may be 
 taken into account under paragraph (1) with respect to 
 each qualified film or television production shall not 
 exceed $15,000,000.
 ``(B) Higher dollar limitation for productions in 
 certain areas.--In the case of any qualified film or 
 television production the aggregate cost of which is 
 significantly incurred in an area eligible for 
 designation as--
 ``(i) a low-income community under section 
 45D, or
 ``(ii) a distressed county or isolated area 
 of distress by the Delta Regional Authority 
 established under section 2009aa-1 of title 7, 
 United States Code,
 subparagraph (A) shall be applied by substituting 
 `$20,000,000' for `$15,000,000'.
 ``(b) Amortization of Remaining Costs.--
 ``(1) In general.--If an election is made under subsection 
 (a) with respect to any qualified film or television 
 production, that portion of the basis of such production in 
 excess of the amount taken into account under subsection (a) 
 shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over the 36-month 
 period beginning with the month in which such production is 
 placed in service.
 ``(2) No other deduction or amortization deduction 
 allowable.--With respect to the basis of any qualified film or 
 television production described in paragraph (1), no other 
 depreciation or amortization deduction shall be allowable.
 ``(c) Election.--
 ``(1) In general.--An election under subsection (a) with 
 respect to any qualified film or television production shall be 
 made in such manner as prescribed by the Secretary and by the 
 due date (including extensions) for filing the taxpayer's 
 return of tax under this chapter for the taxable year in which 
 costs of the production are first incurred.
 ``(2) Revocation of election.--Any election made under 
 subsection (a) may not be revoked without the consent of the 
 Secretary.
 ``(d) Qualified Film or Television Production.--For purposes of 
this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified film or television 
 production' means any production described in paragraph (2) if 
 75 percent of the total compensation of the production is 
 qualified compensation.
 ``(2) Production.--
 ``(A) In general.--A production is described in 
 this paragraph if such production is property described 
 in section 168(f)(3). For purposes of a television 
 series, only the first 44 episodes of such series may 
 be taken into account.
 ``(B) Exception.--A production is not described in 
 this paragraph if records are required under section 
 2257 of title 18, United States Code, to be maintained 
 with respect to any performer in such production.
 ``(3) Qualified compensation.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified 
 compensation' means compensation for services performed 
 in the United States by actors, directors, producers, 
 and other relevant production personnel.
 ``(B) Participations and residuals excluded.--The 
 term `compensation' does not include participations and 
 residuals (as defined in section 167(g)(7)(B)).
 ``(e) Application of Certain Other Rules.--For purposes of this 
section, rules similar to the rules of subsections (b)(2) and (c)(4) of 
section 194 shall apply.
 ``(f) Termination.--This section shall not apply to qualified film 
and television productions commencing after December 31, 2008.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part VI of 
subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 180 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 181. Treatment of qualified film 
 and television productions.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to qualified film and television productions (as defined in 
section 181(d)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by 
this section) commencing after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 322. MODIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF INCOME FORECAST METHOD OF 
 DEPRECIATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 167(g) (relating to depreciation under 
income forecast method) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
 ``(7) Treatment of participations and residuals.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of determining the 
 depreciation deduction allowable with respect to a 
 property under this subsection, the taxpayer may 
 include participations and residuals with respect to 
 such property in the adjusted basis of such property 
 for the taxable year in which the property is placed in 
 service, but only to the extent that such 
 participations and residuals relate to income estimated 
 (for purposes of this subsection) to be earned in 
 connection with the property before the close of the 
 10th taxable year referred to in paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(B) Participations and residuals.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the term `participations and 
 residuals' means, with respect to any property, costs 
 the amount of which by contract varies with the amount 
 of income earned in connection with such property.
 ``(C) Special rules relating to recomputation 
 years.--If the adjusted basis of any property is 
 determined under this paragraph, paragraph (4) shall be 
 applied by substituting `for each taxable year in such 
 period' for `for such period'.
 ``(D) Other special rules.--
 ``(i) Participations and residuals.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the taxpayer 
 may exclude participations and residuals from 
 the adjusted basis of such property and deduct 
 such participations and residuals in the 
 taxable year that such participations and 
 residuals are paid.
 ``(ii) Coordination with other rules.--
 Deductions computed in accordance with this 
 paragraph shall be allowable notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1)(B) or sections 263, 263A, 404, 
 419, or 461(h).
 ``(E) Authority to make adjustments.--The Secretary 
 shall prescribe appropriate adjustments to the basis of 
 property and to the look-back method for the additional 
 amounts allowable as a deduction solely by reason of 
 this paragraph.''.
 (b) Determination of Income.--Section 167(g)(5) (relating to 
special rules) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (E) and (F) as 
subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively, and inserting after 
subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) Treatment of distribution costs.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the income with respect to 
 any property shall be the taxpayer's gross income from 
 such property.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 Subtitle C--Manufacturing Relating to Timber

SEC. 331. EXPENSING OF CERTAIN REFORESTATION EXPENDITURES.

 (a) In General.--So much of subsection (b) of section 194 (relating 
to amortization of reforestation expenditures) as precedes paragraph 
(2) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Treatment as Expenses.--
 ``(1) Election to treat certain reforestation expenditures 
 as expenses.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any qualified 
 timber property with respect to which the taxpayer has 
 made (in accordance with regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary) an election under this subsection, the 
 taxpayer shall treat reforestation expenditures which 
 are paid or incurred during the taxable year with 
 respect to such property as an expense which is not 
 chargeable to capital account. The reforestation 
 expenditures so treated shall be allowed as a 
 deduction.
 ``(B) Dollar limitation.--The aggregate amount of 
 reforestation expenditures which may be taken into 
 account under subparagraph (A) with respect to each 
 qualified timber property for any taxable year shall 
 not exceed $10,000 ($5,000 in the case of a separate 
 return by a married individual (as defined in section 
 7703)).''.
 (b) Net Amortizable Basis.--Section 194(c)(2) (defining amortizable 
basis) is amended by inserting ``which have not been taken into account 
under subsection (b)'' after ``expenditures''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 194(b) is amended by striking paragraphs (3) 
 and (4).
 (2) Section 194(b)(2) is amended by striking ``paragraph 
 (1)'' both places it appears and inserting ``paragraph 
 (1)(B)''.
 (3) Section 194(c) is amended by striking paragraph (4) and 
 inserting the following new paragraphs:
 ``(4) Treatment of trusts and estates.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), this section shall not apply to 
 trusts and estates.
 ``(B) Amortization deduction allowed to estates.--
 The benefit of the deduction for amortization provided 
 by subsection (a) shall be allowed to estates in the 
 same manner as in the case of an individual. The 
 allowable deduction shall be apportioned between the 
 income beneficiary and the fiduciary under regulations 
 prescribed by the Secretary. Any amount so apportioned 
 to a beneficiary shall be taken into account for 
 purposes of determining the amount allowable as a 
 deduction under subsection (a) to such beneficiary.
 ``(5) Application with other deductions.--No deduction 
 shall be allowed under any other provision of this chapter with 
 respect to any expenditure with respect to which a deduction is 
 allowed or allowable under this section to the taxpayer.''.
 (4) The heading for section 194 is amended by striking 
 ``amortization'' and inserting ``treatment''.
 (5) The item relating to section 194 in the table of 
 sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by 
 striking ``Amortization'' and inserting ``Treatment''.
 (d) Repeal of Reforestation Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Section 46 (relating to amount of credit) 
 is amended--
 (A) by adding ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1),
 (B) by striking ``, and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (2) and inserting a period, and
 (C) by striking paragraph (3).
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 48 is amended--
 (i) by striking subsection (b),
 (ii) by striking ``this subsection'' in 
 paragraph (5) of subsection (a) and inserting 
 ``subsection (a)'', and
 (iii) by redesignating such paragraph (5) 
 as subsection (b).
 (B) The heading for section 48 is amended by 
 striking ``; reforestation credit''.
 (C) The item relating to section 48 in the table of 
 sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 is amended by striking ``, reforestation 
 credit''.
 (D) Section 50(c)(3) is amended by striking ``or 
 reforestation credit''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to expenditures paid or incurred after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 332. ELECTION TO TREAT CUTTING OF TIMBER AS A SALE OR EXCHANGE.

 Any election under section 631(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 made for a taxable year ending on or before the date of the 
enactment of this Act may be revoked by the taxpayer for any taxable 
year ending after such date. For purposes of determining whether the 
taxpayer may make a further election under such section, such election 
(and any revocation under this section) shall not be taken into 
account.

SEC. 333. CAPITAL GAIN TREATMENT UNDER SECTION 631(B) TO APPLY TO 
 OUTRIGHT SALES BY LANDOWNERS.

 (a) In General.--The first sentence of section 631(b) (relating to 
disposal of timber with a retained economic interest) is amended by 
striking ``retains an economic interest in such timber'' and inserting 
``either retains an economic interest in such timber or makes an 
outright sale of such timber''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The third sentence of section 631(b) is amended by 
 striking ``The date of disposal'' and inserting ``In the case 
 of disposal of timber with a retained economic interest, the 
 date of disposal''.
 (2) The heading for section 631(b) is amended by striking 
 ``With a Retained Economic Interest''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to sales after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 334. MODIFICATION OF SAFE HARBOR RULES FOR TIMBER REITS.

 (a) Expansion of Prohibited Transaction Safe Harbor.--Section 
857(b)(6) (relating to income from prohibited transactions) is amended 
by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (E) and 
(F), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Certain sales not to constitute prohibited 
 transactions.--For purposes of this part, the term 
 `prohibited transaction' does not include a sale of 
 property which is a real estate asset (as defined in 
 section 856(c)(5)(B)) if--
 ``(i) the trust held the property for not 
 less than 4 years in connection with the trade 
 or business of producing timber,
 ``(ii) the aggregate expenditures made by 
 the trust, or a partner of the trust, during 
 the 4-year period preceding the date of sale 
 which--
 ``(I) are includible in the basis 
 of the property (other than timberland 
 acquisition expenditures), and
 ``(II) are directly related to 
 operation of the property for the 
 production of timber or for the 
 preservation of the property for use as 
 timberland,
 do not exceed 30 percent of the net selling 
 price of the property,
 ``(iii) the aggregate expenditures made by 
 the trust, or a partner of the trust, during 
 the 4-year period preceding the date of sale 
 which--
 ``(I) are includible in the basis 
 of the property (other than timberland 
 acquisition expenditures), and
 ``(II) are not directly related to 
 operation of the property for the 
 production of timber, or for the 
 preservation of the property for use as 
 timberland,
 do not exceed 5 percent of the net selling 
 price of the property,
 ``(iv)(I) during the taxable year the trust 
 does not make more than 7 sales of property 
 (other than sales of foreclosure property or 
 sales to which section 1033 applies), or
 ``(II) the aggregate adjusted bases (as 
 determined for purposes of computing earnings 
 and profits) of property (other than sales of 
 foreclosure property or sales to which section 
 1033 applies) sold during the taxable year does 
 not exceed 10 percent of the aggregate bases 
 (as so determined) of all of the assets of the 
 trust as of the beginning of the taxable year,
 ``(v) in the case that the requirement of 
 clause (iv)(I) is not satisfied, substantially 
 all of the marketing expenditures with respect 
 to the property were made through an 
 independent contractor (as defined in section 
 856(d)(3)) from whom the trust itself does not 
 derive or receive any income, and
 ``(vi) the sales price of the property sold 
 by the trust is not based in whole or in part 
 on income or profits, including income or 
 profits derived from the sale or operation of 
 such property.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 TITLE IV--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Provisions Designed To Curtail Tax Shelters

SEC. 401. CLARIFICATION OF ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE DOCTRINE.

 (a) In General.--Section 7701 is amended by redesignating 
subsection (n) as subsection (o) and by inserting after subsection (m) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Clarification of Economic Substance Doctrine; Etc.--
 ``(1) General rules.--
 ``(A) In general.--In any case in which a court 
 determines that the economic substance doctrine is 
 relevant for purposes of this title to a transaction 
 (or series of transactions), such transaction (or 
 series of transactions) shall have economic substance 
 only if the requirements of this paragraph are met.
 ``(B) Definition of economic substance.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) In general.--A transaction has 
 economic substance only if--
 ``(I) the transaction changes in a 
 meaningful way (apart from Federal tax 
 effects) the taxpayer's economic 
 position, and
 ``(II) the taxpayer has a 
 substantial nontax purpose for entering 
 into such transaction and the 
 transaction is a reasonable means of 
 accomplishing such purpose.
 In applying subclause (II), a purpose of 
 achieving a financial accounting benefit shall 
 not be taken into account in determining 
 whether a transaction has a substantial nontax 
 purpose if the origin of such financial 
 accounting benefit is a reduction of income 
 tax.
 ``(ii) Special rule where taxpayer relies 
 on profit potential.--A transaction shall not 
 be treated as having economic substance by 
 reason of having a potential for profit 
 unless--
 ``(I) the present value of the 
 reasonably expected pre-tax profit from 
 the transaction is substantial in 
 relation to the present value of the 
 expected net tax benefits that would be 
 allowed if the transaction were 
 respected, and
 ``(II) the reasonably expected pre-
 tax profit from the transaction exceeds 
 a risk-free rate of return.
 ``(C) Treatment of fees and foreign taxes.--Fees 
 and other transaction expenses and foreign taxes shall 
 be taken into account as expenses in determining pre-
 tax profit under subparagraph (B)(ii).
 ``(2) Special rules for transactions with tax-indifferent 
 parties.--
 ``(A) Special rules for financing transactions.--
 The form of a transaction which is in substance the 
 borrowing of money or the acquisition of financial 
 capital directly or indirectly from a tax-indifferent 
 party shall not be respected if the present value of 
 the deductions to be claimed with respect to the 
 transaction is substantially in excess of the present 
 value of the anticipated economic returns of the person 
 lending the money or providing the financial capital. A 
 public offering shall be treated as a borrowing, or an 
 acquisition of financial capital, from a tax-
 indifferent party if it is reasonably expected that at 
 least 50 percent of the offering will be placed with 
 tax-indifferent parties.
 ``(B) Artificial income shifting and basis 
 adjustments.--The form of a transaction with a tax-
 indifferent party shall not be respected if--
 ``(i) it results in an allocation of income 
 or gain to the tax-indifferent party in excess 
 of such party's economic income or gain, or
 ``(ii) it results in a basis adjustment or 
 shifting of basis on account of overstating the 
 income or gain of the tax-indifferent party.
 ``(3) Definitions and special rules.--For purposes of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) Economic substance doctrine.--The term 
 `economic substance doctrine' means the common law 
 doctrine under which tax benefits under subtitle A with 
 respect to a transaction are not allowable if the 
 transaction does not have economic substance or lacks a 
 business purpose.
 ``(B) Tax-indifferent party.--The term `tax-
 indifferent party' means any person or entity not 
 subject to tax imposed by subtitle A. A person shall be 
 treated as a tax-indifferent party with respect to a 
 transaction if the items taken into account with 
 respect to the transaction have no substantial impact 
 on such person's liability under subtitle A.
 ``(C) Exception for personal transactions of 
 individuals.--In the case of an individual, this 
 subsection shall apply only to transactions entered 
 into in connection with a trade or business or an 
 activity engaged in for the production of income.
 ``(D) Treatment of lessors.--In applying paragraph 
 (1)(B)(ii) to the lessor of tangible property subject 
 to a lease--
 ``(i) the expected net tax benefits with 
 respect to the leased property shall not 
 include the benefits of--
 ``(I) depreciation,
 ``(II) any tax credit, or
 ``(III) any other deduction as 
 provided in guidance by the Secretary, 
 and
 ``(ii) subclause (II) of paragraph 
 (1)(B)(ii) shall be disregarded in determining 
 whether any of such benefits are allowable.
 ``(4) Other common law doctrines not affected.--Except as 
 specifically provided in this subsection, the provisions of 
 this subsection shall not be construed as altering or 
 supplanting any other rule of law, and the requirements of this 
 subsection shall be construed as being in addition to any such 
 other rule of law.
 ``(5) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such 
 regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the 
 purposes of this subsection. Such regulations may include 
 exemptions from the application of this subsection.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 402. PENALTY FOR FAILING TO DISCLOSE REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.

 (a) In General.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 (relating to 
assessable penalties) is amended by inserting after section 6707 the 
following new section:

``SEC. 6707A. PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO INCLUDE REPORTABLE TRANSACTION 
 INFORMATION WITH RETURN OR STATEMENT.

 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--Any person who fails to include on 
any return or statement any information with respect to a reportable 
transaction which is required under section 6011 to be included with 
such return or statement shall pay a penalty in the amount determined 
under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), the amount of the penalty under subsection (a) shall be 
 $50,000.
 ``(2) Listed transaction.--The amount of the penalty under 
 subsection (a) with respect to a listed transaction shall be 
 $100,000.
 ``(3) Increase in penalty for large entities and high net 
 worth individuals.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a failure under 
 subsection (a) by--
 ``(i) a large entity, or
 ``(ii) a high net worth individual,
 the penalty under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be twice 
 the amount determined without regard to this paragraph.
 ``(B) Large entity.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the term `large entity' means, with respect to any 
 taxable year, a person (other than a natural person) 
 with gross receipts in excess of $10,000,000 for the 
 taxable year in which the reportable transaction occurs 
 or the preceding taxable year. Rules similar to the 
 rules of paragraph (2) and subparagraphs (B), (C), and 
 (D) of paragraph (3) of section 448(c) shall apply for 
 purposes of this subparagraph.
 ``(C) High net worth individual.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `high net worth individual' 
 means, with respect to a reportable transaction, a 
 natural person whose net worth exceeds $2,000,000 
 immediately before the transaction.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Reportable transaction.--The term `reportable 
 transaction' means any transaction with respect to which 
 information is required to be included with a return or 
 statement because, as determined under regulations prescribed 
 under section 6011, such transaction is of a type which the 
 Secretary determines as having a potential for tax avoidance or 
 evasion.
 ``(2) Listed transaction.--Except as provided in 
 regulations, the term `listed transaction' means a reportable 
 transaction which is the same as, or substantially similar to, 
 a transaction specifically identified by the Secretary as a tax 
 avoidance transaction for purposes of section 6011.
 ``(d) Authority To Rescind Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Commissioner of Internal Revenue may 
 rescind all or any portion of any penalty imposed by this 
 section with respect to any violation if--
 ``(A) the violation is with respect to a reportable 
 transaction other than a listed transaction,
 ``(B) the person on whom the penalty is imposed has 
 a history of complying with the requirements of this 
 title,
 ``(C) it is shown that the violation is due to an 
 unintentional mistake of fact;
 ``(D) imposing the penalty would be against equity 
 and good conscience, and
 ``(E) rescinding the penalty would promote 
 compliance with the requirements of this title and 
 effective tax administration.
 ``(2) Discretion.--The exercise of authority under 
 paragraph (1) shall be at the sole discretion of the 
 Commissioner and may be delegated only to the head of the 
 Office of Tax Shelter Analysis. The Commissioner, in the 
 Commissioner's sole discretion, may establish a procedure to 
 determine if a penalty should be referred to the Commissioner 
 or the head of such Office for a determination under paragraph 
 (1).
 ``(3) No appeal.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, any determination under this subsection may not be 
 reviewed in any administrative or judicial proceeding.
 ``(4) Records.--If a penalty is rescinded under paragraph 
 (1), the Commissioner shall place in the file in the Office of 
 the Commissioner the opinion of the Commissioner or the head of 
 the Office of Tax Shelter Analysis with respect to the 
 determination, including--
 ``(A) the facts and circumstances of the 
 transaction,
 ``(B) the reasons for the rescission, and
 ``(C) the amount of the penalty rescinded.
 ``(5) Report.--The Commissioner shall each year report to 
 the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives 
 and the Committee on Finance of the Senate--
 ``(A) a summary of the total number and aggregate 
 amount of penalties imposed, and rescinded, under this 
 section, and
 ``(B) a description of each penalty rescinded under 
 this subsection and the reasons therefor.
 ``(e) Penalty Reported to SEC.--In the case of a person--
 ``(1) which is required to file periodic reports under 
 section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or 
 is required to be consolidated with another person for purposes 
 of such reports, and
 ``(2) which--
 ``(A) is required to pay a penalty under this 
 section with respect to a listed transaction,
 ``(B) is required to pay a penalty under section 
 6662A with respect to any reportable transaction at a 
 rate prescribed under section 6662A(c), or
 ``(C) is required to pay a penalty under section 
 6662B with respect to any noneconomic substance 
 transaction,
the requirement to pay such penalty shall be disclosed in such reports 
filed by such person for such periods as the Secretary shall specify. 
Failure to make a disclosure in accordance with the preceding sentence 
shall be treated as a failure to which the penalty under subsection 
(b)(2) applies.
 ``(f) Coordination With Other Penalties.--The penalty imposed by 
this section is in addition to any penalty imposed under this title.''.
 (b) Disclosure by Secretary.--
 (1) In general.--Section 6103 is amended by redesignating 
 subsection (q) as subsection (r) and by inserting after 
 subsection (p) the following new subsection:
 ``(q) Disclosure Relating to Payments of Certain Penalties.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Secretary 
shall make public the name of any person required to pay a penalty 
described in section 6707A(e)(2) and the amount of the penalty.''.
 (2) Records.--Section 6103(p)(3)(A) is amended by striking 
 ``or (n)'' and inserting ``(n), or (q)''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part I of 
subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 6707 the following:

 ``Sec. 6707A. Penalty for failure to 
 include reportable transaction 
 information with return or 
 statement.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to returns and statements the due date for which is after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 403. ACCURACY-RELATED PENALTY FOR LISTED TRANSACTIONS AND OTHER 
 REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS HAVING A SIGNIFICANT TAX 
 AVOIDANCE PURPOSE.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 68 is amended by inserting 
after section 6662 the following new section:

``SEC. 6662A. IMPOSITION OF ACCURACY-RELATED PENALTY ON UNDERSTATEMENTS 
 WITH RESPECT TO REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--If a taxpayer has a reportable 
transaction understatement for any taxable year, there shall be added 
to the tax an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of such 
understatement.
 ``(b) Reportable Transaction Understatement.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `reportable transaction 
 understatement' means the sum of--
 ``(A) the product of--
 ``(i) the amount of the increase (if any) 
 in taxable income which results from a 
 difference between the proper tax treatment of 
 an item to which this section applies and the 
 taxpayer's treatment of such item (as shown on 
 the taxpayer's return of tax), and
 ``(ii) the highest rate of tax imposed by 
 section 1 (section 11 in the case of a taxpayer 
 which is a corporation), and
 ``(B) the amount of the decrease (if any) in the 
 aggregate amount of credits determined under subtitle A 
 which results from a difference between the taxpayer's 
 treatment of an item to which this section applies (as 
 shown on the taxpayer's return of tax) and the proper 
 tax treatment of such item.
 For purposes of subparagraph (A), any reduction of the excess 
 of deductions allowed for the taxable year over gross income 
 for such year, and any reduction in the amount of capital 
 losses which would (without regard to section 1211) be allowed 
 for such year, shall be treated as an increase in taxable 
 income.
 ``(2) Items to which section applies.--This section shall 
 apply to any item which is attributable to--
 ``(A) any listed transaction, and
 ``(B) any reportable transaction (other than a 
 listed transaction) if a significant purpose of such 
 transaction is the avoidance or evasion of Federal 
 income tax.
 ``(c) Higher Penalty for Nondisclosed Listed and Other Avoidance 
Transactions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall be applied by 
 substituting `30 percent' for `20 percent' with respect to the 
 portion of any reportable transaction understatement with 
 respect to which the requirement of section 6664(d)(2)(A) is 
 not met.
 ``(2) Rules applicable to assertion and compromise of 
 penalty.--
 ``(A) In general.--Only upon the approval by the 
 Chief Counsel for the Internal Revenue Service or the 
 Chief Counsel's delegate at the national office of the 
 Internal Revenue Service may a penalty to which 
 paragraph (1) applies be included in a 1st letter of 
 proposed deficiency which allows the taxpayer an 
 opportunity for administrative review in the Internal 
 Revenue Service Office of Appeals. If such a letter is 
 provided to the taxpayer, only the Commissioner of 
 Internal Revenue may compromise all or any portion of 
 such penalty.
 ``(B) Applicable rules.--The rules of paragraphs 
 (2), (3), (4), and (5) of section 6707A(d) shall apply 
 for purposes of subparagraph (A).
 ``(d) Definitions of Reportable and Listed Transactions.--For 
purposes of this section, the terms `reportable transaction' and 
`listed transaction' have the respective meanings given to such terms 
by section 6707A(c).
 ``(e) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Coordination with penalties, etc., on other 
 understatements.--In the case of an understatement (as defined 
 in section 6662(d)(2))--
 ``(A) the amount of such understatement (determined 
 without regard to this paragraph) shall be increased by 
 the aggregate amount of reportable transaction 
 understatements and noneconomic substance transaction 
 understatements for purposes of determining whether 
 such understatement is a substantial understatement 
 under section 6662(d)(1), and
 ``(B) the addition to tax under section 6662(a) 
 shall apply only to the excess of the amount of the 
 substantial understatement (if any) after the 
 application of subparagraph (A) over the aggregate 
 amount of reportable transaction understatements and 
 noneconomic substance transaction understatements.
 ``(2) Coordination with other penalties.--
 ``(A) Application of fraud penalty.--References to 
 an underpayment in section 6663 shall be treated as 
 including references to a reportable transaction 
 understatement and a noneconomic substance transaction 
 understatement.
 ``(B) No double penalty.--This section shall not 
 apply to any portion of an understatement on which a 
 penalty is imposed under section 6662B or 6663.
 ``(3) Special rule for amended returns.--Except as provided 
 in regulations, in no event shall any tax treatment included 
 with an amendment or supplement to a return of tax be taken 
 into account in determining the amount of any reportable 
 transaction understatement or noneconomic substance transaction 
 understatement if the amendment or supplement is filed after 
 the earlier of the date the taxpayer is first contacted by the 
 Secretary regarding the examination of the return or such other 
 date as is specified by the Secretary.
 ``(4) Noneconomic substance transaction 
 understatement.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 term `noneconomic substance transaction understatement' 
 has the meaning given such term by section 6662B(c).
 ``(5) Cross reference.--

 ``For reporting of section 6662A(c) 
penalty to the Securities and Exchange Commission, see section 
6707A(e).''.
 (b) Determination of Other Understatements.--Subparagraph (A) of 
section 6662(d)(2) is amended by adding at the end the following flush 
sentence:
 ``The excess under the preceding sentence shall be 
 determined without regard to items to which section 
 6662A applies and without regard to items with respect 
 to which a penalty is imposed by section 6662B.''.
 (c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--
 (1) In general.--Section 6664 is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Reasonable Cause Exception for Reportable Transaction 
Understatements.--
 ``(1) In general.--No penalty shall be imposed under 
 section 6662A with respect to any portion of a reportable 
 transaction understatement if it is shown that there was a 
 reasonable cause for such portion and that the taxpayer acted 
 in good faith with respect to such portion.
 ``(2) Special rules.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any 
 reportable transaction understatement unless--
 ``(A) the relevant facts affecting the tax 
 treatment of the item are adequately disclosed in 
 accordance with the regulations prescribed under 
 section 6011,
 ``(B) there is or was substantial authority for 
 such treatment, and
 ``(C) the taxpayer reasonably believed that such 
 treatment was more likely than not the proper 
 treatment.
 A taxpayer failing to adequately disclose in accordance with 
 section 6011 shall be treated as meeting the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A) if the penalty for such failure was rescinded 
 under section 6707A(d).
 ``(3) Rules relating to reasonable belief.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (2)(C)--
 ``(A) In general.--A taxpayer shall be treated as 
 having a reasonable belief with respect to the tax 
 treatment of an item only if such belief--
 ``(i) is based on the facts and law that 
 exist at the time the return of tax which 
 includes such tax treatment is filed, and
 ``(ii) relates solely to the taxpayer's 
 chances of success on the merits of such 
 treatment and does not take into account the 
 possibility that a return will not be audited, 
 such treatment will not be raised on audit, or 
 such treatment will be resolved through 
 settlement if it is raised.
 ``(B) Certain opinions may not be relied upon.--
 ``(i) In general.--An opinion of a tax 
 advisor may not be relied upon to establish the 
 reasonable belief of a taxpayer if--
 ``(I) the tax advisor is described 
 in clause (ii), or
 ``(II) the opinion is described in 
 clause (iii).
 ``(ii) Disqualified tax advisors.--A tax 
 advisor is described in this clause if the tax 
 advisor--
 ``(I) is a material advisor (within 
 the meaning of section 6111(b)(1)) who 
 participates in the organization, 
 management, promotion, or sale of the 
 transaction or who is related (within 
 the meaning of section 267(b) or 
 707(b)(1)) to any person who so 
 participates,
 ``(II) is compensated directly or 
 indirectly by a material advisor with 
 respect to the transaction,
 ``(III) has a fee arrangement with 
 respect to the transaction which is 
 contingent on all or part of the 
 intended tax benefits from the 
 transaction being sustained,
 ``(IV) has an arrangement with 
 respect to the transaction which 
 provides that contractual disputes 
 between the taxpayer and the advisor 
 are to be settled by arbitration or 
 which limits damages by reference to 
 fees paid to the advisor for such 
 transaction, or
 ``(V) as determined under 
 regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary, has a disqualifying 
 financial interest with respect to the 
 transaction.
 ``(iii) Disqualified opinions.--For 
 purposes of clause (i), an opinion is 
 disqualified if the opinion--
 ``(I) is based on unreasonable 
 factual or legal assumptions (including 
 assumptions as to future events),
 ``(II) unreasonably relies on 
 representations, statements, findings, 
 or agreements of the taxpayer or any 
 other person,
 ``(III) does not identify and 
 consider all relevant facts,
 ``(IV) is not signed by all 
 individuals who are principal authors 
 of the opinion, or
 ``(V) fails to meet any other 
 requirement as the Secretary may 
 prescribe.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The heading for subsection (c) 
 of section 6664 is amended by inserting ``for Underpayments'' 
 after ``Exception''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 461(i)(3) is amended by 
 striking ``section 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii)'' and inserting ``section 
 1274(b)(3)(C)''.
 (2) Paragraph (3) of section 1274(b) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``(as defined in section 
 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii))'' in subparagraph (B)(i), and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) Tax shelter.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (B), the term `tax shelter' means--
 ``(i) a partnership or other entity,
 ``(ii) any investment plan or arrangement, 
 or
 ``(iii) any other plan or arrangement,
 if a significant purpose of such partnership, entity, 
 plan, or arrangement is the avoidance or evasion of 
 Federal income tax.''.
 (3) Section 6662(d)(2) is amended by striking subparagraphs 
 (C) and (D).
 (4) Section 6664(c)(1) is amended by striking ``this part'' 
 and inserting ``section 6662 or 6663''.
 (5) Subsection (b) of section 7525 is amended by striking 
 ``section 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii)'' and inserting ``section 
 1274(b)(3)(C)''.
 (6)(A) The heading for section 6662 is amended to read as 
 follows:

``SEC. 6662. IMPOSITION OF ACCURACY-RELATED PENALTY ON 
 UNDERPAYMENTS.''.

 (B) The table of sections for part II of subchapter A of 
 chapter 68 is amended by striking the item relating to section 
 6662 and inserting the following new items:

 ``Sec. 6662. Imposition of accuracy-
 related penalty on 
 underpayments.
 ``Sec. 6662A. Imposition of accuracy-
 related penalty on 
 understatements with respect to 
 reportable transactions.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 404. PENALTY FOR UNDERSTATEMENTS ATTRIBUTABLE TO TRANSACTIONS 
 LACKING ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE, ETC.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 68 is amended by inserting 
after section 6662A the following new section:

``SEC. 6662B. PENALTY FOR UNDERSTATEMENTS ATTRIBUTABLE TO TRANSACTIONS 
 LACKING ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE, ETC.

 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--If a taxpayer has an noneconomic 
substance transaction understatement for any taxable year, there shall 
be added to the tax an amount equal to 40 percent of the amount of such 
understatement.
 ``(b) Reduction of Penalty for Disclosed Transactions.--Subsection 
(a) shall be applied by substituting `20 percent' for `40 percent' with 
respect to the portion of any noneconomic substance transaction 
understatement with respect to which the relevant facts affecting the 
tax treatment of the item are adequately disclosed in the return or a 
statement attached to the return.
 ``(c) Noneconomic Substance Transaction Understatement.--For 
purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `noneconomic substance 
 transaction understatement' means any amount which would be an 
 understatement under section 6662A(b)(1) if section 6662A were 
 applied by taking into account items attributable to 
 noneconomic substance transactions rather than items to which 
 section 6662A would apply without regard to this paragraph.
 ``(2) Noneconomic substance transaction.--The term 
 `noneconomic substance transaction' means any transaction if--
 ``(A) there is a lack of economic substance (within 
 the meaning of section 7701(n)(1)) for the transaction 
 giving rise to the claimed benefit or the transaction 
 was not respected under section 7701(n)(2), or
 ``(B) the transaction fails to meet the 
 requirements of any similar rule of law.
 ``(d) Rules Applicable To Compromise of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the 1st letter of proposed deficiency 
 which allows the taxpayer an opportunity for administrative 
 review in the Internal Revenue Service Office of Appeals has 
 been sent with respect to a penalty to which this section 
 applies, only the Commissioner of Internal Revenue may 
 compromise all or any portion of such penalty.
 ``(2) Applicable rules.--The rules of paragraphs (2), (3), 
 (4), and (5) of section 6707A(d) shall apply for purposes of 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(e) Coordination With Other Penalties.--Except as otherwise 
provided in this part, the penalty imposed by this section shall be in 
addition to any other penalty imposed by this title.
 ``(f) Cross References.--

 ``(1) For coordination of penalty with 
understatements under section 6662 and other special rules, see section 
6662A(e).
 ``(2) For reporting of penalty imposed 
under this section to the Securities and Exchange Commission, see 
section 6707A(e).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of 
subchapter A of chapter 68 is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 6662A the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6662B. Penalty for understatements 
 attributable to transactions 
 lacking economic substance, 
 etc.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 405. MODIFICATIONS OF SUBSTANTIAL UNDERSTATEMENT PENALTY FOR 
 NONREPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) Substantial Understatement of Corporations.--Section 
6662(d)(1)(B) (relating to special rule for corporations) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(B) Special rule for corporations.--In the case 
 of a corporation other than an S corporation or a 
 personal holding company (as defined in section 542), 
 there is a substantial understatement of income tax for 
 any taxable year if the amount of the understatement 
 for the taxable year exceeds the lesser of--
 ``(i) 10 percent of the tax required to be 
 shown on the return for the taxable year (or, 
 if greater, $10,000), or
 ``(ii) $10,000,000.''.
 (b) Reduction for Understatement of Taxpayer Due to Position of 
Taxpayer or Disclosed Item.--
 (1) In general.--Section 6662(d)(2)(B)(i) (relating to 
 substantial authority) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(i) the tax treatment of any item by the 
 taxpayer if the taxpayer had reasonable belief 
 that the tax treatment was more likely than not 
 the proper treatment, or''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 6662(d) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Secretarial list.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 section 6664(d)(2), and section 6694(a)(1), the Secretary may 
 prescribe a list of positions for which the Secretary believes 
 there is not substantial authority or there is no reasonable 
 belief that the tax treatment is more likely than not the 
 proper tax treatment. Such list (and any revisions thereof) 
 shall be published in the Federal Register or the Internal 
 Revenue Bulletin.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 406. TAX SHELTER EXCEPTION TO CONFIDENTIALITY PRIVILEGES RELATING 
 TO TAXPAYER COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 7525(b) (relating to section not to apply 
to communications regarding corporate tax shelters) is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(b) Section Not To Apply to Communications Regarding Tax 
Shelters.--The privilege under subsection (a) shall not apply to any 
written communication which is--
 ``(1) between a federally authorized tax practitioner and--
 ``(A) any person,
 ``(B) any director, officer, employee, agent, or 
 representative of the person, or
 ``(C) any other person holding a capital or profits 
 interest in the person, and
 ``(2) in connection with the promotion of the direct or 
 indirect participation of the person in any tax shelter (as 
 defined in section 1274(b)(3)(C)).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to communications made on or after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 407. DISCLOSURE OF REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 6111 (relating to registration of tax 
shelters) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 6111. DISCLOSURE OF REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Each material advisor with respect to any 
reportable transaction shall make a return (in such form as the 
Secretary may prescribe) setting forth--
 ``(1) information identifying and describing the 
 transaction,
 ``(2) information describing any potential tax benefits 
 expected to result from the transaction, and
 ``(3) such other information as the Secretary may 
 prescribe.
Such return shall be filed not later than the date specified by the 
Secretary.
 ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Material advisor.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `material advisor' 
 means any person--
 ``(i) who provides any material aid, 
 assistance, or advice with respect to 
 organizing, managing, promoting, selling, 
 implementing, insuring, or carrying out any 
 reportable transaction, and
 ``(ii) who directly or indirectly derives 
 gross income in excess of the threshold amount 
 for such aid, assistance, or advice.
 ``(B) Threshold amount.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the threshold amount is--
 ``(i) $50,000 in the case of a reportable 
 transaction substantially all of the tax 
 benefits from which are provided to natural 
 persons, and
 ``(ii) $250,000 in any other case.
 ``(2) Reportable transaction.--The term `reportable 
 transaction' has the meaning given to such term by section 
 6707A(c).
 ``(c) Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe regulations which 
provide--
 ``(1) that only 1 person shall be required to meet the 
 requirements of subsection (a) in cases in which 2 or more 
 persons would otherwise be required to meet such requirements,
 ``(2) exemptions from the requirements of this section, and
 ``(3) such rules as may be necessary or appropriate to 
 carry out the purposes of this section.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The item relating to section 6111 in the table of 
 sections for subchapter B of chapter 61 is amended to read as 
 follows:

 ``Sec. 6111. Disclosure of reportable 
 transactions.''.
 (2)(A) So much of section 6112 as precedes subsection (c) 
 thereof is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 6112. MATERIAL ADVISORS OF REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS MUST KEEP 
 LISTS OF ADVISEES.

 ``(a) In General.--Each material advisor (as defined in section 
6111) with respect to any reportable transaction (as defined in section 
6707A(c)) shall maintain, in such manner as the Secretary may by 
regulations prescribe, a list--
 ``(1) identifying each person with respect to whom such 
 advisor acted as such a material advisor with respect to such 
 transaction, and
 ``(2) containing such other information as the Secretary 
 may by regulations require.
This section shall apply without regard to whether a material advisor 
is required to file a return under section 6111 with respect to such 
transaction.''.
 (B) Section 6112 is amended by redesignating subsection (c) 
 as subsection (b).
 (C) Section 6112(b), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), 
 is amended--
 (i) by inserting ``written'' before ``request'' in 
 paragraph (1)(A), and
 (ii) by striking ``shall prescribe'' in paragraph 
 (2) and inserting ``may prescribe''.
 (D) The item relating to section 6112 in the table of 
 sections for subchapter B of chapter 61 is amended to read as 
 follows:

 ``Sec. 6112. Material advisors of 
 reportable transactions must 
 keep lists of advisees.''.
 (3)(A) The heading for section 6708 is amended to read as 
 follows:

``SEC. 6708. FAILURE TO MAINTAIN LISTS OF ADVISEES WITH RESPECT TO 
 REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.''.

 (B) The item relating to section 6708 in the table of 
 sections for part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended to 
 read as follows:

 ``Sec. 6708. Failure to maintain lists of 
 advisees with respect to 
 reportable transactions.''.
 (c) Required Disclosure Not Subject to Claim of Confidentiality.--
Subparagraph (A) of section 6112(b)(1), as redesignated by subsection 
(b)(2)(B), is amended by adding at the end the following new flush 
sentence:
 ``For purposes of this section, the identity of any person on 
 such list shall not be privileged.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to transactions 
 with respect to which material aid, assistance, or advice 
 referred to in section 6111(b)(1)(A)(i) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 (as added by this section) is provided after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) No claim of confidentiality against disclosure.--The 
 amendment made by subsection (c) shall take effect as if 
 included in the amendments made by section 142 of the Deficit 
 Reduction Act of 1984.

SEC. 408. MODIFICATIONS TO PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO REGISTER TAX 
 SHELTERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 6707 (relating to failure to furnish 
information regarding tax shelters) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 6707. FAILURE TO FURNISH INFORMATION REGARDING REPORTABLE 
 TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--If a person who is required to file a return 
under section 6111(a) with respect to any reportable transaction--
 ``(1) fails to file such return on or before the date 
 prescribed therefor, or
 ``(2) files false or incomplete information with the 
 Secretary with respect to such transaction,
such person shall pay a penalty with respect to such return in the 
amount determined under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 penalty imposed under subsection (a) with respect to any 
 failure shall be $50,000.
 ``(2) Listed transactions.--The penalty imposed under 
 subsection (a) with respect to any listed transaction shall be 
 an amount equal to the greater of--
 ``(A) $200,000, or
 ``(B) 50 percent of the gross income derived by 
 such person with respect to aid, assistance, or advice 
 which is provided with respect to the listed 
 transaction before the date the return including the 
 transaction is filed under section 6111.
 Subparagraph (B) shall be applied by substituting `75 percent' 
 for `50 percent' in the case of an intentional failure or act 
 described in subsection (a).
 ``(c) Certain Rules To Apply.--The provisions of section 6707A(d) 
shall apply to any penalty imposed under this section.
 ``(d) Reportable and Listed Transactions.--The terms `reportable 
transaction' and `listed transaction' have the respective meanings 
given to such terms by section 6707A(c).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The item relating to section 6707 in the 
table of sections for part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended 
by striking ``tax shelters'' and inserting ``reportable transactions''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to returns the due date for which is after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 409. MODIFICATION OF PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO MAINTAIN LISTS OF 
 INVESTORS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 6708 is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--If any person who is required to 
 maintain a list under section 6112(a) fails to make such list 
 available upon written request to the Secretary in accordance 
 with section 6112(b)(1)(A) within 20 business days after the 
 date of the Secretary's request, such person shall pay a 
 penalty of $10,000 for each day of such failure after such 20th 
 day.
 ``(2) Reasonable cause exception.--No penalty shall be 
 imposed by paragraph (1) with respect to the failure on any day 
 if such failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to requests made after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 410. MODIFICATION OF ACTIONS TO ENJOIN CERTAIN CONDUCT RELATED TO 
 TAX SHELTERS AND REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 7408 (relating to action to enjoin 
promoters of abusive tax shelters, etc.) is amended by redesignating 
subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by striking subsections (a) and 
(b) and inserting the following new subsections:
 ``(a) Authority To Seek Injunction.--A civil action in the name of 
the United States to enjoin any person from further engaging in 
specified conduct may be commenced at the request of the Secretary. Any 
action under this section shall be brought in the district court of the 
United States for the district in which such person resides, has his 
principal place of business, or has engaged in specified conduct. The 
court may exercise its jurisdiction over such action (as provided in 
section 7402(a)) separate and apart from any other action brought by 
the United States against such person.
 ``(b) Adjudication and Decree.--In any action under subsection (a), 
if the court finds--
 ``(1) that the person has engaged in any specified conduct, 
 and
 ``(2) that injunctive relief is appropriate to prevent 
 recurrence of such conduct,
the court may enjoin such person from engaging in such conduct or in 
any other activity subject to penalty under this title.
 ``(c) Specified Conduct.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`specified conduct' means any action, or failure to take action, which 
is--
 ``(1) subject to penalty under section 6700, 6701, 6707, or 
 6708, or
 ``(2) in violation of any requirement under regulations 
 issued under section 320 of title 31, United States Code.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The heading for section 7408 is amended to read as 
 follows:

``SEC. 7408. ACTIONS TO ENJOIN SPECIFIED CONDUCT RELATED TO TAX 
 SHELTERS AND REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS.''.

 (2) The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 67 is 
 amended by striking the item relating to section 7408 and 
 inserting the following new item:

 ``Sec. 7408. Actions to enjoin specified conduct related to tax 
 shelters and reportable transactions.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on the day after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 411. UNDERSTATEMENT OF TAXPAYER'S LIABILITY BY INCOME TAX RETURN 
 PREPARER.

 (a) Standards Conformed to Taxpayer Standards.--Section 6694(a) 
(relating to understatements due to unrealistic positions) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``realistic possibility of being sustained 
 on its merits'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``reasonable 
 belief that the tax treatment in such position was more likely 
 than not the proper treatment'',
 (2) by striking ``or was frivolous'' in paragraph (3) and 
 inserting ``or there was no reasonable basis for the tax 
 treatment of such position'', and
 (3) by striking ``Unrealistic'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``Improper''.
 (b) Amount of Penalty.--Section 6694 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$250'' in subsection (a) and inserting 
 ``$1,000'', and
 (2) by striking ``$1,000'' in subsection (b) and inserting 
 ``$5,000''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to documents prepared after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 412. PENALTY ON FAILURE TO REPORT INTERESTS IN FOREIGN FINANCIAL 
 ACCOUNTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 5321(a)(5) of title 31, United States 
Code, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(5) Foreign financial agency transaction violation.--
 ``(A) Penalty authorized.--The Secretary of the 
 Treasury may impose a civil money penalty on any person 
 who violates, or causes any violation of, any provision 
 of section 5314.
 ``(B) Amount of penalty.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (C), the amount of any civil 
 penalty imposed under subparagraph (A) shall 
 not exceed $10,000.
 ``(ii) Reasonable cause exception.--No 
 penalty shall be imposed under subparagraph (A) 
 with respect to any violation if--
 ``(I) such violation was due to 
 reasonable cause, and
 ``(II) the amount of the 
 transaction or the balance in the 
 account at the time of the transaction 
 was properly reported.
 ``(C) Willful violations.--In the case of any 
 person willfully violating, or willfully causing any 
 violation of, any provision of section 5314--
 ``(i) the maximum penalty under 
 subparagraph (B)(i) shall be increased to the 
 greater of--
 ``(I) $100,000, or
 ``(II) 50 percent of the amount 
 determined under subparagraph (D), and
 ``(ii) subparagraph (B)(ii) shall not 
 apply.
 ``(D) Amount.--The amount determined under this 
 subparagraph is--
 ``(i) in the case of a violation involving 
 a transaction, the amount of the transaction, 
 or
 ``(ii) in the case of a violation involving 
 a failure to report the existence of an account 
 or any identifying information required to be 
 provided with respect to an account, the 
 balance in the account at the time of the 
 violation.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to violations occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 413. FRIVOLOUS TAX SUBMISSIONS.

 (a) Civil Penalties.--Section 6702 is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 6702. FRIVOLOUS TAX SUBMISSIONS.

 ``(a) Civil Penalty for Frivolous Tax Returns.--A person shall pay 
a penalty of $5,000 if--
 ``(1) such person files what purports to be a return of a 
 tax imposed by this title but which--
 ``(A) does not contain information on which the 
 substantial correctness of the self-assessment may be 
 judged, or
 ``(B) contains information that on its face 
 indicates that the self-assessment is substantially 
 incorrect; and
 ``(2) the conduct referred to in paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) is based on a position which the Secretary 
 has identified as frivolous under subsection (c), or
 ``(B) reflects a desire to delay or impede the 
 administration of Federal tax laws.
 ``(b) Civil Penalty for Specified Frivolous Submissions.--
 ``(1) Imposition of penalty.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), any person who submits a specified frivolous 
 submission shall pay a penalty of $5,000.
 ``(2) Specified frivolous submission.--For purposes of this 
 section--
 ``(A) Specified frivolous submission.--The term 
 `specified frivolous submission' means a specified 
 submission if any portion of such submission--
 ``(i) is based on a position which the 
 Secretary has identified as frivolous under 
 subsection (c), or
 ``(ii) reflects a desire to delay or impede 
 the administration of Federal tax laws.
 ``(B) Specified submission.--The term `specified 
 submission' means--
 ``(i) a request for a hearing under--
 ``(I) section 6320 (relating to 
 notice and opportunity for hearing upon 
 filing of notice of lien), or
 ``(II) section 6330 (relating to 
 notice and opportunity for hearing 
 before levy), and
 ``(ii) an application under--
 ``(I) section 6159 (relating to 
 agreements for payment of tax liability 
 in installments),
 ``(II) section 7122 (relating to 
 compromises), or
 ``(III) section 7811 (relating to 
 taxpayer assistance orders).
 ``(3) Opportunity to withdraw submission.--If the Secretary 
 provides a person with notice that a submission is a specified 
 frivolous submission and such person withdraws such submission 
 within 30 days after such notice, the penalty imposed under 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to such submission.
 ``(c) Listing of Frivolous Positions.--The Secretary shall 
prescribe (and periodically revise) a list of positions which the 
Secretary has identified as being frivolous for purposes of this 
subsection. The Secretary shall not include in such list any position 
that the Secretary determines meets the requirement of section 
6662(d)(2)(B)(ii)(II).
 ``(d) Reduction of Penalty.--The Secretary may reduce the amount of 
any penalty imposed under this section if the Secretary determines that 
such reduction would promote compliance with and administration of the 
Federal tax laws.
 ``(e) Penalties in Addition to Other Penalties.--The penalties 
imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty 
provided by law.''.
 (b) Treatment of Frivolous Requests for Hearings Before Levy.--
 (1) Frivolous requests disregarded.--Section 6330 (relating 
 to notice and opportunity for hearing before levy) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Frivolous Requests for Hearing, etc.--Notwithstanding any 
other provision of this section, if the Secretary determines that any 
portion of a request for a hearing under this section or section 6320 
meets the requirement of clause (i) or (ii) of section 6702(b)(2)(A), 
then the Secretary may treat such portion as if it were never submitted 
and such portion shall not be subject to any further administrative or 
judicial review.''.
 (2) Preclusion from raising frivolous issues at hearing.--
 Section 6330(c)(4) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``(A)'' and inserting ``(A)(i)'';
 (B) by striking ``(B)'' and inserting ``(ii)'';
 (C) by striking the period at the end of the first 
 sentence and inserting ``; or''; and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (A)(ii) (as so 
 redesignated) the following:
 ``(B) the issue meets the requirement of clause (i) 
 or (ii) of section 6702(b)(2)(A).''.
 (3) Statement of grounds.--Section 6330(b)(1) is amended by 
 striking ``under subsection (a)(3)(B)'' and inserting ``in 
 writing under subsection (a)(3)(B) and states the grounds for 
 the requested hearing''.
 (c) Treatment of Frivolous Requests for Hearings Upon Filing of 
Notice of Lien.--Section 6320 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by striking ``under subsection 
 (a)(3)(B)'' and inserting ``in writing under subsection 
 (a)(3)(B) and states the grounds for the requested hearing'', 
 and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``and (e)'' and 
 inserting ``(e), and (g)''.
 (d) Treatment of Frivolous Applications for Offers-in-Compromise 
and Installment Agreements.--Section 7122 is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Frivolous Submissions, etc.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, if the Secretary determines that any portion 
of an application for an offer-in-compromise or installment agreement 
submitted under this section or section 6159 meets the requirement of 
clause (i) or (ii) of section 6702(b)(2)(A), then the Secretary may 
treat such portion as if it were never submitted and such portion shall 
not be subject to any further administrative or judicial review.''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part I of 
subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by striking the item relating to 
section 6702 and inserting the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6702. Frivolous tax 
 submissions.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to submissions made and issues raised after the date on which the 
Secretary first prescribes a list under section 6702(c) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by subsection (a).

SEC. 414. REGULATION OF INDIVIDUALS PRACTICING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 TREASURY.

 (a) Censure; Imposition of Penalty.--
 (1) In general.--Section 330(b) of title 31, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``, or censure,'' after 
 ``Department'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new flush 
 sentence:
``The Secretary may impose a monetary penalty on any representative 
described in the preceding sentence. If the representative was acting 
on behalf of an employer or any firm or other entity in connection with 
the conduct giving rise to such penalty, the Secretary may impose a 
monetary penalty on such employer, firm, or entity if it knew, or 
reasonably should have known, of such conduct. Such penalty shall not 
exceed the gross income derived (or to be derived) from the conduct 
giving rise to the penalty and may be in addition to, or in lieu of, 
any suspension, disbarment, or censure of the representative.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to actions taken after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (b) Tax Shelter Opinions, etc.--Section 330 of such title 31 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Nothing in this section or in any other provision of law 
shall be construed to limit the authority of the Secretary of the 
Treasury to impose standards applicable to the rendering of written 
advice with respect to any entity, transaction plan or arrangement, or 
other plan or arrangement, which is of a type which the Secretary 
determines as having a potential for tax avoidance or evasion.''.

SEC. 415. PENALTY FOR PROMOTING ABUSIVE TAX SHELTERS.

 (a) Penalty for Promoting Abusive Tax Shelters.--Section 6700 
(relating to promoting abusive tax shelters, etc.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively,
 (2) by striking ``a penalty'' and all that follows through 
 the period in the first sentence of subsection (a) and 
 inserting ``a penalty determined under subsection (b)'', and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty; Calculation of Penalty; Liability for 
Penalty.--
 ``(1) Amount of penalty.--The amount of the penalty imposed 
 by subsection (a) shall not exceed 100 percent of the gross 
 income derived (or to be derived) from such activity by the 
 person or persons subject to such penalty.
 ``(2) Calculation of penalty.--The penalty amount 
 determined under paragraph (1) shall be calculated with respect 
 to each instance of an activity described in subsection (a), 
 each instance in which income was derived by the person or 
 persons subject to such penalty, and each person who 
 participated in such an activity.
 ``(3) Liability for penalty.--If more than 1 person is 
 liable under subsection (a) with respect to such activity, all 
 such persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the 
 penalty under such subsection.
 ``(c) Penalty Not Deductible.--The payment of any penalty imposed 
under this section or the payment of any amount to settle or avoid the 
imposition of such penalty shall not be deductible by the person who is 
subject to such penalty or who makes such payment.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to activities after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 416. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR TAXABLE YEARS FOR WHICH REQUIRED 
 LISTED TRANSACTIONS NOT REPORTED.

 (a) In General.--Section 6501(c) (relating to exceptions) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Listed transactions.--If a taxpayer fails to include 
 on any return or statement for any taxable year any information 
 with respect to a listed transaction (as defined in section 
 6707A(c)(2)) which is required under section 6011 to be 
 included with such return or statement, the time for assessment 
 of any tax imposed by this title with respect to such 
 transaction shall not expire before the date which is 1 year 
 after the earlier of--
 ``(A) the date on which the Secretary is furnished 
 the information so required; or
 ``(B) the date that a material advisor (as defined 
 in section 6111) meets the requirements of section 6112 
 with respect to a request by the Secretary under 
 section 6112(b) relating to such transaction with 
 respect to such taxpayer.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years with respect to which the period for assessing a 
deficiency did not expire before the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 417. DENIAL OF DEDUCTION FOR INTEREST ON UNDERPAYMENTS 
 ATTRIBUTABLE TO NONDISCLOSED REPORTABLE AND NONECONOMIC 
 SUBSTANCE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 163 (relating to deduction for interest) 
is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by 
inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection:
 ``(m) Interest on Unpaid Taxes Attributable To Nondisclosed 
Reportable Transactions and Noneconomic Substance Transactions.--No 
deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any interest paid or 
accrued under section 6601 on any underpayment of tax which is 
attributable to--
 ``(1) the portion of any reportable transaction 
 understatement (as defined in section 6662A(b)) with respect to 
 which the requirement of section 6664(d)(2)(A) is not met, or
 ``(2) any noneconomic substance transaction understatement 
 (as defined in section 6662B(c)).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to transactions in taxable years beginning after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 418. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR TAX LAW ENFORCEMENT.

 There is authorized to be appropriated $300,000,000 for each fiscal 
year beginning after September 30, 2003, for the purpose of carrying 
out tax law enforcement to combat tax avoidance transactions and other 
tax shelters, including the use of offshore financial accounts to 
conceal taxable income.

SEC. 419. PENALTY FOR AIDING AND ABETTING THE UNDERSTATEMENT OF TAX 
 LIABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 6701(a) (relating to imposition of 
penalty) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``the tax liability or'' after ``respect 
 to,'' in paragraph (1),
 (2) by inserting ``aid, assistance, procurement, or advice 
 with respect to such'' before ``portion'' both places it 
 appears in paragraphs (2) and (3), and
 (3) by inserting ``instance of aid, assistance, 
 procurement, or advice or each such'' before ``document'' in 
 the matter following paragraph (3).
 (b) Amount of Penalty.--Subsection (b) of section 6701 (relating to 
penalties for aiding and abetting understatement of tax liability) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty; Calculation of Penalty; Liability for 
Penalty.--
 ``(1) Amount of penalty.--The amount of the penalty imposed 
 by subsection (a) shall not exceed 100 percent of the gross 
 income derived (or to be derived) from such aid, assistance, 
 procurement, or advice provided by the person or persons 
 subject to such penalty.
 ``(2) Calculation of penalty.--The penalty amount 
 determined under paragraph (1) shall be calculated with respect 
 to each instance of aid, assistance, procurement, or advice 
 described in subsection (a), each instance in which income was 
 derived by the person or persons subject to such penalty, and 
 each person who made such an understatement of the liability 
 for tax.
 ``(3) Liability for penalty.--If more than 1 person is 
 liable under subsection (a) with respect to providing such aid, 
 assistance, procurement, or advice, all such persons shall be 
 jointly and severally liable for the penalty under such 
 subsection.''.
 (c) Penalty Not Deductible.--Section 6701 is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Penalty Not Deductible.--The payment of any penalty imposed 
under this section or the payment of any amount to settle or avoid the 
imposition of such penalty shall not be deductible by the person who is 
subject to such penalty or who makes such payment.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to activities after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 420. STUDY ON INFORMATION SHARING AMONG LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, jointly with the 
Attorney General, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, study the effectiveness of, and ways 
to improve, the sharing of information related to the promotion of 
prohibited tax shelters or tax avoidance schemes and other potential 
violations of Federal laws.
 (b) Report.--The Secretary shall, not later than 1 year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, report to the appropriate committees 
of the Congress the results of the study under subsection (a), 
including any recommendations for legislation.

 Subtitle B--Other Corporate Governance Provisions

SEC. 421. AFFIRMATION OF CONSOLIDATED RETURN REGULATION AUTHORITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 1502 (relating to consolidated return 
regulations) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
sentence: ``In prescribing such regulations, the Secretary may 
prescribe rules applicable to corporations filing consolidated returns 
under section 1501 that are different from other provisions of this 
title that would apply if such corporations filed separate returns.''.
 (b) Result Not Overturned.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be construed by treating Treasury 
regulation Sec. 1.1502-20(c)(1)(iii) (as in effect on January 1, 2001) 
as being inapplicable to the type of factual situation in 255 F.3d 1357 
(Fed. Cir. 2001).
 (c) Effective Date.--The provisions of this section shall apply to 
taxable years beginning before, on, or after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 422. DECLARATION BY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER RELATING TO FEDERAL 
 ANNUAL INCOME TAX RETURN OF A CORPORATION.

 (a) In General.--The Federal annual tax return of a corporation 
with respect to income shall also include a declaration signed by the 
chief executive officer of such corporation (or other such officer of 
the corporation as the Secretary of the Treasury may designate if the 
corporation does not have a chief executive officer), under penalties 
of perjury, that the corporation has in place processes and procedures 
to ensure that such return complies with the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 and that the chief executive officer was provided reasonable 
assurance of the accuracy of all material aspects of such return. The 
preceding sentence shall not apply to any return of a regulated 
investment company (within the meaning of section 851 of such Code).
 (b) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to the Federal annual 
tax return of a corporation with respect to income for taxable years 
ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 423. DENIAL OF DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN FINES, PENALTIES, AND OTHER 
 AMOUNTS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (f) of section 162 (relating to trade 
or business expenses) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(f) Fines, Penalties, and Other Amounts.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no 
 deduction otherwise allowable shall be allowed under this 
 chapter for any amount paid or incurred (whether by suit, 
 agreement, or otherwise) to, or at the direction of, a 
 government or entity described in paragraph (4) in relation to 
 the violation of any law or the investigation or inquiry by 
 such government or entity into the potential violation of any 
 law.
 ``(2) Exception for amounts constituting restitution.--
 Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount which the taxpayer 
 establishes constitutes restitution (including remediation of 
 property) for damage or harm caused by or which may be caused 
 by the violation of any law or the potential violation of any 
 law. This paragraph shall not apply to any amount paid or 
 incurred as reimbursement to the government or entity for the 
 costs of any investigation or litigation.
 ``(3) Exception for amounts paid or incurred as the result 
 of certain court orders.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any 
 amount paid or incurred by order of a court in a suit in which 
 no government or entity described in paragraph (4) is a party.
 ``(4) Certain nongovernmental regulatory entities.--An 
 entity is described in this paragraph if it is--
 ``(A) a nongovernmental entity which exercises 
 self-regulatory powers (including imposing sanctions) 
 in connection with a qualified board or exchange (as 
 defined in section 1256(g)(7)), or
 ``(B) to the extent provided in regulations, a 
 nongovernmental entity which exercises self-regulatory 
 powers (including imposing sanctions) as part of 
 performing an essential governmental function.
 ``(5) Exception for taxes due.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to any amount paid or incurred as taxes due.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to amounts paid or incurred after April 27, 2003, except that such 
amendment shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred under any binding 
order or agreement entered into on or before April 27, 2003. Such 
exception shall not apply to an order or agreement requiring court 
approval unless the approval was obtained on or before April 27, 2003.

SEC. 424. DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR PUNITIVE DAMAGES.

 (a) Disallowance of Deduction.--
 (1) In general.--Section 162(g) (relating to treble damage 
 payments under the antitrust laws) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively,
 (B) by striking ``If'' and inserting:
 ``(1) Treble damages.--If'', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Punitive damages.--No deduction shall be allowed 
 under this chapter for any amount paid or incurred for punitive 
 damages in connection with any judgment in, or settlement of, 
 any action. This paragraph shall not apply to punitive damages 
 described in section 104(c).''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The heading for section 162(g) 
 is amended by inserting ``or Punitive Damages'' after ``Laws''.
 (b) Inclusion in Income of Punitive Damages Paid by Insurer or 
Otherwise.--
 (1) In general.--Part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 
 (relating to items specifically included in gross income) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 91. PUNITIVE DAMAGES COMPENSATED BY INSURANCE OR OTHERWISE.

 ``Gross income shall include any amount paid to or on behalf of a 
taxpayer as insurance or otherwise by reason of the taxpayer's 
liability (or agreement) to pay punitive damages.''.
 (2) Reporting requirements.--Section 6041 (relating to 
 information at source) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(f) Section To Apply to Punitive Damages Compensation.--This 
section shall apply to payments by a person to or on behalf of another 
person as insurance or otherwise by reason of the other person's 
liability (or agreement) to pay punitive damages.''.
 (3) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for part 
 II of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new item:

``Sec. 91. Punitive damages compensated by insurance or otherwise.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to damages paid or incurred on or after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 425. INCREASE IN CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTY LIMITATION FOR THE 
 UNDERPAYMENT OR OVERPAYMENT OF TAX DUE TO FRAUD.

 (a) In General.--Section 7206 (relating to fraud and false 
statements) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Any person who--'' and inserting ``(a) In 
 General.--Any person who--'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Increase in Monetary Limitation for Underpayment or 
Overpayment of Tax Due to Fraud.--If any portion of any underpayment 
(as defined in section 6664(a)) or overpayment (as defined in section 
6401(a)) of tax required to be shown on a return is attributable to 
fraudulent action described in subsection (a), the applicable dollar 
amount under subsection (a) shall in no event be less than an amount 
equal to such portion. A rule similar to the rule under section 6663(b) 
shall apply for purposes of determining the portion so attributable.''.
 (b) Increase in Penalties.--
 (1) Attempt to evade or defeat tax.--Section 7201 is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting 
 ``$250,000'',
 (B) by striking ``$500,000'' and inserting 
 ``$1,000,000'', and
 (C) by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 
 years''.
 (2) Willful failure to file return, supply information, or 
 pay tax.--Section 7203 is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence--
 (i) by striking ``misdemeanor'' and 
 inserting ``felony'', and
 (ii) by striking ``1 year'' and inserting 
 ``10 years'', and
 (B) by striking the third sentence.
 (3) Fraud and false statements.--Section 7206(a) (as 
 redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting 
 ``$250,000'',
 (B) by striking ``$500,000'' and inserting 
 ``$1,000,000'', and
 (C) by striking ``3 years'' and inserting ``5 
 years''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to underpayments and overpayments attributable to actions 
occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle C--Enron-Related Tax Shelter Provisions

SEC. 431. LIMITATION ON TRANSFER OR IMPORTATION OF BUILT-IN LOSSES.

 (a) In General.--Section 362 (relating to basis to corporations) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Limitations on Built-In Losses.--
 ``(1) Limitation on importation of built-in losses.--
 ``(A) In general.--If in any transaction described 
 in subsection (a) or (b) there would (but for this 
 subsection) be an importation of a net built-in loss, 
 the basis of each property described in subparagraph 
 (B) which is acquired in such transaction shall 
 (notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b)) be its fair 
 market value immediately after such transaction.
 ``(B) Property described.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), property is described in this 
 subparagraph if--
 ``(i) gain or loss with respect to such 
 property is not subject to tax under this 
 subtitle in the hands of the transferor 
 immediately before the transfer, and
 ``(ii) gain or loss with respect to such 
 property is subject to such tax in the hands of 
 the transferee immediately after such transfer.
 In any case in which the transferor is a partnership, 
 the preceding sentence shall be applied by treating 
 each partner in such partnership as holding such 
 partner's proportionate share of the property of such 
 partnership.
 ``(C) Importation of net built-in loss.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), there is an importation 
 of a net built-in loss in a transaction if the 
 transferee's aggregate adjusted bases of property 
 described in subparagraph (B) which is transferred in 
 such transaction would (but for this paragraph) exceed 
 the fair market value of such property immediately 
 after such transaction.
 ``(2) Limitation on transfer of built-in losses in section 
 351 transactions.--
 ``(A) In general.--If--
 ``(i) property is transferred by a 
 transferor in any transaction which is 
 described in subsection (a) and which is not 
 described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, 
 and
 ``(ii) the transferee's aggregate adjusted 
 bases of such property so transferred would 
 (but for this paragraph) exceed the fair market 
 value of such property immediately after such 
 transaction,
 then, notwithstanding subsection (a), the transferee's 
 aggregate adjusted bases of the property so transferred 
 shall not exceed the fair market value of such property 
 immediately after such transaction.
 ``(B) Allocation of basis reduction.--The aggregate 
 reduction in basis by reason of subparagraph (A) shall 
 be allocated among the property so transferred in 
 proportion to their respective built-in losses 
 immediately before the transaction.
 ``(C) Exception for transfers within affiliated 
 group.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any 
 transaction if the transferor owns stock in the 
 transferee meeting the requirements of section 
 1504(a)(2). In the case of property to which 
 subparagraph (A) does not apply by reason of the 
 preceding sentence, the transferor's basis in the stock 
 received for such property shall not exceed its fair 
 market value immediately after the transfer.''.
 (b) Comparable Treatment Where Liquidation.--Paragraph (1) of 
section 334(b) (relating to liquidation of subsidiary) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--If property is received by a corporate 
 distributee in a distribution in a complete liquidation to 
 which section 332 applies (or in a transfer described in 
 section 337(b)(1)), the basis of such property in the hands of 
 such distributee shall be the same as it would be in the hands 
 of the transferor; except that the basis of such property in 
 the hands of such distributee shall be the fair market value of 
 the property at the time of the distribution--
 ``(A) in any case in which gain or loss is 
 recognized by the liquidating corporation with respect 
 to such property, or
 ``(B) in any case in which the liquidating 
 corporation is a foreign corporation, the corporate 
 distributee is a domestic corporation, and the 
 corporate distributee's aggregate adjusted bases of 
 property described in section 362(e)(1)(B) which is 
 distributed in such liquidation would (but for this 
 subparagraph) exceed the fair market value of such 
 property immediately after such liquidation.''.
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
 apply to transactions after December 31, 2003.
 (2) Liquidations.--The amendment made by subsection (b) 
 shall apply to liquidations after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 432. NO REDUCTION OF BASIS UNDER SECTION 734 IN STOCK HELD BY 
 PARTNERSHIP IN CORPORATE PARTNER.

 (a) In General.--Section 755 is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(c) No Allocation of Basis Decrease to Stock of Corporate 
Partner.--In making an allocation under subsection (a) of any decrease 
in the adjusted basis of partnership property under section 734(b)--
 ``(1) no allocation may be made to stock in a corporation 
 (or any person which is related (within the meaning of section 
 267(b) or 707(b)(1)) to such corporation) which is a partner in 
 the partnership, and
 ``(2) any amount not allocable to stock by reason of 
 paragraph (1) shall be allocated under subsection (a) to other 
 partnership property in such manner as the Secretary may 
 prescribe.
Gain shall be recognized to the partnership to the extent that the 
amount required to be allocated under paragraph (2) to other 
partnership property exceeds the aggregate adjusted basis of such other 
property immediately before the allocation required by paragraph 
(2).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to distributions after February 13, 2003.

SEC. 433. REPEAL OF SPECIAL RULES FOR FASITS.

 (a) In General.--Part V of subchapter M of chapter 1 (relating to 
financial asset securitization investment trusts) is hereby repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Paragraph (6) of section 56(g) is amended by striking 
 ``REMIC, or FASIT'' and inserting ``or REMIC''.
 (2) Clause (ii) of section 382(l)(4)(B) is amended by 
 striking ``a REMIC to which part IV of subchapter M applies, or 
 a FASIT to which part V of subchapter M applies,'' and 
 inserting ``or a REMIC to which part IV of subchapter M 
 applies,''.
 (3) Paragraph (1) of section 582(c) is amended by striking 
 ``, and any regular interest in a FASIT,''.
 (4) Subparagraph (E) of section 856(c)(5) is amended by 
 striking the last sentence.
 (5)(A) Section 860G(a)(1) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new sentence: ``An interest shall not fail to 
 qualify as a regular interest solely because the specified 
 principal amount of the regular interest (or the amount of 
 interest accrued on the regular interest) can be reduced as a 
 result of the nonoccurrence of 1 or more contingent payments 
 with respect to any reverse mortgage loan held by the REMIC if, 
 on the startup day for the REMIC, the sponsor reasonably 
 believes that all principal and interest due under the regular 
 interest will be paid at or prior to the liquidation of the 
 REMIC.''.
 (B) The last sentence of section 860G(a)(3) is amended by 
 inserting ``, and any reverse mortgage loan (and each balance 
 increase on such loan meeting the requirements of subparagraph 
 (A)(iii)) shall be treated as an obligation secured by an 
 interest in real property'' before the period at the end.
 (6) Paragraph (3) of section 860G(a) is amended by adding 
 ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking ``, and'' 
 at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting a period, and by 
 striking subparagraph (D).
 (7) Section 860G(a)(3), as amended by paragraph (6), is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), if more than 50 percent of the 
 obligations transferred to, or purchased by, the REMIC are 
 originated by the United States or any State (or any political 
 subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of the United States or 
 any State) and are principally secured by an interest in real 
 property, then each obligation transferred to, or purchased by, 
 the REMIC shall be treated as secured by an interest in real 
 property.''.
 (8)(A) Section 860G(a)(3)(A) is amended by striking ``or'' 
 at the end of clause (i), by inserting ``or'' at the end of 
 clause (ii), and by inserting after clause (ii) the following 
 new clause:
 ``(iii) represents an increase in the 
 principal amount under the original terms of an 
 obligation described in clause (i) or (ii) if 
 such increase--
 ``(I) is attributable to an advance 
 made to the obligor pursuant to the 
 original terms of the obligation,
 ``(II) occurs after the startup 
 day, and
 ``(III) is purchased by the REMIC 
 pursuant to a fixed price contract in 
 effect on the startup day.''.
 (B) Section 860G(a)(7)(B) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(B) Qualified reserve fund.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `qualified reserve fund' 
 means any reasonably required reserve to--
 ``(i) provide for full payment of expenses 
 of the REMIC or amounts due on regular 
 interests in the event of defaults on qualified 
 mortgages or lower than expected returns on 
 cash flow investments, or
 ``(ii) provide a source of funds for the 
 purchase of obligations described in clause 
 (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A).
 The aggregate fair market value of the assets held in 
 any such reserve shall not exceed 50 percent of the 
 aggregate fair market value of all of the assets of the 
 REMIC on the startup day, and the amount of any such 
 reserve shall be promptly and appropriately reduced to 
 the extent the amount held in such reserve is no longer 
 reasonably required for purposes specified in clause 
 (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph.''.
 (9) Subparagraph (C) of section 1202(e)(4) is amended by 
 striking ``REMIC, or FASIT'' and inserting ``or REMIC''.
 (10) Clause (xi) of section 7701(a)(19)(C) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and any regular interest in a 
 FASIT,'', and
 (B) by striking ``or FASIT'' each place it appears.
 (11) Subparagraph (A) of section 7701(i)(2) is amended by 
 striking ``or a FASIT''.
 (12) The table of parts for subchapter M of chapter 1 is 
 amended by striking the item relating to part V.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall take effect on February 
 14, 2003.
 (2) Exception for existing fasits.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to any FASIT in existence on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act to the extent that regular interests issued by the 
 FASIT before such date continue to remain outstanding in 
 accordance with the original terms of issuance.

SEC. 434. EXPANDED DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR INTEREST ON 
 CONVERTIBLE DEBT.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 163(l) is amended by 
inserting ``or equity held by the issuer (or any related party) in any 
other person'' after ``or a related party''.
 (b) Capitalization Allowed With Respect to Equity of Persons Other 
Than Issuer and Related Parties.--Section 163(l) is amended by 
redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6) and by 
inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Capitalization allowed with respect to equity of 
 persons other than issuer and related parties.--If the 
 disqualified debt instrument of a corporation is payable in 
 equity held by the issuer (or any related party) in any other 
 person (other than a related party), the basis of such equity 
 shall be increased by the amount not allowed as a deduction by 
 reason of paragraph (1) with respect to the instrument.''.
 (c) Exception for Certain Instruments Issued by Dealers in 
Securities.--Section 163(l), as amended by subsection (b), is amended 
by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs (6) and (7) and 
by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Exception for certain instruments issued by dealers 
 in securities.--For purposes of this subsection, the term 
 `disqualified debt instrument' does not include indebtedness 
 issued by a dealer in securities (or a related party) which is 
 payable in, or by reference to, equity (other than equity of 
 the issuer or a related party) held by such dealer in its 
 capacity as a dealer in securities. For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `dealer in securities' has the meaning 
 given such term by section 475.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--Paragraph (3) of section 163(l) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``or a related party'' in the material 
 preceding subparagraph (A) and inserting ``or any other 
 person'', and
 (2) by striking ``or interest'' each place it appears.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to debt instruments issued after February 13, 2003.

SEC. 435. EXPANDED AUTHORITY TO DISALLOW TAX BENEFITS UNDER SECTION 
 269.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 269 (relating to 
acquisitions made to evade or avoid income tax) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(a) In General.--If--
 ``(1)(A) any person or persons acquire, directly or 
 indirectly, control of a corporation, or
 ``(B) any corporation acquires, directly or indirectly, 
 property of another corporation and the basis of such property, 
 in the hands of the acquiring corporation, is determined by 
 reference to the basis in the hands of the transferor 
 corporation, and
 ``(2) the principal purpose for which such acquisition was 
 made is evasion or avoidance of Federal income tax,
then the Secretary may disallow such deduction, credit, or other 
allowance. For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), control means the 
ownership of stock possessing at least 50 percent of the total combined 
voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 50 
percent of the total value of all shares of all classes of stock of the 
corporation.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to stock and property acquired after February 13, 2003.

SEC. 436. MODIFICATION OF INTERACTION BETWEEN SUBPART F AND PASSIVE 
 FOREIGN INVESTMENT COMPANY RULES.

 (a) Limitation on Exception From PFIC Rules for United States 
Shareholders of Controlled Foreign Corporations.--Paragraph (2) of 
section 1297(e) (relating to passive foreign investment company) is 
amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence:
 ``Such term shall not include any period if the earning 
 of subpart F income by such corporation during such 
 period would result in only a remote likelihood of an 
 inclusion in gross income under section 
 951(a)(1)(A)(i).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years of controlled foreign corporations beginning after 
February 13, 2003, and to taxable years of United States shareholders 
with or within which such taxable years of controlled foreign 
corporations end.

 Subtitle D--Provisions to Discourage Expatriation

SEC. 441. TAX TREATMENT OF INVERTED CORPORATE ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter C of chapter 80 (relating to provisions 
affecting more than one subtitle) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 7874. RULES RELATING TO INVERTED CORPORATE ENTITIES.

 ``(a) Inverted Corporations Treated as Domestic Corporations.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a foreign incorporated entity is 
 treated as an inverted domestic corporation, then, 
 notwithstanding section 7701(a)(4), such entity shall be 
 treated for purposes of this title as a domestic corporation.
 ``(2) Inverted domestic corporation.--For purposes of this 
 section, a foreign incorporated entity shall be treated as an 
 inverted domestic corporation if, pursuant to a plan (or a 
 series of related transactions)--
 ``(A) the entity completes after March 20, 2002, 
 the direct or indirect acquisition of substantially all 
 of the properties held directly or indirectly by a 
 domestic corporation or substantially all of the 
 properties constituting a trade or business of a 
 domestic partnership,
 ``(B) after the acquisition at least 80 percent of 
 the stock (by vote or value) of the entity is held--
 ``(i) in the case of an acquisition with 
 respect to a domestic corporation, by former 
 shareholders of the domestic corporation by 
 reason of holding stock in the domestic 
 corporation, or
 ``(ii) in the case of an acquisition with 
 respect to a domestic partnership, by former 
 partners of the domestic partnership by reason 
 of holding a capital or profits interest in the 
 domestic partnership, and
 ``(C) the expanded affiliated group which after the 
 acquisition includes the entity does not have 
 substantial business activities in the foreign country 
 in which or under the law of which the entity is 
 created or organized when compared to the total 
 business activities of such expanded affiliated group.
 Except as provided in regulations, an acquisition of properties 
 of a domestic corporation shall not be treated as described in 
 subparagraph (A) if none of the corporation's stock was readily 
 tradeable on an established securities market at any time 
 during the 4-year period ending on the date of the acquisition.
 ``(b) Preservation of Domestic Tax Base in Certain Inversion 
Transactions to Which Subsection (a) Does Not Apply.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a foreign incorporated entity would 
 be treated as an inverted domestic corporation with respect to 
 an acquired entity if either--
 ``(A) subsection (a)(2)(A) were applied by 
 substituting `after December 31, 1996, and on or before 
 March 20, 2002' for `after March 20, 2002' and 
 subsection (a)(2)(B) were applied by substituting `more 
 than 50 percent' for `at least 80 percent', or
 ``(B) subsection (a)(2)(B) were applied by 
 substituting `more than 50 percent' for `at least 80 
 percent',
 then the rules of subsection (c) shall apply to any inversion 
 gain of the acquired entity during the applicable period and 
 the rules of subsection (d) shall apply to any related party 
 transaction of the acquired entity during the applicable 
 period. This subsection shall not apply for any taxable year if 
 subsection (a) applies to such foreign incorporated entity for 
 such taxable year.
 ``(2) Acquired entity.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `acquired entity' means 
 the domestic corporation or partnership substantially 
 all of the properties of which are directly or 
 indirectly acquired in an acquisition described in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) to which this subsection applies.
 ``(B) Aggregation rules.--Any domestic person 
 bearing a relationship described in section 267(b) or 
 707(b) to an acquired entity shall be treated as an 
 acquired entity with respect to the acquisition 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) Applicable period.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `applicable period' 
 means the period--
 ``(i) beginning on the first date 
 properties are acquired as part of the 
 acquisition described in subsection (a)(2)(A) 
 to which this subsection applies, and
 ``(ii) ending on the date which is 10 years 
 after the last date properties are acquired as 
 part of such acquisition.
 ``(B) Special rule for inversions occurring before 
 march 21, 2002.--In the case of any acquired entity to 
 which paragraph (1)(A) applies, the applicable period 
 shall be the 10-year period beginning on January 1, 
 2003.
 ``(c) Tax on Inversion Gains May Not Be Offset.--If subsection (b) 
applies--
 ``(1) In general.--The taxable income of an acquired entity 
 (or any expanded affiliated group which includes such entity) 
 for any taxable year which includes any portion of the 
 applicable period shall in no event be less than the inversion 
 gain of the entity for the taxable year.
 ``(2) Credits not allowed against tax on inversion gain.--
 Credits shall be allowed against the tax imposed by this 
 chapter on an acquired entity for any taxable year described in 
 paragraph (1) only to the extent such tax exceeds the product 
 of--
 ``(A) the amount of the inversion gain for the 
 taxable year, and
 ``(B) the highest rate of tax specified in section 
 11(b)(1).
 For purposes of determining the credit allowed by section 901 
 inversion gain shall be treated as from sources within the 
 United States.
 ``(3) Special rules for partnerships.--In the case of an 
 acquired entity which is a partnership--
 ``(A) the limitations of this subsection shall 
 apply at the partner rather than the partnership level,
 ``(B) the inversion gain of any partner for any 
 taxable year shall be equal to the sum of--
 ``(i) the partner's distributive share of 
 inversion gain of the partnership for such 
 taxable year, plus
 ``(ii) income or gain required to be 
 recognized for the taxable year by the partner 
 under section 367(a), 741, or 1001, or under 
 any other provision of chapter 1, by reason of 
 the transfer during the applicable period of 
 any partnership interest of the partner in such 
 partnership to the foreign incorporated entity, 
 and
 ``(C) the highest rate of tax specified in the rate 
 schedule applicable to the partner under chapter 1 
 shall be substituted for the rate of tax under 
 paragraph (2)(B).
 ``(4) Inversion gain.--For purposes of this section, the 
 term `inversion gain' means any income or gain required to be 
 recognized under section 304, 311(b), 367, 1001, or 1248, or 
 under any other provision of chapter 1, by reason of the 
 transfer during the applicable period of stock or other 
 properties by an acquired entity--
 ``(A) as part of the acquisition described in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) to which subsection (b) applies, 
 or
 ``(B) after such acquisition to a foreign related 
 person.
 The Secretary may provide that income or gain from the sale of 
 inventories or other transactions in the ordinary course of a 
 trade or business shall not be treated as inversion gain under 
 subparagraph (B) to the extent the Secretary determines such 
 treatment would not be inconsistent with the purposes of this 
 section.
 ``(5) Coordination with section 172 and minimum tax.--Rules 
 similar to the rules of paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 
 860E(a) shall apply for purposes of this section.
 ``(6) Statute of limitations.--
 ``(A) In general.--The statutory period for the 
 assessment of any deficiency attributable to the 
 inversion gain of any taxpayer for any pre-inversion 
 year shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years 
 from the date the Secretary is notified by the taxpayer 
 (in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe) of the 
 acquisition described in subsection (a)(2)(A) to which 
 such gain relates and such deficiency may be assessed 
 before the expiration of such 3-year period 
 notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule 
 of law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.
 ``(B) Pre-inversion year.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `pre-inversion year' means 
 any taxable year if--
 ``(i) any portion of the applicable period 
 is included in such taxable year, and
 ``(ii) such year ends before the taxable 
 year in which the acquisition described in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) is completed.
 ``(d) Special Rules Applicable to Acquired Entities to Which 
Subsection (b) Applies.--
 ``(1) Increases in accuracy-related penalties.--In the case 
 of any underpayment of tax of an acquired entity to which 
 subsection (b) applies--
 ``(A) section 6662(a) shall be applied with respect 
 to such underpayment by substituting `30 percent' for 
 `20 percent', and
 ``(B) if such underpayment is attributable to one 
 or more gross valuation understatements, the increase 
 in the rate of penalty under section 6662(h) shall be 
 to 50 percent rather than 40 percent.
 ``(2) Modifications of limitation on interest deduction.--
 In the case of an acquired entity to which subsection (b) 
 applies, section 163(j) shall be applied--
 ``(A) without regard to paragraph (2)(A)(ii) 
 thereof, and
 ``(B) by substituting `25 percent' for `50 percent' 
 each place it appears in paragraph (2)(B) thereof.
 ``(e) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Rules for application of subsection (a)(2).--In 
 applying subsection (a)(2) for purposes of subsections (a) and 
 (b), the following rules shall apply:
 ``(A) Certain stock disregarded.--There shall not 
 be taken into account in determining ownership for 
 purposes of subsection (a)(2)(B)--
 ``(i) stock held by members of the expanded 
 affiliated group which includes the foreign 
 incorporated entity, or
 ``(ii) stock of such entity which is sold 
 in a public offering or private placement 
 related to the acquisition described in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A).
 ``(B) Plan deemed in certain cases.--If a foreign 
 incorporated entity acquires directly or indirectly 
 substantially all of the properties of a domestic 
 corporation or partnership during the 4-year period 
 beginning on the date which is 2 years before the 
 ownership requirements of subsection (a)(2)(B) are met 
 with respect to such domestic corporation or 
 partnership, such actions shall be treated as pursuant 
 to a plan.
 ``(C) Certain transfers disregarded.--The transfer 
 of properties or liabilities (including by contribution 
 or distribution) shall be disregarded if such transfers 
 are part of a plan a principal purpose of which is to 
 avoid the purposes of this section.
 ``(D) Special rule for related partnerships.--For 
 purposes of applying subsection (a)(2) to the 
 acquisition of a domestic partnership, except as 
 provided in regulations, all partnerships which are 
 under common control (within the meaning of section 
 482) shall be treated as 1 partnership.
 ``(E) Treatment of certain rights.--The Secretary 
 shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary--
 ``(i) to treat warrants, options, contracts 
 to acquire stock, convertible debt instruments, 
 and other similar interests as stock, and
 ``(ii) to treat stock as not stock.
 ``(2) Expanded affiliated group.--The term `expanded 
 affiliated group' means an affiliated group as defined in 
 section 1504(a) but without regard to section 1504(b)(3), 
 except that section 1504(a) shall be applied by substituting 
 `more than 50 percent' for `at least 80 percent' each place it 
 appears.
 ``(3) Foreign incorporated entity.--The term `foreign 
 incorporated entity' means any entity which is, or but for 
 subsection (a)(1) would be, treated as a foreign corporation 
 for purposes of this title.
 ``(4) Foreign related person.--The term `foreign related 
 person' means, with respect to any acquired entity, a foreign 
 person which--
 ``(A) bears a relationship to such entity described 
 in section 267(b) or 707(b), or
 ``(B) is under the same common control (within the 
 meaning of section 482) as such entity.
 ``(5) Subsequent acquisitions by unrelated domestic 
 corporations.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to such conditions, 
 limitations, and exceptions as the Secretary may 
 prescribe, if, after an acquisition described in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) to which subsection (b) applies, a 
 domestic corporation stock of which is traded on an 
 established securities market acquires directly or 
 indirectly any properties of one or more acquired 
 entities in a transaction with respect to which the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B) are met, this section 
 shall cease to apply to any such acquired entity with 
 respect to which such requirements are met.
 ``(B) Requirements.--The requirements of the 
 subparagraph are met with respect to a transaction 
 involving any acquisition described in subparagraph (A) 
 if--
 ``(i) before such transaction the domestic 
 corporation did not have a relationship 
 described in section 267(b) or 707(b), and was 
 not under common control (within the meaning of 
 section 482), with the acquired entity, or any 
 member of an expanded affiliated group 
 including such entity, and
 ``(ii) after such transaction, such 
 acquired entity--
 ``(I) is a member of the same 
 expanded affiliated group which 
 includes the domestic corporation or 
 has such a relationship or is under 
 such common control with any member of 
 such group, and
 ``(II) is not a member of, and does 
 not have such a relationship and is not 
 under such common control with any 
 member of, the expanded affiliated 
 group which before such acquisition 
 included such entity.
 ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall provide such regulations as 
are necessary to carry out this section, including regulations 
providing for such adjustments to the application of this section as 
are necessary to prevent the avoidance of the purposes of this section, 
including the avoidance of such purposes through--
 ``(1) the use of related persons, pass-thru or other 
 noncorporate entities, or other intermediaries, or
 ``(2) transactions designed to have persons cease to be (or 
 not become) members of expanded affiliated groups or related 
 persons.''.
 (b) Information Reporting.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
exercise the Secretary's authority under the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 to require entities involved in transactions to which section 7874 
of such Code (as added by subsection (a)) applies to report to the 
Secretary, shareholders, partners, and such other persons as the 
Secretary may prescribe such information as is necessary to ensure the 
proper tax treatment of such transactions.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter C 
of chapter 80 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 7874. Rules relating to inverted 
 corporate entities.''.
 (d) Transition Rule for Certain Regulated Investment Companies and 
Unit Investment Trusts.--Notwithstanding section 7874 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by subsection (a)), a regulated 
investment company, or other pooled fund or trust specified by the 
Secretary of the Treasury, may elect to recognize gain by reason of 
section 367(a) of such Code with respect to a transaction under which a 
foreign incorporated entity is treated as an inverted domestic 
corporation under section 7874(a) of such Code by reason of an 
acquisition completed after March 20, 2002, and before January 1, 2004.
 (e) Disclosure of Corporate Expatriation Transactions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act 
 of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78n) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(i) Proxy Solicitations in Connection With Corporate Expatriation 
Transactions.--
 ``(1) Disclosure to shareholders of effects of corporate 
 expatriation transaction.--The Commission shall, by rule, 
 require that each domestic issuer shall prominently disclose, 
 not later than 5 business days before any shareholder vote 
 relating to a corporate expatriation transaction, as a separate 
 and distinct document accompanying each proxy statement 
 relating to the transaction--
 ``(A) the number of employees of the domestic 
 issuer that would be located in the new foreign 
 jurisdiction of incorporation or organization of that 
 issuer upon completion of the corporate expatriation 
 transaction;
 ``(B) how the rights of holders of the securities 
 of the domestic issuer would be impacted by a completed 
 corporate expatriation transaction, and any differences 
 in such rights before and after a completed corporate 
 expatriation transaction; and
 ``(C) that, as a result of a completed corporate 
 expatriation transaction, any taxable holder of the 
 securities of the domestic issuer shall be subject to 
 the taxation of any capital gains realized with respect 
 to such securities, and the amount of any such capital 
 gains tax that would apply as a result of the 
 transaction.
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection, the following 
 definitions shall apply:
 ``(A) Corporate expatriation transaction.--The term 
 `corporate expatriation transaction' means any 
 transaction, or series of related transactions, 
 described in subsection (a) or (b) of section 7874 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(A) Domestic issuer.--The term `domestic issuer' 
 means an issuer created or organized in the United 
 States or under the law of the United States or of any 
 State.''
 (2) Effective date.--Section 14(i) of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 (as added by this subsection) shall apply 
 with respect to corporate expatriation transactions (as defined 
 in that section 14(i)) proposed on and after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 442. IMPOSITION OF MARK-TO-MARKET TAX ON INDIVIDUALS WHO 
 EXPATRIATE.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part II of subchapter N of chapter 1 
is amended by inserting after section 877 the following new section:

``SEC. 877A. TAX RESPONSIBILITIES OF EXPATRIATION.

 ``(a) General Rules.--For purposes of this subtitle--
 ``(1) Mark to market.--Except as provided in subsections 
 (d) and (f), all property of a covered expatriate to whom this 
 section applies shall be treated as sold on the day before the 
 expatriation date for its fair market value.
 ``(2) Recognition of gain or loss.--In the case of any sale 
 under paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) notwithstanding any other provision of this 
 title, any gain arising from such sale shall be taken 
 into account for the taxable year of the sale, and
 ``(B) any loss arising from such sale shall be 
 taken into account for the taxable year of the sale to 
 the extent otherwise provided by this title, except 
 that section 1091 shall not apply to any such loss.
 Proper adjustment shall be made in the amount of any gain or 
 loss subsequently realized for gain or loss taken into account 
 under the preceding sentence.
 ``(3) Exclusion for certain gain.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amount which, but for this 
 paragraph, would be includible in the gross income of 
 any individual by reason of this section shall be 
 reduced (but not below zero) by $600,000. For purposes 
 of this paragraph, allocable expatriation gain taken 
 into account under subsection (f)(2) shall be treated 
 in the same manner as an amount required to be 
 includible in gross income.
 ``(B) Cost-of-living adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of an 
 expatriation date occurring in any calendar 
 year after 2004, the $600,000 amount under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an 
 amount equal to--
 ``(I) such dollar amount, 
 multiplied by
 ``(II) the cost-of-living 
 adjustment determined under section 
 1(f)(3) for such calendar year, 
 determined by substituting `calendar 
 year 2003' for `calendar year 1992' in 
 subparagraph (B) thereof.
 ``(ii) Rounding rules.--If any amount after 
 adjustment under clause (i) is not a multiple 
 of $1,000, such amount shall be rounded to the 
 next lower multiple of $1,000.
 ``(4) Election to continue to be taxed as united states 
 citizen.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a covered expatriate elects 
 the application of this paragraph--
 ``(i) this section (other than this 
 paragraph and subsection (i)) shall not apply 
 to the expatriate, but
 ``(ii) in the case of property to which 
 this section would apply but for such election, 
 the expatriate shall be subject to tax under 
 this title in the same manner as if the 
 individual were a United States citizen.
 ``(B) Requirements.--Subparagraph (A) shall not 
 apply to an individual unless the individual--
 ``(i) provides security for payment of tax 
 in such form and manner, and in such amount, as 
 the Secretary may require,
 ``(ii) consents to the waiver of any right 
 of the individual under any treaty of the 
 United States which would preclude assessment 
 or collection of any tax which may be imposed 
 by reason of this paragraph, and
 ``(iii) complies with such other 
 requirements as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(C) Election.--An election under subparagraph (A) 
 shall apply to all property to which this section would 
 apply but for the election and, once made, shall be 
 irrevocable. Such election shall also apply to property 
 the basis of which is determined in whole or in part by 
 reference to the property with respect to which the 
 election was made.
 ``(b) Election To Defer Tax.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the taxpayer elects the application 
 of this subsection with respect to any property treated as sold 
 by reason of subsection (a), the payment of the additional tax 
 attributable to such property shall be postponed until the due 
 date of the return for the taxable year in which such property 
 is disposed of (or, in the case of property disposed of in a 
 transaction in which gain is not recognized in whole or in 
 part, until such other date as the Secretary may prescribe).
 ``(2) Determination of tax with respect to property.--For 
 purposes of paragraph (1), the additional tax attributable to 
 any property is an amount which bears the same ratio to the 
 additional tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year 
 solely by reason of subsection (a) as the gain taken into 
 account under subsection (a) with respect to such property 
 bears to the total gain taken into account under subsection (a) 
 with respect to all property to which subsection (a) applies.
 ``(3) Termination of postponement.--No tax may be postponed 
 under this subsection later than the due date for the return of 
 tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year which includes 
 the date of death of the expatriate (or, if earlier, the time 
 that the security provided with respect to the property fails 
 to meet the requirements of paragraph (4), unless the taxpayer 
 corrects such failure within the time specified by the 
 Secretary).
 ``(4) Security.--
 ``(A) In general.--No election may be made under 
 paragraph (1) with respect to any property unless 
 adequate security is provided to the Secretary with 
 respect to such property.
 ``(B) Adequate security.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), security with respect to any property 
 shall be treated as adequate security if--
 ``(i) it is a bond in an amount equal to 
 the deferred tax amount under paragraph (2) for 
 the property, or
 ``(ii) the taxpayer otherwise establishes 
 to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the 
 security is adequate.
 ``(5) Waiver of certain rights.--No election may be made 
 under paragraph (1) unless the taxpayer consents to the waiver 
 of any right under any treaty of the United States which would 
 preclude assessment or collection of any tax imposed by reason 
 of this section.
 ``(6) Elections.--An election under paragraph (1) shall 
 only apply to property described in the election and, once 
 made, is irrevocable. An election may be made under paragraph 
 (1) with respect to an interest in a trust with respect to 
 which gain is required to be recognized under subsection 
 (f)(1).
 ``(7) Interest.--For purposes of section 6601--
 ``(A) the last date for the payment of tax shall be 
 determined without regard to the election under this 
 subsection, and
 ``(B) section 6621(a)(2) shall be applied by 
 substituting `5 percentage points' for `3 percentage 
 points' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
 ``(c) Covered Expatriate.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 term `covered expatriate' means an expatriate.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--An individual shall not be treated as a 
 covered expatriate if--
 ``(A) the individual--
 ``(i) became at birth a citizen of the 
 United States and a citizen of another country 
 and, as of the expatriation date, continues to 
 be a citizen of, and is taxed as a resident of, 
 such other country, and
 ``(ii) has not been a resident of the 
 United States (as defined in section 
 7701(b)(1)(A)(ii)) during the 5 taxable years 
 ending with the taxable year during which the 
 expatriation date occurs, or
 ``(B)(i) the individual's relinquishment of United 
 States citizenship occurs before such individual 
 attains age 18\1/2\, and
 ``(ii) the individual has been a resident of the 
 United States (as so defined) for not more than 5 
 taxable years before the date of relinquishment.
 ``(d) Exempt Property; Special Rules for Pension Plans.--
 ``(1) Exempt property.--This section shall not apply to the 
 following:
 ``(A) United states real property interests.--Any 
 United States real property interest (as defined in 
 section 897(c)(1)), other than stock of a United States 
 real property holding corporation which does not, on 
 the day before the expatriation date, meet the 
 requirements of section 897(c)(2).
 ``(B) Specified property.--Any property or interest 
 in property not described in subparagraph (A) which the 
 Secretary specifies in regulations.
 ``(2) Special rules for certain retirement plans.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a covered expatriate holds on 
 the day before the expatriation date any interest in a 
 retirement plan to which this paragraph applies--
 ``(i) such interest shall not be treated as 
 sold for purposes of subsection (a)(1), but
 ``(ii) an amount equal to the present value 
 of the expatriate's nonforfeitable accrued 
 benefit shall be treated as having been 
 received by such individual on such date as a 
 distribution under the plan.
 ``(B) Treatment of subsequent distributions.--In 
 the case of any distribution on or after the 
 expatriation date to or on behalf of the covered 
 expatriate from a plan from which the expatriate was 
 treated as receiving a distribution under subparagraph 
 (A), the amount otherwise includible in gross income by 
 reason of the subsequent distribution shall be reduced 
 by the excess of the amount includible in gross income 
 under subparagraph (A) over any portion of such amount 
 to which this subparagraph previously applied.
 ``(C) Treatment of subsequent distributions by 
 plan.--For purposes of this title, a retirement plan to 
 which this paragraph applies, and any person acting on 
 the plan's behalf, shall treat any subsequent 
 distribution described in subparagraph (B) in the same 
 manner as such distribution would be treated without 
 regard to this paragraph.
 ``(D) Applicable plans.--This paragraph shall apply 
 to--
 ``(i) any qualified retirement plan (as 
 defined in section 4974(c)),
 ``(ii) an eligible deferred compensation 
 plan (as defined in section 457(b)) of an 
 eligible employer described in section 
 457(e)(1)(A), and
 ``(iii) to the extent provided in 
 regulations, any foreign pension plan or 
 similar retirement arrangements or programs.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Expatriate.--The term `expatriate' means--
 ``(A) any United States citizen who relinquishes 
 citizenship, and
 ``(B) any long-term resident of the United States 
 who--
 ``(i) ceases to be a lawful permanent 
 resident of the United States (within the 
 meaning of section 7701(b)(6)), or
 ``(ii) commences to be treated as a 
 resident of a foreign country under the 
 provisions of a tax treaty between the United 
 States and the foreign country and who does not 
 waive the benefits of such treaty applicable to 
 residents of the foreign country.
 ``(2) Expatriation date.--The term `expatriation date' 
 means--
 ``(A) the date an individual relinquishes United 
 States citizenship, or
 ``(B) in the case of a long-term resident of the 
 United States, the date of the event described in 
 clause (i) or (ii) of paragraph (1)(B).
 ``(3) Relinquishment of citizenship.--A citizen shall be 
 treated as relinquishing United States citizenship on the 
 earliest of--
 ``(A) the date the individual renounces such 
 individual's United States nationality before a 
 diplomatic or consular officer of the United States 
 pursuant to paragraph (5) of section 349(a) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1481(a)(5)),
 ``(B) the date the individual furnishes to the 
 United States Department of State a signed statement of 
 voluntary relinquishment of United States nationality 
 confirming the performance of an act of expatriation 
 specified in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of section 
 349(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1481(a)(1)-(4)),
 ``(C) the date the United States Department of 
 State issues to the individual a certificate of loss of 
 nationality, or
 ``(D) the date a court of the United States cancels 
 a naturalized citizen's certificate of naturalization.
 Subparagraph (A) or (B) shall not apply to any individual 
 unless the renunciation or voluntary relinquishment is 
 subsequently approved by the issuance to the individual of a 
 certificate of loss of nationality by the United States 
 Department of State.
 ``(4) Long-term resident.--The term `long-term resident' 
 has the meaning given to such term by section 877(e)(2).
 ``(f) Special Rules Applicable to Beneficiaries' Interests in 
Trust.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if 
 an individual is determined under paragraph (3) to hold an 
 interest in a trust on the day before the expatriation date--
 ``(A) the individual shall not be treated as having 
 sold such interest,
 ``(B) such interest shall be treated as a separate 
 share in the trust, and
 ``(C)(i) such separate share shall be treated as a 
 separate trust consisting of the assets allocable to 
 such share,
 ``(ii) the separate trust shall be treated as 
 having sold its assets on the day before the 
 expatriation date for their fair market value and as 
 having distributed all of its assets to the individual 
 as of such time, and
 ``(iii) the individual shall be treated as having 
 recontributed the assets to the separate trust.
 Subsection (a)(2) shall apply to any income, gain, or loss of 
 the individual arising from a distribution described in 
 subparagraph (C)(ii). In determining the amount of such 
 distribution, proper adjustments shall be made for liabilities 
 of the trust allocable to an individual's share in the trust.
 ``(2) Special rules for interests in qualified trusts.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the trust interest described 
 in paragraph (1) is an interest in a qualified trust--
 ``(i) paragraph (1) and subsection (a) 
 shall not apply, and
 ``(ii) in addition to any other tax imposed 
 by this title, there is hereby imposed on each 
 distribution with respect to such interest a 
 tax in the amount determined under subparagraph 
 (B).
 ``(B) Amount of tax.--The amount of tax under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be equal to the lesser of--
 ``(i) the highest rate of tax imposed by 
 section 1(e) for the taxable year which 
 includes the day before the expatriation date, 
 multiplied by the amount of the distribution, 
 or
 ``(ii) the balance in the deferred tax 
 account immediately before the distribution 
 determined without regard to any increases 
 under subparagraph (C)(ii) after the 30th day 
 preceding the distribution.
 ``(C) Deferred tax account.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (B)(ii)--
 ``(i) Opening balance.--The opening balance 
 in a deferred tax account with respect to any 
 trust interest is an amount equal to the tax 
 which would have been imposed on the allocable 
 expatriation gain with respect to the trust 
 interest if such gain had been included in 
 gross income under subsection (a).
 ``(ii) Increase for interest.--The balance 
 in the deferred tax account shall be increased 
 by the amount of interest determined (on the 
 balance in the account at the time the interest 
 accrues), for periods after the 90th day after 
 the expatriation date, by using the rates and 
 method applicable under section 6621 for 
 underpayments of tax for such periods, except 
 that section 6621(a)(2) shall be applied by 
 substituting `5 percentage points' for `3 
 percentage points' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
 ``(iii) Decrease for taxes previously 
 paid.--The balance in the tax deferred account 
 shall be reduced--
 ``(I) by the amount of taxes 
 imposed by subparagraph (A) on any 
 distribution to the person holding the 
 trust interest, and
 ``(II) in the case of a person 
 holding a nonvested interest, to the 
 extent provided in regulations, by the 
 amount of taxes imposed by subparagraph 
 (A) on distributions from the trust 
 with respect to nonvested interests not 
 held by such person.
 ``(D) Allocable expatriation gain.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the allocable expatriation gain with 
 respect to any beneficiary's interest in a trust is the 
 amount of gain which would be allocable to such 
 beneficiary's vested and nonvested interests in the 
 trust if the beneficiary held directly all assets 
 allocable to such interests.
 ``(E) Tax deducted and withheld.--
 ``(i) In general.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be deducted and 
 withheld by the trustees from the distribution 
 to which it relates.
 ``(ii) Exception where failure to waive 
 treaty rights.--If an amount may not be 
 deducted and withheld under clause (i) by 
 reason of the distributee failing to waive any 
 treaty right with respect to such 
 distribution--
 ``(I) the tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be imposed 
 on the trust and each trustee shall be 
 personally liable for the amount of 
 such tax, and
 ``(II) any other beneficiary of the 
 trust shall be entitled to recover from 
 the distributee the amount of such tax 
 imposed on the other beneficiary.
 ``(F) Disposition.--If a trust ceases to be a 
 qualified trust at any time, a covered expatriate 
 disposes of an interest in a qualified trust, or a 
 covered expatriate holding an interest in a qualified 
 trust dies, then, in lieu of the tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), there is hereby imposed a tax 
 equal to the lesser of--
 ``(i) the tax determined under paragraph 
 (1) as if the day before the expatriation date 
 were the date of such cessation, disposition, 
 or death, whichever is applicable, or
 ``(ii) the balance in the tax deferred 
 account immediately before such date.
 Such tax shall be imposed on the trust and each trustee 
 shall be personally liable for the amount of such tax 
 and any other beneficiary of the trust shall be 
 entitled to recover from the covered expatriate or the 
 estate the amount of such tax imposed on the other 
 beneficiary.
 ``(G) Definitions and special rules.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph--
 ``(i) Qualified trust.--The term `qualified 
 trust' means a trust which is described in 
 section 7701(a)(30)(E).
 ``(ii) Vested interest.--The term `vested 
 interest' means any interest which, as of the 
 day before the expatriation date, is vested in 
 the beneficiary.
 ``(iii) Nonvested interest.--The term 
 `nonvested interest' means, with respect to any 
 beneficiary, any interest in a trust which is 
 not a vested interest. Such interest shall be 
 determined by assuming the maximum exercise of 
 discretion in favor of the beneficiary and the 
 occurrence of all contingencies in favor of the 
 beneficiary.
 ``(iv) Adjustments.--The Secretary may 
 provide for such adjustments to the bases of 
 assets in a trust or a deferred tax account, 
 and the timing of such adjustments, in order to 
 ensure that gain is taxed only once.
 ``(v) Coordination with retirement plan 
 rules.--This subsection shall not apply to an 
 interest in a trust which is part of a 
 retirement plan to which subsection (d)(2) 
 applies.
 ``(3) Determination of beneficiaries' interest in trust.--
 ``(A) Determinations under paragraph (1).--For 
 purposes of paragraph (1), a beneficiary's interest in 
 a trust shall be based upon all relevant facts and 
 circumstances, including the terms of the trust 
 instrument and any letter of wishes or similar 
 document, historical patterns of trust distributions, 
 and the existence of and functions performed by a trust 
 protector or any similar adviser.
 ``(B) Other determinations.--For purposes of this 
 section--
 ``(i) Constructive ownership.--If a 
 beneficiary of a trust is a corporation, 
 partnership, trust, or estate, the 
 shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries shall 
 be deemed to be the trust beneficiaries for 
 purposes of this section.
 ``(ii) Taxpayer return position.--A 
 taxpayer shall clearly indicate on its income 
 tax return--
 ``(I) the methodology used to 
 determine that taxpayer's trust 
 interest under this section, and
 ``(II) if the taxpayer knows (or 
 has reason to know) that any other 
 beneficiary of such trust is using a 
 different methodology to determine such 
 beneficiary's trust interest under this 
 section.
 ``(g) Termination of Deferrals, etc.--In the case of any covered 
expatriate, notwithstanding any other provision of this title--
 ``(1) any period during which recognition of income or gain 
 is deferred shall terminate on the day before the expatriation 
 date, and
 ``(2) any extension of time for payment of tax shall cease 
 to apply on the day before the expatriation date and the unpaid 
 portion of such tax shall be due and payable at the time and in 
 the manner prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(h) Imposition of Tentative Tax.--
 ``(1) In general.--If an individual is required to include 
 any amount in gross income under subsection (a) for any taxable 
 year, there is hereby imposed, immediately before the 
 expatriation date, a tax in an amount equal to the amount of 
 tax which would be imposed if the taxable year were a short 
 taxable year ending on the expatriation date.
 ``(2) Due date.--The due date for any tax imposed by 
 paragraph (1) shall be the 90th day after the expatriation 
 date.
 ``(3) Treatment of tax.--Any tax paid under paragraph (1) 
 shall be treated as a payment of the tax imposed by this 
 chapter for the taxable year to which subsection (a) applies.
 ``(4) Deferral of tax.--The provisions of subsection (b) 
 shall apply to the tax imposed by this subsection to the extent 
 attributable to gain includible in gross income by reason of 
 this section.
 ``(i) Special Liens for Deferred Tax Amounts.--
 ``(1) Imposition of lien.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a covered expatriate makes an 
 election under subsection (a)(4) or (b) which results 
 in the deferral of any tax imposed by reason of 
 subsection (a), the deferred amount (including any 
 interest, additional amount, addition to tax, 
 assessable penalty, and costs attributable to the 
 deferred amount) shall be a lien in favor of the United 
 States on all property of the expatriate located in the 
 United States (without regard to whether this section 
 applies to the property).
 ``(B) Deferred amount.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the deferred amount is the amount of the 
 increase in the covered expatriate's income tax which, 
 but for the election under subsection (a)(4) or (b), 
 would have occurred by reason of this section for the 
 taxable year including the expatriation date.
 ``(2) Period of lien.--The lien imposed by this subsection 
 shall arise on the expatriation date and continue until--
 ``(A) the liability for tax by reason of this 
 section is satisfied or has become unenforceable by 
 reason of lapse of time, or
 ``(B) it is established to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that no further tax liability may arise by 
 reason of this section.
 ``(3) Certain rules apply.--The rules set forth in 
 paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of section 6324A(d) shall apply 
 with respect to the lien imposed by this subsection as if it 
 were a lien imposed by section 6324A.
 ``(j) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section.''.
 (b) Inclusion in Income of Gifts and Bequests Received by United 
States Citizens and Residents From Expatriates.--Section 102 (relating 
to gifts, etc. not included in gross income) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Gifts and Inheritances From Covered Expatriates.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not exclude from 
 gross income the value of any property acquired by gift, 
 bequest, devise, or inheritance from a covered expatriate after 
 the expatriation date. For purposes of this subsection, any 
 term used in this subsection which is also used in section 877A 
 shall have the same meaning as when used in section 877A.
 ``(2) Exceptions for transfers otherwise subject to estate 
 or gift tax.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any property if 
 either--
 ``(A) the gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance 
 is--
 ``(i) shown on a timely filed return of tax 
 imposed by chapter 12 as a taxable gift by the 
 covered expatriate, or
 ``(ii) included in the gross estate of the 
 covered expatriate for purposes of chapter 11 
 and shown on a timely filed return of tax 
 imposed by chapter 11 of the estate of the 
 covered expatriate, or
 ``(B) no such return was timely filed but no such 
 return would have been required to be filed even if the 
 covered expatriate were a citizen or long-term resident 
 of the United States.''.
 (c) Definition of Termination of United States Citizenship.--
Section 7701(a) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(48) Termination of united states citizenship.--
 ``(A) In general.--An individual shall not cease to 
 be treated as a United States citizen before the date 
 on which the individual's citizenship is treated as 
 relinquished under section 877A(e)(3).
 ``(B) Dual citizens.--Under regulations prescribed 
 by the Secretary, subparagraph (A) shall not apply to 
 an individual who became at birth a citizen of the 
 United States and a citizen of another country.''.
 (d) Ineligibility for Visa or Admission to United States.--
 (1) In general.--Section 212(a)(10)(E) of the Immigration 
 and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(10)(E)) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(E) Former citizens not in compliance with 
 expatriation revenue provisions.--Any alien who is a 
 former citizen of the United States who relinquishes 
 United States citizenship (within the meaning of 
 section 877A(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986) and who is not in compliance with section 877A of 
 such Code (relating to expatriation).''.
 (2) Availability of information.--
 (A) In general.--Section 6103(l) (relating to 
 disclosure of returns and return information for 
 purposes other than tax administration) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(19) Disclosure to deny visa or admission to certain 
 expatriates.--Upon written request of the Attorney General or 
 the Attorney General's delegate, the Secretary shall disclose 
 whether an individual is in compliance with section 877A (and 
 if not in compliance, any items of noncompliance) to officers 
 and employees of the Federal agency responsible for 
 administering section 212(a)(10)(E) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act solely for the purpose of, and to the extent 
 necessary in, administering such section 212(a)(10)(E).''.
 (B) Safeguards.--
 (i) Technical amendments.--Paragraph (4) of 
 section 6103(p) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986, as amended by section 202(b)(2)(B) of the 
 Trade Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-210; 116 
 Stat. 961), is amended by striking ``or (17)'' 
 after ``any other person described in 
 subsection (l)(16)'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``or (18)''.
 (ii) Conforming amendments.--Section 
 6103(p)(4) (relating to safeguards), as amended 
 by clause (i), is amended by striking ``or 
 (18)'' after ``any other person described in 
 subsection (l)(16)'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``(18), or (19)''.
 (3) Effective dates.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the amendments made by this subsection shall apply 
 to individuals who relinquish United States citizenship 
 on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (B) Technical amendments.--The amendments made by 
 paragraph (2)(B)(i) shall take effect as if included in 
 the amendments made by section 202(b)(2)(B) of the 
 Trade Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-210; 116 Stat. 961).
 (e) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 877 is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(g) Application.--This section shall not apply to an expatriate 
(as defined in section 877A(e)) whose expatriation date (as so defined) 
occurs on or after January 1, 2004.''.
 (2) Section 2107 is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(f) Application.--This section shall not apply to any expatriate 
subject to section 877A.''.
 (3) Section 2501(a)(3) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) Application.--This paragraph shall not apply 
 to any expatriate subject to section 877A.''.
 (4)(A) Paragraph (1) of section 6039G(d) is amended by 
 inserting ``or 877A'' after ``section 877''.
 (B) The second sentence of section 6039G(e) is amended by 
 inserting ``or who relinquishes United States citizenship 
 (within the meaning of section 877A(e)(3))'' after ``877(a))''.
 (C) Section 6039G(f) is amended by inserting ``or 
 877A(e)(2)(B)'' after ``877(e)(1)''.
 (f) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of 
part II of subchapter N of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 877 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 877A. Tax responsibilities of 
 expatriation.''.
 (g) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in this subsection, the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to expatriates 
 (within the meaning of section 877A(e) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986, as added by this section) whose expatriation date 
 (as so defined) occurs on or after January 1, 2004.
 (2) Gifts and bequests.--Section 102(d) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by subsection (b)) shall apply 
 to gifts and bequests received on or after January 1, 2004, 
 from an individual or the estate of an individual whose 
 expatriation date (as so defined) occurs after such date.
 (3) Due date for tentative tax.--The due date under section 
 877A(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by 
 this section, shall in no event occur before the 90th day after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 443. EXCISE TAX ON STOCK COMPENSATION OF INSIDERS IN INVERTED 
 CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle D is amended by adding at the end the 
following new chapter:

 ``CHAPTER 48--STOCK COMPENSATION OF INSIDERS IN INVERTED CORPORATIONS

 ``Sec. 5000A. Stock compensation of 
 insiders in inverted 
 corporations entities.

``SEC. 5000A. STOCK COMPENSATION OF INSIDERS IN INVERTED CORPORATIONS.

 ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--In the case of an individual who is a 
disqualified individual with respect to any inverted corporation, there 
is hereby imposed on such person a tax equal to 20 percent of the value 
(determined under subsection (b)) of the specified stock compensation 
held (directly or indirectly) by or for the benefit of such individual 
or a member of such individual's family (as defined in section 267) at 
any time during the 12-month period beginning on the date which is 6 
months before the inversion date.
 ``(b) Value.--For purposes of subsection (a)--
 ``(1) In general.--The value of specified stock 
 compensation shall be--
 ``(A) in the case of a stock option (or other 
 similar right) or any stock appreciation right, the 
 fair value of such option or right, and
 ``(B) in any other case, the fair market value of 
 such compensation.
 ``(2) Date for determining value.--The determination of 
 value shall be made--
 ``(A) in the case of specified stock compensation 
 held on the inversion date, on such date,
 ``(B) in the case of such compensation which is 
 canceled during the 6 months before the inversion date, 
 on the day before such cancellation, and
 ``(C) in the case of such compensation which is 
 granted after the inversion date, on the date such 
 compensation is granted.
 ``(c) Tax To Apply Only if Shareholder Gain Recognized.--Subsection 
(a) shall apply to any disqualified individual with respect to an 
inverted corporation only if gain (if any) on any stock in such 
corporation is recognized in whole or part by any shareholder by reason 
of the acquisition referred to in section 7874(a)(2)(A) (determined by 
substituting `July 10, 2002' for `March 20, 2002') with respect to such 
corporation.
 ``(d) Exception Where Gain Recognized on Compensation.--Subsection 
(a) shall not apply to--
 ``(1) any stock option which is exercised on the inversion 
 date or during the 6-month period before such date and to the 
 stock acquired in such exercise, if income is recognized under 
 section 83 on or before the inversion date with respect to the 
 stock acquired pursuant to such exercise, and
 ``(2) any specified stock compensation which is exercised, 
 sold, exchanged, distributed, cashed out, or otherwise paid 
 during such period in a transaction in which gain or loss is 
 recognized in full.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Disqualified individual.--The term `disqualified 
 individual' means, with respect to a corporation, any 
 individual who, at any time during the 12-month period 
 beginning on the date which is 6 months before the inversion 
 date--
 ``(A) is subject to the requirements of section 
 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 with 
 respect to such corporation, or
 ``(B) would be subject to such requirements if such 
 corporation were an issuer of equity securities 
 referred to in such section.
 ``(2) Inverted corporation; inversion date.--
 ``(A) Inverted corporation.--The term `inverted 
 corporation' means any corporation to which subsection 
 (a) or (b) of section 7874 applies determined--
 ``(i) by substituting `July 10, 2002' for 
 `March 20, 2002' in section 7874(a)(2)(A), and
 ``(ii) without regard to subsection 
 (b)(1)(A).
 Such term includes any predecessor or successor of such 
 a corporation.
 ``(B) Inversion date.--The term `inversion date' 
 means, with respect to a corporation, the date on which 
 the corporation first becomes an inverted corporation.
 ``(3) Specified stock compensation.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `specified stock 
 compensation' means payment (or right to payment) 
 granted by the inverted corporation (or by any member 
 of the expanded affiliated group which includes such 
 corporation) to any person in connection with the 
 performance of services by a disqualified individual 
 for such corporation or member if the value of such 
 payment or right is based on (or determined by 
 reference to) the value (or change in value) of stock 
 in such corporation (or any such member).
 ``(B) Exceptions.--Such term shall not include--
 ``(i) any option to which part II of 
 subchapter D of chapter 1 applies, or
 ``(ii) any payment or right to payment from 
 a plan referred to in section 280G(b)(6).
 ``(4) Expanded affiliated group.--The term `expanded 
 affiliated group' means an affiliated group (as defined in 
 section 1504(a) without regard to section 1504(b)(3)); except 
 that section 1504(a) shall be applied by substituting `more 
 than 50 percent' for `at least 80 percent' each place it 
 appears.
 ``(f) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Cancellation of restriction.--The cancellation of a 
 restriction which by its terms will never lapse shall be 
 treated as a grant.
 ``(2) Payment or reimbursement of tax by corporation 
 treated as specified stock compensation.--Any payment of the 
 tax imposed by this section directly or indirectly by the 
 inverted corporation or by any member of the expanded 
 affiliated group which includes such corporation--
 ``(A) shall be treated as specified stock 
 compensation, and
 ``(B) shall not be allowed as a deduction under any 
 provision of chapter 1.
 ``(3) Certain restrictions ignored.--Whether there is 
 specified stock compensation, and the value thereof, shall be 
 determined without regard to any restriction other than a 
 restriction which by its terms will never lapse.
 ``(4) Property transfers.--Any transfer of property shall 
 be treated as a payment and any right to a transfer of property 
 shall be treated as a right to a payment.
 ``(5) Other administrative provisions.--For purposes of 
 subtitle F, any tax imposed by this section shall be treated as 
 a tax imposed by subtitle A.
 ``(g) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section.''.
 (b) Denial of Deduction.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (6) of section 275(a) is amended 
 by inserting ``48,'' after ``46,''.
 (2) $1,000,000 limit on deductible compensation reduced by 
 payment of excise tax on specified stock compensation.--
 Paragraph (4) of section 162(m) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(G) Coordination with excise tax on specified 
 stock compensation.--The dollar limitation contained in 
 paragraph (1) with respect to any covered employee 
 shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of 
 any payment (with respect to such employee) of the tax 
 imposed by section 5000A directly or indirectly by the 
 inverted corporation (as defined in such section) or by 
 any member of the expanded affiliated group (as defined 
 in such section) which includes such corporation.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The last sentence of section 3121(v)(2)(A) is amended 
 by inserting before the period ``or to any specified stock 
 compensation (as defined in section 5000A) on which tax is 
 imposed by section 5000A''.
 (2) The table of chapters for subtitle D is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Chapter 48. Stock compensation of 
 insiders in inverted 
 corporations.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on July 11, 2002; except that periods before such date shall not 
be taken into account in applying the periods in subsections (a) and 
(e)(1) of section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added 
by this section.

SEC. 444. REINSURANCE OF UNITED STATES RISKS IN FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 845(a) (relating to allocation in case of 
reinsurance agreement involving tax avoidance or evasion) is amended by 
striking ``source and character'' and inserting ``amount, source, or 
character''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to any risk reinsured after April 11, 2002.

SEC. 445. REPORTING OF TAXABLE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 
61 is amended by inserting after section 6043 the following new 
section:

``SEC. 6043A. TAXABLE MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The acquiring corporation in any taxable 
acquisition shall make a return (according to the forms or regulations 
prescribed by the Secretary) setting forth--
 ``(1) a description of the acquisition,
 ``(2) the name and address of each shareholder of the 
 acquired corporation who is required to recognize gain (if any) 
 as a result of the acquisition,
 ``(3) the amount of money and the fair market value of 
 other property transferred to each such shareholder as part of 
 such acquisition, and
 ``(4) such other information as the Secretary may 
 prescribe.
To the extent provided by the Secretary, the requirements of this 
section applicable to the acquiring corporation shall be applicable to 
the acquired corporation and not to the acquiring corporation.
 ``(b) Nominee Reporting.--Any person who holds stock as a nominee 
for another person shall furnish in the manner prescribed by the 
Secretary to such other person the information provided by the 
corporation under subsection (d).
 ``(c) Taxable Acquisition.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`taxable acquisition' means any acquisition by a corporation of stock 
in or property of another corporation if any shareholder of the 
acquired corporation is required to recognize gain (if any) as a result 
of such acquisition.
 ``(d) Statements To Be Furnished to Shareholders.--Every person 
required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each 
shareholder whose name is required to be set forth in such return a 
written statement showing--
 ``(1) the name, address, and phone number of the 
 information contact of the person required to make such return,
 ``(2) the information required to be shown on such return 
 with respect to such shareholder, and
 ``(3) such other information as the Secretary may 
 prescribe.
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be 
furnished to the shareholder on or before January 31 of the year 
following the calendar year during which the taxable acquisition 
occurred.''.
 (b) Assessable Penalties.--
 (1) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1) (defining 
 information return) is amended by redesignating clauses (ii) 
 through (xviii) as clauses (iii) through (xix), respectively, 
 and by inserting after clause (i) the following new clause:
 ``(ii) section 6043A(a) (relating to 
 returns relating to taxable mergers and 
 acquisitions),''.
 (2) Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) (relating to 
 definitions) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (F) 
 through (BB) as subparagraphs (G) through (CC), respectively, 
 and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) subsections (b) and (d) of section 6043A 
 (relating to returns relating to taxable mergers and 
 acquisitions).''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of 
part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended by inserting after 
the item relating to section 6043 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6043A. Returns relating to taxable 
 mergers and acquisitions.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to acquisitions after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle E--International Tax

SEC. 451. CLARIFICATION OF BANKING BUSINESS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING 
 INVESTMENT OF EARNINGS IN UNITED STATES PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 956(c)(2) is amended 
to read as follows:
 ``(A) obligations of the United States, money, or 
 deposits with persons described in paragraph (4);''.
 (b) Eligible Persons.--Section 956(c) (relating to exceptions to 
definition of United States property) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Financial services providers.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (2)(A), a person is described in this paragraph if at 
 least 80 percent of the person's income is income 
 described in section 904(d)(2)(C)(ii) (and the 
 regulations thereunder) which is derived from persons 
 who are not related persons.
 ``(B) Special rules.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A)--
 ``(i) all related persons shall be treated 
 as 1 person in applying the 80-percent test, 
 and
 ``(ii) there shall be disregarded any item 
 of income or gain from a transaction or series 
 of transactions a principal purpose of which is 
 the qualification of a person as a person 
 described in this paragraph.
 ``(C) Related person.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `related person' has the meaning 
 given such term by section 954(d)(3).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 452. PROHIBITION ON NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN THROUGH COMPLETE 
 LIQUIDATION OF HOLDING COMPANY.

 (a) In General.--Section 332 is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(d) Recognition of Gain on Liquidation of Certain Holding 
Companies.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of any distribution to a 
 foreign corporation in complete liquidation of an applicable 
 holding company--
 ``(A) subsection (a) and section 331 shall not 
 apply to such distribution, and
 ``(B) such distribution shall be treated as a 
 distribution to which section 301 applies.
 ``(2) Applicable holding company.--For purposes of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `applicable holding 
 company' means any domestic corporation--
 ``(i) which is a common parent of an 
 affiliated group,
 ``(ii) stock of which is directly owned by 
 the distributee foreign corporation,
 ``(iii) substantially all of the assets of 
 which consist of stock in other members of such 
 affiliated group, and
 ``(iv) which has not been in existence at 
 all times during the 5 years immediately 
 preceding the date of the liquidation.
 ``(B) Affiliated group.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `affiliated group' has the meaning 
 given such term by section 1504(a) (without regard to 
 paragraphs (2) and (4) 0f section 1504(b)).
 ``(3) Coordination with subpart f.--If the distributee of a 
 distribution described in paragraph (1) is a controlled foreign 
 corporation (as defined in section 957), then notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1) or subsection (a), such distribution shall be 
 treated as a distribution to which section 331 applies.
 ``(4) Regulations.--The Secretary shall provide such 
 regulations as appropriate to prevent the abuse of this 
 subsection, including regulations which provide, for the 
 purposes of clause (iv) of paragraph (2)(A), that a corporation 
 is not in existence for any period unless it is engaged in the 
 active conduct of a trade or business or owns a significant 
 ownership interest in another corporation so engaged.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to distributions in complete liquidation occurring on or after the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 453. PREVENTION OF MISMATCHING OF INTEREST AND ORIGINAL ISSUE 
 DISCOUNT DEDUCTIONS AND INCOME INCLUSIONS IN TRANSACTIONS 
 WITH RELATED FOREIGN PERSONS.

 (a) Original Issue Discount.--Section 163(e)(3) (relating to 
special rule for original issue discount on obligation held by related 
foreign person) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (B) as 
subparagraph (C) and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following 
new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Special rule for certain foreign entities.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of any debt 
 instrument having original issue discount which 
 is held by a related foreign person which is a 
 foreign personal holding company (as defined in 
 section 552), a controlled foreign corporation 
 (as defined in section 957), or a passive 
 foreign investment company (as defined in 
 section 1297), a deduction shall be allowable 
 to the issuer with respect to such original 
 issue discount for any taxable year before the 
 taxable year in which paid only to the extent 
 such original issue discount (reduced by 
 properly allowable deductions and qualified 
 deficits under section 952(c)(1)(B)) is 
 includible during such prior taxable year in 
 the gross income of a United States person who 
 owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) 
 stock in such corporation.
 ``(ii) Secretarial authority.--The 
 Secretary may by regulation exempt transactions 
 from the application of clause (i), including 
 any transaction which is entered into by a 
 payor in the ordinary course of a trade or 
 business in which the payor is predominantly 
 engaged.''.
 (b) Interest and Other Deductible Amounts.--Section 267(a)(3) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting:
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Special rule for certain foreign entities.--
 ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), in the case of any item 
 payable to a foreign personal holding company 
 (as defined in section 552), a controlled 
 foreign corporation (as defined in section 
 957), or a passive foreign investment company 
 (as defined in section 1297), a deduction shall 
 be allowable to the payor with respect to such 
 amount for any taxable year before the taxable 
 year in which paid only to the extent that an 
 amount attributable to such item (reduced by 
 properly allowable deductions and qualified 
 deficits under section 952(c)(1)(B)) is 
 includible during such prior taxable year in 
 the gross income of a United States person who 
 owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) 
 stock in such corporation.
 ``(ii) Secretarial authority.--The 
 Secretary may by regulation exempt transactions 
 from the application of clause (i), including 
 any transaction which is entered into by a 
 payor in the ordinary course of a trade or 
 business in which the payor is predominantly 
 engaged and in which the payment of the accrued 
 amounts occurs within 8\1/2\ months after 
 accrual or within such other period as the 
 Secretary may prescribe.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to payments accrued on or after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 454. EFFECTIVELY CONNECTED INCOME TO INCLUDE CERTAIN FOREIGN 
 SOURCE INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Section 864(c)(4)(B) (relating to treatment of 
income from sources without the United States as effectively connected 
income) is amended by adding at the end the following new flush 
sentence:
 ``Any income or gain which is equivalent to any item of 
 income or gain described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) 
 shall be treated in the same manner as such item for 
 purposes of this subparagraph.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 455. RECAPTURE OF OVERALL FOREIGN LOSSES ON SALE OF CONTROLLED 
 FOREIGN CORPORATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 904(f)(3) (relating to dispositions) is 
amending by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Application to certain dispositions of stock 
 in controlled foreign corporation.--
 ``(i) In general.--This paragraph shall 
 apply to an applicable disposition in the same 
 manner as if it were a disposition of property 
 described in subparagraph (A), except that the 
 exception contained in subparagraph (C)(i) 
 shall not apply.
 ``(ii) Applicable disposition.--For 
 purposes of clause (i), the term `applicable 
 disposition' means any disposition of any share 
 of stock in a controlled foreign corporation in 
 a transaction or series of transactions if, 
 immediately before such transaction or series 
 of transactions, the taxpayer owned more than 
 50 percent (by vote or value) of the stock of 
 the controlled foreign corporation.
 ``(iii) Exception.--A disposition shall not 
 be treated as an applicable disposition under 
 clause (ii) if it is part of a transaction or 
 series of transactions--
 ``(I) to which section 351 or 721 
 applies, or under which the transferor 
 receives stock in a foreign corporation 
 in exchange for the stock in the 
 controlled foreign corporation and the 
 stock received is exchanged basis 
 property (as defined in section 
 7701(a)(44)), and
 ``(II) immediately after which, the 
 transferor owns (by vote or value) at 
 least the same percentage of stock in 
 the controlled foreign corporation (or, 
 if the controlled foreign corporation 
 is not in existence after such 
 transaction or series of transactions, 
 in another foreign corporation stock in 
 which was received by the transferor in 
 exchange for stock in the controlled 
 foreign corporation) as the percentage 
 of stock in the controlled foreign 
 corporation which the taxpayer owned 
 immediately before such transaction or 
 series of transactions.
 Clause (i) shall apply to any gain recognized 
 on any disposition to which this clause 
 applies.
 ``(iv) Controlled foreign corporation.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `controlled foreign corporation' has the 
 meaning given such term by section 957.
 ``(v) Stock ownership.--For purposes of 
 this subparagraph, ownership of stock shall be 
 determined under the rules of subsections (a) 
 and (b) of section 958.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to dispositions after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 456. MINIMUM HOLDING PERIOD FOR FOREIGN TAX CREDIT ON WITHHOLDING 
 TAXES ON INCOME OTHER THAN DIVIDENDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 901 is amended by redesignating subsection 
(l) as subsection (m) and by inserting after subsection (k) the 
following new subsection:
 ``(l) Minimum Holding Period for Withholding Taxes on Gain and 
Income Other Than Dividends etc.--
 ``(1) In general.--In no event shall a credit be allowed 
 under subsection (a) for any withholding tax (as defined in 
 subsection (k)) on any item of income or gain with respect to 
 any property if--
 ``(A) such property is held by the recipient of the 
 item for 15 days or less during the 30-day period 
 beginning on the date which is 15 days before the date 
 on which the right to receive payment of such item 
 arises, or
 ``(B) to the extent that the recipient of the item 
 is under an obligation (whether pursuant to a short 
 sale or otherwise) to make related payments with 
 respect to positions in substantially similar or 
 related property.
 This paragraph shall not apply to any dividend to which 
 subsection (k) applies.
 ``(2) Exception for taxes paid by dealers.--
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 any qualified tax with respect to any property held in 
 the active conduct in a foreign country of a business 
 as a dealer in such property.
 ``(B) Qualified tax.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the term `qualified tax' means a tax paid to a 
 foreign country (other than the foreign country 
 referred to in subparagraph (A)) if--
 ``(i) the item to which such tax is 
 attributable is subject to taxation on a net 
 basis by the country referred to in 
 subparagraph (A), and
 ``(ii) such country allows a credit against 
 its net basis tax for the full amount of the 
 tax paid to such other foreign country.
 ``(C) Dealer.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), 
 the term `dealer' means--
 ``(i) with respect to a security, any 
 person to whom paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
 subsection (k) would not apply by reason of 
 paragraph (4) thereof if such security were 
 stock, and
 ``(ii) with respect to any other property, 
 any person with respect to whom such property 
 is described in section 1221(a)(1).
 ``(D) Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe 
 such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out 
 this paragraph, including regulations to prevent the 
 abuse of the exception provided by this paragraph and 
 to treat other taxes as qualified taxes.
 ``(3) Exceptions.--The Secretary may by regulation provide 
 that paragraph (1) shall not apply to property where the 
 Secretary determines that the application of paragraph (1) to 
 such property is not necessary to carry out the purposes of 
 this subsection.
 ``(4) Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules 
 of paragraphs (5), (6), and (7) of subsection (k) shall apply 
 for purposes of this subsection.
 ``(5) Determination of holding period.--Holding periods 
 shall be determined for purposes of this subsection without 
 regard to section 1235 or any similar rule.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The heading of subsection (k) of section 
901 is amended by inserting ``on Dividends'' after ``Taxes''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or accrued more than 30 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle F--Other Revenue Provisions

 PART I--FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS

SEC. 461. TREATMENT OF STRIPPED INTERESTS IN BOND AND PREFERRED STOCK 
 FUNDS, ETC.

 (a) In General.--Section 1286 (relating to tax treatment of 
stripped bonds) is amended by redesignating subsection (f) as 
subsection (g) and by inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(f) Treatment of Stripped Interests in Bond and Preferred Stock 
Funds, etc.--In the case of an account or entity substantially all of 
the assets of which consist of bonds, preferred stock, or a combination 
thereof, the Secretary may by regulations provide that rules similar to 
the rules of this section and 305(e), as appropriate, shall apply to 
interests in such account or entity to which (but for this subsection) 
this section or section 305(e), as the case may be, would not apply.''.
 (b) Cross Reference.--Subsection (e) of section 305 is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Cross reference.--

 ``For treatment of stripped interests 
in certain accounts or entities holding preferred stock, see section 
1286(f).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to purchases and dispositions after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 462. APPLICATION OF EARNINGS STRIPPING RULES TO PARTNERS WHICH ARE 
 C CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 163(j) (relating to limitation on 
deduction for interest on certain indebtedness) is amended by 
redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (9) and by inserting after 
paragraph (7) the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) Allocations to certain corporate partners.--If a C 
 corporation is a partner in a partnership--
 ``(A) the corporation's allocable share of 
 indebtedness and interest income of the partnership 
 shall be taken into account in applying this subsection 
 to the corporation, and
 ``(B) if a deduction is not disallowed under this 
 subsection with respect to any interest expense of the 
 partnership, this subsection shall be applied 
 separately in determining whether a deduction is 
 allowable to the corporation with respect to the 
 corporation's allocable share of such interest 
 expense.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 463. RECOGNITION OF CANCELLATION OF INDEBTEDNESS INCOME REALIZED 
 ON SATISFACTION OF DEBT WITH PARTNERSHIP INTEREST.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (8) of section 108(e) (relating to 
general rules for discharge of indebtedness (including discharges not 
in title 11 cases or insolvency)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(8) Indebtedness satisfied by corporate stock or 
 partnership interest.--For purposes of determining income of a 
 debtor from discharge of indebtedness, if--
 ``(A) a debtor corporation transfers stock, or
 ``(B) a debtor partnership transfers a capital or 
 profits interest in such partnership,
 to a creditor in satisfaction of its recourse or nonrecourse 
 indebtedness, such corporation or partnership shall be treated 
 as having satisfied the indebtedness with an amount of money 
 equal to the fair market value of the stock or interest. In the 
 case of any partnership, any discharge of indebtedness income 
 recognized under this paragraph shall be included in the 
 distributive shares of taxpayers which were the partners in the 
 partnership immediately before such discharge.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
with respect to cancellations of indebtedness occurring on or after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 464. MODIFICATION OF STRADDLE RULES.

 (a) Rules Relating to Identified Straddles.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1092(a)(2) 
 (relating to special rule for identified straddles) is amended 
 to read as follows:
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any straddle 
 which is an identified straddle--
 ``(i) paragraph (1) shall not apply with 
 respect to identified positions comprising the 
 identified straddle,
 ``(ii) if there is any loss with respect to 
 any identified position of the identified 
 straddle, the basis of each of the identified 
 offsetting positions in the identified straddle 
 shall be increased by an amount which bears the 
 same ratio to the loss as the unrecognized gain 
 with respect to such offsetting position bears 
 to the aggregate unrecognized gain with respect 
 to all such offsetting positions, and
 ``(iii) any loss described in clause (ii) 
 shall not otherwise be taken into account for 
 purposes of this title.''.
 (2) Identified straddle.--Section 1092(a)(2)(B) (defining 
 identified straddle) is amended--
 (A) by striking clause (ii) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(ii) to the extent provided by 
 regulations, the value of each position of 
 which (in the hands of the taxpayer immediately 
 before the creation of the straddle) is not 
 less than the basis of such position in the 
 hands of the taxpayer at the time the straddle 
 is created, and'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new flush 
 sentence:
 ``The Secretary shall prescribe regulations which 
 specify the proper methods for clearly identifying a 
 straddle as an identified straddle (and the positions 
 comprising such straddle), which specify the rules for 
 the application of this section for a taxpayer which 
 fails to properly identify the positions of an 
 identified straddle, and which specify the ordering 
 rules in cases where a taxpayer disposes of less than 
 an entire position which is part of an identified 
 straddle.''.
 (3) Unrecognized gain.--Section 1092(a)(3) (defining 
 unrecognized gain) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (B) 
 as subparagraph (C) and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Special rule for identified straddles.--For 
 purposes of paragraph (2)(A)(ii), the unrecognized gain 
 with respect to any identified offsetting position 
 shall be the excess of the fair market value of the 
 position at the time of the determination over the fair 
 market value of the position at the time the taxpayer 
 identified the position as a position in an identified 
 straddle.''.
 (4) Conforming amendment.--Section 1092(c)(2) is amended by 
 striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating subparagraph (C) 
 as subparagraph (B).
 (b) Physically Settled Positions.--Section 1092(d) (relating to 
definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(8) Special rules for physically settled positions.--For 
 purposes of subsection (a), if a taxpayer settles a position 
 which is part of a straddle by delivering property to which the 
 position relates (and such position, if terminated, would 
 result in a realization of a loss), then such taxpayer shall be 
 treated as if such taxpayer--
 ``(A) terminated the position for its fair market 
 value immediately before the settlement, and
 ``(B) sold the property so delivered by the 
 taxpayer at its fair market value.''.
 (c) Repeal of Stock Exception.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (3) of section 1092(d) (relating 
 to definitions and special rules) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(3) Special rules for stock.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `personal property' 
 includes--
 ``(i) any stock which is a part of a 
 straddle at least 1 of the offsetting positions 
 of which is a position with respect to such 
 stock or substantially similar or related 
 property, or
 ``(ii) any stock of a corporation formed or 
 availed of to take positions in personal 
 property which offset positions taken by any 
 shareholder.
 ``(B) Rule for application.--For purposes of 
 determining whether subsection (e) applies to any 
 transaction with respect to stock described in 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), all includible corporations of an 
 affiliated group (within the meaning of section 
 1504(a)) shall be treated as 1 taxpayer.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1258(d)(1) is amended by 
 striking ``; except that the term `personal property' shall 
 include stock''.
 (d) Modifications of Qualified Covered Call Exception.--
 (1) Markets on which options may be traded.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1092(c)(4)(B)(i) is 
 amended by striking ``or other market which the 
 Secretary determines has rules adequate to carry out 
 the purposes of this paragraph''.
 (B) Regulations.--Section 1092(c)(4)(H) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such 
 regulations shall not add any exchange or market not 
 described in subparagraph (B)(i) to the exchanges or 
 markets on which qualified covered call options may be 
 traded.''
 (2) Holding period for dividend exclusion.--The last 
 sentence of section 246(c) is amended by inserting: ``, other 
 than a qualified covered call option to which section 1092(f) 
 applies'' before the period at the end.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to positions established on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 465. DENIAL OF INSTALLMENT SALE TREATMENT FOR ALL READILY 
 TRADEABLE DEBT.

 (a) In General.--Section 453(f)(4)(B) (relating to purchaser 
evidences of indebtedness payable on demand or readily tradeable) is 
amended by striking ``is issued by a corporation or a government or 
political subdivision thereof and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to sales occurring on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 PART II--CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS

SEC. 466. MODIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF TRANSFERS TO CREDITORS IN 
 DIVISIVE REORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 361(b)(3) (relating to treatment of 
transfers to creditors) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new sentence: ``In the case of a reorganization described in section 
368(a)(1)(D) with respect to which stock or securities of the 
corporation to which the assets are transferred are distributed in a 
transaction which qualifies under section 355, this paragraph shall 
apply only to the extent that the sum of the money and the fair market 
value of other property transferred to such creditors does not exceed 
the adjusted bases of such assets transferred.''.
 (b) Liabilities in Excess of Basis.--Section 357(c)(1)(B) is 
amended by inserting ``with respect to which stock or securities of the 
corporation to which the assets are transferred are distributed in a 
transaction which qualifies under section 355'' after ``section 
368(a)(1)(D)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to transfers of money or other property, or liabilities assumed, 
in connection with a reorganization occurring on or after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 467. CLARIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF NONQUALIFIED PREFERRED STOCK.

 (a) In General.--Section 351(g)(3)(A) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: ``Stock shall not be treated as participating in 
corporate growth to any significant extent unless there is a real and 
meaningful likelihood of the shareholder actually participating in the 
earnings and growth of the corporation.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to transactions after May 14, 2003.

SEC. 468. MODIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF CONTROLLED GROUP OF 
 CORPORATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1563(a)(2) (relating to brother-sister 
controlled group) is amended by striking ``possessing--'' and all that 
follows through ``(B)'' and inserting ``possessing''.
 (b) Application of Existing Rules to Other Code Provisions.--
Section 1563(f) (relating to other definitions and rules) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Brother-sister controlled group definition for 
 provisions other than this part.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as specifically provided 
 in an applicable provision, subsection (a)(2) shall be 
 applied to an applicable provision as if it read as 
 follows:
 ```(2) Brother-sister controlled group.--Two or more 
 corporations if 5 or fewer persons who are individuals, 
 estates, or trusts own (within the meaning of subsection (d)(2) 
 stock possessing--
 ```(A) at least 80 percent of the total combined 
 voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote, 
 or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of 
 all classes of stock, of each corporation, and
 ```(B) more than 50 percent of the total combined 
 voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote 
 or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of 
 all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into 
 account the stock ownership of each such person only to 
 the extent such stock ownership is identical with 
 respect to each such corporation.'
 ``(B) Applicable provision.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, an applicable provision is any provision of 
 law (other than this part) which incorporates the 
 definition of controlled group of corporations under 
 subsection (a).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 469. MANDATORY BASIS ADJUSTMENTS IN CONNECTION WITH PARTNERSHIP 
 DISTRIBUTIONS AND TRANSFERS OF PARTNERSHIP INTERESTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 754 is repealed.
 (b) Adjustment to Basis of Undistributed Partnership Property.--
Section 734 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``, with respect to which the election 
 provided in section 754 is in effect,'' in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1) of subsection (b),
 (2) by striking ``(as adjusted by section 732(d))'' both 
 places it appears in subsection (b),
 (3) by striking the last sentence of subsection (b),
 (4) by striking subsection (a) and by redesignating 
 subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (a) and (b), 
 respectively, and
 (5) by striking ``optional'' in the heading.
 (c) Adjustment to Basis of Partnership Property.--Section 743 is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``with respect to which the election 
 provided in section 754 is in effect'' in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1) of subsection (b),
 (2) by striking subsection (a) and by redesignating 
 subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (a) and (b), 
 respectively,
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Election To Adjust Basis for Transfers Upon Death of 
Partner.--Subsection (a) shall not apply and no adjustments shall be 
made in the case of any transfer of an interest in a partnership upon 
the death of a partner unless an election to do so is made by the 
partnership. Such an election shall apply with respect to all such 
transfers of interests in the partnership. Any election under section 
754 in effect on the date of the enactment of this subsection shall 
constitute an election made under this subsection. Such election may be 
revoked by the partnership, subject to such limitations as may be 
provided by regulations prescribed by the Secretary.'', and
 (4) by striking ``optional'' in the heading.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subsection (d) of section 732 is repealed.
 (2) Section 755(a) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``section 734(b) (relating to the 
 optional adjustment'' and inserting ``section 734(a) 
 (relating to the adjustment'', and
 (B) by striking ``section 743(b) (relating to the 
 optional adjustment'' and inserting ``section 743(a) 
 (relating to the adjustment''.
 (3) Section 755(c), as added by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``section 734(b)'' and inserting ``section 734(a)''.
 (4) Section 761(e)(2) is amended by striking ``optional''.
 (5) Section 774(a) is amended by striking ``743(b)'' both 
 places it appears and inserting ``743(a)''.
 (6) The item relating to section 734 in the table of 
 sections for subpart B of part II of subchapter K of chapter 1 
 is amended by striking ``Optional''.
 (7) The item relating to section 743 in the table of 
 sections for subpart C of part II of subchapter K of chapter 1 
 is amended by striking ``Optional''.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to transfers and 
 distributions made after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Repeal of section 732(d).--The amendments made by 
 subsections (b)(2) and (d)(1) shall apply to--
 (A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
 transfers made after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, and
 (B) in the case of any transfer made on or before 
 such date to which section 732(d) applies, 
 distributions made after the date which is 2 years 
 after such date of enactment.

 PART III--DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION

SEC. 471. EXTENSION OF AMORTIZATION OF INTANGIBLES TO SPORTS 
 FRANCHISES.

 (a) In General.--Section 197(e) (relating to exceptions to 
definition of section 197 intangible) is amended by striking paragraph 
(6) and by redesignating paragraphs (7) and (8) as paragraphs (6) and 
(7), respectively.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1)(A) Section 1056 (relating to basis limitation for 
 player contracts transferred in connection with the sale of a 
 franchise) is repealed.
 (B) The table of sections for part IV of subchapter O of 
 chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 
 1056.
 (2) Section 1245(a) (relating to gain from disposition of 
 certain depreciable property) is amended by striking paragraph 
 (4).
 (3) Section 1253 (relating to transfers of franchises, 
 trademarks, and trade names) is amended by striking subsection 
 (e).
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to property 
 acquired after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Section 1245.--The amendment made by subsection (b)(2) 
 shall apply to franchises acquired after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 472. CLASS LIVES FOR UTILITY GRADING COSTS.

 (a) Gas Utility Property.--Section 168(e)(3)(E) (defining 15-year 
property) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by 
striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', 
and by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) initial clearing and grading land 
 improvements with respect to gas utility 
 property.''.
 (b) Electric Utility Property.--Section 168(e)(3) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) 20-year property.--The term `20-year 
 property' means initial clearing and grading land 
 improvements with respect to any electric utility 
 transmission and distribution plant.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``or (E)(iv)'' after ``(E)(iii)'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``(F)......................................... 25''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 473. EXPANSION OF LIMITATION ON DEPRECIATION OF CERTAIN PASSENGER 
 AUTOMOBILES.

 (a) In General.--Section 179(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (relating to limitations) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Limitation on cost taken into account for certain 
 passenger vehicles.--
 ``(A) In general.--The cost of any sport utility 
 vehicle for any taxable year which may be taken into 
 account under this section shall not exceed $25,000.
 ``(B) Sport utility vehicle.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `sport utility 
 vehicle' means any 4-wheeled vehicle--
 ``(I) which is primarily designed 
 or which can be used to carry 
 passengers over public streets, roads, 
 or highways (except any vehicle 
 operated exclusively on a rail or 
 rails),
 ``(II) which is not subject to 
 section 280F, and
 ``(III) which is rated at not more 
 than 14,000 pounds gross vehicle 
 weight.
 ``(ii) Certain vehicles excluded.--Such 
 term does not include any vehicle which--
 ``(I) is designed to have a seating 
 capacity of more than 9 persons behind 
 the driver's seat,
 ``(II) is equipped with a cargo 
 area of at least 6 feet in interior 
 length which is an open area or is 
 designed for use as an open area but is 
 enclosed by a cap and is not readily 
 accessible directly from the passenger 
 compartment, or
 ``(III) has an integral enclosure, 
 fully enclosing the driver compartment 
 and load carrying device, does not have 
 seating rearward of the driver's seat, 
 and has no body section protruding more 
 than 30 inches ahead of the leading 
 edge of the windshield.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 474. CONSISTENT AMORTIZATION OF PERIODS FOR INTANGIBLES.

 (a) Start-Up Expenditures.--
 (1) Allowance of deduction.--Paragraph (1) of section 
 195(b) (relating to start-up expenditures) is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(1) Allowance of deduction.--If a taxpayer elects the 
 application of this subsection with respect to any start-up 
 expenditures--
 ``(A) the taxpayer shall be allowed a deduction for 
 the taxable year in which the active trade or business 
 begins in an amount equal to the lesser of--
 ``(i) the amount of start-up expenditures 
 with respect to the active trade or business, 
 or
 ``(ii) $5,000, reduced (but not below zero) 
 by the amount by which such start-up 
 expenditures exceed $50,000, and
 ``(B) the remainder of such start-up expenditures 
 shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over the 180-
 month period beginning with the month in which the 
 active trade or business begins.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subsection (b) of section 195 is 
 amended by striking ``Amortize'' and inserting ``Deduct'' in 
 the heading.
 (b) Organizational Expenditures.--Subsection (a) of section 248 
(relating to organizational expenditures) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(a) Election to Deduct.--If a corporation elects the application 
of this subsection (in accordance with regulations prescribed by the 
Secretary) with respect to any organizational expenditures--
 ``(1) the corporation shall be allowed a deduction for the 
 taxable year in which the corporation begins business in an 
 amount equal to the lesser of--
 ``(A) the amount of organizational expenditures 
 with respect to the taxpayer, or
 ``(B) $5,000, reduced (but not below zero) by the 
 amount by which such organizational expenditures exceed 
 $50,000, and
 ``(2) the remainder of such organizational expenditures 
 shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over the 180-month 
 period beginning with the month in which the corporation begins 
 business.''.
 (c) Treatment of Organizational and Syndication Fees or 
Partnerships.--
 (1) In general.--Section 709(b) (relating to amortization 
 of organization fees) is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) 
 as paragraph (3) and by amending paragraph (1) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) Allowance of deduction.--If a taxpayer elects the 
 application of this subsection (in accordance with regulations 
 prescribed by the Secretary) with respect to any organizational 
 expenses--
 ``(A) the taxpayer shall be allowed a deduction for 
 the taxable year in which the partnership begins 
 business in an amount equal to the lesser of--
 ``(i) the amount of organizational expenses 
 with respect to the partnership, or
 ``(ii) $5,000, reduced (but not below zero) 
 by the amount by which such organizational 
 expenses exceed $50,000, and
 ``(B) the remainder of such organizational expenses 
 shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over the 180-
 month period beginning with the month in which the 
 partnership begins business.
 ``(2) Dispositions before close of amortization period.--In 
 any case in which a partnership is liquidated before the end of 
 the period to which paragraph (1)(B) applies, any deferred 
 expenses attributable to the partnership which were not allowed 
 as a deduction by reason of this section may be deducted to the 
 extent allowable under section 165.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subsection (b) of section 709 is 
 amended by striking ``Amortization'' and inserting 
 ``Deduction'' in the heading.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 475. REFORM OF TAX TREATMENT OF LEASING OPERATIONS.

 (a) Clarification of Recovery Period for Tax-Exempt Use Property 
Subject to Lease.--Subparagraph (A) of section 168(g)(3) (relating to 
special rules for determining class life) is amended by inserting 
``(notwithstanding any other subparagraph of this paragraph)'' after 
``shall''.
 (b) Limitation on Depreciation Period for Software Leased to Tax-
Exempt Entity.--Paragraph (1) of section 167(f) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Tax-exempt use property subject to lease.--In 
 the case of computer software which would be tax-exempt 
 use property as defined in subsection (h) of section 
 168 if such section applied to computer software, the 
 useful life under subparagraph (A) shall not be less 
 than 125 percent of the lease term (within the meaning 
 of section 168(i)(3)).''
 (c) Lease Term To Include Related Service Contracts.--Subparagraph 
(A) of section 168(i)(3) (relating to lease term) is amended by 
striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i), by redesignating clause (ii) 
as clause (iii), and by inserting after clause (i) the following new 
clause:
 ``(ii) the term of a lease shall include 
 the term of any service contract or similar 
 arrangement (whether or not treated as a lease 
 under section 7701(e))--
 ``(I) which is part of the same 
 transaction (or series of related 
 transactions) which includes the lease, 
 and
 ``(II) which is with respect to the 
 property subject to the lease or 
 substantially similar property, and''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to leases entered into after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 476. LIMITATION ON DEDUCTIONS ALLOCABLE TO PROPERTY USED BY 
 GOVERNMENTS OR OTHER TAX-EXEMPT ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 
(relating to taxable year for which deductions taken) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 470. LIMITATIONS ON LOSSES FROM TAX-EXEMPT USE PROPERTY.

 ``(a) Limitation on Losses.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, a tax-exempt use loss for any taxable year shall not be 
allowed.
 ``(b) Disallowed Loss Carried to Next Year.--Any tax-exempt use 
loss with respect to any tax-exempt use property which is disallowed 
under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall be treated as a 
deduction with respect to such property in the next taxable year.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Tax-exempt use loss.--The term `tax-exempt use loss' 
 means, with respect to any taxable year, the amount (if any) by 
 which--
 ``(A) the sum of--
 ``(i) the aggregate deductions (other than 
 interest) directly allocable to a tax-exempt 
 use property, plus
 ``(ii) the aggregate deductions for 
 interest properly allocable to such property, 
 exceed
 ``(B) the aggregate income from such property.
 ``(2) Tax-exempt use property.--The term `tax-exempt use 
 property' has the meaning given to such term by section 168(h) 
 (without regard to paragraph (1)(C) or (3) thereof and 
 determined as if property described in section 167(f)(1)(B) 
 were tangible property). Such term shall not include property 
 with respect to which the credit under section 42 is allowed 
 and which, but for this sentence, would be tax-exempt property 
 solely by reason of section 168(h)(6).
 ``(d) Exception for Certain Leases.--This section shall not apply 
to any lease of property which meets the requirements of all of the 
following paragraphs:
 ``(1) Property not financed with tax-exempt bonds or 
 federal funds.--A lease of property meets the requirements of 
 this paragraph if no part of the property was financed 
 (directly or indirectly) from--
 ``(A) the proceeds of an obligation the interest on 
 which is exempt from tax under section 103(a) and which 
 (or any refunding bond of which) is outstanding when 
 the lease is entered into, or
 ``(B) Federal funds.
 The Secretary may by regulations provide for a de minimis 
 exception from this paragraph.
 ``(2) Availability of funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--A lease of property meets the 
 requirements of this paragraph if (at any time during 
 the lease term) not more than an allowable amount of 
 funds are--
 ``(i) subject to any arrangement referred 
 to in subparagraph (B), or
 ``(ii) set aside or expected to be set 
 aside,
 to or for the benefit of the lessor or a lender, or to 
 or for the benefit of the lessee to satisfy the 
 lessee's obligations or options under the lease. Funds 
 shall be treated as described in clause (ii) only if a 
 reasonable person would conclude, based on the facts 
 and circumstances, that such funds are so described.
 ``(B) Arrangements.--The arrangements referred to 
 in this subparagraph are--
 ``(i) a defeasance arrangement, a loan by 
 the lessee to the lessor or a lender, a deposit 
 arrangement, a letter of credit collateralized 
 with cash or cash equivalents, a payment 
 undertaking agreement, a lease prepayment, a 
 sinking fund arrangement, or any similar 
 arrangement (whether or not such arrangement 
 provides credit support), and
 ``(ii) any other arrangement identified by 
 the Secretary in regulations.
 ``(C) Allowable amount.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as otherwise 
 provided in this subparagraph, the term 
 `allowable amount' means an amount equal to 20 
 percent of the lessor's adjusted basis in the 
 property at the time the lease is entered into.
 ``(ii) Higher amount permitted in certain 
 cases.--To the extent provided in regulations, 
 a higher percentage shall be permitted under 
 clause (i) where necessary because of the 
 credit-worthiness of the lessee. In no event 
 may such regulations permit a percentage of 
 more than 50 percent.
 ``(iii) Option to purchase.--If under the 
 lease the lessee has the option to purchase the 
 property for a fixed price or for other than 
 the fair market value of the property 
 (determined at the time of exercise), the 
 allowable amount at the time such option may be 
 exercised may not exceed 50 percent of the 
 price at which such option may be exercised.
 ``(iv) No allowable amount for certain 
 arrangements.--The allowable amount shall be 
 zero in the case of any arrangement which 
 involves--
 ``(I) a loan from the lessee to the 
 lessor or a lender,
 ``(II) any deposit, letter of 
 credit, or payment undertaking 
 agreement involving a lender, or
 ``(III) any credit support made 
 available to the lessor in which a 
 lender (if any) does not have a claim 
 which is senior to the lessor.
 For purposes of subclause (I), the term `loan' 
 shall not include any amount treated as a loan 
 under section 467 with respect to a section 467 
 rental agreement.
 ``(3) Lessor must make substantial equity investment.--A 
 lease of property meets the requirements of this paragraph if--
 ``(A) the lessor--
 ``(i) has at the time the lease is entered 
 into an unconditional at-risk equity investment 
 (as determined by the Secretary) in the 
 property of at least 20 percent of the lessor's 
 adjusted basis in the property as of that time, 
 and
 ``(ii) maintains such investment throughout 
 the term of the lease, and
 ``(B) the fair market value of the property at the 
 end of the lease term is reasonably expected to be 
 equal to at least 20 percent of such basis.
 Subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B) shall not apply if the lease term 
 is described in section 168(h)(1)(C)(ii), or in the case of 
 qualified technological equipment, is described in section 
 168(h)(3). For purposes of subparagraph (B), the fair market 
 value at the end of the lease term shall be reduced to the 
 extent that a person other than the lessor bears a risk of loss 
 in the value of the property.
 ``(4) Lessee may not bear more than minimal risk of loss.--
 ``(A) In general.--A lease of property meets the 
 requirements of this paragraph if there is no 
 arrangement under which more than a minimal risk of 
 loss (as determined under regulations) in the value of 
 the property is borne by the lessee.
 ``(B) Certain arrangements fail requirement.--In no 
 event will the requirements of this paragraph be met if 
 there is any arrangement under which the lessee bears--
 ``(i) any portion of the loss that would 
 occur if the fair market value of the leased 
 property were 25 percent less than its 
 reasonably expected fair market value at the 
 time the lease is terminated, or
 ``(ii) more than 50 percent of the loss 
 that would occur if the fair market value of 
 the leased property at the time the lease is 
 terminated were zero.
 ``(5) Property with more than 7-year class life.--In the 
 case of a lease--
 ``(A) of property with a class life (as defined in 
 section 168(i)(1)) of more than 7 years, and
 ``(B) under which the lessee has the option to 
 purchase the property,
 the lease meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the 
 purchase price under the option equals the fair market value of 
 the property (determined at the time of exercise).
 ``(6) Regulatory requirements.--A lease of property meets 
 the requirements of this paragraph if such lease of property 
 meets such requirements as the Secretary may prescribe by 
 regulations.
 ``(e) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Treatment of former tax-exempt use property.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any former tax-
 exempt use property--
 ``(i) any deduction allowable under 
 subsection (b) with respect to such property 
 for any taxable year shall be allowed only to 
 the extent of any net income (without regard to 
 such deduction) from such property for such 
 taxable year, and
 ``(ii) any portion of such unused deduction 
 remaining after application of clause (i) shall 
 be treated as allowable under subsection (b) 
 with respect to such property in the next 
 taxable year.
 ``(B) Former tax-exempt use property.--For purposes 
 of this subsection, the term `former tax-exempt use 
 property' means any property which--
 ``(i) is not tax-exempt use property for 
 the taxable year, but
 ``(ii) was tax-exempt use property for any 
 prior taxable year.
 ``(2) Disposition of entire interest in property.--If 
 during the taxable year a taxpayer disposes of the taxpayer's 
 entire interest in tax-exempt use property (or former tax-
 exempt use property), rules similar to the rules of section 
 469(g) shall apply for purposes of this section.
 ``(3) Coordination with section 469.--This section shall be 
 applied before the application of section 469.
 ``(f) Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Related parties.--The terms `lessor', `lessee', and 
 `lender' include any related party (within the meaning of 
 section 197(f)(9)(C)(i)).
 ``(2) Lease term.--The term `lease term' has the meaning 
 given to such term by section 168(i)(3).
 ``(3) Lender.--The term `lender' means, with respect to any 
 lease, a person that makes a loan to the lessor which is 
 secured (or economically similar to being secured) by the lease 
 or the leased property.
 ``(4) Loan.--The term `loan' includes any similar 
 arrangement.
 ``(g) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section, including regulation which--
 ``(1) allow in appropriate cases the aggregation of 
 property subject to the same lease, and
 ``(2) provide for the determination of the allocation of 
 interest expense for purposes of this section.''
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of 
part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new item:

``Sec. 470. Limitations on losses from tax-exempt use property.''
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to leases entered into after November 18, 2003.
 (2) Leases to foreign entities.--In the case of tax-exempt 
 use property leased to a tax-exempt entity which is a foreign 
 person or entity, the amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to taxable years beginning after January 31, 2004, with 
 respect to leases entered into on or before November 18, 2003.

 PART IV--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

SEC. 481. CLARIFICATION OF RULES FOR PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX FOR 
 CERTAIN DEEMED ASSET SALES.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (13) of section 338(h) (relating to tax 
on deemed sale not taken into account for estimated tax purposes) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: ``The preceding sentence 
shall not apply with respect to a qualified stock purchase for which an 
election is made under paragraph (10).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to transactions occurring after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 482. EXTENSION OF IRS USER FEES.

 (a) In General.--Section 7528(c) (relating to termination) is 
amended by striking ``December 31, 2004'' and inserting ``September 30, 
2013''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to requests after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 483. DOUBLING OF CERTAIN PENALTIES, FINES, AND INTEREST ON 
 UNDERPAYMENTS RELATED TO CERTAIN OFFSHORE FINANCIAL 
 ARRANGEMENT.

 (a) Determination of Penalty.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, in the case of an applicable taxpayer--
 (A) the determination as to whether any interest or 
 applicable penalty is to be imposed with respect to any 
 arrangement to which any initiative described in 
 paragraph (2) applied, or to any underpayment of 
 Federal income tax attributable to items arising in 
 connection with any arrangement described in paragraph 
 (2), shall be made without regard to section 6664 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and
 (B) if any such interest or applicable penalty is 
 imposed, the amount of such interest or penalty shall 
 be equal to twice that determined without regard to 
 this section.
 (2) Applicable taxpayer.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term ``applicable taxpayer'' means a taxpayer eligible to 
 participate in--
 (A) the Department of the Treasury's Offshore 
 Voluntary Compliance Initiative, or
 (B) the Department of the Treasury's voluntary 
 disclosure initiative which applies to the taxpayer by 
 reason of the taxpayer's underreporting of United 
 States income tax liability through financial 
 arrangements which rely on the use of offshore 
 arrangements which were the subject of the initiative 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (b) Definitions and Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) Applicable penalty.--The term ``applicable penalty'' 
 means any penalty, addition to tax, or fine imposed under 
 chapter 68 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (2) Voluntary offshore compliance initiative.--The term 
 ``Voluntary Offshore Compliance Initiative'' means the program 
 established by the Department of the Treasury in January of 
 2003 under which any taxpayer was eligible to voluntarily 
 disclose previously undisclosed income on assets placed in 
 offshore accounts and accessed through credit card and other 
 financial arrangements.
 (3) Participation.--A taxpayer shall be treated as having 
 participated in the Voluntary Offshore Compliance Initiative if 
 the taxpayer submitted the request in a timely manner and all 
 information requested by the Secretary of the Treasury or his 
 delegate within a reasonable period of time following the 
 request.
 (c) Effective Date.--The provisions of this section shall apply to 
interest, penalties, additions to tax, and fines with respect to any 
taxable year if as of the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
assessment of any tax, penalty, or interest with respect to such 
taxable year is not prevented by the operation of any law or rule of 
law.

SEC. 484. PARTIAL PAYMENT OF TAX LIABILITY IN INSTALLMENT AGREEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Section 6159(a) (relating to authorization of 
 agreements) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``satisfy liability for payment 
 of'' and inserting ``make payment on'', and
 (B) by inserting ``full or partial'' after 
 ``facilitate''.
 (2) Section 6159(c) (relating to Secretary required to 
 enter into installment agreements in certain cases) is amended 
 in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by inserting ``full'' 
 before ``payment''.
 (b) Requirement To Review Partial Payment Agreements Every Two 
Years.--Section 6159, as amended by this Act, is amended by 
redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), 
and (g), respectively, and inserting after subsection (c) the following 
new subsection:
 ``(d) Secretary Required To Review Installment Agreements for 
Partial Collection Every Two Years.--In the case of an agreement 
entered into by the Secretary under subsection (a) for partial 
collection of a tax liability, the Secretary shall review the agreement 
at least once every 2 years.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to agreements entered into on or after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 485. EXTENSION OF CUSTOMS USER FEES.

 Section 13031(j)(3) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1985 (19 U.S.C. 58c(j)(3)) is amended by striking 
``March 1, 2005'' and inserting ``September 30, 2013''.

SEC. 486. DEPOSITS MADE TO SUSPEND RUNNING OF INTEREST ON POTENTIAL 
 UNDERPAYMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 67 (relating to interest 
on underpayments) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``SEC. 6603. DEPOSITS MADE TO SUSPEND RUNNING OF INTEREST ON POTENTIAL 
 UNDERPAYMENTS, ETC.

 ``(a) Authority To Make Deposits Other Than As Payment of Tax.--A 
taxpayer may make a cash deposit with the Secretary which may be used 
by the Secretary to pay any tax imposed under subtitle A or B or 
chapter 41, 42, 43, or 44 which has not been assessed at the time of 
the deposit. Such a deposit shall be made in such manner as the 
Secretary shall prescribe.
 ``(b) No Interest Imposed.--To the extent that such deposit is used 
by the Secretary to pay tax, for purposes of section 6601 (relating to 
interest on underpayments), the tax shall be treated as paid when the 
deposit is made.
 ``(c) Return of Deposit.--Except in a case where the Secretary 
determines that collection of tax is in jeopardy, the Secretary shall 
return to the taxpayer any amount of the deposit (to the extent not 
used for a payment of tax) which the taxpayer requests in writing.
 ``(d) Payment of Interest.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 6611 (relating 
 to interest on overpayments), a deposit which is returned to a 
 taxpayer shall be treated as a payment of tax for any period to 
 the extent (and only to the extent) attributable to a 
 disputable tax for such period. Under regulations prescribed by 
 the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of section 6611(b)(2) 
 shall apply.
 ``(2) Disputable tax.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term `disputable tax' means the amount of tax 
 specified at the time of the deposit as the taxpayer's 
 reasonable estimate of the maximum amount of any tax 
 attributable to disputable items.
 ``(B) Safe harbor based on 30-day letter.--In the 
 case of a taxpayer who has been issued a 30-day letter, 
 the maximum amount of tax under subparagraph (A) shall 
 not be less than the amount of the proposed deficiency 
 specified in such letter.
 ``(3) Other definitions.--For purposes of paragraph (2)--
 ``(A) Disputable item.--The term `disputable item' 
 means any item of income, gain, loss, deduction, or 
 credit if the taxpayer--
 ``(i) has a reasonable basis for its 
 treatment of such item, and
 ``(ii) reasonably believes that the 
 Secretary also has a reasonable basis for 
 disallowing the taxpayer's treatment of such 
 item.
 ``(B) 30-day letter.--The term `30-day letter' 
 means the first letter of proposed deficiency which 
 allows the taxpayer an opportunity for administrative 
 review in the Internal Revenue Service Office of 
 Appeals.
 ``(4) Rate of interest.--The rate of interest allowable 
 under this subsection shall be the Federal short-term rate 
 determined under section 6621(b), compounded daily.
 ``(e) Use of Deposits.--
 ``(1) Payment of tax.--Except as otherwise provided by the 
 taxpayer, deposits shall be treated as used for the payment of 
 tax in the order deposited.
 ``(2) Returns of deposits.--Deposits shall be treated as 
 returned to the taxpayer on a last-in, first-out basis.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of 
chapter 67 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6603. Deposits made to suspend 
 running of interest on 
 potential underpayments, 
 etc.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to deposits made after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) Coordination with deposits made under revenue procedure 
 84-58.--In the case of an amount held by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury or his delegate on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act as a deposit in the nature of a cash bond deposit pursuant 
 to Revenue Procedure 84-58, the date that the taxpayer 
 identifies such amount as a deposit made pursuant to section 
 6603 of the Internal Revenue Code (as added by this Act) shall 
 be treated as the date such amount is deposited for purposes of 
 such section 6603.

SEC. 487. QUALIFIED TAX COLLECTION CONTRACTS.

 (a) Contract Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 64 (relating to 
 collection) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 section:

``SEC. 6306. QUALIFIED TAX COLLECTION CONTRACTS.

 ``(a) In General.--Nothing in any provision of law shall be 
construed to prevent the Secretary from entering into a qualified tax 
collection contract.
 ``(b) Qualified Tax Collection Contract.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `qualified tax collection contract' means any 
contract which--
 ``(1) is for the services of any person (other than an 
 officer or employee of the Treasury Department)--
 ``(A) to locate and contact any taxpayer specified 
 by the Secretary,
 ``(B) to request full payment from such taxpayer of 
 an amount of Federal tax specified by the Secretary 
 and, if such request cannot be met by the taxpayer, to 
 offer the taxpayer an installment agreement providing 
 for full payment of such amount during a period not to 
 exceed 3 years, and
 ``(C) to obtain financial information specified by 
 the Secretary with respect to such taxpayer,
 ``(2) prohibits each person providing such services under 
 such contract from committing any act or omission which 
 employees of the Internal Revenue Service are prohibited from 
 committing in the performance of similar services,
 ``(3) prohibits subcontractors from--
 ``(A) having contacts with taxpayers,
 ``(B) providing quality assurance services, and
 ``(C) composing debt collection notices, and
 ``(4) permits subcontractors to perform other services only 
 with the approval of the Secretary.
 ``(c) Fees and Expenses.--The Secretary may retain and use--
 ``(1) an amount not in excess of 25 percent of the amount 
 collected under any qualified tax collection contract for the 
 costs of services performed under such contract, and
 ``(2) an amount not in excess of 25 percent of such amount 
 collected for collection enforcement activities of the Internal 
 Revenue Service.
The Secretary shall keep adequate records regarding amounts so retained 
and used. The amount credited as paid by any taxpayer shall be 
determined without regard to this subsection.
 ``(d) No Federal Liability.--The United States shall not be liable 
for any act or omission of any person performing services under a 
qualified tax collection contract.
 ``(e) Application of Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.--The 
provisions of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692 et 
seq.) shall apply to any qualified tax collection contract, except to 
the extent superseded by section 6304, section 7602(c), or by any other 
provision of this title.
 ``(f) Application of Section.--In no event may the term of any 
qualified tax collection contract extend beyond the date which is 5 
years after the date of the enactment of this section.
 ``(g) Cross References.--
 ``(1) For damages for certain unauthorized collection 
 actions by persons performing services under a qualified tax 
 collection contract, see section 7433A.
 ``(2) For application of Taxpayer Assistance Orders to 
 persons performing services under a qualified tax collection 
 contract, see section 7811(a)(4).''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 7809(a) is amended by inserting 
 ``6306,'' before ``7651''.
 (B) The table of sections for subchapter A of 
 chapter 64 is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new item:

 ``Sec. 6306. Qualified Tax Collection 
 Contracts.''.
 (b) Civil Damages for Certain Unauthorized Collection Actions by 
Persons Performing Services Under Qualified Tax Collection Contracts.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter B of chapter 76 (relating to 
 proceedings by taxpayers and third parties) is amended by 
 inserting after section 7433 the following new section:

``SEC. 7433A. CIVIL DAMAGES FOR CERTAIN UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION ACTIONS 
 BY PERSONS PERFORMING SERVICES UNDER QUALIFIED TAX 
 COLLECTION CONTRACTS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to the modifications provided by 
subsection (b), section 7433 shall apply to the acts and omissions of 
any person performing services under a qualified tax collection 
contract (as defined in section 6306(b)) to the same extent and in the 
same manner as if such person were an employee of the Internal Revenue 
Service.
 ``(b) Modifications.--For purposes of subsection (a)--
 ``(1) Any civil action brought under section 7433 by reason 
 of this section shall be brought against the person who entered 
 into the qualified tax collection contract with the Secretary 
 and shall not be brought against the United States.
 ``(2) Such person and not the United States shall be liable 
 for any damages and costs determined in such civil action.
 ``(3) Such civil action shall not be an exclusive remedy 
 with respect to such person.
 ``(4) Subsections (c), (d)(1), and (e) of section 7433 
 shall not apply.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for 
 subchapter B of chapter 76 is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 7433 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 7433A. Civil damages for certain 
 unauthorized collection actions 
 by persons performing services 
 under a qualified tax 
 collection contract.''.
 (c) Application of Taxpayer Assistance Orders to Persons Performing 
Services Under a Qualified Tax Collection Contract.--Section 7811 
(relating to taxpayer assistance orders) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Application to Persons Performing Services Under a Qualified 
Tax Collection Contract.--Any order issued or action taken by the 
National Taxpayer Advocate pursuant to this section shall apply to 
persons performing services under a qualified tax collection contract 
(as defined in section 6306(b)) to the same extent and in the same 
manner as such order or action applies to the Secretary.''.
 (d) Ineligibility of Individuals Who Commit Misconduct To Perform 
Under Contract.--Section 1203 of the Internal Revenue Service 
Restructuring Act of 1998 (relating to termination of employment for 
misconduct) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(e) Individuals Performing Services Under a Qualified Tax 
Collection Contract.--An individual shall cease to be permitted to 
perform any services under any qualified tax collection contract (as 
defined in section 6306(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) if 
there is a final determination by the Secretary of the Treasury under 
such contract that such individual committed any act or omission 
described under subsection (b) in connection with the performance of 
such services.''.
 (e) Biennial Report.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
biennially submit (beginning in 2005) to the Committee on Finance of 
the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of 
Representatives a report with respect to qualified tax collection 
contracts under section 6306 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as 
added by this section) which includes--
 (1) a complete cost benefit analysis,
 (2) the impact of such contracts on collection enforcement 
 staff levels in the Internal Revenue Service,
 (3) the amounts collected and the collection costs incurred 
 (directly and indirectly),
 (4) an evaluation of contractor performance,
 (5) a disclosure safeguard report in a form similar to that 
 required under section 6103(p)(5) of such Code, and
 (6) a measurement plan which includes a comparison of the 
 best practices used by the private collectors with the Internal 
 Revenue Service's own collection techniques) and mechanisms to 
 identify and capture information on successful collection 
 techniques used by the contractors which could be adopted by 
 the Internal Revenue Service.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made to this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 488. WHISTLEBLOWER REFORMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 7623 (relating to expenses of detection of 
underpayments and fraud, etc.) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``(a) In 
 General.--The Secretary'',
 (2) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1) and 
 inserting ``or'',
 (3) by striking ``(other than interest)'', and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(b) Awards to Whistleblowers.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary proceeds with any 
 administrative or judicial action described in subsection (a) 
 based on information brought to the Secretary's attention by an 
 individual, such individual shall, subject to paragraph (2), 
 receive as an award at least 15 percent but not more than 30 
 percent of the collected proceeds (including penalties, 
 interest, additions to tax, and additional amounts) resulting 
 from the action (including any related actions) or from any 
 settlement in response to such action. The determination of the 
 amount of such award by the Whistleblower Office shall depend 
 upon the extent to which the individual substantially 
 contributed to such action.
 ``(2) Award in case of less substantial contribution.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the event the action 
 described in paragraph (1) is one which the 
 Whistleblower Office determines to be based principally 
 on disclosures of specific allegations (other than 
 information provided by the individual described in 
 paragraph (1)) resulting from a judicial or 
 administrative hearing, from a governmental report, 
 hearing, audit, or investigation, or from the news 
 media, the Whistleblower Office may award such sums as 
 it considers appropriate, but in no case more than 10 
 percent of the collected proceeds (including penalties, 
 interest, additions to tax, and additional amounts) 
 resulting from the action (including any related 
 actions) or from any settlement in response to such 
 action, taking into account the significance of the 
 individual's information and the role of such 
 individual and any legal representative of such 
 individual in contributing to such action.
 ``(B) Nonapplication of paragraph where individual 
 is original source of information.--Subparagraph (A) 
 shall not apply if the information resulting in the 
 initiation of the action described in paragraph (1) was 
 originally provided by the individual described in 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Appeal of award determination.--Any determination 
 regarding an award under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject 
 to the filing by the individual described in such paragraph of 
 a petition for review with the Tax Court under rules similar to 
 the rules under section 7463 (without regard to the amount in 
 dispute) and such review shall be subject to the rules under 
 section 7461(b)(1).
 ``(4) Application of this subsection.--This subsection 
 shall apply with respect to any action--
 ``(A) against any taxpayer, but in the case of any 
 individual, only if such individual's gross income 
 exceeds $200,000 for any taxable year subject to such 
 action, and
 ``(B) if the tax, penalties, interest, additions to 
 tax, and additional amounts in dispute exceed $20,000.
 ``(5) Additional rules.--
 ``(A) No contract necessary.--No contract with the 
 Internal Revenue Service is necessary for any 
 individual to receive an award under this subsection.
 ``(B) Representation.--Any individual described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2) may be represented by counsel.
 ``(C) Award not subject to individual alternative 
 minimum tax.--No award received under this subsection 
 shall be included in gross income for purposes of 
 determining alternative minimum taxable income.
 ``(c) Whistleblower Office.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is established in the Internal 
 Revenue Service an office to be known as the `Whistleblower 
 Office' which--
 ``(A) shall analyze information received from any 
 individual described in subsection (b) and either 
 investigate the matter itself or assign it to the 
 appropriate Internal Revenue Service office,
 ``(B) shall monitor any action taken with respect 
 to such matter,
 ``(C) shall inform such individual that it has 
 accepted the individual's information for further 
 review,
 ``(D) may require such individual and any legal 
 representative of such individual to not disclose any 
 information so provided,
 ``(E) may ask for additional assistance from such 
 individual or any legal representative of such 
 individual, and
 ``(F) shall determine the amount to be awarded to 
 such individual under subsection (b).
 ``(2) Funding for office.--From the amounts available for 
 expenditure under subsection (a), the Whistleblower Office 
 shall be credited with an amount equal to the awards made under 
 subsection (b). These funds shall be used to maintain the 
 Whistleblower Office and also to reimburse other Internal 
 Revenue Service offices for related costs, such as costs of 
 investigation and collection.
 ``(3) Request for assistance.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any assistance requested under 
 paragraph (1)(E) shall be under the direction and 
 control of the Whistleblower Office or the office 
 assigned to investigate the matter under subparagraph 
 (A). To the extent the disclosure of any returns or 
 return information to the individual or legal 
 representative is required for the performance of such 
 assistance, such disclosure shall be pursuant to a 
 contract entered into between the Secretary and the 
 recipients of such disclosure subject to section 
 6103(n).
 ``(B) Funding of assistance.--From the funds made 
 available to the Whistleblower Office under paragraph 
 (2), the Whistleblower Office may reimburse the costs 
 incurred by any legal representative in providing 
 assistance described in subparagraph (A).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to information provided on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 489. PROTECTION OF OVERTIME PAY.

 Section 13 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 213) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k)(1) The Secretary shall not promulgate any rule under 
subsection (a)(1) that exempts from the overtime pay provisions of 
section 7 any employee who earns less than $23,660 per year.
 ``(2) The Secretary shall not promulgate any rule under subsection 
(a)(1) concerning the right to overtime pay that is not as protective, 
or more protective, of the overtime pay rights of employees in the 
occupations or job classifications described in paragraph (3) as the 
protections provided for such employees under the regulations in effect 
under such subsection on March 31, 2003.
 ``(3) The occupations or job classifications described in this 
paragraph are as follows:
 ``(A) Any worker paid on an hourly basis.
 ``(B) Blue collar workers.
 ``(C) Any worker provided overtime under a collective 
 bargaining agreement.
 ``(D) Team leaders.
 ``(E) Computer programmers.
 ``(F) Registered nurses.
 ``(G) Licensed practical nurses.
 ``(H) Nurse midwives.
 ``(I) Nursery school teachers.
 ``(J) Oil and gas pipeline workers.
 ``(K) Oil and gas field workers.
 ``(L) Oil and gas platform workers.
 ``(M) Refinery workers.
 ``(N) Steel workers.
 ``(O) Shipyard and ship scrapping workers.
 ``(P) Teachers.
 ``(Q) Technicians.
 ``(R) Journalists.
 ``(S) Chefs.
 ``(T) Cooks.
 ``(U) Police officers.
 ``(V) Firefighters.
 ``(W) Fire sergeants.
 ``(X) Police sergeants.
 ``(Y) Emergency medical technicians.
 ``(Z) Paramedics.
 ``(AA) Waste disposal workers.
 ``(BB) Day care workers.
 ``(CC) Maintenance employees.
 ``(DD) Production line employees.
 ``(EE) Construction employees.
 ``(FF) Carpenters.
 ``(GG) Mechanics.
 ``(HH) Plumbers.
 ``(II) Iron workers.
 ``(JJ) Craftsmen.
 ``(KK) Operating engineers.
 ``(LL) Laborers.
 ``(MM) Painters.
 ``(NN) Cement masons.
 ``(OO) Stone and brick masons.
 ``(PP) Sheet metal workers.
 ``(QQ) Utility workers.
 ``(RR) Longshoremen.
 ``(SS) Stationary engineers.
 ``(TT) Welders.
 ``(UU) Boilermakers.
 ``(VV) Funeral directors.
 ``(WW) Athletic trainers.
 ``(XX) Outside sales employees.
 ``(YY) Inside sales employees.
 ``(ZZ) Grocery store managers.
 ``(AAA) Financial services industry workers.
 ``(BBB) Route drivers.
 ``(CCC) Assistant retail managers.
 ``(4) Any portion of a rule promulgated under subsection (a)(1) 
after March 31, 2003, that modifies the overtime pay provisions of 
section 7 in a manner that is inconsistent with paragraphs (2) and (3) 
shall have no force or effect as it relates to the occupation or job 
classification involved.''.

SEC. 490. PROTECTION OF OVERTIME PAY.

 Section 13 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 213) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Notwithstanding the provisions of subchapter II of chapter 5 
and chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as 
the Administrative Procedures Act) or any other provision of law, any 
portion of the final rule promulgated on April 23, 2004, revising part 
541 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, that exempts from the 
overtime pay provisions of section 7 any employee who would not 
otherwise be exempt if the regulations in effect on March 31, 2003 
remained in effect, shall have no force or effect and that portion of 
such regulations (as in effect on March 31, 2003) that would prevent 
such employee from being exempt shall remain in effect. Notwithstanding 
the preceding sentence, the increased salary requirements provided for 
in such final rule at section 541.600 of such title 29, shall remain in 
effect.''.

 PART V--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 491. ADDITION OF VACCINES AGAINST HEPATITIS A TO LIST OF TAXABLE 
 VACCINES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4132(a)(1) (defining taxable vaccine) is 
amended by redesignating subparagraphs (I), (J), (K), and (L) as 
subparagraphs (J), (K), (L), and (M), respectively, and by inserting 
after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) Any vaccine against hepatitis A.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 9510(c)(1)(A) is amended by 
striking ``October 18, 2000'' and inserting ``the date of the enactment 
of the Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) Sales, etc.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to sales and uses on or after the first day of the first 
 month which begins more than 4 weeks after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Deliveries.--For purposes of paragraph (1) and section 
 4131 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in the case of sales 
 on or before the effective date described in such paragraph for 
 which delivery is made after such date, the delivery date shall 
 be considered the sale date.

SEC. 492. RECOGNITION OF GAIN FROM THE SALE OF A PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE 
 ACQUIRED IN A LIKE-KIND EXCHANGE WITHIN 5 YEARS OF SALE.

 (a) In General.--Section 121(d) (relating to special rules for 
exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Property acquired in like-kind exchange.--If a 
 taxpayer acquired property in an exchange to which section 1031 
 applied, subsection (a) shall not apply to the sale or exchange 
 of such property if it occurs during the 5-year period 
 beginning with the date of the acquisition of such property.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to sales or exchanges after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 493. MODIFICATION OF EXEMPTION FROM TAX FOR SMALL PROPERTY AND 
 CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANIES.

 (a) Premiums as Percentage of Gross Receipts Increased.--Section 
501(c)(15)(A)(i)(II) is amended by striking ``50 percent'' and 
inserting ``60 percent''.
 (b) Limitation on Net Written Premiums Increased.--Section 
831(b)(2) (relating to companies to which this subsection applies) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``$1,200,000'' and inserting 
 ``$1,890,000'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Inflation adjustments.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of any 
 taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 
 2005, the dollar amount in subparagraph (A)(i) 
 shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 ``(I) such dollar amount, 
 multiplied by
 ``(II) the cost-of-living 
 adjustment determined under section 
 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which 
 the taxable year begins, by 
 substituting `calendar year 2004' for 
 `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph 
 (B) thereof.
 ``(ii) Rounding.--If the amount in 
 subparagraph (A)(i) as increased under clause 
 (i) is not a multiple of $10,000, such amount 
 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 
 $10,000.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years 
 beginning after December 31, 2004.
 (2) Transition rule for companies in receivership or 
 liquidation.--In the case of a company or association which--
 (A) for the taxable year which includes April 1, 
 2004, meets the requirements of section 501(c)(15)(A) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as in effect for 
 the last taxable year beginning before January 1, 2004, 
 and
 (B) on April 1, 2004, is in a receivership, 
 liquidation, or similar proceeding under the 
 supervision of a State court,
 the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable 
 years beginning after the earlier of the date such proceeding 
 ends (or, if later, December 31, 2004) or December 31, 2007.

SEC. 494. TREATMENT OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS OF PATENTS AND SIMILAR 
 PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 170(e)(1)(B) (relating to certain 
contributions of ordinary income and capital gain property) is amended 
by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by adding ``or'' at the 
end of clause (ii), and by inserting after clause (ii) the following 
new clause:
 ``(iii) of any patent, copyright, 
 trademark, trade name, trade secret, know-how, 
 software (other than software described in 
 section 197(e)(3)(A)(i)), or similar property, 
 or applications or registrations of such 
 property,''.
 (b) Additional Deduction for Certain Contributions of Patents and 
Similar Property.--Section 170(e) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Additional deduction for certain contributions of 
 patents and similar property.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a charitable 
 contribution of any property described in paragraph 
 (1)(B)(iii) (other than copyrights described in section 
 1221(a)(3) or 1231(b)(1)(C) or property contributed to 
 or for the use of an organization described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(ii)), if--
 ``(i) the lesser of--
 ``(I) 5 percent of the fair market 
 value of such property (determined at 
 the time of such contribution), or
 ``(II) $1,000,000, exceeds
 ``(ii) the amount of such contribution as 
 determined under paragraph (1),
 then the amount of the charitable contribution of such 
 property otherwise taken into account under this 
 section shall equal the amount determined under clause 
 (i).''.
 (c) Certain Donee Income From Intellectual Property Treated as an 
Additional Charitable Contribution.--Section 170 is amended by 
redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after 
subsection (l) the following new subsection:
 ``(m) Certain Donee Income From Intellectual Property Treated as an 
Additional Charitable Contribution.--
 ``(1) Treatment as additional contribution.--In the case of 
 a taxpayer who makes a qualified intellectual property 
 contribution, the deduction allowed under subsection (a) for 
 each taxable year of the taxpayer ending on or after the date 
 of such contribution shall be increased (subject to the 
 limitations under subsection (b)) by the applicable percentage 
 of qualified donee income with respect to such contribution 
 which is properly allocable to such year under this subsection.
 ``(2) Qualified donee income.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `qualified donee income' means any net 
 income received by or accrued to the donee which is properly 
 allocable to the qualified intellectual property.
 ``(3) Allocation of qualified donee income to taxable years 
 of donor.--For purposes of this subsection, qualified donee 
 income shall be treated as properly allocable to a taxable year 
 of the donor if such income is received by or accrued to the 
 donee for the taxable year of the donee which ends within or 
 with such taxable year of the donor.
 ``(4) 10-year limitation.--Income shall not be treated as 
 properly allocable to qualified intellectual property for 
 purposes of this subsection if such income is received by or 
 accrued to the donee after the 10-year period beginning on the 
 date of the contribution of such property.
 ``(5) Benefit limited to life of intellectual property.--
 Income shall not be treated as properly allocable to qualified 
 intellectual property for purposes of this subsection if such 
 income is received by or accrued to the donee after the 
 expiration of the legal life of such property.
 ``(6) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `applicable percentage' means the 
 percentage determined under the following table which 
 corresponds to a taxable year of the donor ending on or after 
 the date of the qualified intellectual property contribution:

``Taxable Year of Donor Ending On Applicable Percentage:
 or After Date of 
 Contribution:
 1st or 2d..................................... 100 
 3rd........................................... 90 
 4th........................................... 80 
 5th........................................... 70 
 6th........................................... 60 
 7th........................................... 50 
 8th........................................... 40 
 9th........................................... 30 
 10th.......................................... 20 
 11th or 12th.................................. 10.
 ``(7) Qualified intellectual property contribution.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified intellectual 
 property contribution' means any charitable contribution of 
 qualified intellectual property--
 ``(A) the amount of which taken into account under 
 this section--
 ``(i) is reduced by reason of subsection 
 (e)(1), or
 ``(ii) determined under subsection (e)(7), 
 and
 ``(B) with respect to which the donor informs the 
 donee at the time of such contribution that the donor 
 intends to treat such contribution as a qualified 
 intellectual property contribution for purposes of this 
 subsection and section 6050L.
 ``(8) Qualified intellectual property.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `qualified intellectual property' 
 means property described in subsection (e)(1)(B)(iii) (other 
 than copyrights described in section 1221(a)(3) or 
 1231(b)(1)(C) or property contributed to or for the use of an 
 organization described in subsection (e)(1)(B)(ii)).
 ``(9) Other special rules.--
 ``(A) Application of limitations on charitable 
 contributions.--Any increase under this subsection of 
 the deduction provided under subparagraph (a) shall be 
 treated for purposes of subsection (b) as a deduction 
 which is attributable to a charitable contribution to 
 the donee to which such increase relates.
 ``(B) Net income determined by donee.--The net 
 income taken into account under paragraph (2) shall not 
 exceed the amount of such income reported under section 
 6050L(b)(1).
 ``(C) Deduction limited to 12 taxable years.--
 Except as may be provided under subparagraph (D)(i), 
 this subsection shall not apply with respect to any 
 qualified intellectual property contribution for any 
 taxable year of the donor after the 12th taxable year 
 of the donor which ends on or after the date of such 
 contribution.
 ``(D) Regulations.--The Secretary may issue 
 regulations or other guidance to carry out the purposes 
 of this subsection, including regulations or guidance--
 ``(i) modifying the application of this 
 subsection in the case of a donor or donee with 
 a short taxable year, and
 ``(ii) providing for the determination of 
 an amount to be treated as net income of the 
 donee which is properly allocable to qualified 
 intellectual property in the case of a donee 
 who uses such property to further a purpose or 
 function constituting the basis of the donee's 
 exemption under section 501 (or, in the case of 
 a governmental unit, any purpose described in 
 section 170(c)) and does not possess a right to 
 receive any payment from a third party with 
 respect to such property.''.
 (d) Reporting Requirements.--Section 6050L (relating to returns 
relating to certain dispositions of donated property) is amended to 
read as follows:

``SEC. 6050L. RETURNS RELATING TO CERTAIN DONATED PROPERTY.

 ``(a) Dispositions of Donated Property.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the donee of any charitable deduction 
 property sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of such 
 property within 2 years after its receipt, the donee shall make 
 a return (in accordance with forms and regulations prescribed 
 by the Secretary) showing--
 ``(A) the name, address, and TIN of the donor,
 ``(B) a description of the property,
 ``(C) the date of the contribution,
 ``(D) the amount received on the disposition, and
 ``(E) the date of such disposition.
 ``(2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Charitable deduction property.--The term 
 `charitable deduction property' means any property 
 (other than publicly traded securities) contributed in 
 a contribution for which a deduction was claimed under 
 section 170 if the claimed value of such property (plus 
 the claimed value of all similar items of property 
 donated by the donor to 1 or more donees) exceeds 
 $5,000.
 ``(B) Publicly traded securities.--The term 
 `publicly traded securities' means securities for which 
 (as of the date of the contribution) market quotations 
 are readily available on an established securities 
 market.
 ``(b) Qualified Intellectual Property Contributions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each donee with respect to a qualified 
 intellectual property contribution shall make a return (at such 
 time and in such form and manner as the Secretary may by 
 regulations prescribe) with respect to each specified taxable 
 year of the donee showing--
 ``(A) the name, address, and TIN of the donor,
 ``(B) a description of the qualified intellectual 
 property contributed,
 ``(C) the date of the contribution, and
 ``(D) the amount of net income of the donee for the 
 taxable year which is properly allocable to the 
 qualified intellectual property (determined without 
 regard to paragraph (9)(B) of section 170(m) and with 
 the modifications described in paragraphs (4) and (5) 
 of such section).
 ``(2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--Terms used in this subsection 
 which are also used in section 170(m) have the 
 respective meanings given such terms in such section.
 ``(B) Specified taxable year.--The term `specified 
 taxable year' means, with respect to any qualified 
 intellectual property contribution, any taxable year of 
 the donee any portion of which is part of the 10-year 
 period beginning on the date of such contribution.
 ``(c) Statement to Be Furnished to Donors.--Every person making a 
return under subsection (a) or (b) shall furnish a copy of such return 
to the donor at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by 
regulations prescribe.''.
 (e) Processing Fee.--Section 170, as amended by subsection (b), is 
amended by redesignating subsection (n) as subsection (o) and by 
inserting after subsection (m) the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Processing Fee.--In the case of a deduction allowed for any 
taxable year under this section with respect to a charitable 
contribution of any property described in subsection (e)(1)(B)(iii) 
(other than copyrights described in section 1221(a)(3) or 1231(b)(1)(C) 
or property contributed to or for the use of an organization described 
in subsection (e)(1)(B)(ii)), the taxpayer shall include, with the 
taxpayer's return of tax including such deduction, a fee equal to 1 
percent of the amount of such deduction. Such fee shall be credited by 
the Secretary to the operations of the Exempt Organizations unit within 
the Internal Revenue Service.''.
 (f) Modification of Substantial Valuations Misstatement Penalty for 
Charitable Contributions of Property.--
 (1) Substantial misstatements.--Section 6662(e)(1)(A) 
 (relating to substantial valuation misstatements under chapter 
 1) is amended by inserting ``(50 percent or more in the case of 
 a charitable contribution of any property described in section 
 170(e)(1)(B)(iii))'' after ``200 percent or more''.
 (2) Gross misstatements.--Section 6662(h)(2)(A) (defining 
 gross valuation misstatements) is amended by striking clause 
 (ii) and inserting the following new clauses:
 ``(ii) `100 percent or more' for `50 
 percent or more',
 ``(iii) `25 percent or less' for `50 
 percent or less', and''.
 (g) Anti-Abuse Rules.--The Secretary of the Treasury--
 (1) may prescribe such regulations or other guidance as may 
 be necessary or appropriate to prevent the avoidance of the 
 purposes of paragraphs (1)(B)(iii) and (7) of section 170(e) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by subsections (a) 
 and (b)), including preventing--
 (A) the circumvention of the reduction of the 
 charitable deduction by embedding or bundling the 
 patent or similar property as part of a charitable 
 contribution of property that includes the patent or 
 similar property,
 (B) the manipulation of the basis of the property 
 to increase the amount of the charitable deduction 
 through the use of related persons, pass-thru entities, 
 or other intermediaries, or through the use of any 
 provision of law or regulation (including the 
 consolidated return regulations), and
 (C) a donor from changing the form of the patent or 
 similar property to property of a form for which 
 different deduction rules would apply, and
 (2) shall prescribe guidance on appraisal standards for 
 contributions of property described in section 
 170(e)(1)(B)(iii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as 
 added by this section).
 (h) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to contributions made after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 495. INCREASE IN AGE OF MINOR CHILDREN WHOSE UNEARNED INCOME IS 
 TAXED AS IF PARENT'S INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Section 1(g)(2)(A) (relating to child to whom 
subsection applies) is amended by striking ``age 14'' and inserting 
``age 18''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 496. HOLDING PERIOD FOR PREFERRED STOCK.

 (a) In General.--Section 1(h)(11)(B)(iii)(I) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(I) with respect to which the 
 holding period requirements of section 
 246(c) are not met, determined by 
 substituting `60 days' for `45' days 
 each place it appears, by substituting 
 `120-day' for `90-day' each place it 
 appears, and by substituting `120 days' 
 for `90 days' and `240-day' for `180-
 day' in paragraph (2).''
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 497. SUBSTANTIAL PRESENCE TEST REQUIRED TO DETERMINE BONA FIDE 
 RESIDENCE IN UNITED STATES POSSESSIONS.

 (a) Substantial Presence Test.--
 (1) In General.--Subpart D of part III of subchapter N of 
 chapter 1 (relating to possessions of the United States) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 937. BONA FIDE RESIDENT.

 ``For purposes of this subpart, section 865(g)(3), section 876, 
section 881(b), paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 901(b), section 
957(c), section 3401(a)(8)(C), and section 7654(a), the term `bona fide 
resident' means a person who satisfies a test, determined by the 
Secretary, similar to the substantial presence test under section 
7701(b)(3) with respect to Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana 
Islands, Puerto Rico, or the Virgin Islands, as the case may be.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) The following provisions are amended by 
 striking ``during the entire taxable year'' and 
 inserting ``for the taxable year'':
 (i) Paragraph (3) of section 865(g).
 (ii) Subsection (a) of section 876(a).
 (iii) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 
 901(b).
 (iv) Subsection (a) of section 931.
 (v) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 933.
 (B) Section 931(d) is amended by striking paragraph 
 (3).
 (C) Section 932 is amended by striking ``at the 
 close of the taxable year'' and inserting ``for the 
 taxable year'' each place it appears.
 (3) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections of subpart D 
 of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 937. Bona fide resident.''.
 (b) Reporting Requirements for Bona Fide Residents of the Virgin 
Islands.--Paragraph (2) of section 932(c) (relating to treatment of 
Virgin Islands residents) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Filing requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (4), 
 each individual to whom this subsection applies for the 
 taxable year shall file an income tax return for the 
 taxable year with--
 ``(i) the Virgin Islands, and
 ``(ii) the United States.
 ``(B) Filing fee.--The Secretary shall charge a 
 processing fee with respect to the return filed under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) of an amount appropriate to cover 
 the administrative costs of the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) and the enforcement of the 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii).''.
 (c) Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6717. FAILURE OF VIRGIN ISLANDS RESIDENTS TO FILE RETURNS WITH 
 THE UNITED STATES.

 ``(a) Penalty Authorized.--The Secretary may impose a civil money 
penalty on any person who violates, or causes any violation of, the 
requirements of section 932(c)(2)(A)(ii).
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (c), 
 the amount of any civil penalty imposed under subsection (a) 
 shall not exceed $5,000.
 ``(2) Reasonable cause exception.--No penalty shall be 
 imposed under subsection (a) with respect to any violation if 
 such violation was due to reasonable cause and the taxpayer 
 acted in good faith.
 ``(c) Willful Violations.--In the case of any person willfully 
violating, or willfully causing any violation of, any requirement of 
section 932(c)(2)(A)(ii)--
 ``(1) the maximum penalty under subsection (b)(1) shall be 
 increased to $25,000 and
 ``(2) subsection (b)(2) shall not apply.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for Part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6717. Failure of Virgin Islands 
 residents to file returns with 
 the United States.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

 TITLE V--PROTECTION OF UNITED STATES WORKERS FROM COMPETITION OF 
 FOREIGN WORKFORCES

SEC. 501. LIMITATIONS ON OFF-SHORE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS.

 (a) Limitations.--
 (1) In general.--The Office of Federal Procurement Policy 
 Act (41 U.S.C. 403 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 42. LIMITATIONS ON OFF-SHORE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS.

 ``(a) Conversions to Contractor Performance of Federal 
Activities.--An activity or function of an executive agency that is 
converted to contractor performance under Office of Management and 
Budget Circular A-76 may not be performed by the contractor or any 
subcontractor at a location outside the United States except to the 
extent that such activity or function was previously performed by 
Federal Government employees outside the United States.
 ``(b) Other Federal Contracts.--(1) A contract that is entered into 
by the head of an executive agency may not be performed outside the 
United States except to meet a requirement of the executive agency for 
the contract to be performed specifically at a location outside the 
United States.
 ``(2) The prohibition in paragraph (1) does not apply in the case 
of a contract of an executive agency if--
 ``(A) the President determines in writing that it is 
 necessary in the national security interests of the United 
 States for the contract to be performed outside the United 
 States; or
 ``(B) the head of such executive agency makes a 
 determination and reports such determination on a timely basis 
 to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget that--
 ``(i) the property or services needed by the 
 executive agency are available only by means of 
 performance of the contract outside the United States; 
 and
 ``(ii) no property or services available by means 
 of performance of the contract inside the United States 
 would satisfy the executive agency's need.
 ``(3) Paragraph (1) does not apply to the performance of a contract 
outside the United States under the exception provided in subsection 
(a).
 ``(c) State Contracts.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
funds appropriated for financial assistance for a State may not be 
disbursed to or for such State during a fiscal year unless the chief 
executive of that State has transmitted to the Administrator for 
Federal Procurement Policy, not later than April 1 of the preceding 
fiscal year, a written certification that none of such funds will be 
expended for the performance outside the United States of contracts 
entered into by such State.
 ``(2) The prohibition on disbursement of funds to or for a State 
under paragraph (1) does not apply with respect to the performance of a 
State contract outside the United States if--
 ``(A) the chief executive of such State--
 ``(i) determines that the property or services 
 needed by the State are available only by means of 
 performance of the contract outside the United States 
 and no property or services available by means of 
 performance of the contract inside the United States 
 would satisfy the State's need; and
 ``(ii) transmits a notification of such 
 determination to the head of the executive agency of 
 the United States that administers the authority under 
 which such funds are disbursed to or for the State; and
 ``(B) the head of the executive agency receiving the 
 notification of such determination--
 ``(i) confirms that the facts warrant the 
 determination;
 ``(ii) approves the determination; and
 ``(iii) transmits a notification of the approval of 
 the determination to the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget.
 ``(3) In this subsection, the term `State' means each of the 
several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Trust 
Territory of the Pacific Islands.
 ``(d) Subsections (b) and (c) shall not apply to procurement 
covered by the World Trade Organization Government Procurement 
Agreement.
 ``(e) National Security Exemption.--Subsection (b) shall not apply 
to any procurement for national security purposes entered into by--
 ``(1) the Department of Defense or any agency or entity 
 thereof;
 ``(2) the Department of the Army, the Department of the 
 Navy, the Department of the Air Force, or any agency or entity 
 of any of the military departments;
 ``(3) the Department of Homeland Security;
 ``(4) the Department of Energy or any agency or entity 
 thereof, with respect to the national security programs of that 
 Department; or
 ``(5) any element of the intelligence community.
 ``(f) Responsibilities of OMB.--The Director of the Office of 
Management and Budget shall--
 ``(1) maintain--
 ``(A) the waivers granted under subsection (b)(2), 
 together with the determinations and certifications on 
 which such waivers were based; and
 ``(B) the notifications received under subsection 
 (c)(2)(B)(iii); and
 ``(2) submit to Congress promptly after the end of each 
 quarter of each fiscal year a report that sets forth--
 ``(A) the waivers that were granted under 
 subsection (b)(2) during such quarter; and
 ``(B) the notifications that were received under 
 subsection (c)(2)(B)(iii) during such quarter.
 ``(g) Annual GAO Review.--The Comptroller General shall--
 ``(1) review, each fiscal year, the waivers granted during 
 such fiscal year under subsection (b)(2) and the disbursements 
 of funds authorized pursuant to the exceptions in subsections 
 (c)(2) and (e); and
 ``(2) promptly after the end of such fiscal year, transmit 
 to Congress a report containing a list of the contracts covered 
 by such waivers and exception together with a brief description 
 of the performance of each such contract to the maximum extent 
 feasible outside the United States.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections in section 
 1(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new item:

``Sec. 42. Limitations on off-shore performance of contracts.''.
 (b) Inapplicability to States During First Two Fiscal Years.--
Section 42(c) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (as added 
by subsection (a)) shall not apply to disbursements of funds to a State 
during the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted and the next fiscal 
year.

SEC. 502. REPEAL OF SUPERSEDED LAW.

 Section 647 of the Transportation, Treasury, and Independent 
Agencies Appropriations Act, 2004 (division F of Public Law 108-199) is 
amended by striking subsection (e).

SEC. 503. EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY.

 (a) In General.--This title and the amendments made by this title 
shall take effect 30 days after the Secretary of Commerce certifies 
that the amendments made by this title will not result in the loss of 
more jobs than it will protect and will not cause harm to the United 
States economy. The initial certification shall be made by the 
Secretary of Commerce no later than 90 days after the enactment of this 
Act. Such certification must be renewed on or before January 1 of each 
year in order for the amendments made by this title to be in effect for 
that year.
 (b) Consistency With International Agreements.--The provisions of 
this title shall not apply to the extent that they may be inconsistent 
with obligations under international agreements. Within 90 days of this 
legislation, the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with 
the Office of the United States Trade Representative, shall develop 
guidelines for the implementation of this provision.

 TITLE VI--OTHER PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Provisions Relating to Housing

SEC. 601. TREATMENT OF QUALIFIED MORTGAGE BONDS.

 (a) Year Holiday.--Section 143(a)(2)(A)(iv) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 shall not apply to amounts received during the 1-year 
period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act with respect 
to any bond outstanding on such date.
 (b) Repeal of Required Use of Certain Principal Repayments on 
Mortgage Subsidy Bond Financings To Redeem Bonds.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 143(a)(2) 
 (defining qualified mortgage issue) is amended by adding 
 ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking ``, and'' at the 
 end of clause (iii) and inserting a period, and by striking 
 clause (iv) and the last sentence.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Clause (ii) of section 
 143(a)(2)(D) is amended by striking ``(and clause (iv) of 
 subparagraph (A))''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to bonds originally issued after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 602. PREMIUMS FOR MORTGAGE INSURANCE.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (3) of section 163(h) (relating to 
qualified residence interest) is amended by adding after subparagraph 
(D) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) Mortgage insurance premiums treated as 
 interest.--
 ``(i) In general.--Premiums paid or accrued 
 for qualified mortgage insurance by a taxpayer 
 during the taxable year in connection with 
 acquisition indebtedness with respect to a 
 qualified residence of the taxpayer shall be 
 treated for purposes of this subsection as 
 qualified residence interest.
 ``(ii) Phaseout.--The amount otherwise 
 allowable as a deduction under clause (i) shall 
 be reduced (but not below zero) by 10 percent 
 of such amount for each $1,000 ($500 in the 
 case of a married individual filing a separate 
 return) (or fraction thereof) that the 
 taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the 
 taxable year exceeds $100,000 ($50,000 in the 
 case of a married individual filing a separate 
 return).''.
 (b) Definition and Special Rules.--Paragraph (4) of section 163(h) 
(relating to other definitions and special rules) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(E) Qualified mortgage insurance.--The term 
 `qualified mortgage insurance' means--
 ``(i) the Home Loan Guaranty Program of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs, and mortgage 
 insurance provided by the Federal Housing 
 Administration or the Rural Housing 
 Administration, and
 ``(ii) private mortgage insurance (as 
 defined by section 2 of the Homeowners 
 Protection Act of 1998 (12 U.S.C. 4901), as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 subparagraph).
 ``(F) Special rules for prepaid qualified mortgage 
 insurance.--Any amount paid by the taxpayer for 
 qualified mortgage insurance that is properly allocable 
 to any mortgage the payment of which extends to periods 
 that are after the close of the taxable year in which 
 such amount is paid shall be chargeable to capital 
 account and shall be treated as paid in such periods to 
 which so allocated. No deduction shall be allowed for 
 the unamortized balance of such account if such 
 mortgage is satisfied before the end of its term. The 
 preceding sentences shall not apply to amounts paid for 
 qualified mortgage insurance provided by the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs or the Rural Housing 
 Administration.''.
 (c) Information Returns Relating to Mortgage Insurance.--Section 
6050H (relating to returns relating to mortgage interest received in 
trade or business from individuals) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(h) Returns Relating to Mortgage Insurance Premiums.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may prescribe, by 
 regulations, that any person who, in the course of a trade or 
 business, receives from any individual premiums for mortgage 
 insurance aggregating $600 or more for any calendar year, shall 
 make a return with respect to each such individual. Such return 
 shall be in such form, shall be made at such time, and shall 
 contain such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(2) Statement to be furnished to individuals with respect 
 to whom information is required.--Every person required to make 
 a return under paragraph (1) shall furnish to each individual 
 with respect to whom a return is made a written statement 
 showing such information as the Secretary may prescribe. Such 
 written statement shall be furnished on or before January 31 of 
 the year following the calendar year for which the return under 
 paragraph (1) was required to be made.
 ``(3) Special rules.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) rules similar to the rules of subsection (c) 
 shall apply, and
 ``(B) the term `mortgage insurance' means--
 ``(i) the Home Loan Guaranty Program of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs, and mortgage 
 insurance provided by the Federal Housing 
 Administration or the Rural Housing 
 Administration, and
 ``(ii) private mortgage insurance (as 
 defined by section 2 of the Homeowners 
 Protection Act of 1998 (12 U.S.C. 4901), as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 subparagraph).''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or accrued in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2004, and ending before January 1, 2006.

SEC. 603. INCREASE IN HISTORIC REHABILITATION CREDIT FOR CERTAIN LOW-
 INCOME HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.

 (a) In General.--Section 47 (relating to rehabilitation credit) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Special Rule Regarding Certain Historic Structures.--In the 
case of any qualified rehabilitation expenditure with respect to any 
certified historic structure--
 ``(1) which is placed in service after the date of the 
 enactment of this subsection,
 ``(2) which is part of a qualified low-income building with 
 respect to which a credit under section 42 is allowed, and
 ``(3) substantially all of the residential rental units of 
 which are used for tenants who have attained the age of 65,
subsection (a)(2) shall be applied by substituting `25 percent' for `20 
percent'.''.
 (b) Application of MACRS.--The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall 
be applied and administered as if paragraph (4)(X) of section 251(d) of 
the Tax Reform Act of 1986 as applied to the amendments made by section 
201 of such Act had not been enacted with respect to any property 
described in such paragraph and placed in service after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 Subtitle B--Provisions Relating to Bonds

SEC. 611. EXPANSION OF NEW YORK LIBERTY ZONE TAX BENEFITS.

 (a) Additional Extension of Tax-Exempt Bond Financing.--Section 
1400L(d)(2)(D), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``2006'' 
and inserting ``2010''.
 (b) Extension of Advance Refundings.--Section 1400L(e)(1) is 
amended by striking ``2005'' and inserting ``2006''.

SEC. 612. MODIFICATIONS OF TREATMENT OF QUALIFIED ZONE ACADEMY BONDS.

 (a) Proceeds of Bonds May Be Used for Construction and Land 
Acquisition.--Paragraph (5) of section 1397E(d) (defining qualified 
purpose) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``rehabilitating or repairing'' in 
 subparagraph (A) and inserting ``constructing, rehabilitating, 
 or repairing'', and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E), respectively, and by inserting 
 after subparagraph (A) the following:
 ``(B) acquiring the land on which the facility is 
 to be constructed,''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to obligations issued after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 613. MODIFICATIONS OF AUTHORITY OF INDIAN TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS TO 
 ISSUE TAX-EXEMPT BONDS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 7871(c) (relating to 
Indian tribal governments treated as States for certain purposes) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 103 shall 
 apply to any obligation issued by an Indian tribal government 
 (or subdivision thereof) only if--
 ``(A) such obligation--
 ``(i) is part of an issue 95 percent or 
 more of the net proceeds of which are to be 
 used to finance any facility located on an 
 Indian reservation, and
 ``(ii) is issued before January 1, 2006, or
 ``(B) such obligation is part of an issue 
 substantially all of the proceeds of which are to be 
 used in the exercise of any essential governmental 
 function.''.
 (b) Special Rules and Definitions.--Subsection (c) of section 7871 
is amended by inserting at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Special rules and definitions.--
 ``(A) Exclusion of gaming.--An obligation described 
 in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) may not be 
 used to finance any portion of a building in which 
 class II or III gaming (as defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2702)) is 
 conducted or housed.
 ``(B) Indian reservation.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term `Indian reservation' means--
 ``(i) a reservation, as defined in section 
 4(10) of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 
 (25 U.S.C. 1903(10)), and
 ``(ii) lands held under the provisions of 
 the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 
 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) by a Native corporation as 
 defined in section 3(m) of such Act (43 U.S.C. 
 1602(m)).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to obligations issued after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 614. DEFINITION OF MANUFACTURING FACILITY FOR SMALL ISSUE BONDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 144(a)(12) (relating to termination dates) 
is amended by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the following new 
subparagraphs:
 ``(C) Manufacturing facility.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `manufacturing facility' means any 
 facility which is used in--
 ``(i) the manufacture of tangible personal 
 property (including processing which results in 
 a change in the condition of such property),
 ``(ii) the manufacture or development of 
 any software product or process if--
 ``(I) it takes more than 6 months 
 to manufacture or develop such product,
 ``(II) the manufacture or 
 development could not with due 
 diligence be reasonably expected to 
 occur in less than 6 months, and
 ``(III) the software product or 
 process comprises programs, routines, 
 and attendant documentation developed 
 and maintained for use in computer and 
 telecommunications technology, or
 ``(iii) the manufacture or development of 
 any biobased product or bioenergy if--
 ``(I) it takes more than 6 months 
 to manufacture or develop, and
 ``(II) the manufacture or 
 development could not with due 
 diligence be reasonably expected to 
 occur in less than 6 months.
 ``(D) Related facilities.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (C), the term `manufacturing facility' 
 includes a facility which is directly and functionally 
 related to a manufacturing facility (determined without 
 regard to subparagraph (C)) if--
 ``(i) such facility, including an office 
 facility and a research and development 
 facility, is located on the same site as the 
 manufacturing facility, and
 ``(ii) not more than 40 percent of the net 
 proceeds of the issue are used to provide such 
 facility.
 ``(E) Other definitions.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (C)(iii)--
 ``(i) Biobased product.--The term `biobased 
 product' means a commercial or industrial 
 product (other than food or feed) which 
 utilizes biological products or renewable 
 domestic agricultural (plant, animal, and 
 marine) or forestry materials.
 ``(ii) Bioenergy.--The term `bioenergy' 
 means biomass used in the production of energy, 
 including liquid, solid, or gaseous fuels, 
 electricity, and heat.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to obligations issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 615. CONSERVATION BONDS.

 (a) Tax-Exempt Bond Financing.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986, any qualified forest conservation bond shall be 
 treated as an exempt facility bond under section 142 of such 
 Code.
 (2) Qualified forest conservation bond.--For purposes of 
 this section, the term ``qualified forest conservation bond'' 
 means any bond issued as part of an issue if--
 (A) 95 percent or more of the net proceeds (as 
 defined in section 150(a)(3) of such Code) of such 
 issue are to be used for qualified project costs,
 (B) such bond is issued for a qualified 
 organization, and
 (C) such bond is issued before December 31, 2006.
 (3) Limitation on aggregate amount issued.--
 (A) In general.--The maximum aggregate face amount 
 of bonds which may be issued under this subsection 
 shall not exceed $1,500,000,000 for all projects 
 (excluding refunding bonds).
 (B) Allocation of limitation.--The limitation 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be allocated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury among qualified organizations 
 based on criteria established by the Secretary not 
 later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
 this section, after consultation with the Chief of the 
 Forest Service.
 (4) Qualified project costs.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``qualified project costs'' means the sum 
 of--
 (A) the cost of acquisition by the qualified 
 organization from an unrelated person of forests and 
 forest land which at the time of acquisition or 
 immediately thereafter are subject to a conservation 
 restriction described in subsection (c)(2),
 (B) capitalized interest on the qualified forest 
 conservation bonds for the 3-year period beginning on 
 the date of issuance of such bonds, and
 (C) credit enhancement fees which constitute 
 qualified guarantee fees (within the meaning of section 
 148 of such Code).
 (5) Special rules.--In applying the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 to any qualified forest conservation bond, the 
 following modifications shall apply:
 (A) Section 146 of such Code (relating to volume 
 cap) shall not apply.
 (B) For purposes of section 147(b) of such Code 
 (relating to maturity may not exceed 120 percent of 
 economic life), the land and standing timber acquired 
 with proceeds of qualified forest conservation bonds 
 shall have an economic life of 35 years.
 (C) Subsections (c) and (d) of section 147 of such 
 Code (relating to limitations on acquisition of land 
 and existing property) shall not apply.
 (D) Section 57(a)(5) of such Code (relating to tax-
 exempt interest) shall not apply to interest on 
 qualified forest conservation bonds.
 (6) Treatment of current refunding bonds.--Paragraphs 
 (2)(C) and (3) shall not apply to any bond (or series of bonds) 
 issued to refund a qualified forest conservation bond issued 
 before December 31, 2006, if--
 (A) the average maturity date of the issue of which 
 the refunding bond is a part is not later than the 
 average maturity date of the bonds to be refunded by 
 such issue,
 (B) the amount of the refunding bond does not 
 exceed the outstanding amount of the refunded bond, and
 (C) the net proceeds of the refunding bond are used 
 to redeem the refunded bond not later than 90 days 
 after the date of the issuance of the refunding bond.
 For purposes of subparagraph (A), average maturity shall be 
 determined in accordance with section 147(b)(2)(A) of such 
 Code.
 (7) Effective date.--This subsection shall apply to 
 obligations issued on or after the date which is 180 days after 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Items From Qualified Harvesting Activities Not Subject to Tax 
or Taken Into Account.--
 (1) In general.--Income, gains, deductions, losses, or 
 credits from a qualified harvesting activity conducted by a 
 qualified organization shall not be subject to tax or taken 
 into account under subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986.
 (2) Limitation.--The amount of income excluded from gross 
 income under paragraph (1) for any taxable year shall not 
 exceed the amount used by the qualified organization to make 
 debt service payments during such taxable year for qualified 
 forest conservation bonds.
 (3) Qualified harvesting activity.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1)--
 (A) In general.--The term ``qualified harvesting 
 activity'' means the sale, lease, or harvesting, of 
 standing timber--
 (i) on land owned by a qualified 
 organization which was acquired with proceeds 
 of qualified forest conservation bonds,
 (ii) with respect to which a written 
 acknowledgement has been obtained by the 
 qualified organization from the State or local 
 governments with jurisdiction over such land 
 that the acquisition lessens the burdens of 
 such government with respect to such land, and
 (iii) pursuant to a qualified conservation 
 plan adopted by the qualified organization.
 (B) Exceptions.--
 (i) Cessation as qualified organization.--
 The term ``qualified harvesting activity'' 
 shall not include any sale, lease, or 
 harvesting for any period during which the 
 organization ceases to qualify as a qualified 
 organization.
 (ii) Exceeding limits on harvesting.--The 
 term ``qualified harvesting activity'' shall 
 not include any sale, lease, or harvesting of 
 standing timber on land acquired with proceeds 
 of qualified forest conservation bonds to the 
 extent that--
 (I) the average annual area of 
 timber harvested from such land exceeds 
 2.5 percent of the total area of such 
 land or,
 (II) the quantity of timber removed 
 from such land exceeds the quantity 
 which can be removed from such land 
 annually in perpetuity on a sustained-
 yield basis with respect to such land.
 The limitations under subclauses (I) and (II) 
 shall not apply to post-fire restoration and 
 rehabilitation or sanitation harvesting of 
 timber stands which are substantially damaged 
 by fire, windthrow, or other catastrophes, or 
 which are in imminent danger from insect or 
 disease attack.
 (4) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply to any 
 qualified harvesting activity of a qualified organization 
 occurring after the date on which there is no outstanding 
 qualified forest conservation bond with respect to such 
 qualified organization or any such bond ceases to be a tax-
 exempt bond.
 (5) Partial recapture of benefits if harvesting limit 
 exceeded.--If, as of the date that this subsection ceases to 
 apply under paragraph (3), the average annual area of timber 
 harvested from the land exceeds the requirement of paragraph 
 (3)(B)(ii)(I), the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall be increased, under rules prescribed 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury, by the sum of the tax 
 benefits attributable to such excess and interest at the 
 underpayment rate under section 6621 of such Code for the 
 period of the underpayment.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) Qualified conservation plan.--The term ``qualified 
 conservation plan'' means a multiple land use program or plan 
 which--
 (A) is designed and administered primarily for the 
 purposes of protecting and enhancing wildlife and fish, 
 timber, scenic attributes, recreation, and soil and 
 water quality of the forest and forest land,
 (B) mandates that conservation of forest and forest 
 land is the single-most significant use of the forest 
 and forest land, and
 (C) requires that timber harvesting be consistent 
 with--
 (i) restoring and maintaining reference 
 conditions for the region's ecotype,
 (ii) restoring and maintaining a 
 representative sample of young, mid, and late 
 successional forest age classes,
 (iii) maintaining or restoring the 
 resources' ecological health for purposes of 
 preventing damage from fire, insect, or 
 disease,
 (iv) maintaining or enhancing wildlife or 
 fish habitat, or
 (v) enhancing research opportunities in 
 sustainable renewable resource uses.
 (2) Conservation restriction.--The conservation restriction 
 described in this paragraph is a restriction which--
 (A) is granted in perpetuity to an unrelated person 
 which is described in section 170(h)(3) of such Code 
 and which, in the case of a nongovernmental unit, is 
 organized and operated for conservation purposes,
 (B) meets the requirements of clause (ii) or 
 (iii)(II) of section 170(h)(4)(A) of such Code,
 (C) obligates the qualified organization to pay the 
 costs incurred by the holder of the conservation 
 restriction in monitoring compliance with such 
 restriction, and
 (D) requires an increasing level of conservation 
 benefits to be provided whenever circumstances allow 
 it.
 (3) Qualified organization.--The term ``qualified 
 organization'' means an organization--
 (A) which is a nonprofit organization substantially 
 all the activities of which are charitable, scientific, 
 or educational, including acquiring, protecting, 
 restoring, managing, and developing forest lands and 
 other renewable resources for the long-term charitable, 
 educational, scientific and public benefit,
 (B) more than half of the value of the property of 
 which consists of forests and forest land acquired with 
 the proceeds from qualified forest conservation bonds,
 (C) which periodically conducts educational 
 programs designed to inform the public of 
 environmentally sensitive forestry management and 
 conservation techniques,
 (D) which has at all times a board of directors--
 (i) at least 20 percent of the members of 
 which represent the holders of the conservation 
 restriction described in paragraph (2),
 (ii) at least 20 percent of the members of 
 which are public officials, and
 (iii) not more than one-third of the 
 members of which are individuals who are or 
 were at any time within 5 years before the 
 beginning of a term of membership on the board, 
 an employee of, independent contractor with 
 respect to, officer of, director of, or held a 
 material financial interest in, a commercial 
 forest products enterprise with which the 
 qualified organization has a contractual or 
 other financial arrangement,
 (E) the bylaws of which require at least two-thirds 
 of the members of the board of directors to vote 
 affirmatively to approve the qualified conservation 
 plan and any change thereto, and
 (F) upon dissolution, is required to dedicate its 
 assets to--
 (i) an organization described in section 
 501(c)(3) of such Code which is organized and 
 operated for conservation purposes, or
 (ii) a governmental unit described in 
 section 170(c)(1) of such Code.
 (4) Unrelated person.--The term ``unrelated person'' means 
 a person who is not a related person.
 (5) Related person.--A person shall be treated as related 
 to another person if--
 (A) such person bears a relationship to such other 
 person described in section 267(b) (determined without 
 regard to paragraph (9) thereof), or 707(b)(1), of such 
 Code, determined by substituting ``25 percent'' for 
 ``50 percent'' each place it appears therein, and
 (B) in the case such other person is a non-profit 
 organization, if such person controls directly or 
 indirectly more than 25 percent of the governing body 
 of such organization.

SEC. 616. INDIAN SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Bureau.--The term ``Bureau'' means the Bureau of Indian 
 Affairs of the Department.
 (2) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the 
 Department of the Interior.
 (3) Escrow account.--The term ``escrow account'' means the 
 tribal school modernization escrow account established under 
 subsection (b)(6)(B)(i).
 (4) Indian.--The term ``Indian'' means any individual who 
 is a member of an Indian tribe.
 (5) Indian tribe.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the 
 meaning given the term ``Indian tribal government'' by 
 section 7701(a)(40) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 (including the application of section 7871(d) of 
 that Code).
 (B) Inclusion.--The term ``Indian tribe'' includes 
 a consortium of Indian tribes approved by the 
 Secretary.
 (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior.
 (7) Tribal school.--The term ``tribal school'' means an 
 elementary school, secondary school, or dormitory that--
 (A) is operated by a tribal organization or the 
 Bureau for the education of Indian children; and
 (B) under a contract, a grant, or an agreement, or 
 for a Bureau-operated school, receives financial 
 assistance to pay the costs of operation from funds 
 made available under--
 (i) section 102, 103(a), or 208 of the 
 Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450f, 450h(a), 458d); 
 or
 (ii) the Tribally Controlled Schools Act of 
 1988 (25 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.).
 (b) Issuance of Bonds.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a pilot 
 program under which eligible Indian tribes may issue qualified 
 tribal school modernization bonds to provide funding for the 
 construction, rehabilitation, or repair of tribal schools 
 (including the advance planning and design of tribal schools).
 (2) Eligibility.--
 (A) In general.--To be eligible to issue any 
 qualified tribal school modernization bond under the 
 program under paragraph (1), an Indian tribe shall--
 (i) prepare and submit to the Secretary a 
 plan of construction that meets the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B);
 (ii) provide for quarterly and final 
 inspection of the project by the Bureau; and
 (iii) pledge that the facilities financed 
 by the bond will be used primarily for 
 elementary and secondary educational purposes 
 for not less than the period during which the 
 bond remains outstanding.
 (B) Plan of construction.--A plan of construction 
 referred to in subparagraph (A)(i) meets the 
 requirements of this subparagraph if the plan--
 (i) contains a description of the 
 construction to be carried out with funding 
 provided under a qualified tribal school 
 modernization bond;
 (ii) demonstrates that a comprehensive 
 survey has been completed to determine the 
 construction needs of the tribal school 
 involved;
 (iii) contains assurances that funding 
 under the bond will be used only for the 
 activities described in the plan;
 (iv) contains a response to the evaluation 
 criteria contained in Instructions and 
 Application for Replacement School 
 Construction, Revision 6, dated February 6, 
 1999; and
 (v) contains any other reasonable and 
 related information determined to be 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (C) Priority.--In determining whether an Indian 
 tribe is eligible to participate in the program under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to 
 an Indian tribe that, as demonstrated by the relevant 
 plans of construction, will fund projects--
 (i) described in the Education Facilities 
 Replacement Construction Priorities List, as of 
 fiscal year 2000, of the Bureau (65 Fed. Reg. 
 4623);
 (ii) described in any subsequent priorities 
 list published in the Federal Register; or
 (iii) that meet the criteria for ranking 
 schools as described in Instructions and 
 Application for Replacement School 
 Construction, Revision 6, dated February 6, 
 1999.
 (D) Advance planning and design funding.--
 (i) In general.--An Indian tribe may 
 propose in the plan of construction of the 
 Indian tribe to receive advance planning and 
 design funding from the escrow account.
 (ii) Conditions on allocation of funds.--As 
 a condition to the allocation to an Indian 
 tribe of advance planning and design funds from 
 the escrow account under clause (i), the Indian 
 tribe shall agree--
 (I) to issue qualified tribal 
 school modernization bonds after the 
 date of receipt of the funds; and
 (II) as a condition of each bond 
 issuance, that the Indian tribe will 
 deposit into the escrow account, or a 
 fund managed by the trustee as 
 described in paragraph (4)(C), an 
 amount equal to the amount of funds 
 received from the escrow account.
 (3) Permissible activities.--In addition to the use of 
 funds permitted under paragraph (1), an Indian tribe may use 
 amounts received through the issuance of a qualified tribal 
 school modernization bond--
 (A) to enter into and make payments under contracts 
 with licensed and bonded architects, engineers, and 
 construction firms--
 (i) to determine the needs of the tribal 
 school; and
 (ii) for the design and engineering of the 
 tribal school;
 (B) enter into and make payments under contracts 
 with financial advisers, underwriters, attorneys, 
 trustees, and other professionals who would be able to 
 provide assistance to the Indian tribe in issuing 
 bonds; and
 (C) carry out other activities determined to be 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (4) Bond trustee.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, any qualified tribal school 
 modernization bond issued by an Indian tribe under this 
 subsection shall be subject to a trust agreement 
 between the Indian tribe and a trustee.
 (B) Trustee.--Any bank or trust company that meets 
 requirements established by the Secretary may be 
 designated as a trustee under subparagraph (A).
 (C) Content of trust agreement.--A trust agreement 
 entered into by an Indian tribe under this paragraph 
 shall specify that the trustee, with respect to any 
 bond issued under this subsection, shall--
 (i) act as a repository for the proceeds of 
 the bond;
 (ii) make payments to bondholders;
 (iii) receive, as a condition to the 
 issuance of the bond, a transfer of funds from 
 the escrow account, or from other funds 
 furnished by or on behalf of the Indian tribe, 
 in an amount that (including interest earnings 
 from the investment of the funds in obligations 
 of, or fully guaranteed by, the United States, 
 or from other investments authorized by 
 paragraph (10)) will produce funds sufficient 
 to timely pay in full the entire principal 
 amount of the bond on the stated maturity date 
 of the bond;
 (iv) invest the funds transferred under 
 clause (iii) in an investment described in that 
 clause; and
 (v)(I) hold and invest the funds 
 transferred under clause (iii) in a segregated 
 fund or account under the agreement; and
 (II) use the fund or account solely for 
 payment of the costs of items described in 
 paragraph (3).
 (D) Requirements for making direct payments.--
 (i) Payments.--
 (I) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, the trustee 
 shall make any payment referred to in 
 subparagraph (C)(v) in accordance with 
 such requirements as the Indian tribe 
 shall prescribe in the trust agreement 
 entered into under subparagraph (C).
 (II) Inspection.--Before making a 
 payment for a project to a contractor 
 under subparagraph (C)(v), to ensure 
 completion of the project, the trustee 
 shall require an inspection of the 
 project by--
 (aa) a local financial 
 institution; or
 (bb) an independent 
 inspecting architect or 
 engineer.
 (ii) Contracts.--Each contract referred to 
 in paragraph (3) shall specify, or be 
 renegotiated to specify, that payments under 
 the contract shall be made in accordance with 
 this paragraph.
 (5) Payments of principal and interest.--
 (A) Principal.--
 (i) In general.--No principal payment on 
 any qualified tribal school modernization bond 
 shall be required under this subsection until 
 the final, stated date on which the bond 
 reaches maturity.
 (ii) Maturity; outstanding principal.--With 
 respect to a qualified tribal school 
 modernization bond issued under this 
 subsection--
 (I) the bond shall reach maturity 
 not later than 15 years after the date 
 of issuance of the bond; and
 (II) on the date on which the bond 
 reaches maturity, the entire 
 outstanding principal under the bond 
 shall become due and payable.
 (B) Interest.--There shall be awarded a tax credit 
 under section 1400M of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 in lieu of interest on a qualified tribal school 
 modernization bond issued under this subsection.
 (6) Bond guarantees.--
 (A) In general.--Payment of the principal portion 
 of a qualified tribal school modernization bond issued 
 under this subsection shall be guaranteed solely by 
 amounts deposited with each respective bond trustee as 
 described in paragraph (4)(C)(iii).
 (B) Establishment of account.--
 (i) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the Secretary may--
 (I) establish a tribal school 
 modernization escrow account; and
 (II) beginning in fiscal year 2005, 
 from amounts made available for school 
 replacement under the construction 
 account of the Bureau, deposit not more 
 than $30,000,000 for each fiscal year 
 into the escrow account.
 (ii) Transfers of excess proceeds.--Excess 
 proceeds held under any trust agreement that 
 are not needed for any of the purposes 
 described in clauses (iii) and (v) of paragraph 
 (4)(C) shall be transferred, from time to time, 
 by the trustee for deposit into the escrow 
 account.
 (iii) Payments.--The Secretary shall use 
 any amounts deposited in the escrow account 
 under clauses (i) and (ii)--
 (I) to make payments to trustees 
 appointed and acting in accordance with 
 paragraph (4); or
 (II) to make payments described in 
 paragraph (2)(D).
 (7) Limitations.--
 (A) Obligation to repay.--
 (i) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the principal amount on any 
 qualified tribal school modernization bond 
 issued under this subsection shall be repaid 
 only to the extent of any escrowed funds 
 provided under paragraph (4)(C)(iii).
 (ii) No guarantee.--No qualified tribal 
 school modernization bond issued by an Indian 
 tribe under this subsection shall be an 
 obligation of, and no payment of the principal 
 of such a bond shall be guaranteed by--
 (I) the United States;
 (II) the Indian tribe; or
 (III) the tribal school for which 
 the bond was issued.
 (B) Land and facilities.--No land or facility 
 purchased or improved with amounts derived from a 
 qualified tribal school modernization bond issued under 
 this subsection shall be mortgaged or used as 
 collateral for the bond.
 (8) Sale of bonds.--A qualified tribal school modernization 
 bond may be sold at a purchase price equal to, in excess of, or 
 at a discount from, the par amount of the bond.
 (9) Treatment of trust agreement earnings.--No amount 
 earned through the investment of funds under the control of a 
 trustee under any trust agreement described in paragraph (4) 
 shall be subject to Federal income taxation.
 (10) Investment of sinking funds.--A sinking fund 
 established for the purpose of the payment of principal on a 
 qualified tribal school modernization bond issued under this 
 subsection shall be invested in--
 (A) obligations issued by or guaranteed by the 
 United States; or
 (B) such other assets as the Secretary of the 
 Treasury may by regulation allow.
 (c) Expansion of Incentives for Tribal Schools.--Chapter 1 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter:

 ``Subchapter Z--Tribal School Modernization Provisions

``Sec. 1400M. Credit to holders of qualified tribal school 
 modernization bonds.

``SEC. 1400M. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF QUALIFIED TRIBAL SCHOOL 
 MODERNIZATION BONDS.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds a 
qualified tribal school modernization bond on a credit allowance date 
of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be 
allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such 
taxable year an amount equal to the sum of the credits determined under 
subsection (b) with respect to credit allowance dates during such year 
on which the taxpayer holds such bond.
 ``(b) Amount of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined 
 under this subsection with respect to any credit allowance date 
 for a qualified tribal school modernization bond is 25 percent 
 of the annual credit determined with respect to such bond.
 ``(2) Annual credit.--The annual credit determined with 
 respect to any qualified tribal school modernization bond is 
 the product of--
 ``(A) the applicable credit rate, multiplied by
 ``(B) the outstanding face amount of the bond.
 ``(3) Applicable credit rate.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable credit rate with respect to an issue is the 
 rate equal to an average market yield (as of the date of sale 
 of the issue) on outstanding long-term corporate obligations 
 (as determined by the Secretary).
 ``(4) Special rule for issuance and redemption.--In the 
 case of a bond which is issued during the 3-month period ending 
 on a credit allowance date, the amount of the credit determined 
 under this subsection with respect to such credit allowance 
 date shall be a ratable portion of the credit otherwise 
 determined based on the portion of the 3-month period during 
 which the bond is outstanding. A similar rule shall apply when 
 the bond is redeemed.
 ``(c) Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.--
 ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) 
 for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of--
 ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as 
 defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by 
 section 55, over
 ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under part 
 IV of subchapter A (other than subpart C thereof, 
 relating to refundable credits).
 ``(2) Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable 
 under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by 
 paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be 
 carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit 
 allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
 ``(d) Qualified Tribal School Modernization Bond; Other 
Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified tribal school modernization bond.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified tribal 
 school modernization bond' means, subject to 
 subparagraph (B), any bond issued as part of an issue 
 under section 616(b) of the Jumpstart Our Business 
 Strength (JOBS) Act, as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this section, if--
 ``(i) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of 
 such issue are to be used for the construction, 
 rehabilitation, or repair of a school facility 
 funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the 
 Department of the Interior or for the 
 acquisition of land on which such a facility is 
 to be constructed with part of the proceeds of 
 such issue,
 ``(ii) the bond is issued by an Indian 
 tribe,
 ``(iii) the issuer designates such bond for 
 purposes of this section, and
 ``(iv) the term of each bond which is part 
 of such issue does not exceed 15 years.
 ``(B) National limitation on amount of bonds 
 designated.--
 ``(i) National limitation.--There is a 
 national qualified tribal school modernization 
 bond limitation for each calendar year. Such 
 limitation is--
 ``(I) $200,000,000 for 2005,
 ``(II) $200,000,000 for 2006, and
 ``(III) zero after 2006.
 ``(ii) Allocation of limitation.--The 
 national qualified tribal school modernization 
 bond limitation shall be allocated to Indian 
 tribes by the Secretary of the Interior subject 
 to the provisions of section 616 of the 
 Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act, as 
 in effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 section.
 ``(iii) Designation subject to limitation 
 amount.--The maximum aggregate face amount of 
 bonds issued during any calendar year which may 
 be designated under subsection (d)(1) with 
 respect to any Indian tribe shall not exceed 
 the limitation amount allocated to such 
 government under clause (ii) for such calendar 
 year.
 ``(iv) Carryover of unused limitation.--If 
 for any calendar year--
 ``(I) the limitation amount under 
 this subparagraph, exceeds
 ``(II) the amount of qualified 
 tribal school modernization bonds 
 issued during such year,
 the limitation amount under this subparagraph 
 for the following calendar year shall be 
 increased by the amount of such excess. The 
 preceding sentence shall not apply if such 
 following calendar year is after 2012.
 ``(2) Credit allowance date.--The term `credit allowance 
 date' means--
 ``(A) March 15,
 ``(B) June 15,
 ``(C) September 15, and
 ``(D) December 15.
 Such term includes the last day on which the bond is 
 outstanding.
 ``(3) Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
 ``(4) Tribe.--The term `tribe' has the meaning given the 
 term `Indian tribal government' by section 7701(a)(40), 
 including the application of section 7871(d). Such term 
 includes any consortium of tribes approved by the Secretary of 
 the Interior.
 ``(e) Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the 
amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section 
(determined without regard to subsection (c)) and the amount so 
included shall be treated as interest income.
 ``(f) Bonds Held by Regulated Investment Companies.--If any 
qualified tribal school modernization bond is held by a regulated 
investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be 
allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by 
the Secretary.
 ``(g) Treatment for Estimated Tax Purposes.--Solely for purposes of 
sections 6654 and 6655, the credit allowed by this section to a 
taxpayer by reason of holding a qualified tribal school modernization 
bonds on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a 
payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.
 ``(h) Credit Treated as Allowed Under Part IV of Subchapter A.--For 
purposes of subtitle F, the credit allowed by this section shall be 
treated as a credit allowable under part IV of subchapter A of this 
chapter.
 ``(i) Reporting.--Issuers of qualified tribal school modernization 
bonds shall submit reports similar to the reports required under 
section 149(e).''.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 1 
is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Subchapter Z. Tribal school 
 modernization provisions.''.
 (e) Additional Provisions.--
 (1) Sovereign immunity.--This section and the amendments 
 made by this section shall not be construed to impact, limit, 
 or affect the sovereign immunity of the Federal Government or 
 any State or tribal government.
 (2) Application.--This section and the amendments made by 
 this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act with respect to bonds issued after December 31, 2004, 
 regardless of the status of regulations promulgated thereunder.

 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Depreciation

SEC. 621. SPECIAL PLACED IN SERVICE RULE FOR BONUS DEPRECIATION 
 PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(k)(2)(D) (relating to special rules) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) Syndication.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), if--
 ``(I) property is originally placed 
 in service after September 10, 2001, by 
 the lessor of such property,
 ``(II) such property is sold by 
 such lessor or any subsequent purchaser 
 within 3 months after the date so 
 placed in service (or, in the case of 
 multiple units of property subject to 
 the same lease, within 3 months after 
 the date the final unit is placed in 
 service, so long as the period between 
 the time the first unit is placed in 
 service and the time the last unit is 
 placed in service does not exceed 12 
 months), and
 ``(III) the user of such property 
 after the last sale during such 3-month 
 period remains the same as when such 
 property was originally placed in 
 service,
 such property shall be treated as originally 
 placed in service not earlier than the date of 
 such last sale, so long as no previous owner of 
 such property elects the application of this 
 subsection with respect to such property.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to sales after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 622. MODIFICATION OF DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCE FOR AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Aircraft Treated as Qualified Property.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 168(k) is amended 
 by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (F) as subparagraphs 
 (D) through (G), respectively, and by inserting after 
 subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Certain aircraft.--The term `qualified 
 property' includes property--
 ``(i) which meets the requirements of 
 clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (A),
 ``(ii) which is an aircraft which is not a 
 transportation property (as defined in 
 subparagraph (B)(iii)) other than for 
 agricultural or firefighting purposes,
 ``(iii) which is purchased and on which 
 such purchaser, at the time of the contract for 
 purchase, has made a nonrefundable deposit of 
 the lesser of--
 ``(I) 10 percent of the cost, or
 ``(II) $100,000, and
 ``(iv) which has--
 ``(I) an estimated production 
 period exceeding 4 months, and
 ``(II) a cost exceeding 
 $200,000.''.
 (2) Placed in service date.--Clause (iv) of section 
 168(k)(2)(A) is amended by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and 
 inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 168(k)(2)(B) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new clause:
 ``(iv) Application of subparagraph.--This 
 subparagraph shall not apply to any property 
 which is described in subparagraph (C).''.
 (2) Section 168(k)(4)(A)(ii) is amended by striking 
 ``paragraph (2)(C)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)(D)''.
 (3) Section 168(k)(4)(B)(iii) is amended by inserting ``and 
 paragraph (2)(C)'' after ``of this paragraph)''.
 (4) Section 168(k)(4)(C) is amended by striking 
 ``subparagraphs (B) and (D)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs 
 (B), (C), and (E)''.
 (5) Section 168(k)(4)(D) is amended by striking ``Paragraph 
 (2)(E)'' and inserting ``Paragraph (2)(F)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 623. MODIFICATION OF CLASS LIFE FOR CERTAIN TRACK FACILITIES.

 (a) 7-Year Property.--Subparagraph (C) of section 168(e)(3) 
(relating to classification of certain property) is amended by 
redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii) and by inserting after clause 
(i) the following new clause:
 ``(ii) any motorsports entertainment 
 complex, and''.
 (b) Definition.--Section 168(i) (relating to definitions and 
special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(15) Motorsports entertainment complex.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `motorsports 
 entertainment complex' means a racing track facility 
 which--
 ``(i) is permanently situated on land, and
 ``(ii) during the 36-month period following 
 the first day of the month in which the asset 
 is placed in service, is scheduled to host 1 or 
 more racing events for automobiles (of any 
 type), trucks, or motorcycles which are open to 
 the public for the price of admission.
 ``(B) Ancillary and support facilities.--Such term 
 shall include, if owned by the complex and provided for 
 the benefit of patrons of the complex--
 ``(i) ancillary grounds and facilities and 
 land improvements in support of the complex's 
 activities (including parking lots, sidewalks, 
 waterways, bridges, fences, and landscaping),
 ``(ii) support facilities (including food 
 and beverage retailing, souvenir vending, and 
 other nonlodging accommodations), and
 ``(iii) appurtenances associated with such 
 facilities and related attractions and 
 amusements (including ticket booths, race track 
 surfaces, suites and hospitality facilities, 
 grandstands and viewing structures, props, 
 walls, facilities that support the delivery of 
 entertainment services, other special purpose 
 structures, facades, shop interiors, and 
 buildings).
 ``(C) Exception.--Such term shall not include any 
 transportation equipment, administrative services 
 assets, warehouses, administrative buildings, hotels, 
 or motels.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to any property placed in service after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act and before January 1, 2008.
 (2) No inference.--Nothing in the amendments made by this 
 section shall be construed to affect the treatment of expenses 
 incurred on or before the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 624. MINIMUM TAX RELIEF FOR CERTAIN TAXPAYERS.

 (a) Election to Increase Minimum Tax Credit Limitation in Lieu of 
Bonus Depreciation.--
 (1) In general.--Section 53 (relating to credit for prior 
 year minimum tax liability) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(e) Additional Credit in Lieu of Bonus Depreciation.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of a corporation making an 
 election under this subsection for a taxable year, the 
 limitation under subsection (c) shall be increased by an amount 
 equal to 50 percent of the bonus depreciation amount.
 ``(2) Bonus depreciation amount.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the bonus depreciation amount for any taxable year is an 
 amount (not in excess of $25,000,000) equal to the product of--
 ``(A) 30 percent, and
 ``(B) the excess (if any) of--
 ``(i) the aggregate amount of depreciation 
 which would be determined under section 168 for 
 property placed in service during such taxable 
 year if no election under this subsection were 
 made, over
 ``(ii) the aggregate allowance for 
 depreciation allowable with respect to such 
 property placed in service for such taxable 
 year.
 ``(3) Aggregation rule.--All members of the same controlled 
 group of corporations shall be treated as 1 corporation for 
 purposes of this subsection.
 ``(4) Election.--Sections 168(k) (other than paragraph 
 (2)(F) thereof) shall not apply to any property placed in 
 service during a taxable year by a corporation making an 
 election under this subsection for such taxable year. An 
 election under this subsection may only be revoked with the 
 consent of the Secretary.
 ``(5) Credit refundable.--The aggregate increase in the 
 credit allowed by this section for any taxable year by reason 
 of this subsection shall for purposes of this title (other than 
 subsection (b)(2) of this section) be treated as a credit 
 allowed to the taxpayer under subpart C.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Subsection (k) of section 168 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Cross reference.--For an election to claim certain 
 minimum tax credits in lieu of the allowance determined under 
 this subsection, see section 53(e).''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2003.
 (b) Use of General Business Credits Against Alternative Minimum 
Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Section 38(c) (relating to limitations 
 based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph 
 (4) as paragraph (5) and by inserting after paragraph (3) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Special rule for 2004.--Notwithstanding the preceding 
 provisions of this paragraph, in the case of any taxable year 
 beginning in 2004, the credit allowed under subsection (a) 
 shall not exceed the greater of--
 ``(A) the amount determined under this subsection 
 without regard to this paragraph, or
 ``(B) 50 percent of the lesser of--
 ``(i) the amount which would be determined 
 under this subsection if the tentative minimum 
 tax were treated as being zero in applying 
 paragraph (1) to such credit, or
 ``(ii) the amount of the current year 
 business credit.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning in 2004.

 Subtitle D--Expansion of Business Credit

SEC. 631. NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT FOR NATIVE AMERICAN RESERVATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits) is amended by redesignating 
sections 45E and 45F as sections 45F and 45G, respectively, and by 
inserting after section 45D the following new section:

``SEC. 45E. NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT FOR NATIVE AMERICAN RESERVATIONS.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 38, in the case 
 of a taxpayer who holds a qualified equity investment on a 
 credit allowance date of such investment which occurs during 
 the taxable year, the Native American new markets tax credit 
 determined under this section for such taxable year is an 
 amount equal to the applicable percentage of the amount paid to 
 the reservation development entity for such investment at its 
 original issue.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable percentage is--
 ``(A) 5 percent with respect to the first 3 credit 
 allowance dates, and
 ``(B) 6 percent with respect to the remainder of 
 the credit allowance dates.
 ``(3) Credit allowance date.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the term `credit allowance date' means, with respect to 
 any qualified equity investment--
 ``(A) the date on which such investment is 
 initially made, and
 ``(B) each of the 6 anniversary dates of such date 
 thereafter.
 ``(b) Qualified Equity Investment.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified equity investment' 
 means any equity investment in a reservation development entity 
 if--
 ``(A) such investment is acquired by the taxpayer 
 at its original issue (directly or through an 
 underwriter) solely in exchange for cash,
 ``(B) substantially all of such cash is used by the 
 reservation development entity to make qualified low-
 income reservation investments, and
 ``(C) such investment is designated for purposes of 
 this section by the reservation development entity.
 Such term shall not include any equity investment issued by a 
 reservation development entity more than 5 years after the date 
 that such entity receives an allocation under subsection (f). 
 Any allocation not used within such 5-year period may be 
 reallocated by the Secretary under subsection (f).
 ``(2) Limitation.--The maximum amount of equity investments 
 issued by a reservation development entity which may be 
 designated under paragraph (1)(C) by such entity shall not 
 exceed the portion of the limitation amount allocated under 
 subsection (f) to such entity.
 ``(3) Safe harbor for determining use of cash.--The 
 requirement of paragraph (1)(B) shall be treated as met if at 
 least 85 percent of the aggregate gross assets of the 
 reservation development entity are invested in qualified low-
 income reservation investments.
 ``(4) Treatment of subsequent purchasers.--The term 
 `qualified equity investment' includes any equity investment 
 which would (but for paragraph (1)(A)) be a qualified equity 
 investment in the hands of the taxpayer if such investment was 
 a qualified equity investment in the hands of a prior holder.
 ``(5) Redemptions.--A rule similar to the rule of section 
 1202(c)(3) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
 ``(6) Equity investment.--The term `equity investment' 
 means--
 ``(A) any stock (other than nonqualified preferred 
 stock as defined in section 351(g)(2)) in an entity 
 which is a corporation, and
 ``(B) any capital interest in an entity which is a 
 partnership.
 ``(c) Reservation Development Entity.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `reservation development 
 entity' means any domestic corporation or partnership if--
 ``(A) the primary mission of the entity is serving, 
 or providing investment capital for, low-income 
 reservations,
 ``(B) the entity maintains accountability to 
 residents of low-income reservations through their 
 representation on any governing board of the entity or 
 on any advisory board to the entity, and
 ``(C) the entity is certified by the Secretary for 
 purposes of this section as being a reservation 
 development entity.
 ``(2) Exception.--For purposes of subparagraph (C) of 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall not certify an entity as a 
 reservation development entity if such entity is also certified 
 as a qualified community development entity under section 
 45D(c).
 ``(d) Qualified Low-Income Reservation Investments.--For purposes 
of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified low-income 
 reservation investment' means--
 ``(A) any capital or equity investment in, or loan 
 to, any qualified active low-income reservation 
 business,
 ``(B) the purchase from another reservation 
 development entity of any loan made by such entity 
 which is a qualified low-income reservation investment,
 ``(C) financial counseling and other services 
 specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary to 
 businesses located in, and residents of, low-income 
 reservations, and
 ``(D) any equity investment in, or loan to, any 
 reservation development entity.
 ``(2) Qualified active low-income reservation business.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the term `qualified active low-income reservation 
 business' means, with respect to any taxable year, any 
 corporation (including a nonprofit corporation) or 
 partnership if for such year--
 ``(i) at least 50 percent of the total 
 gross income of such entity is derived from the 
 active conduct of a qualified business within 
 any low-income reservation,
 ``(ii) a substantial portion of the use of 
 the tangible property of such entity (whether 
 owned or leased) is within any low-income 
 reservation,
 ``(iii) a substantial portion of the 
 services performed for such entity by its 
 employees are performed in any low-income 
 reservation,
 ``(iv) less than 5 percent of the average 
 of the aggregate unadjusted bases of the 
 property of such entity is attributable to 
 collectibles (as defined in section 408(m)(2)) 
 other than collectibles that are held primarily 
 for sale to customers in the ordinary course of 
 such business, and
 ``(v) less than 5 percent of the average of 
 the aggregate unadjusted bases of the property 
 of such entity is attributable to nonqualified 
 financial property (as defined in section 
 1397C(e)).
 ``(B) Proprietorship.--Such term shall include any 
 business carried on by an individual as a proprietor if 
 such business would meet the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A) were it incorporated.
 ``(C) Portions of business may be qualified active 
 low-income reservation business.--The term `qualified 
 active low-income reservation business' includes any 
 trades or businesses which would qualify as a qualified 
 active low-income reservation business if such trades 
 or businesses were separately incorporated.
 ``(3) Qualified business.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `qualified business' has the meaning given to such 
 term by section 45D(d)(3).
 ``(e) Low-Income Reservation.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `low-income reservation' means any Indian reservation (as defined 
in section 168(j)(6)) which has a poverty rate of at least 40 percent.
 ``(f) National Limitation on Amount of Investments Designated.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is a Native American new markets 
 tax credit limitation of $50,000,000 for each of calendar years 
 2004 through 2007.
 ``(2) Allocation of limitation.--The limitation under 
 paragraph (1) shall be allocated by the Secretary among 
 reservation development entities selected by the Secretary. In 
 making allocations under the preceding sentence, the Secretary 
 shall give priority to any entity--
 ``(A) with a record of having successfully provided 
 capital or technical assistance to disadvantaged 
 businesses or communities, or
 ``(B) which intends to satisfy the requirement 
 under subsection (b)(1)(B) by making qualified low-
 income reservation investments in 1 or more businesses 
 in which persons unrelated to such entity (within the 
 meaning of section 267(b) or 707(b)(1)) hold the 
 majority equity interest.
 ``(3) Carryover of unused limitation.--If the Native 
 American new markets tax credit limitation for any calendar 
 year exceeds the aggregate amount allocated under paragraph (2) 
 for such year, such limitation for the succeeding calendar year 
 shall be increased by the amount of such excess. No amount may 
 be carried under the preceding sentence to any calendar year 
 after 2014.
 ``(g) Recapture of Credit in Certain Cases.--
 ``(1) In general.--If, at any time during the 7-year period 
 beginning on the date of the original issue of a qualified 
 equity investment in a reservation development entity, there is 
 a recapture event with respect to such investment, then the tax 
 imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which such 
 event occurs shall be increased by the credit recapture amount.
 ``(2) Credit recapture amount.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the credit recapture amount is an amount equal to the sum 
 of--
 ``(A) the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed 
 to the taxpayer under section 38 for all prior taxable 
 years which would have resulted if no credit had been 
 determined under this section with respect to such 
 investment, plus
 ``(B) interest at the underpayment rate established 
 under section 6621 on the amount determined under 
 subparagraph (A) for each prior taxable year for the 
 period beginning on the due date for filing the return 
 for the prior taxable year involved.
 No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for interest 
 described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(3) Recapture event.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 there is a recapture event with respect to an equity investment 
 in a reservation development entity if--
 ``(A) such entity ceases to be a reservation 
 development entity,
 ``(B) the proceeds of the investment cease to be 
 used as required of subsection (b)(1)(B), or
 ``(C) such investment is redeemed by such entity.
 ``(4) Special rules.--
 ``(A) Tax benefit rule.--The tax for the taxable 
 year shall be increased under paragraph (1) only with 
 respect to credits allowed by reason of this section 
 which were used to reduce tax liability. In the case of 
 credits not so used to reduce tax liability, the 
 carryforwards and carrybacks under section 39 shall be 
 appropriately adjusted.
 ``(B) No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax 
 under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax 
 imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the 
 amount of any credit under this chapter or for purposes 
 of section 55.
 ``(h) Basis Reduction.--The basis of any qualified equity 
investment shall be reduced by the amount of any credit determined 
under this section with respect to such investment. This subsection 
shall not apply for purposes of sections 1202, 1400B, and 1400F.
 ``(i) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be appropriate to carry out this section, including 
regulations--
 ``(1) which limit the credit for investments which are 
 directly or indirectly subsidized by other Federal tax benefits 
 (including the credit under section 42 and the exclusion from 
 gross income under section 103),
 ``(2) which prevent the abuse of the purposes of this 
 section,
 ``(3) which provide rules for determining whether the 
 requirement of subsection (b)(1)(B) is treated as met,
 ``(4) which impose appropriate reporting requirements, and
 ``(5) which apply the provisions of this section to newly 
 formed entities.''.
 (b) Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 38 is amended by 
 redesignating paragraphs (14) and (15) as paragraphs (15) and 
 (16), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (13) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(14) the Native American new markets tax credit 
 determined under section 45E(a),''.
 (2) Limitation on carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 
 is amended by redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (11) 
 and by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(10) No carryback of native american new markets tax 
 credit before january 1, 2004.--No portion of the unused 
 business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to 
 the credit under section 45E may be carried back to a taxable 
 year ending before January 1, 2004.''.
 (c) Deduction for Unused Credit.--Subsection (c) of section 196 is 
amended by redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (11), by striking 
``and'' at the end of paragraph (9), and by inserting after paragraph 
(9) the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) the Native American new markets tax credit 
 determined under section 45E(a), and''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 38(b)(15), as redesignated by subsection 
 (b)(1), is amended--
 (A) by striking ``45E(c)'' and inserting 
 ``45F(c)'', and
 (B) by striking ``45E(a)'' and inserting 
 ``45F(a)''.
 (2) Section 38(b)(16), as redesignated by subsection 
 (b)(1), is amended by striking ``45F(a)'' and inserting 
 ``45G(a)''.
 (3) Section 39(d)(11), as redesignated by subsection 
 (b)(2), is amended by striking ``section 45E'' and inserting 
 ``section 45F''.
 (4) Section 196(c)(11), as redesignated by subsection (c), 
 is amended by striking ``45E(a)'' and inserting ``45F(a)''.
 (5) Section 1016(a)(28) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``under section 45F'' and inserting 
 ``under section 45G'', and
 (B) by striking ``section 45F(f)(1)'' and inserting 
 ``section 45G(f)(1)''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by striking the items 
relating to sections 45E and 45F and inserting the following:

 ``Sec. 45E. New markets tax credit for 
 Native American reservations.
 ``Sec. 45F. Small employer pension plan 
 startup costs.
 ``Sec. 45G. Employer-provided child care 
 credit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to investments made after December 31, 2003.
 (f) Guidance on Allocation of National Limitation.--Not later than 
120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate shall issue guidance which 
specifies--
 (1) how entities shall apply for an allocation under 
 section 45E(f)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as 
 added by this section;
 (2) the competitive procedure through which such 
 allocations are made; and
 (3) the actions that such Secretary or delegate shall take 
 to ensure that such allocations are properly made to 
 appropriate entities.
 (g) Audit and Report.--Not later than January 31 of 2007 and 2010, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall, pursuant to an 
audit of the Native American new markets tax credit program established 
under section 45E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by 
subsection (a)), report to Congress on such program, including all 
reservation development entities that receive an allocation under the 
Native American new markets credit under such section.
 (h) Grants in Coordination With Credit.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury is 
 authorized to award a grant of not more than $1,000,000 to the 
 First Nations Oweesta Corporation.
 (2) Use of funds.--The grant awarded under paragraph (1) 
 may be used--
 (A) to enhance the capacity of people living on 
 low-income reservations (within the meaning of section 
 45E(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added 
 by this section) to access, apply, control, create, 
 leverage, utilize, and retain the financial benefits to 
 such low-income reservations which are attributable to 
 qualified low-income reservation investments (within 
 the meaning of section 45E(d) of such Code), and
 (B) to provide access to appropriate financial 
 capital for the development of such low-income 
 reservations.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated $1,000,000 for fiscal years 2004 through 
 2014 to carry out the provisions of this subsection.

SEC. 632. READY RESERVE-NATIONAL GUARD EMPLOYEE CREDIT AND READY 
 RESERVE-NATIONAL GUARD REPLACEMENT EMPLOYEE CREDIT.

 (a) Ready Reserve-National Guard Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 (relating to business-related credits), as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 45H. READY RESERVE-NATIONAL GUARD EMPLOYEE CREDIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the Ready Reserve-
National Guard employee credit determined under this section for any 
taxable year with respect to each Ready Reserve-National Guard employee 
of an employer is an amount equal to 50 percent of the lesser of--
 ``(1) the actual compensation amount with respect to such 
 employee for such taxable year, or
 ``(2) $30,000.
 ``(b) Definition of Actual Compensation Amount.--For purposes of 
this section, the term `actual compensation amount' means the amount of 
compensation paid or incurred by an employer with respect to a Ready 
Reserve-National Guard employee on any day when the employee was absent 
from employment for the purpose of performing qualified active duty.
 ``(c) Limitations.--No credit shall be allowed with respect to any 
day that a Ready Reserve-National Guard employee who performs qualified 
active duty was not scheduled to work (for reason other than to 
participate in qualified active duty).
 ``(d) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Qualified active duty.--The term `qualified active 
 duty' means--
 ``(A) active duty, other than the training duty 
 specified in section 10147 of title 10, United States 
 Code (relating to training requirements for the Ready 
 Reserve), or section 502(a) of title 32, United States 
 Code (relating to required drills and field exercises 
 for the National Guard), in connection with which an 
 employee is entitled to reemployment rights and other 
 benefits or to a leave of absence from employment under 
 chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code, and
 ``(B) hospitalization incident to such duty.
 ``(2) Compensation.--The term `compensation' means any 
 remuneration for employment, whether in cash or in kind, which 
 is paid or incurred by a taxpayer and which is deductible from 
 the taxpayer's gross income under section 162(a)(1).
 ``(3) Ready reserve-national guard employee.--The term 
 `Ready Reserve-National Guard employee' means an employee who 
 is a member of the Ready Reserve of a reserve component of an 
 Armed Force of the United States as described in sections 10142 
 and 10101 of title 10, United States Code.
 ``(4) Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules 
 of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(e) Portion of Credit Refundable.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an employer of a 
 qualified first responder, the aggregate credits allowed to a 
 taxpayer under subpart C shall be increased by the lesser of--
 ``(A) the credit which would be allowed under this 
 section without regard to this subsection and the 
 limitation under section 38(c), or
 ``(B) the amount by which the aggregate amount of 
 credits allowed by this subpart (determined without 
 regard to this subsection) would increase if the 
 limitation imposed by section 38(c) for any taxable 
 year were increased by the amount of employer payroll 
 taxes imposed on the taxpayer during the calendar year 
 in which the taxable year begins.
 The amount of the credit allowed under this subsection shall 
 not be treated as a credit allowed under this subpart and shall 
 reduce the amount of the credit otherwise allowable under 
 subsection (a) without regard to section 38(c).
 ``(2) Employer payroll taxes.--For purposes of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `employer payroll 
 taxes' means the taxes imposed by--
 ``(i) section 3111(b), and
 ``(ii) sections 3211(a) and 3221(a) 
 (determined at a rate equal to the rate under 
 section 3111(b)).
 ``(B) Special rule.--A rule similar to the rule of 
 section 24(d)(2)(C) shall apply for purposes of 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) Qualified first responder.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `qualified first responder' means any 
 person who is--
 ``(A) employed as a law enforcement official, a 
 firefighter, or a paramedic, and
 ``(B) a Ready Reserve-National Guard employee.''.
 (2) Credit to be part of general business credit.--
 Subsection (b) of section 38 (relating to general business 
 credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking 
 ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (15), by striking the period 
 at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting ``, plus'', and by 
 adding at the end the following:
 ``(17) the Ready Reserve-National Guard employee credit 
 determined under section 45H(a).''.
 (3) Denial of double benefit.--Section 280C(a) (relating to 
 rule for employment credits) is amended by inserting 
 ``45H(a),'' after ``45A(a),''.
 (4) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for 
 subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended 
 by this Act, is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
 section 45G the following:

 ``Sec. 45H. Ready Reserve-National Guard 
 employee credit.''.
 (5) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after September 30, 
 2004, in taxable years ending after such date.
 (b) Ready Reserve-National Guard Replacement Employee Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.), as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by adding after section 30C the following 
 new section:

``SEC. 30D. READY RESERVE-NATIONAL GUARD REPLACEMENT EMPLOYEE CREDIT.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, 
 there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by 
 this chapter for the taxable year the sum of the employment 
 credits for each qualified replacement employee under this 
 section.
 ``(2) Employment credit.--The employment credit with 
 respect to a qualified replacement employee of the taxpayer for 
 any taxable year is equal to 50 percent of the lesser of--
 ``(A) the individual's qualified compensation 
 attributable to service rendered as a qualified 
 replacement employee, or
 ``(B) $12,000.
 ``(b) Qualified Compensation.--The term `qualified compensation' 
means--
 ``(1) compensation which is normally contingent on the 
 qualified replacement employee's presence for work and which is 
 deductible from the taxpayer's gross income under section 
 162(a)(1),
 ``(2) compensation which is not characterized by the 
 taxpayer as vacation or holiday pay, or as sick leave or pay, 
 or as any other form of pay for a nonspecific leave of absence, 
 and
 ``(3) group health plan costs (if any) with respect to the 
 qualified replacement employee.
 ``(c) Qualified Replacement Employee.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified replacement 
 employee' means an individual who is hired to replace a Ready 
 Reserve-National Guard employee or a Ready Reserve-National 
 Guard self-employed taxpayer, but only with respect to the 
 period during which such Ready Reserve-National Guard employee 
 or Ready Reserve-National Guard self-employed taxpayer 
 participates in qualified active duty, including time spent in 
 travel status.
 ``(2) Ready reserve-national guard employee.--The term 
 `Ready Reserve-National Guard employee' has the meaning given 
 such term by section 45H(d)(3).
 ``(3) Ready reserve-national guard self-employed 
 taxpayer.--The term `Ready Reserve-National Guard self-employed 
 taxpayer' means a taxpayer who--
 ``(A) has net earnings from self-employment (as 
 defined in section 1402(a)) for the taxable year, and
 ``(B) is a member of the Ready Reserve of a reserve 
 component of an Armed Force of the United States as 
 described in section 10142 and 10101 of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 ``(d) Coordination With Other Credits.--The amount of credit 
otherwise allowable under sections 51(a) and 1396(a) with respect to 
any employee shall be reduced by the credit allowed by this section 
with respect to such employee.
 ``(e) Limitations.--
 ``(1) Application with other credits.--The credit allowed 
 under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the 
 excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced 
 by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and 
 sections 27, 29, and 30, over
 ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable 
 year.
 ``(2) Disallowance for failure to comply with employment or 
 reemployment rights of members of the reserve components of the 
 armed forces of the united states.--No credit shall be allowed 
 under subsection (a) to a taxpayer for--
 ``(A) any taxable year, beginning after the date of 
 the enactment of this section, in which the taxpayer is 
 under a final order, judgment, or other process issued 
 or required by a district court of the United States 
 under section 4323 of title 38 of the United States 
 Code with respect to a violation of chapter 43 of such 
 title, and
 ``(B) the 2 succeeding taxable years.
 ``(f) General Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Eligible taxpayer.--The term `eligible taxpayer' 
 means a small business employer or a Ready Reserve-National 
 Guard self-employed taxpayer.
 ``(2) Small business employer.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `small business 
 employer' means, with respect to any taxable year, any 
 employer who employed an average of 50 or fewer 
 employees on business days during such taxable year.
 ``(B) Controlled groups.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), all persons treated as a single 
 employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of 
 section 414 shall be treated as a single employer.
 ``(3) Qualified active duty.--The term `qualified active 
 duty' has the meaning given such term by section 45H(d)(1).
 ``(4) Special rules for certain manufacturers.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of any qualified 
 manufacturer--
 ``(i) subsection (a)(2)(B) shall be applied 
 by substituting `$20,000' for `$12,000', and
 ``(ii) paragraph (2)(A) of this subsection 
 shall be applied by substituting `100' for 
 `50'.
 ``(B) Qualified manufacturer.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `qualified manufacturer' means any 
 person if--
 ``(i) the primary business of such person 
 is classified in sector 31, 32, or 33 of the 
 North American Industrial Classification 
 System, and
 ``(ii) all of such person's facilities 
 which are used for production in such business 
 are located in the United States.
 ``(5) Carryback and carryforward allowed.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) for a taxable year exceeds the amount of 
 the limitation under subsection (e)(1) for such taxable 
 year (in this paragraph referred to as the `unused 
 credit year'), such excess shall be a credit carryback 
 to each of the 3 taxable years preceding the unused 
 credit year and a credit carryforward to each of the 20 
 taxable years following the unused credit year.
 ``(B) Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 
 39 shall apply with respect to the credit carryback and 
 credit carryforward under subparagraph (A).
 ``(6) Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules 
 of subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply.''.
 (2) No deduction for compensation taken into account for 
 credit.--Section 280C(a) (relating to rule for employment 
 credits), as amended by this Act, is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``or compensation'' after 
 ``salaries'', and
 (B) by inserting ``30D,'' before ``45A(a),''.
 (3) Conforming amendment.--Section 55(c)(2), as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by inserting ``30D(e)(1),'' after 
 ``30C(e),''.
 (4) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subpart 
 B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this 
 Act, is amended by adding after the item relating to section 
 30C the following new item:

 ``Sec. 30D. Credit for replacement of 
 activated military 
 reservists.''.
 (5) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after September 30, 
 2004, in taxable years ending after such date.
 (c) Application of Annual Exclusion Limit Under Section 911 to 
Housing Costs.--
 (1) In general.--Section 911(c) (relating to housing cost 
 amount) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) Limit on exclusion for employer provided housing 
 costs.--The housing cost amount for any individual for any 
 taxable year attributable to employer provided amounts shall 
 not exceed the excess (if any) of--
 ``(A) the product of--
 ``(i) the exclusion amount determined under 
 subsection (b)(2)(D) for the taxable year, and
 ``(ii) a fraction equal to the number of 
 days of the taxable year within the applicable 
 period described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 subsection (d)(1) divided by the number of days 
 in the taxable year, over
 ``(B) the foreign earned income of the individual 
 excluded under subsection (a)(1) for the taxable 
 year.''
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 911(c)(1) is amended by 
 striking ``The'' and inserting ``Except as provided in 
 paragraph (4), the''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 633. RURAL INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 42A. RURAL INVESTMENT CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the 
rural investment credit determined under this section for any taxable 
year in the credit period shall be an amount equal to the applicable 
percentage of the eligible basis of each qualified rural investment 
building.
 ``(b) Applicable Percentage: 70 Percent Present Value Credit for 
New Buildings; 30 Percent Present Value Credit for Existing 
Buildings.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `applicable percentage' means 
 the appropriate percentage prescribed by the Secretary for the 
 earlier of--
 ``(A) the first month of the credit period with 
 respect to a rural investment building, or
 ``(B) at the election of the taxpayer, the month in 
 which the taxpayer and the rural investment credit 
 agency enter into an agreement with respect to such 
 building (which is binding on such agency, the 
 taxpayer, and all successors in interest) as to the 
 rural investment credit dollar amount to be allocated 
 to such building.
 A month may be elected under subparagraph (B) only if the 
 election is made not later than the 5th day after the close of 
 such month. Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
 ``(2) Method of prescribing percentages.--The percentages 
 prescribed by the Secretary for any month shall be percentages 
 which will yield over a 10-year period amounts of credit under 
 subsection (a) which have a present value equal to--
 ``(A) 70 percent of the eligible basis of a new 
 building, and
 ``(B) 30 percent of the eligible basis of an 
 existing building.
 ``(3) Method of discounting.--The present value under 
 paragraph (2) shall be determined--
 ``(A) as of the last day of the 1st year of the 10-
 year period referred to in paragraph (2),
 ``(B) by using a discount rate equal to 72 percent 
 of the average of the annual Federal mid-term rate and 
 the annual Federal long-term rate applicable under 
 section 1274(d)(1) to the month applicable under 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) and compounded 
 annually, and
 ``(C) by assuming that the credit allowable under 
 this section for any year is received on the last day 
 of such year.
 ``(c) Eligible Basis; Qualified Rural Investment Building.--For 
purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Eligible basis.--
 ``(A) In general.--The eligible basis of any 
 qualified rural investment building for any taxable 
 year shall be determined under rules similar to the 
 rules under section 42(d), except that--
 ``(i) the determination of the adjusted 
 basis of any building shall be made as of the 
 beginning of the credit period, and
 ``(ii) such basis shall include development 
 costs properly attributable to such building.
 ``(B) Development costs.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the term `development costs' 
 includes--
 ``(i) site preparation costs,
 ``(ii) State and local impact fees,
 ``(iii) reasonable development costs,
 ``(iv) professional fees related to basis 
 items,
 ``(v) construction financing costs related 
 to basis items other than land, and
 ``(vi) on-site and adjacent improvements 
 required by State and local governments.
 ``(2) Qualified rural investment building.--The term 
 `qualified rural investment building' means any building which 
 is part of a qualified rural investment project at all times 
 during the period--
 ``(A) beginning on the 1st day in the compliance 
 period on which such building is part of such an 
 investment project, and
 ``(B) ending on the last day of the compliance 
 period with respect to such building.
 ``(d) Rehabilitation Expenditures Treated as Separate New 
Building.--Rehabilitation expenditures paid or incurred by the taxpayer 
with respect to any building shall be treated for purposes of this 
section as a separate new building under the rules of section 42(e).
 ``(e) Definition and Special Rules Relating to Credit Period.--
 ``(1) Credit period defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term `credit period' means, with respect to any building, 
 the period of 10 taxable years beginning with the taxable year 
 in which the building is first placed in service.
 ``(2) Special rule for 1st year of credit period.--
 ``(A) In general.--The credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) with respect to any building for the 1st 
 taxable year of the credit period shall be determined 
 by multiplying such credit by the fraction--
 ``(i) the numerator of which is the number 
 of full months of such year during which such 
 building was in service, and
 ``(ii) the denominator of which is 12.
 ``(B) Disallowed 1st year credit allowed in 11th 
 year.--Any reduction by reason of subparagraph (A) in 
 the credit allowable (without regard to subparagraph 
 (A)) for the 1st taxable year of the credit period 
 shall be allowable under subsection (a) for the 1st 
 taxable year following the credit period.
 ``(3) Credit period for existing buildings not to begin 
 before rehabilitation credit allowed.--The credit period for an 
 existing building shall not begin before the 1st taxable year 
 of the credit period for rehabilitation expenditures with 
 respect to the building.
 ``(f) Qualified Rural Investment Project; Qualifying County.--For 
purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified rural investment project.--The term 
 `qualified rural investment project' means any investment 
 project of 1 or more qualified rural investment buildings 
 located in a qualifying county (and, if necessary to the 
 project, any contiguous county) and selected by the State 
 according to its qualified rural investment plan.
 ``(2) Qualifying county.--The term `qualifying county' 
 means any county which--
 ``(A) is outside a metropolitan statistical area 
 (defined as such by the Office of Management and 
 Budget), and
 ``(B) during the 20-year period ending with the 
 year in which the most recent census was conducted, has 
 a net out-migration of inhabitants from the county of 
 at least 10 percent of the population of the county at 
 the beginning of such period.
 ``(g) Limitation on Aggregate Credit Allowable With Respect to 
Investment Projects Located in a State.--
 ``(1) Credit may not exceed credit amount allocated to 
 building.--The amount of the credit determined under this 
 section for any taxable year with respect to any building shall 
 not exceed the rural investment credit dollar amount allocated 
 to such building under rules similar to the rules of section 
 42(h)(1).
 ``(2) Allocated credit amount to apply to all taxable years 
 ending during or after credit allocation year.--Any rural 
 investment credit dollar amount allocated to any building for 
 any calendar year--
 ``(A) shall apply to such building for all taxable 
 years in the credit period ending during or after such 
 calendar year, and
 ``(B) shall reduce the aggregate rural investment 
 credit dollar amount of the allocating agency only for 
 such calendar year.
 ``(3) Rural investment credit dollar amount for agencies.--
 ``(A) In general.--The aggregate rural investment 
 credit dollar amount which a rural investment credit 
 agency may allocate for any calendar year is the 
 portion of the State rural investment credit ceiling 
 allocated under this paragraph for such calendar year 
 to such agency.
 ``(B) State ceiling initially allocated to state 
 rural investment credit agencies.--Except as provided 
 in subparagraphs (D) and (E), the State rural 
 investment credit ceiling for each calendar year shall 
 be allocated to the rural investment credit agency of 
 such State. If there is more than 1 rural investment 
 credit agency of a State, all such agencies shall be 
 treated as a single agency.
 ``(C) State rural investment credit ceiling.--The 
 State rural investment credit ceiling applicable to any 
 State and any calendar year shall be an amount equal to 
 the sum of--
 ``(i) the unused State rural investment 
 credit ceiling (if any) of such State for the 
 preceding calendar year,
 ``(ii) $185,000 for each qualifying county 
 in the State,
 ``(iii) the amount of State rural 
 investment credit ceiling returned in the 
 calendar year, plus
 ``(iv) the amount (if any) allocated under 
 subparagraph (D) to such State by the 
 Secretary.
 For purposes of clause (i), the unused State rural 
 investment credit ceiling for any calendar year is the 
 excess (if any) of the sum of the amounts described in 
 clauses (ii) through (iv) over the aggregate rural 
 investment credit dollar amount allocated for such 
 year. For purposes of clause (iii), the amount of State 
 rural investment credit ceiling returned in the 
 calendar year equals the rural investment credit dollar 
 amount previously allocated within the State to any 
 investment project which fails to meet the 10 percent 
 test under section 42(h)(1)(E)(ii) on a date after the 
 close of the calendar year in which the allocation was 
 made or which does not become a qualified rural 
 investment project within the period required by this 
 section or the terms of the allocation or to any 
 investment project with respect to which an allocation 
 is canceled by mutual consent of the rural investment 
 credit agency and the allocation recipient.
 ``(D) Unused rural investment credit carryovers 
 allocated among certain states.--
 ``(i) In general.--The unused rural 
 investment credit carryover of a State for any 
 calendar year shall be assigned to the 
 Secretary for allocation among qualified States 
 for the succeeding calendar year.
 ``(ii) Unused rural investment credit 
 carryover.--For purposes of this subparagraph, 
 the unused rural investment credit carryover of 
 a State for any calendar year is the excess (if 
 any) of the unused State rural investment 
 credit ceiling for such year (as defined in 
 subparagraph (C)(i)) over the excess (if any) 
 of--
 ``(I) the unused State rural 
 investment credit ceiling for the year 
 preceding such year, over
 ``(II) the aggregate rural 
 investment credit dollar amount 
 allocated for such year.
 ``(iii) Formula for allocation of unused 
 rural investment credit carryovers among 
 qualified states.--The amount allocated under 
 this subparagraph to a qualified State for any 
 calendar year shall be the amount determined by 
 the Secretary to bear the same ratio to the 
 aggregate unused rural investment credit 
 carryovers of all States for the preceding 
 calendar year as such State's population for 
 the calendar year bears to the population of 
 all qualified States for the calendar year. For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, population 
 shall be determined in accordance with section 
 146(j).
 ``(iv) Qualified state.--For purposes of 
 this subparagraph, the term `qualified State' 
 means, with respect to a calendar year, any 
 State--
 ``(I) which allocated its entire 
 State rural investment credit ceiling 
 for the preceding calendar year, and
 ``(II) for which a request is made 
 (not later than May 1 of the calendar 
 year) to receive an allocation under 
 clause (iii).
 ``(E) State may provide for different allocation.--
 Rules similar to the rules of section 146(e) (other 
 than paragraph (2)(B) thereof) shall apply for purposes 
 of this paragraph.
 ``(F) Population.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 population shall be determined in accordance with 
 section 146(j).
 ``(G) Cost-of-living adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of a 
 calendar year after 2005, the $185,000 amount 
 in subparagraph (C) shall be increased by an 
 amount equal to--
 ``(I) such dollar amount, 
 multiplied by
 ``(II) the cost-of-living 
 adjustment determined under section 
 1(f)(3) for such calendar year by 
 substituting `calendar year 2004' for 
 `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph 
 (B) thereof.
 ``(ii) Rounding.--Any increase under clause 
 (i) which is not a multiple of $5,000 shall be 
 rounded to the next lowest multiple of $5,000.
 ``(4) Portion of state ceiling set-aside for certain 
 investment projects involving qualified nonprofit 
 organizations.--
 ``(A) In general.--At least 10 percent of the State 
 rural investment credit ceiling for any State for any 
 calendar year shall be allocated to qualified rural 
 investment projects described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Investment projects involving qualified 
 nonprofit organizations.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), a qualified rural investment project is described 
 in this subparagraph if a qualified nonprofit 
 organization is to materially participate (within the 
 meaning of section 469(h)) in the development and 
 operation of the investment project throughout the 
 compliance period.
 ``(C) Qualified nonprofit organization.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified 
 nonprofit organization' means any organization if--
 ``(i) such organization is described in any 
 paragraph of section 501(c) and is exempt from 
 tax under section 501(a),
 ``(ii) such organization is determined by 
 the State rural investment credit agency not to 
 be affiliated with or controlled by a for-
 profit organization; and
 ``(iii) 1 of the exempt purposes of such 
 organization includes the fostering of rural 
 investment.
 ``(D) Treatment of certain subsidiaries.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, a qualified nonprofit organization 
 shall be treated as satisfying the ownership 
 and material participation test of subparagraph 
 (B) if any qualified corporation in which such 
 organization holds stock satisfies such test.
 ``(ii) Qualified corporation.--For purposes 
 of clause (i), the term `qualified corporation' 
 means any corporation if 100 percent of the 
 stock of such corporation is held by 1 or more 
 qualified nonprofit organizations at all times 
 during the period such corporation is in 
 existence.
 ``(E) State may not override set-aside.--Nothing in 
 subparagraph (F) of paragraph (3) shall be construed to 
 permit a State not to comply with subparagraph (A) of 
 this paragraph.
 ``(F) Credits for qualified nonprofit 
 organizations.--
 ``(i) Allowance of credit.--Any credit 
 which would be allowable under subsection (a) 
 with respect to a qualified rural investment 
 building of a qualified nonprofit organization 
 if such organization were not exempt from tax 
 under this chapter shall be treated as a credit 
 allowable under subpart C to such organization.
 ``(ii) Use of credit.--A qualified 
 nonprofit organization may assign, trade, sell, 
 or otherwise transfer any credit allowable to 
 such organization under subparagraph (A) to any 
 taxpayer.
 ``(iii) Credit not income.--A transfer 
 under subparagraph (B) of any credit allowable 
 under subparagraph (A) shall not result in 
 income for purposes of section 511.
 ``(5) Special rules.--
 ``(A) Building must be located within jurisdiction 
 of credit agency.--A rural investment credit agency may 
 allocate its aggregate rural investment credit dollar 
 amount only to buildings located in the jurisdiction of 
 the governmental unit of which such agency is a part.
 ``(B) Agency allocations in excess of limit.--If 
 the aggregate rural investment credit dollar amounts 
 allocated by a rural investment credit agency for any 
 calendar year exceed the portion of the State rural 
 investment credit ceiling allocated to such agency for 
 such calendar year, the rural investment credit dollar 
 amounts so allocated shall be reduced (to the extent of 
 such excess) for buildings in the reverse of the order 
 in which the allocations of such amounts were made.
 ``(C) Credit reduced if allocated credit dollar 
 amount is less than credit which would be allowable 
 without regard to sales convention, etc.--
 ``(i) In general.--The amount of the credit 
 determined under this section with respect to 
 any building shall not exceed the clause (ii) 
 percentage of the amount of the credit which 
 would (but for this subparagraph) be determined 
 under this section with respect to such 
 building.
 ``(ii) Determination of percentage.--For 
 purposes of clause (i), the clause (ii) 
 percentage with respect to any building is the 
 percentage which--
 ``(I) the rural investment credit 
 dollar amount allocated to such 
 building bears to
 ``(II) the credit amount determined 
 in accordance with clause (iii).
 ``(iii) Determination of credit amount.--
 The credit amount determined in accordance with 
 this clause is the amount of the credit which 
 would (but for this subparagraph) be determined 
 under this section with respect to the building 
 if this section were applied without regard to 
 paragraph (2)(A) of subsection (e).
 ``(D) Rural investment credit agency to specify 
 applicable percentage and maximum eligible basis.--In 
 allocating a rural investment credit dollar amount to 
 any building, the rural investment credit agency shall 
 specify the applicable percentage and the maximum 
 eligible basis which may be taken into account under 
 this section with respect to such building. The 
 applicable percentage and maximum eligible basis so 
 specified shall not exceed the applicable percentage 
 and eligible basis determined under this section 
 without regard to this subsection.
 ``(6) Other definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Rural investment credit agency.--The term 
 `rural investment credit agency' means any agency 
 authorized to carry out this subsection.
 ``(B) Possessions treated as States.--The term 
 `State' includes a possession of the United States.
 ``(7) Portion of state ceiling set-aside for qualified 
 rural small business investment credits.--Not more than 10 
 percent of the State rural investment credit ceiling for any 
 State for any calendar year may be allocated to qualified rural 
 small business investment credits under section 42B.
 ``(h) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Compliance period.--The term `compliance period' 
 means, with respect to any building, the period of 10 taxable 
 years beginning with the 1st taxable year of the credit period 
 with respect thereto.
 ``(2) New building.--The term `new building' means a 
 building the original use of which begins with the taxpayer.
 ``(3) Existing building.--The term `existing building' 
 means any building which is not a new building.
 ``(4) Application to estates and trusts.--In the case of an 
 estate or trust, the amount of the credit determined under 
 subsection (a) and any increase in tax under subsection (i) 
 shall be apportioned between the estate or trust and the 
 beneficiaries on the basis of the income of the estate or trust 
 allocable to each.
 ``(i) Recapture of Credit.--If--
 ``(1) as of the close of any taxable year in the compliance 
 period, the amount of the eligible basis of any building with 
 respect to the taxpayer is less than
 ``(2) the amount of such basis as of the close of the 
 preceding taxable year,
 then the taxpayer's tax under this chapter for the taxable year 
 shall be increased by the credit recapture amount determined 
 under rules similar to the rules of section 42(j).
 ``(j) Certifications and Other Reports to Secretary.--
 ``(1) Certification with respect to 1st year of credit 
 period.--Following the close of the 1st taxable year in the 
 credit period with respect to any qualified rural investment 
 building, the taxpayer shall certify to the Secretary (at such 
 time and in such form and in such manner as the Secretary 
 prescribes)--
 ``(A) the taxable year, and calendar year, in which 
 such building was first placed in service,
 ``(B) the eligible basis of such building as of the 
 beginning of the credit period,
 ``(C) the maximum applicable percentage and 
 eligible basis permitted to be taken into account by 
 the appropriate rural investment credit agency under 
 subsection (g),
 ``(D) the election made under subsection (f) with 
 respect to the qualified rural investment project of 
 which such building is a part, and
 ``(E) such other information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 In the case of a failure to make the certification required by 
 the preceding sentence on the date prescribed therefor, unless 
 it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and 
 not to willful neglect, no credit shall be allowable by reason 
 of subsection (a) with respect to such building for any taxable 
 year ending before such certification is made.
 ``(2) Annual reports to the secretary.--The Secretary may 
 require taxpayers to submit an information return (at such time 
 and in such form and manner as the Secretary prescribes) for 
 each taxable year setting forth--
 ``(A) the eligible basis for the taxable year of 
 each qualified rural investment building of the 
 taxpayer,
 ``(B) the information described in paragraph (1)(C) 
 for the taxable year, and
 ``(C) such other information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 The penalty under section 6652(j) shall apply to any failure to 
 submit the return required by the Secretary under the preceding 
 sentence on the date prescribed therefor.
 ``(3) Annual reports from rural investment credit 
 agencies.--Each agency which allocates any rural investment 
 credit amount to any building for any calendar year shall 
 submit to the Secretary (at such time and in such manner as the 
 Secretary shall prescribe) an annual report specifying--
 ``(A) the amount of rural investment credit amount 
 allocated to each building for such year,
 ``(B) sufficient information to identify each such 
 building and the taxpayer with respect thereto, and
 ``(C) such other information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 The penalty under section 6652(j) shall apply to any failure to 
 submit the report required by the preceding sentence on the 
 date prescribed therefor.
 ``(k) Responsibilities of Rural Investment Credit Agencies.--
 ``(1) Plans for allocation of credit among investment 
 projects.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this section, the rural investment credit 
 dollar amount with respect to any building shall be 
 zero unless--
 ``(i) such amount was allocated pursuant to 
 a qualified rural investment plan of the agency 
 which is approved by the governmental unit (in 
 accordance with rules similar to the rules of 
 section 147(f)(2) (other than subparagraph 
 (B)(ii) thereof)) of which such agency is a 
 part,
 ``(ii) such agency notifies the chief 
 executive officer (or the equivalent) of the 
 local jurisdiction within which the building is 
 located of such investment project and provides 
 such individual a reasonable opportunity to 
 comment on the investment project,
 ``(iii) a comprehensive market study of the 
 development needs of individuals in the 
 qualifying county to be served by the 
 investment project is conducted before the 
 credit allocation is made and at the 
 developer's expense by a disinterested party 
 who is approved by such agency, and
 ``(iv) a written explanation is available 
 to the general public for any allocation of a 
 rural investment credit dollar amount which is 
 not made in accordance with established 
 priorities and selection criteria of the rural 
 investment credit agency.
 ``(B) Qualified rural investment plan.--For 
 purposes of this section, the term `qualified rural 
 investment plan' means any plan--
 ``(i) which sets forth selection criteria 
 to be used to determine priorities of the rural 
 investment credit agency which are appropriate 
 to qualifying counties,
 ``(ii) which also gives preference in 
 allocating rural investment credit dollar 
 amounts among selected investment projects to--
 ``(I) investment projects that 
 target those small rural counties with 
 consistently high rates of net out-
 migration,
 ``(II) investment projects that 
 link the economic development and job 
 creation efforts of 2 or more small 
 rural counties with high rates of net 
 out-migration, and
 ``(III) investment projects that 
 link the economic development and job 
 creation efforts of 1 or more small 
 rural counties in the State with high 
 rates of net out-migration to related 
 efforts in regions of such State 
 experiencing economic growth, and
 ``(iii) which provides a procedure that the 
 agency (or an agent or other private contractor 
 of such agency) will follow in monitoring for 
 noncompliance with the provisions of this 
 section and in notifying the Internal Revenue 
 Service of such noncompliance which such agency 
 becomes aware of and in monitoring for 
 noncompliance through regular site visits.
 ``(C) Certain selection criteria must be used.--The 
 selection criteria set forth in a qualified rural 
 investment plan must include--
 ``(i) investment project location,
 ``(ii) technology and transportation 
 infrastructure needs, and
 ``(iii) private development trends.
 ``(2) Credit allocated to building not to exceed amount 
 necessary to assure investment project feasibility.--
 ``(A) In general.--The rural investment credit 
 dollar amount allocated to an investment project shall 
 not exceed the amount the rural investment credit 
 agency determines is necessary for the financial 
 feasibility of the investment project and its viability 
 as a qualified rural investment project throughout the 
 compliance period.
 ``(B) Agency evaluation.--In making the 
 determination under subparagraph (A), the rural 
 investment credit agency shall consider--
 ``(i) the sources and uses of funds and the 
 total financing planned for the investment 
 project,
 ``(ii) any proceeds or receipts expected to 
 be generated by reason of tax benefits,
 ``(iii) the percentage of the rural 
 investment credit dollar amount used for 
 investment project costs other than the cost of 
 intermediaries, and
 ``(iv) the reasonableness of the 
 developmental and operational costs of the 
 investment project.
 Clause (iii) shall not be applied so as to impede the 
 development of investment projects in hard-to-develop 
 areas.
 ``(C) Determination made when credit amount applied 
 for and when building placed in service.--
 ``(i) In general.--A determination under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be made as of each of 
 the following times:
 ``(I) The application for the rural 
 investment credit dollar amount.
 ``(II) The allocation of the rural 
 investment credit dollar amount.
 ``(III) The date the building is 
 first placed in service.
 ``(ii) Certification as to amount of other 
 subsidies.--Prior to each determination under 
 clause (i), the taxpayer shall certify to the 
 rural investment credit agency the full extent 
 of all Federal, State, and local subsidies 
 which apply (or which the taxpayer expects to 
 apply) with respect to the building.
 ``(l) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section, including regulations--
 ``(1) dealing with--
 ``(A) investment projects which include more than 1 
 building or only a portion of a building,
 ``(B) buildings which are sold in portions,
 ``(2) providing for the application of this section to 
 short taxable years,
 ``(3) preventing the avoidance of the rules of this 
 section, and
 ``(4) providing the opportunity for rural investment credit 
 agencies to correct administrative errors and omissions with 
 respect to allocations and record keeping within a reasonable 
 period after their discovery, taking into account the 
 availability of regulations and other administrative guidance 
 from the Secretary.''.
 (b) Current Year Business Credit Calculation.--Section 38(b) 
(relating to current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (16), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (17) and inserting ``, plus'', and 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(18) the rural investment credit determined under section 
 42A(a).''.
 (c) Limitation on Carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 
(relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits), as amended 
by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) No carryback of rural investment credit before 
 effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for 
 any taxable year which is attributable to the rural investment 
 credit determined under section 42A may be carried back to a 
 taxable year beginning before the date of the enactment of the 
 Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 55(c)(1) is amended by inserting ``or 
 subsection (i) or (j) of section 42A'' after ``section 42''.
 (2) Subsections (i)(c)(3), (i)(c)(6)(B)(i), and (k)(1) of 
 section 469 are each amended by inserting ``or 42A'' after 
 ``section 42''.
 (3) Section 772(a) is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
 end of paragraph (10), by redesignating paragraph (11) as 
 paragraph (12), and by inserting after paragraph (10) the 
 following:
 ``(11) the rural investment credit determined under section 
 42A, and''.
 (4) Section 774(b)(4) is amended by inserting ``, 42A(i),'' 
 after ``section 42(j)''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 42 the following:

 ``Sec. 42A. Rural investment credit.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to expenditures made in taxable years beginning after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 634. QUALIFIED RURAL SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 42B. QUALIFIED RURAL SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of a 
qualified rural small business, the amount of the qualified rural small 
business investment credit determined under this section for any 
taxable year is equal to 30 percent of the qualified expenditures for 
the taxable year of such business.
 ``(b) Dollar Limitation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The credit allowable under subsection 
 (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of--
 ``(A) $5,000, or
 ``(B) the amount when added to the aggregate 
 credits allowable to the taxpayer under subsection (a) 
 for all preceding taxable years does not exceed 
 $25,000.
 ``(2) No double credit allowed.--In the case of any 
 qualified rural small business which places in service a 
 qualified rural investment building with respect to which a 
 rural investment credit is allowed under section 42A for any 
 taxable year, paragraph (1)(A) shall be applied with respect to 
 such taxable year by substituting `zero' for `$5,000'.
 ``(c) Qualified Rural Small Business.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `qualified rural small business' means any person if 
such person--
 ``(1) employed not more than 5 full-time employees during 
 the taxable year,
 ``(2) materially and substantially participates in 
 management,
 ``(3) is located in a qualifying county, and
 ``(4) submitted a qualified business plan with respect to 
 which the rural investment credit agency with jurisdiction over 
 such qualifying county has allocated a portion of the State 
 rural investment ceiling for such taxable year under section 
 42A(g)(7).
For purposes of paragraph (1), an employee shall be considered full-
time if such employee is employed at least 30 hours per week for 20 or 
more calendar weeks in the taxable year.
 ``(d) Qualified Expenditures.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified expenditures' means 
 expenditures normally associated with starting or expanding a 
 business and included in a qualified business plan, including 
 costs for capital, plant and equipment, inventory expenses, and 
 wages, but not including interest costs.
 ``(2) Only certain expenditures included for existing 
 businesses.--In the case of a qualified rural small business 
 with respect to which a credit under subsection (a) was allowed 
 for a preceding taxable year, such term shall include only so 
 much of the expenditures described in paragraph (1) for the 
 taxable year as exceed the aggregate of such expenditures for 
 the preceding taxable year.
 ``(e) Qualified Business Plan.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `qualified business plan' means a business plan which--
 ``(1) has been approved by the rural investment credit 
 agency with jurisdiction over the qualifying county in which 
 the qualified rural small business is located pursuant to such 
 agency's rural investment plan, and
 ``(2) meets such requirements as the agency may specify.
 ``(f) Denial of Double Benefit.--In the case of the amount of the 
credit determined under this section--
 ``(1) no deduction or credit shall be allowed for such 
 amount under any other provision of this chapter, and
 ``(2) no increase in the adjusted basis of any property 
 shall result from such amount.
 ``(g) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) any term which is used in this section which is used 
 in section 42A shall have the meaning given such term by 
 section 42A, and
 ``(2) rules similar to the rules under subsections (j)(2), 
 (j)(3), and (k) of section 42A shall apply.''.
 (b) Current Year Business Credit Calculation.--Section 38(b) 
(relating to current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (17), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (18) and inserting ``, plus'', and 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(19) the qualified rural small business investment credit 
 determined under section 42B(a).''.
 (c) Limitation on Carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 
(relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits), as amended 
by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(13) No carryback of qualified rural small business 
 investment credit before effective date.--No portion of the 
 unused business credit for any taxable year which is 
 attributable to the qualified rural small business investment 
 credit determined under section 42B may be carried back to a 
 taxable year beginning before the date of the enactment of the 
 Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act.''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 42A the 
following:

 ``Sec. 42B. Qualified rural small 
 business investment credit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to expenditures made in taxable years beginning after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 635. CREDIT FOR MAINTENANCE OF RAILROAD TRACK.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business-related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45I. RAILROAD TRACK MAINTENANCE CREDIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the railroad track 
maintenance credit determined under this section for the taxable year 
is an amount equal to 30 percent of the qualified railroad track 
maintenance expenditures paid or incurred by an eligible taxpayer 
during the taxable year.
 ``(b) Limitation.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any 
taxable year shall not exceed the product of--
 ``(1) $3,500, and
 ``(2) the number of miles of railroad track owned or leased 
 by the eligible taxpayer as of the close of the taxable year.
 ``(c) Eligible taxpayer.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`eligible taxpayer' means--
 ``(1) any Class II or Class III railroad, and
 ``(2) any person who transports property using the rail 
 facilities of a person described in paragraph (1) or who 
 furnishes railroad-related property or services to such a 
 person.
 ``(d) Qualified Railroad Track Maintenance Expenditures.--For 
purposes of this section, the term `qualified railroad track 
maintenance expenditures' means expenditures (whether or not otherwise 
chargeable to capital account) for maintaining railroad track 
(including roadbed, bridges, and related track structures) owned or 
leased as of January 1, 2005, by a Class II or Class III railroad.
 ``(e) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Class ii or Class iii railroad.--For purposes of this 
 section, the terms `Class II railroad' and `Class III railroad' 
 have the meanings given such terms by the Surface 
 Transportation Board.
 ``(2) Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 paragraph (1) of section 41(f) shall apply for purposes of this 
 section.
 ``(3) Basis adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if 
 a credit is allowed under this section with respect to any 
 railroad track, the basis of such track shall be reduced by the 
 amount of the credit so allowed.
 ``(f) Application of Section.--This section shall apply to 
qualified railroad track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred 
during taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004, and before 
January 1, 2008.''.
 (b) Limitation on Carryback.--Section 39(d) (relating to transition 
rules), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(14) No carryback of railroad track maintenance credit 
 before effective date.--No portion of the unused business 
 credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the 
 railroad track maintenance credit determined under section 45I 
 may be carried to a taxable year beginning before January 1, 
 2005.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 38(b) (relating to general business credit), as 
 amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end 
 of paragraph (18), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (19) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the 
 end the following new paragraph:
 ``(20) the railroad track maintenance credit determined 
 under section 45I(a).''.
 (2) Subsection (a) of section 1016, as amended by this Act, 
 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (28), by 
 striking the period at the end of paragraph (29) and inserting 
 ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(30) in the case of railroad track with respect to which 
 a credit was allowed under section 45I, to the extent provided 
 in section 45I(e)(3).''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45H the 
following new item:

 ``Sec. 45I. Railroad track maintenance 
 credit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 636. RAILROAD REVITALIZATION AND SECURITY INVESTMENT CREDIT.

 (a) Railroad Revitalization and Security Investment Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 (relating to business-related credits), as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 section:

``SEC. 45J. RAILROAD REVITALIZATION AND SECURITY INVESTMENT CREDIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the railroad 
revitalization and security investment credit determined under this 
section for the taxable year is the amount equal to 50 percent of the 
qualified project expenditures paid or incurred by the taxpayer during 
the taxable year.
 ``(b) Qualified Project Expenditures.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term 
 `qualified project expenditures' means, with respect to any 
 project for intercity passenger rail transportation (as defined 
 under section 24102 of title 49, United States Code) which is 
 included in a State rail plan, expenditures (whether or not 
 otherwise chargeable to capital account) for--
 ``(A) planning,
 ``(B) environmental review and environmental impact 
 mitigation,
 ``(C) track and track structure rehabilitation, 
 relocation, improvement, and development,
 ``(D) railroad safety and security improvements,
 ``(E) communications and signaling improvements,
 ``(F) intercity passenger rail equipment 
 acquisition, and
 ``(G) rail station and intermodal facilities 
 development.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--An expenditure shall not be treated as a 
 qualified project expenditure unless all persons which conduct 
 rail operations over the infrastructure with respect to which 
 such an expenditure is made--
 ``(A) are employers for purposes of the Railroad 
 Retirement Act of 1974 and are carriers for purposes of 
 the Railway Labor Act (unless such a person is an 
 operator with respect to commuter rail passenger 
 transportation (as defined in section 24102(4) of title 
 49, United States Code) of a State or local government 
 authority (as such terms are defined in section 5302 of 
 such title) eligible to receive financial assistance 
 under section 5307 of such title, a contractor 
 performing services in connection with the operations 
 with respect to commuter rail passenger transportation 
 (as so defined), or the Alaska Railroad or its 
 contractors),
 ``(B) provide assurances to the State that any 
 collective bargaining agreements with such a person's 
 employees (including terms regulating the contracting 
 of work) will remain in full force and effect according 
 to the terms of the agreements for work performed for 
 such a person on the railroad transportation corridor, 
 and
 ``(C) comply with the protective agreements 
 established under section 504 of the Railroad 
 Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 with 
 respect to employees affected by actions taken in 
 connection with the project.
 ``(c) Limitation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit allowed under 
 subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to any project 
 for which qualified project expenditures are made shall not 
 exceed the limitation allocated to such project under this 
 subsection for the calendar year in which the taxable year 
 begins.
 ``(2) State limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is a State railroad 
 revitalization and security investment credit 
 limitation for each calendar year. Such limitation is 
 the amount which bears the same ratio to $165,000,000 
 as the allocation number for such State bears to the 
 allocation number for all States.
 ``(B) Allocation number.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the allocation number is, with 
 respect to any State, the sum of the following:
 ``(i) The number of railroad and public 
 road at grade crossings on intercity passenger 
 rail routes within the State.
 ``(ii) The number of intercity passenger 
 train miles within the State.
 ``(iii) The number of intercity 
 embarkations and disembarkations for each 
 passenger within the State.
 ``(3) Unused credit carryovers allocated among certain 
 states.--
 ``(A) In general.--The unused credit carryover for 
 all States for any calendar year shall be reallocated 
 to each qualified State in an amount which bears the 
 same ratio to the unused credit carryover for all 
 States for the calendar as the allocation number for 
 such qualified State bears to the allocation number for 
 all qualified States.
 ``(B) Unused credit carryover.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `unused credit carryover' 
 means, with respect to any State, the excess of the 
 State limitation (determined under paragraph (2)) for 
 the calendar year over the amount allocated by the 
 State under paragraph (4) for such calendar year.
 ``(C) Qualified states.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `qualified State' means any State--
 ``(i) which allocated its entire State 
 limitation amount under paragraph (4) for the 
 calendar year, and
 ``(ii) for which a request is made to 
 receive an allocation under this paragraph.
 ``(4) Allocation within states.--Each State shall allocate 
 the limitation amount allocated to such State under paragraphs 
 (2) and (3) to projects for intercity passenger rail 
 transportation which are included in the State rail plan of 
 such State.
 ``(5) New york city rail projects.--
 ``(A) In general.--In addition to the amounts 
 allocated under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall 
 allocate a limitation of $200,000,000 to New York City, 
 New York, for qualified project expenditures within the 
 New York Liberty Zone (as defined in section 1400L(h)) 
 for the period described in subsection (h).
 ``(B) Allocation among projects.--Of the limitation 
 allocated under subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) $100,000,000 shall be allocated to 
 projects designated by the Mayor of New York 
 City, New York, and
 ``(ii) $100,000,000 shall be allocated to 
 projects designated by the Governor of New 
 York.
 ``(C) Special rule regarding qualified project 
 expenditures.--For purposes of this paragraph, a 
 qualified project expenditure shall include any 
 expenditure for improvements to subway systems, for 
 commuter rail systems, for rail links to airports, and 
 for public infrastructure improvements in the vicinity 
 of rail or subway stations.
 ``(d) State rail plan.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`State rail plan' means a plan prepared and maintained in accordance 
with chapter 225 of title 49, United States Code.
 ``(e) Basis Adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit 
is allowed under this section with respect to any property, the basis 
of such property shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so 
allowed.
 ``(f) No Double Benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this 
section with respect to any expenditures for which a credit is allowed 
under section 45I.
 ``(g) Credit Transferability.--Any credit allowable under this 
section may be transferred (but not more than once) if--
 ``(1) the credit exceeds the tax liability of the taxpayer 
 for the taxable year, or
 ``(2) the taxpayer is not subject to any tax imposed by 
 this chapter by reason of having a tax-exempt status.
 ``(h) Application of Section.--This section shall apply to 
qualified project expenditures paid or incurred during taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 2004, and before January 1, 2008.''.
 (2) Limitation on carryback.--Section 39(d) (relating to 
 transition rules), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(15) No carryback of section 45j credit before effective 
 date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable 
 year which is attributable to the credit determined under 
 section 45J(a) may be carried back to any taxable year 
 beginning before January 1, 2005.''.
 (3) Conforming Amendments.--
 (A) Section 38(b) (relating to general business 
 credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking 
 ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (19), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (20) and inserting ``, 
 plus'', and by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(21) the railroad revitalization and security investment 
 credit determined under section 45J(a).''.
 (B) Subsection (a) of section 1016, as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
 paragraph (29), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (30) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding 
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(31) in the case of property with respect to which a 
 credit was allowed under section 45J, to the extent provided in 
 section 45J(e).''.
 (4) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart 
 D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this 
 Act, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
 45I the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45J. Railroad revitalization and 
 security investment credit.''.
 (5) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.
 (b) State rail plans.--
 (1) In general.--Part B of subtitle V of title 49, United 
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``CHAPTER 225--STATE RAIL PLANS

 ``Sec.
 ``22501. Authority.
 ``22502. Purposes.
 ``22503. Transparency; coordination.
 ``22504. Content.
 ``22505. Approval.
 ``22506. Definitions.
``Sec. 22501. Authority
 ``(a) In General.--Each State may prepare and maintain a State rail 
plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
 ``(b) Requirements.--For the preparation and periodic revision of a 
State rail plan, a State shall--
 ``(1) establish or designate a State rail transportation 
 authority to prepare, maintain, coordinate, and administer the 
 plan;
 ``(2) establish or designate a State rail plan approval 
 authority to approve the plan;
 ``(3) make the State's approved plan available to the 
 public and transmit a copy to the Secretary of Transportation; 
 and
 ``(4) revise the plan no less frequently than once every 5 
 years.
``Sec. 22502. Purposes
 ``(a) Purposes.--The purposes of a State rail plan are as follows:
 ``(1) To set forth State policy involving freight and 
 passenger rail transportation, including commuter rail 
 operations, in the State.
 ``(2) To present priorities and strategies to enhance rail 
 service in the State that benefits the public.
 ``(3) To serve as the basis for Federal and State rail 
 investments within the State.
 ``(b) Content.--The State rail plan shall establish the period 
covered by such plan.
 ``(c) Consistency With State Transportation Efforts.--A State rail 
plan shall be consistent with the State transportation planning goals 
and programs and shall set forth rail transportation's role within the 
State transportation system.
``Sec. 22503. Transparency; coordination
 ``(a) Preparation.--A State shall provide adequate and reasonable 
notice and opportunity for comment and other input on a proposed State 
rail plan under this chapter to the following:
 ``(1) The public.
 ``(2) Rail carriers.
 ``(3) Commuter and transit authorities operating in, or 
 affected by rail operations within, the State.
 ``(4) Units of local government.
 ``(5) Other parties interested in the preparation and 
 review of the State rail plan.
 ``(b) Intergovernmental Coordination.--A State shall review the 
freight and passenger rail service activities and initiatives of 
regional planning agencies, regional transportation authorities, and 
municipalities within the State, or in the region in which the State is 
located, while preparing the plan, and shall include any 
recommendations made by such agencies, authorities, and municipalities 
as deemed appropriate by the State.
``Sec. 22504. Content
 ``(a) In General.--Each State rail plan shall contain the 
following:
 ``(1) An inventory of the existing overall rail 
 transportation system and rail services and facilities within 
 the State and an analysis of the role of rail transportation 
 within the State's surface transportation system.
 ``(2) A comprehensive review of all rail lines within the 
 State, including proposed high speed rail corridors and 
 significant rail line segments not currently in service.
 ``(3) A statement of the State's passenger rail service 
 objectives, including minimum service levels, for intercity 
 passenger rail transportation routes in the State.
 ``(4) A general analysis of rail's transportation, 
 economic, and environmental impacts in the State, including 
 congestion mitigation, trade and economic development, air 
 quality, land-use, energy-use, and community impacts.
 ``(5) A long-range rail investment program for current and 
 future freight and passenger infrastructure in the State that 
 meets the requirements of subsection (b).
 ``(6) A statement of public financing issues for rail 
 projects and service in the State, including a list of current 
 and prospective public capital and operating funding resources, 
 public subsidies, State taxation, and other financial policies 
 relating to rail infrastructure development.
 ``(7) An identification of rail infrastructure issues 
 within the State that reflects consultation with all relevant 
 stake holders.
 ``(8) A review of major passenger and freight intermodal 
 rail connections and facilities within the State, including 
 seaports, and prioritized options to maximize service 
 integration and efficiency between rail and other modes of 
 transportation within the State.
 ``(9) A review of publicly funded projects within the State 
 to improve rail transportation safety and security, including 
 all major projects funded under section 130 of title 23.
 ``(10) A performance evaluation of passenger rail services 
 operating in the State, including possible improvements in 
 those services, and a description of strategies to achieve 
 those improvements.
 ``(11) A compilation of studies and reports on high-speed 
 rail corridor development within the State not included in a 
 previous plan under this chapter, and a plan for funding any 
 recommended development of such corridors in the State.
 ``(12) A statement that the State satisfies the conditions 
 set forth in section 22102.
 ``(b) Long-Range Service and Investment Program.--
 ``(1) Program content.--A long-range rail investment 
 program included in a State rail plan under subsection (a)(5) 
 shall include the following matters:
 ``(A) Two lists for rail capital projects, 1 list 
 for freight rail capital projects and 1 list for 
 intercity passenger rail capital projects.
 ``(B) A detailed funding plan for the projects.
 ``(2) Project list content.--The lists of freight and 
 intercity passenger rail capital projects shall contain--
 ``(A) a description of the anticipated public and 
 private benefits of each such project; and
 ``(B) a statement of the correlation between--
 ``(i) public funding contributions for the 
 projects; and
 ``(ii) the public benefits.
 ``(3) Considerations for project list.--In preparing the 
 list of freight and intercity passenger rail capital projects, 
 a State rail transportation authority shall take into 
 consideration the following matters:
 ``(A) Contributions made by non-Federal and non-
 State sources through user fees, matching funds, or 
 other private capital involvement.
 ``(B) Rail capacity and congestion effects.
 ``(C) Effects to highway, aviation, and maritime 
 capacity, congestion, or safety.
 ``(D) Regional balance.
 ``(E) Environmental impact.
 ``(F) Economic and employment impacts.
 ``(G) Projected ridership and other service 
 measures for passenger rail projects.
``Sec. 22505. Approval
 ``The State rail plan approval authority established or designated 
under section 22501(b)(2) may approve a State rail plan for the 
purposes of this chapter if--
 ``(1) the plan meets all of the requirements applicable to 
 State plans under this chapter;
 ``(2) for each ready-to-commence project listed on the 
 ranked list of freight and intercity passenger rail capital 
 improvement projects under the plan--
 ``(A) the project meets all safety and 
 environmental requirements, including those prescribed 
 under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 
 U.S.C. 4331 et seq.) that are applicable to the project 
 under law; and
 ``(B) the State has entered into an agreement with 
 any owner of rail infrastructure or right-of-way 
 directly affected by the project that provides for the 
 State to proceed with the project and includes 
 assurances regarding capacity and compensation for use 
 of such infrastructure or right-of-way, if applicable; 
 and
 ``(3) the content of the plan is coordinated with State 
 transportation plans developed pursuant to section 135 of title 
 23.
``Sec. 22506. Definitions
 ``In this chapter:
 ``(1) Private benefit.--The term `private benefit'--
 ``(A) means a benefit accrued to a person or 
 private entity, other than the National Railroad 
 Passenger Corporation, that directly improves the 
 economic and competitive condition of that person or 
 entity through improved assets, cost reductions, 
 service improvements, or other means; and
 ``(B) shall be determined on a project-by-project 
 basis, based upon an agreement between the State and 
 the affected persons or private entities.
 ``(2) Public benefit.--The term `public benefit'--
 ``(A) means a benefit accrued to the public in the 
 form of enhanced mobility of people or goods, 
 environmental protection or enhancement, congestion 
 mitigation, enhanced trade and economic development, 
 improved air quality or land use, more efficient energy 
 use, enhanced public safety or security, reduction of 
 public expenditures due to improved transportation 
 efficiency or infrastructure preservation, and other 
 positive community effects; and
 ``(B) shall be determined on a project-by-project 
 basis, based upon an agreement between the State and 
 the persons or private entities involved in the 
 project.
 ``(3) State.--The term `State' means any of the 50 States 
 and the District of Columbia.
 ``(4) State rail transportation authority.--The term `State 
 rail transportation authority' means the State agency or 
 official responsible under the direction of the Chief Executive 
 of the State or a State law for preparation, maintenance, 
 coordination, and administration of the State rail plan under 
 this chapter.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of chapters at the 
 beginning of subtitle V of title 49, United States Code, is 
 amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 223 the 
 following:

``225. STATE RAIL PLANS........................................22501.''.

SEC. 637. MODIFICATION OF TARGETED AREAS DESIGNATED FOR NEW MARKETS TAX 
 CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 45D(e) is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(2) Targeted populations.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 regulations under which 1 or more targeted populations (within 
 the meaning of section 103(20) of the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 
 4702(20))) may be treated as low-income communities. Such 
 regulations shall include procedures for determining which 
 entities are qualified active low-income community businesses 
 with respect to such populations.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to designations made by the Secretary of the Treasury after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 638. MODIFICATION OF INCOME REQUIREMENT FOR CENSUS TRACTS WITHIN 
 HIGH MIGRATION RURAL COUNTIES.

 (a) In general.--Section 45D(e) (relating to low-income community) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Modification of income requirement for census tracts 
 within high migration rural counties.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a population 
 census tract located within a high migration rural 
 county, paragraph (1)(B)(i) shall be applied by 
 substituting `85 percent' for `80 percent'.
 ``(B) High migration rural county.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `high migration rural county' 
 means any county which, during the 20-year period 
 ending with the year in which the most recent census 
 was conducted, has a net out-migration of inhabitants 
 from the county of at least 10 percent of the 
 population of the county at the beginning of such 
 period.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect as if included in the amendment made by section 121(a) of the 
Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000.

SEC. 639. CREDIT FOR INVESTMENT IN TECHNOLOGY TO MAKE MOTION PICTURES 
 MORE ACCESSIBLE TO THE DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Allowance of credit.--Subpart D of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to business related 
 credits), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new section:

``SEC. 45T. EXPENDITURES TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO MOTION PICTURES FOR THE 
 DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an 
eligible taxpayer, the motion picture accessibility credit for any 
taxable year shall be an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified 
expenditures made by the eligible taxpayer during the taxable year.
 ``(b) Eligible Taxpayer.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`eligible taxpayer' means a taxpayer who is in the business of--
 ``(1) showing motion pictures to the public in theaters, or
 ``(2) producing or distributing such motion pictures.
 ``(c) Qualified Expenditures.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `qualified expenditures' means amounts paid or incurred by the 
taxpayer for the purpose of making motion pictures accessible to 
individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing through the use of 
captioning technology.
 ``(d) Basis Adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit 
is allowed under this section with respect to any property, the basis 
of such property shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so 
allowed.
 ``(e) No Double Benefit.--In the case of the credit determined 
under this section, no deduction or credit shall be allowed for such 
amount under any other provision of this chapter.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 38(b) (relating to general business 
 credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking 
 ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (30), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (31) and inserting ``, 
 plus'', and by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(32) the motion picture accessibility credit determined 
 under section 45T(a).''.
 (B) Subsection (a) of section 1016, as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
 paragraph (38), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (39) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding 
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(40) in the case of property with respect to which a 
 credit was allowed under section 45T, to the extent provided in 
 section 45T(d).''.
 (b) Limitation on Carryback.--Section 39(d) (relating to transition 
rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(16) No carryback of motion picture accessibility credit 
 before effective date.--No portion of the unused business 
 credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the motion 
 picture accessibility credit determined under section 45T may 
 be carried to a taxable year beginning before January 1, 
 2004.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45S the 
following new item:

 ``Sec. 45T. Expenditures to provide 
 access to motion pictures for 
 the deaf and hard of 
 hearing.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 641. EXCLUSION OF GAIN OR LOSS ON SALE OR EXCHANGE OF CERTAIN 
 BROWNFIELD SITES FROM UNRELATED BUSINESS TAXABLE INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (b) of section 512 (relating to 
unrelated business taxable income), as amended by this Act, is amended 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(19) Treatment of gain or loss on sale or exchange of 
 certain brownfield sites.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph 
 (5)(B), there shall be excluded any gain or loss from 
 the qualified sale, exchange, or other disposition of 
 any qualifying brownfield property by an eligible 
 taxpayer.
 ``(B) Eligible taxpayer.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `eligible 
 taxpayer' means, with respect to a property, 
 any organization exempt from tax under section 
 501(a) which--
 ``(I) acquires from an unrelated 
 person a qualifying brownfield 
 property, and
 ``(II) pays or incurs eligible 
 remediation expenditures with respect 
 to such property in an amount which 
 exceeds the greater of $550,000 or 12 
 percent of the fair market value of the 
 property at the time such property was 
 acquired by the eligible taxpayer, 
 determined as if there was not a 
 presence of a hazardous substance, 
 pollutant, or contaminant on the 
 property which is complicating the 
 expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of 
 the property.
 ``(ii) Exception.--Such term shall not 
 include any organization which is--
 ``(I) potentially liable under 
 section 107 of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, 
 and Liability Act of 1980 with respect 
 to the qualifying brownfield property,
 ``(II) affiliated with any other 
 person which is so potentially liable 
 through any direct or indirect familial 
 relationship or any contractual, 
 corporate, or financial relationship 
 (other than a contractual, corporate, 
 or financial relationship which is 
 created by the instruments by which 
 title to any qualifying brownfield 
 property is conveyed or financed or by 
 a contract of sale of goods or 
 services), or
 ``(III) the result of a 
 reorganization of a business entity 
 which was so potentially liable.
 ``(C) Qualifying brownfield property.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `qualifying 
 brownfield property' means any real property 
 which is certified, before the taxpayer incurs 
 any eligible remediation expenditures (other 
 than to obtain a Phase I environmental site 
 assessment), by an appropriate State agency 
 (within the meaning of section 198(c)(4)) in 
 the State in which such property is located as 
 a brownfield site within the meaning of section 
 101(39) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 
 1980 (as in effect on the date of the enactment 
 of this paragraph).
 ``(ii) Request for certification.--Any 
 request by an eligible taxpayer for a 
 certification described in clause (i) shall 
 include a sworn statement by the eligible 
 taxpayer and supporting documentation of the 
 presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, 
 or contaminant on the property which is 
 complicating the expansion, redevelopment, or 
 reuse of the property given the property's 
 reasonably anticipated future land uses or 
 capacity for uses of the property (including a 
 Phase I environmental site assessment and, if 
 applicable, evidence of the property's presence 
 on a local, State, or Federal list of 
 brownfields or contaminated property) and other 
 environmental assessments prepared or obtained 
 by the taxpayer.
 ``(D) Qualified sale, exchange, or other 
 disposition.--For purposes of this paragraph--
 ``(i) In general.--A sale, exchange, or 
 other disposition of property shall be 
 considered as qualified if--
 ``(I) such property is transferred 
 by the eligible taxpayer to an 
 unrelated person, and
 ``(II) within 1 year of such 
 transfer the eligible taxpayer has 
 received a certification from the 
 Environmental Protection Agency or an 
 appropriate State agency (within the 
 meaning of section 198(c)(4)) in the 
 State in which such property is located 
 that, as a result of the eligible 
 taxpayer's remediation actions, such 
 property would not be treated as a 
 qualifying brownfield property in the 
 hands of the transferee.
 For purposes of subclause (II), before issuing 
 such certification, the Environmental 
 Protection Agency or appropriate State agency 
 shall respond to comments received pursuant to 
 clause (ii)(V) in the same form and manner as 
 required under section 117(b) of the 
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph).
 ``(ii) Request for certification.--Any 
 request by an eligible taxpayer for a 
 certification described in clause (i) shall be 
 made not later than the date of the transfer 
 and shall include a sworn statement by the 
 eligible taxpayer certifying the following:
 ``(I) Remedial actions which comply 
 with all applicable or relevant and 
 appropriate requirements (consistent 
 with section 121(d) of the 
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 
 1980) have been substantially 
 completed, such that there are no 
 hazardous substances, pollutants, or 
 contaminants which complicate the 
 expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of 
 the property given the property's 
 reasonably anticipated future land uses 
 or capacity for uses of the property.
 ``(II) The reasonably anticipated 
 future land uses or capacity for uses 
 of the property are more economically 
 productive or environmentally 
 beneficial than the uses of the 
 property in existence on the date of 
 the certification described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i). For purposes of 
 the preceding sentence, use of property 
 as a landfill or other hazardous waste 
 facility shall not be considered more 
 economically productive or 
 environmentally beneficial.
 ``(III) A remediation plan has been 
 implemented to bring the property into 
 compliance with all applicable local, 
 State, and Federal environmental laws, 
 regulations, and standards and to 
 ensure that the remediation protects 
 human health and the environment.
 ``(IV) The remediation plan 
 described in subclause (III), including 
 any physical improvements required to 
 remediate the property, is either 
 complete or substantially complete, 
 and, if substantially complete, 
 sufficient monitoring, funding, 
 institutional controls, and financial 
 assurances have been put in place to 
 ensure the complete remediation of the 
 property in accordance with the 
 remediation plan as soon as is 
 reasonably practicable after the sale, 
 exchange, or other disposition of such 
 property.
 ``(V) Public notice and the 
 opportunity for comment on the request 
 for certification was completed before 
 the date of such request. Such notice 
 and opportunity for comment shall be in 
 the same form and manner as required 
 for public participation required under 
 section 117(a) of the Comprehensive 
 Environmental Response, Compensation, 
 and Liability Act of 1980 (as in effect 
 on the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph). For purposes of this 
 subclause, public notice shall include, 
 at a minimum, publication in a major 
 local newspaper of general circulation.
 ``(iii) Attachment to tax returns.--A copy 
 of each of the requests for certification 
 described in clause (ii) of subparagraph (C) 
 and this subparagraph shall be included in the 
 tax return of the eligible taxpayer (and, where 
 applicable, of the qualifying partnership) for 
 the taxable year during which the transfer 
 occurs.
 ``(iv) Substantial completion.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, a remedial 
 action is substantially complete when any 
 necessary physical construction is complete, 
 all immediate threats have been eliminated, and 
 all long-term threats are under control.
 ``(E) Eligible remediation expenditures.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `eligible 
 remediation expenditures' means, with respect 
 to any qualifying brownfield property, any 
 amount paid or incurred by the eligible 
 taxpayer to an unrelated third person to obtain 
 a Phase I environmental site assessment of the 
 property, and any amount so paid or incurred 
 after the date of the certification described 
 in subparagraph (C)(i) for goods and services 
 necessary to obtain a certification described 
 in subparagraph (D)(i) with respect to such 
 property, including expenditures--
 ``(I) to manage, remove, control, 
 contain, abate, or otherwise remediate 
 a hazardous substance, pollutant, or 
 contaminant on the property,
 ``(II) to obtain a Phase II 
 environmental site assessment of the 
 property, including any expenditure to 
 monitor, sample, study, assess, or 
 otherwise evaluate the release, threat 
 of release, or presence of a hazardous 
 substance, pollutant, or contaminant on 
 the property,
 ``(III) to obtain environmental 
 regulatory certifications and approvals 
 required to manage the remediation and 
 monitoring of the hazardous substance, 
 pollutant, or contaminant on the 
 property, and
 ``(IV) regardless of whether it is 
 necessary to obtain a certification 
 described in subparagraph (D)(i)(II), 
 to obtain remediation cost-cap or stop-
 loss coverage, re-opener or regulatory 
 action coverage, or similar coverage 
 under environmental insurance policies, 
 or financial guarantees required to 
 manage such remediation and monitoring.
 ``(ii) Exceptions.--Such term shall not 
 include--
 ``(I) any portion of the purchase 
 price paid or incurred by the eligible 
 taxpayer to acquire the qualifying 
 brownfield property,
 ``(II) environmental insurance 
 costs paid or incurred to obtain legal 
 defense coverage, owner/operator 
 liability coverage, lender liability 
 coverage, professional liability 
 coverage, or similar types of coverage,
 ``(III) any amount paid or incurred 
 to the extent such amount is 
 reimbursed, funded, or otherwise 
 subsidized by grants provided by the 
 United States, a State, or a political 
 subdivision of a State for use in 
 connection with the property, proceeds 
 of an issue of State or local 
 government obligations used to provide 
 financing for the property the interest 
 of which is exempt from tax under 
 section 103, or subsidized financing 
 provided (directly or indirectly) under 
 a Federal, State, or local program 
 provided in connection with the 
 property, or
 ``(IV) any expenditure paid or 
 incurred before the date of the 
 enactment of this paragraph.
 For purposes of subclause (III), the Secretary 
 may issue guidance regarding the treatment of 
 government-provided funds for purposes of 
 determining eligible remediation expenditures.
 ``(F) Determination of gain or loss.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the determination of gain or loss 
 shall not include an amount treated as gain which is 
 ordinary income with respect to section 1245 or section 
 1250 property, including amounts deducted as section 
 198 expenses which are subject to the recapture rules 
 of section 198(e), if the taxpayer had deducted such 
 amounts in the computation of its unrelated business 
 taxable income.
 ``(G) Special rules for partnerships.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of an 
 eligible taxpayer which is a partner of a 
 qualifying partnership which acquires, 
 remediates, and sells, exchanges, or otherwise 
 disposes of a qualifying brownfield property, 
 this paragraph shall apply to the eligible 
 taxpayer's distributive share of the qualifying 
 partnership's gain or loss from the sale, 
 exchange, or other disposition of such 
 property.
 ``(ii) Qualifying partnership.--The term 
 `qualifying partnership' means a partnership 
 which--
 ``(I) has a partnership agreement 
 which satisfies the requirements of 
 section 514(c)(9)(B)(vi) at all times 
 beginning on the date of the first 
 certification received by the 
 partnership under subparagraph (C)(i),
 ``(II) satisfies the requirements 
 of subparagraphs (B)(i), (C), (D), and 
 (E), if `qualified partnership' is 
 substituted for `eligible taxpayer' 
 each place it appears therein (except 
 subparagraph (D)(iii)), and
 ``(III) is not an organization 
 which would be prevented from 
 constituting an eligible taxpayer by 
 reason of subparagraph (B)(ii).
 ``(iii) Requirement that tax-exempt partner 
 be a partner since first certification.--This 
 paragraph shall apply with respect to any 
 eligible taxpayer which is a partner of a 
 partnership which acquires, remediates, and 
 sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of a 
 qualifying brownfield property only if such 
 eligible taxpayer was a partner of the 
 qualifying partnership at all times beginning 
 on the date of the first certification received 
 by the partnership under subparagraph (C)(i) 
 and ending on the date of the sale, exchange, 
 or other disposition of the property by the 
 partnership.
 ``(iv) Regulations.--The Secretary shall 
 prescribe such regulations as are necessary to 
 prevent abuse of the requirements of this 
 subparagraph, including abuse through--
 ``(I) the use of special 
 allocations of gains or losses, or
 ``(II) changes in ownership of 
 partnership interests held by eligible 
 taxpayers.
 ``(H) Special rules for multiple properties.--
 ``(i) In general.--An eligible taxpayer or 
 a qualifying partnership of which the eligible 
 taxpayer is a partner may make a 1-time 
 election to apply this paragraph to more than 1 
 qualifying brownfield property by averaging the 
 eligible remediation expenditures for all such 
 properties acquired during the election period. 
 If the eligible taxpayer or qualifying 
 partnership makes such an election, the 
 election shall apply to all qualified sales, 
 exchanges, or other dispositions of qualifying 
 brownfield properties the acquisition and 
 transfer of which occur during the period for 
 which the election remains in effect.
 ``(ii) Election.--An election under clause 
 (i) shall be made with the eligible taxpayer's 
 or qualifying partnership's timely filed tax 
 return (including extensions) for the first 
 taxable year for which the taxpayer or 
 qualifying partnership intends to have the 
 election apply. An election under clause (i) is 
 effective for the period--
 ``(I) beginning on the date which 
 is the first day of the taxable year of 
 the return in which the election is 
 included or a later day in such taxable 
 year selected by the eligible taxpayer 
 or qualifying partnership, and
 ``(II) ending on the date which is 
 the earliest of a date of revocation 
 selected by the eligible taxpayer or 
 qualifying partnership, the date which 
 is 8 years after the date described in 
 subclause (I), or, in the case of an 
 election by a qualifying partnership of 
 which the eligible taxpayer is a 
 partner, the date of the termination of 
 the qualifying partnership.
 ``(iii) Revocation.--An eligible taxpayer 
 or qualifying partnership may revoke an 
 election under clause (i)(II) by filing a 
 statement of revocation with a timely filed tax 
 return (including extensions). A revocation is 
 effective as of the first day of the taxable 
 year of the return in which the revocation is 
 included or a later day in such taxable year 
 selected by the eligible taxpayer or qualifying 
 partnership. Once an eligible taxpayer or 
 qualifying partnership revokes the election, 
 the eligible taxpayer or qualifying partnership 
 is ineligible to make another election under 
 clause (i) with respect to any qualifying 
 brownfield property subject to the revoked 
 election.
 ``(I) Recapture.--If an eligible taxpayer excludes 
 gain or loss from a sale, exchange, or other 
 disposition of property to which an election under 
 subparagraph (H) applies, and such property fails to 
 satisfy the requirements of this paragraph, the 
 unrelated business taxable income of the eligible 
 taxpayer for the taxable year in which such failure 
 occurs shall be determined by including any previously 
 excluded gain or loss from such sale, exchange, or 
 other disposition allocable to such taxpayer, and 
 interest shall be determined at the overpayment rate 
 established under section 6621 on any resulting tax for 
 the period beginning with the due date of the return 
 for the taxable year during which such sale, exchange, 
 or other disposition occurred, and ending on the date 
 of payment of the tax.
 ``(J) Related persons.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, a person shall be treated as related to 
 another person if--
 ``(i) such person bears a relationship to 
 such other person described in section 267(b) 
 (determined without regard to paragraph (9) 
 thereof), or section 707(b)(1), determined by 
 substituting `25 percent' for `50 percent' each 
 place it appears therein, and
 ``(ii) in the case such other person is a 
 nonprofit organization, if such person controls 
 directly or indirectly more than 25 percent of 
 the governing body of such organization.''
 (b) Exclusion From Definition of Debt-Financed Property.--Section 
514(b)(1) (defining debt-financed property) is amended by striking 
``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the 
end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``; or'', and by inserting after 
subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) any property the gain or loss from the sale, 
 exchange, or other disposition of which would be 
 excluded by reason of the provisions of section 
 512(b)(19) in computing the gross income of any 
 unrelated trade or business.''.
 (c) Savings Clause.--Nothing in the amendments made by this section 
shall affect any duty, liability, or other requirement imposed under 
any other Federal or State law. Notwithstanding section 128(b) of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
of 1980, a certification provided by the Environmental Protection 
Agency or an appropriate State agency (within the meaning of section 
198(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) shall not affect the 
liability of any person under section 107(a) of such Act.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to any gain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other disposition 
of any property acquired by the taxpayer after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 642. MODIFICATION OF UNRELATED BUSINESS INCOME LIMITATION ON 
 INVESTMENT IN CERTAIN DEBT-FINANCED PROPERTIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 514(c)(6) (relating to acquisition 
indebtedness) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``include an obligation'' and inserting 
 ``include--
 ``(A) an obligation'',
 (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, 
 or'', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) indebtedness incurred by a small business 
 investment company licensed under the Small Business 
 Investment Act of 1958 which is evidenced by a 
 debenture--
 ``(i) issued by such company under section 
 303(a) of such Act, and
 ``(ii) held or guaranteed by the Small 
 Business Administration.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to acquisitions made on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 643. CIVIL RIGHTS TAX RELIEF.

 (a) Deduction Allowed Whether or Not Taxpayer Itemizes Other 
Deductions.--Subsection (a) of section 62 (defining adjusted gross 
income) is amended by inserting after paragraph (18) the following new 
item:
 ``(19) Costs involving discrimination suits, etc.--Any 
 deduction allowable under this chapter for attorney fees and 
 court costs paid by, or on behalf of, the taxpayer in 
 connection with any action involving a claim of unlawful 
 discrimination (as defined in subsection (e)) or a claim of a 
 violation of subchapter III of chapter 37 of title 31, United 
 States Code or a claim made under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(3)(A)). The preceding 
 sentence shall not apply to any deduction in excess of the 
 amount includible in the taxpayer's gross income for the 
 taxable year on account of a judgment or settlement (whether by 
 suit or agreement and whether as lump sum or periodic payments) 
 resulting from such claim.''.
 (b) Unlawful Discrimination Defined.--Section 62 is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Unlawful discrimination defined.--For purposes of subsection 
(a)(19), the term `unlawful discrimination' means an act that is 
unlawful under any of the following:
 ``(1) Section 302 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (2 U.S.C. 
 1202).
 ``(2) Section 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, or 207 of the 
 Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 (2 U.S.C. 1311, 1312, 
 1313, 1314, 1315, 1316, or 1317).
 ``(3) The National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 151 et 
 seq.).
 ``(4) The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 
 et seq.).
 ``(5) Section 4 or 15 of the Age Discrimination in 
 Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 623 or 633a).
 ``(6) Section 501 or 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
 (29 U.S.C. 791 or 794).
 ``(7) Section 510 of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1140).
 ``(8) Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (29 
 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.).
 ``(9) The Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988 (29 
 U.S.C. 201 et seq.).
 ``(10) The Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification 
 Act (29 U.S.C. 2102 et seq.).
 ``(11) Section 105 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 
 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2615).
 ``(12) Chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code (relating 
 to employment and reemployment rights of members of the 
 uniformed services).
 ``(13) Section 1977, 1979, or 1980 of the Revised Statutes 
 (42 U.S.C. 1981, 1983, or 1985).
 ``(14) Section 703, 704, or 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2, 2000e-3, or 2000e-16).
 ``(15) Section 804, 805, 806, 808, or 818 of the Fair 
 Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3604, 3605, 3606, 3608, or 3617).
 ``(16) Section 102, 202, 302, or 503 of the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12112, 12132, 12182, or 
 12203).
 ``(17) Any provision of Federal law (popularly known as 
 whistleblower protection provisions) prohibiting the discharge 
 of an employee, the discrimination against an employee, or any 
 other form of retaliation or reprisal against an employee for 
 asserting rights or taking other actions permitted under 
 Federal law.
 ``(18) Any provision of Fderal, State, or local law, or 
 common law claims permitted under Federal, State, or local 
 law--
 ``(i) providing for the enforcement of 
 civil rights, or
 ``(ii) regulating any aspect of the 
 employment relationship, including claims for 
 wages, compensation, or benefits, or 
 prohibiting the discharge of an employee, the 
 discrimination against an employee, or any 
 other form of retaliation or reprisal against 
 an employee for asserting rights or taking 
 other actions permitted by law.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to fees and costs paid after December 31, 2002, with respect to 
any judgment or settlement occurring after such date.

SEC. 644. EXCLUSION FOR PAYMENTS TO INDIVIDUALS UNDER NATIONAL HEALTH 
 SERVICE CORPS LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM AND CERTAIN STATE 
 LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 108(f) (relating to student loans) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Payments under national health service corps loan 
 repayment program and certain state loan repayment programs.--
 In the case of an individual, gross income shall not include 
 any amount received under section 338B(g) of the Public Health 
 Service Act or under a State program described in section 338I 
 of such Act.''.
 (b) Treatment for Purposes of Employment Taxes.--Each of the 
following provisions is amended by inserting ``108(f)(4),'' after 
``74(c),'':
 (1) Section 3121(a)(20).
 (2) Section 3231(e)(5).
 (3) Section 3306(b)(16).
 (4) Section 3401(a)(19).
 (5) Section 209(a)(17) of the Social Security Act.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts received by an individual in taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 645. CERTAIN EXPENSES OF RURAL LETTER CARRIERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 162(o) (relating to treatment of certain 
reimbursed expenses of rural mail carriers) is amended by redesignating 
paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the 
following:
 ``(2) Special rule where expenses exceed reimbursements.--
 Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(A), if the expenses incurred by 
 an employee for the use of a vehicle in performing services 
 described in paragraph (1) exceed the qualified reimbursements 
 for such expenses, such excess shall be taken into account in 
 computing the miscellaneous itemized deductions of the employee 
 under section 67.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The heading for section 162(o) is 
amended by striking ``Reimbursed''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 646. METHOD OF ACCOUNTING FOR NAVAL SHIPBUILDERS.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a qualified naval ship contract, 
the taxable income of such contract during the 5-taxable year period 
beginning with the taxable year in which the contract commencement date 
occurs shall be determined under a method identical to the method used 
in the case of a qualified ship contract (as defined in section 
10203(b)(2)(B) of the Revenue Act of 1987).
 (b) Recapture of Tax Benefit.--In the case of a qualified naval 
ship contract to which subsection (a) applies, the taxpayer's tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the first 
taxable year following the 5-taxable year period described in 
subsection (a) shall be increased by the excess (if any) of--
 (1) the amount of tax which would have been imposed during 
 such period if this section had not been enacted, over
 (2) the amount of tax so imposed during such period.
 (c) Qualified Naval Ship Contract.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) In general.--The term ``qualified naval ship contract'' 
 means any contract or portion thereof that is for the 
 construction in the United States of 1 ship or submarine for 
 the Federal Government if the taxpayer reasonably expects the 
 acceptance date will occur no later than 9 years after the 
 construction commencement date.
 (2) Acceptance date.--The term ``acceptance date'' means 
 the date 1 year after the date on which the Federal Government 
 issues a letter of acceptance or other similar document for the 
 ship or submarine.
 (3) Construction commencement date.--The term 
 ``construction commencement date'' means the date on which the 
 physical fabrication of any section or component of the ship or 
 submarine begins.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to contracts for 
ships or submarines with respect to which the construction commencement 
date occurs after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 647. SUSPENSION OF POLICYHOLDERS SURPLUS ACCOUNT PROVISIONS.

 (a) Distributions To Shareholders From Pre-1984 Policyholders 
Surplus Account.--Section 815 (relating to distributions to 
shareholders from pre-1984 policyholders surplus account) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Special Rules Applicable During 2004 and 2005.--In the case 
of any taxable year of a stock life insurance company beginning after 
December 31, 2003, and before January 1, 2006--
 ``(1) the amount under subsection (a)(2) for such taxable 
 year shall be treated as zero, and
 ``(2) notwithstanding subsection (b), in determining any 
 subtractions from an account under subsections (c)(3) and 
 (d)(3), any distribution to shareholders during such taxable 
 year shall be treated as made first out of the policyholders 
 surplus account, then out of the shareholders surplus account, 
 and finally out of other accounts.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 648. PAYMENT OF DIVIDENDS ON STOCK OF COOPERATIVES WITHOUT 
 REDUCING PATRONAGE DIVIDENDS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 1388 (relating to 
patronage dividend defined) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new sentence: ``For purposes of paragraph (3), net earnings 
shall not be reduced by amounts paid during the year as dividends on 
capital stock or other proprietary capital interests of the 
organization to the extent that the articles of incorporation or bylaws 
of such organization or other contract with patrons provide that such 
dividends are in addition to amounts otherwise payable to patrons which 
are derived from business done with or for patrons during the taxable 
year.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to distributions in taxable years beginning after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 649. SPECIAL RULES FOR LIVESTOCK SOLD ON ACCOUNT OF WEATHER-
 RELATED CONDITIONS.

 (a) Replacement of Livestock With Other Farm Property.--Subsection 
(f) of section 1033 (relating to involuntary conversions) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``drought, flood, or other weather-related 
 conditions, or'' after ``because of'',
 (2) by inserting ``in the case of soil contamination or 
 other environmental contamination'' after ``including real 
 property'', and
 (3) by striking ``Where There Has Been Environmental 
 Contamination'' in the heading and inserting ``in Certain 
 Cases''.
 (b) Extension of Replacement Period of Involuntarily Converted 
Livestock.--Subsection (e) of section 1033 (relating to involuntary 
conversions) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Conditions.--For purposes'' and inserting 
 ``Conditions.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Extension of replacement period.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of drought, flood, 
 or other weather-related conditions described in 
 paragraph (1) which result in the area being designated 
 as eligible for assistance by the Federal Government, 
 subsection (a)(2)(B) shall be applied with respect to 
 any converted property by substituting `4 years' for `2 
 years'.
 ``(B) Further extension by secretary.--The 
 Secretary may extend on a regional basis the period for 
 replacement under this section (after the application 
 of subparagraph (A)) for such additional time as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate if the weather-related 
 conditions which resulted in such application continue 
 for more than 3 years.''.
 (c) Income Inclusion Rules.--Section 451(e) (relating to special 
rule for proceeds from livestock sold on account of drought, flood, or 
other weather-related conditions) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Special election rules.--If section 1033(e)(2) 
 applies to a sale or exchange of livestock described in 
 paragraph (1), the election under paragraph (1) shall be deemed 
 valid if made during the replacement period described in such 
 section.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 650. MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, in the case of a taxpayer who elects the application of 
this section and who was a party to a motor vehicle sales and service 
agreement with a motor vehicle manufacturer who announced in December 
2000 that it would phase-out the motor vehicle brand to which such 
agreement relates--
 (1) amounts received by such taxpayer from such 
 manufacturer on account of the termination of such agreement 
 (hereafter in this section referred to as ``termination 
 payment'') are considered to be received for property used in 
 the trade or business of a motor vehicle retail sales and 
 service dealership, and
 (2) to the extent such termination payment is reinvested in 
 property used in a motor vehicle retail sales and service 
 dealership located within the United States, such property 
 shall qualify as like-kind replacement property to which 
 section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply 
 with the following modifications:
 (A) Such section shall be applied without regard to 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B)(ii) of subsection (a)(3).
 (B) The period described in section 1031(a)(3)(B) 
 of such Code shall be applied by substituting ``2 
 years'' for ``180 days''.
 (b) Rules for Election.--
 (1) Form of election.--The taxpayer shall make an election 
 under this section in such form and manner as the Secretary of 
 the Treasury may prescribe and shall include in such election 
 the amount of the termination payment received, the 
 identification of the replacement property purchased, and such 
 other information as the Secretary may prescribe.
 (2) Election on amended return.--The Secretary of the 
 Treasury shall permit an election under this section on an 
 amended tax return for taxable years beginning before the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Statute of Limitations.--Notwithstanding the provisions of any 
other law or rule of law, the statutory period for the assessment for 
any deficiency attributable to any termination payment gain shall be 
extended until 3 years after the date the Secretary of the Treasury is 
notified by the taxpayer of the like-kind replacement property or an 
intention not to replace.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to amounts received 
after December 12, 2000, in taxable years ending after such date.

SEC. 651. EXPANSION OF DESIGNATED RENEWAL COMMUNITY AREA BASED ON 2000 
 CENSUS DATA.

 (a) Renewal Communities.--Section 1400E (relating to designation of 
renewal communities) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(g) Expansion of Designated Areas.--
 ``(1) Expansion based on 2000 Census.--At the request of 
 the nominating entity with respect to a renewal community, the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may expand the area 
 of a renewal community to include any census tract--
 ``(A) which, at the time such community was 
 nominated, met the requirements of this section for 
 inclusion in such community but for the failure of such 
 tract to meet 1 or more of the population and poverty 
 rate requirements of this section using 1990 census 
 data, and
 ``(B) which meets all failed population and poverty 
 rate requirements of this section using 2000 census 
 data.
 ``(2) Expansion to certain areas which do not meet 
 population requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--At the request of 1 or more 
 local governments and the State or States in which an 
 area described in subparagraph (B) is located, the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may expand a 
 designated area to include such area.
 ``(B) Area.--An area is described in this 
 subparagraph if--
 ``(i) the area is adjacent to at least 1 
 other area designated as a renewal community,
 ``(ii) the area has a population less than 
 the population required under subsection 
 (c)(2)(C), and
 ``(iii)(I) the area meets the requirements 
 of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection 
 (c)(2) and subparagraph (A) of subsection 
 (c)(3), or
 ``(II) the area contains a population of 
 less than 100 people.
 ``(3) Applicability.--Any expansion of a renewal community 
 under this section shall take effect as provided in subsection 
 (b).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this subsection shall 
take effect as if included in the amendments made by section 101 of the 
Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000.

SEC. 652. REDUCTION OF HOLDING PERIOD TO 12 MONTHS FOR PURPOSES OF 
 DETERMINING WHETHER HORSES ARE SECTION 1231 ASSETS.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1231(b)(3) (relating 
to definition of property used in the trade or business) is amended by 
striking ``and horses''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 653. BLUE RIBBON COMMISSION ON COMPREHENSIVE TAX REFORM.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established the ``Blue Ribbon 
 Commission on Comprehensive Tax Reform'' (in this section 
 referred to as the ``Commission'').
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed 
 of 17 members of whom--
 (i) 3 shall be appointed by the majority 
 leader of the Senate;
 (ii) 3 shall be appointed by the minority 
 leader of the Senate;
 (iii) 3 shall be appointed by the Speaker 
 of the House of Representatives;
 (iv) 3 shall be appointed by the minority 
 leader of the House of Representatives; and
 (v) 5 shall be appointed by the President, 
 of which no more than 3 shall be of the same 
 party as the President.
 (B) Federal employees.--The members of the 
 Commission may be employees or former employees of the 
 Federal Government.
 (C) Date.--The appointments of the members of the 
 Commission shall be made not later than October 30, 
 2004.
 (3) Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members shall be 
 appointed for the life of the Commission. Any vacancy in the 
 Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in 
 the same manner as the original appointment.
 (4) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
 on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the 
 Commission shall hold its first meeting.
 (5) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the 
 Chairman.
 (6) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission 
 shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may 
 hold hearings.
 (7) Chairman and vice chairman.--The President shall select 
 a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members.
 (b) Duties of the Commission.--
 (1) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study 
 of all matters relating to a comprehensive reform of the 
 Federal tax system, including the reform of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 and the implementation (if appropriate) of 
 other types of tax systems.
 (2) Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop 
 recommendations on how to comprehensively reform the Federal 
 tax system in a manner that generates appropriate revenue for 
 the Federal Government.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date on 
 which all initial members of the commission have been appointed 
 pursuant to subsection (a)(2), the Commission shall submit a 
 report to the President and Congress which shall contain a 
 detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the 
 Commission, together with its recommendations for such 
 legislation and administrative actions as it considers 
 appropriate.
 (c) Powers of the Commission.--
 (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit 
 and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and 
 receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to 
 carry out this Act.
 (2) Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may 
 secure directly from any Federal department or agency such 
 information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out 
 this Act. Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the 
 head of such department or agency shall furnish such 
 information to the Commission.
 (3) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions 
 as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
 (4) Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of 
 gifts or donations of services or property.
 (d) Commission Personnel Matters.--
 (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission 
 who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government 
 shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of 
 the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the 
 Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such 
 member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the 
 Commission. All members of the Commission who are officers or 
 employees of the United States shall serve without compensation 
 in addition to that received for their services as officers or 
 employees of the United States.
 (2) Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall 
 be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business 
 in the performance of services for the Commission.
 (3) Staff.--
 (A) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission 
 may, without regard to the civil service laws and 
 regulations, appoint and terminate an executive 
 director and such other additional personnel as may be 
 necessary to enable the Commission to perform its 
 duties. The employment of an executive director shall 
 be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
 (B) Compensation.--The Chairman of the Commission 
 may fix the compensation of the executive director and 
 other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States 
 Code, relating to classification of positions and 
 General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay 
 for the executive director and other personnel may not 
 exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive 
 Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
 (4) Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government 
 employee may be detailed to the Commission without 
 reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or 
 loss of civil service status or privilege.
 (5) Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.--
 The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and 
 intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United 
 States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the 
 daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for 
 level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such 
 title.
 (e) Termination of the Commission.--The Commission shall terminate 
90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under 
subsection (b).
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary to the Commission to carry out 
this section.

SEC. 654. TREATMENT OF DISTRIBUTIONS BY ESOPS WITH RESPECT TO S 
 CORPORATION STOCK.

 (a) In General.--Section 4975(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentences:
``A plan shall not be treated as violating the requirements of section 
401, 409, or subsection (e)(7), or as engaging in a prohibited 
transaction for purposes of paragraph (3), merely by reason of any 
distribution described in section 1368(a) with respect to S corporation 
stock which constitutes qualifying employer securities if the 
distribution is, in accordance with the plan provisions, used to make 
payments on a loan described in paragraph (3) the proceeds of which 
were used to acquire the qualifying employer securities (whether or not 
allocated to participants). The preceding sentence shall not apply in 
the case of a distribution which is paid with respect to any employer 
security which is allocated to a participant unless the plan provides 
that employer securities with a fair market value of not less than the 
amount of such distribution are allocated to such participant for the 
year which (but for the preceding sentence) such distribution would 
have been allocated to such participant.''
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1998.

SEC. 655. CLARIFICATION OF WORKING CAPITAL FOR REASONABLY ANTICIPATED 
 NEEDS OF A BUSINESS FOR PURPOSES OF ACCUMULATED EARNINGS 
 TAX.

 (a) In General.--Section 537(b) (relating to special rules) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Working capital.--The reasonably anticipated needs of 
 a business for any taxable year shall include working capital 
 for the business in an amount which is not less than the sum of 
 the cost of goods, operating expenses, taxes, and interest 
 expense which the business incurred during the preceding 
 taxable year. Any amounts incurred as part of a plan a 
 principal purpose of which is to increase the limitation under 
 this subsection shall not be taken into account.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003, and before January 
1, 2009.

SEC. 656. TAX TREATMENT OF STATE OWNERSHIP OF RAILROAD REAL ESTATE 
 INVESTMENT TRUST.

 (a) In General.--If a State owns all of the outstanding stock of a 
corporation which is a real estate investment trust, which is a non-
operating class III railroad, and substantially all of the activities 
of which consist of the ownership, leasing, and operation by such 
corporation of facilities, equipment, and other property used by the 
corporation or other persons in railroad transportation, then, for 
purposes of section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986--
 (1) income derived from such activities by the corporation 
 shall be treated as accruing to the State, and
 (2) such activities shall be treated as the exercise of an 
 essential governmental function of the State to the extent such 
 activities are of a type which are an essential government 
 function (within the meaning of section 115 of such Code).
 (b) Gain or Loss Not Recognized on Conversion.--Notwithstanding 
section 337(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986--
 (1) no gain or loss shall be recognized under section 336 
 or 337 of such Code, and
 (2) no change in basis of the property of such corporation 
 shall occur,
because of any change of status of the corporation to a tax-exempt 
entity by reason of the application of subsection (a).
 (c) Tax-Exempt Financing.--Any obligation issued by an entity 
described in subsection (a) shall be treated as an obligation of the 
State for purposes of applying section 103 and part IV of subchapter B 
of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) Real estate investment trust.--The term ``real estate 
 investment trust'' has the meaning given such term by section 
 856(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (2) Non-operating class iii railroad.--The term ``non-
 operating class III railroad'' has the meaning given such term 
 by part A of subtitle IV of title 49, United States Code (49 
 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.) and the regulations thereunder.
 (3) State.--The term ``State'' includes--
 (A) the District of Columbia and any possession of 
 the United States, and
 (B) any authority, agency, or public corporation of 
 a State.
 (e) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), this 
 section shall apply on and after the date on which a State 
 becomes the owner of all of the outstanding stock of a 
 corporation described in subsection (a).
 (2) Exception.--This section shall not apply to any State 
 which--
 (A) becomes the owner of all of the voting stock of 
 a corporation described in subsection (a) after 
 December 31, 2003, or
 (B) becomes the owner of all of the outstanding 
 stock of a corporation described in subsection (a) 
 after December 31, 2005.

SEC. 657. CLARIFICATION OF CONTRIBUTION IN AID OF CONSTRUCTION FOR 
 WATER AND SEWERAGE DISPOSAL UTILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 118(c)(3) (relating to 
definitions) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) Contribution in aid of construction.--The 
 term `contribution in aid of construction' shall be 
 defined by regulations prescribed by the Secretary, 
 except that such term--
 ``(i) shall include amounts paid as 
 customer connection fees (including amounts 
 paid to connect the customer's water service 
 line or sewer lateral line to the utility's 
 distribution or collection system or extend a 
 main water or sewer line to provide service to 
 a customer), and
 ``(ii) shall not include amounts paid as 
 service charges for starting or stopping 
 services.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to contributions made after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 658. CREDIT FOR PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF AGRICULTURAL WATER 
 CONSERVATION SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to foreign tax credit, etc.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new section:

``SEC. 30B. PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF AGRICULTURAL WATER 
 CONSERVATION SYSTEMS.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, 
there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this 
chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 30 percent of the water 
conservation system expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during 
such year.
 ``(b) Limitations.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) with 
respect to any acre of land which is served by a water conservation 
system shall not exceed the excess of--
 ``(1) $500, over
 ``(2) the amount of credit allowed under this section with 
 respect to such acre for all prior taxable years.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Eligible taxpayer.--The term `eligible taxpayer' 
 means any taxpayer if--
 ``(A) at least 50 percent of such taxpayer's gross 
 income is normally derived from farm land, and
 ``(B) such taxpayer complies with all Federal, 
 State, and local water rights and environmental laws.
 ``(2) Water conservation system expenses.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `water conservation 
 system expenses' means expenses for the purchase and 
 installation of a water conservation system but only 
 if--
 ``(i) the land served by the water 
 conservation system is entirely in a county or 
 county-equivalent area which has received, in 
 the taxable year the expenses were paid or 
 incurred or in any of the 3 preceding taxable 
 years, a primary-county designation due to 
 drought by the Secretary of Agriculture, and
 ``(ii) such system is certified as saving 
 at least 5 percent more irrigation water than 
 the irrigation system which was used on such 
 land immediately prior to the installation of 
 such water conservation system.
 For purposes of clause (ii), irrigation water savings 
 shall be determined and certified under regulations 
 prescribed jointly by the Natural Resources 
 Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture 
 and the Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of the 
 Interior. Such regulations shall include a list of 
 individuals or organizations qualified to make such 
 certification.
 ``(B) Water conservation system.--The term `water 
 conservation system' means, with respect to farm land--
 ``(i) new or replacement irrigation 
 equipment and machinery, including sprinklers, 
 pipes, siphons, nozzles, pumps, motors, and 
 engines, and
 ``(ii) computer systems for irrigation and 
 water management.
 ``(C) Farm land.--The term `farm land' means land 
 used in a trade or business by the taxpayer or a tenant 
 of the taxpayer for--
 ``(i) the production of crops, fruits, or 
 other agricultural products,
 ``(ii) the raising, harvesting, or growing 
 of trees, or
 ``(iii) the sustenance of livestock.
 ``(d) Year Expenditure Made.--For purposes of this section, an 
expenditure with respect to a water conservation system shall be 
treated as made when the original installation of the system is 
completed.
 ``(e) Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.--
 ``(1) Liability for tax.--The credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess 
 (if any) of--
 ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year, reduced 
 by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and 
 the preceding sections of this subpart, over
 ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable 
 year.
 ``(2) Carryforward of unused credit.--If the amount of the 
 credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year 
 exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1) for the taxable 
 year, the excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable 
 year and added to the amount allowable as a credit under 
 subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
 ``(f) Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed 
under this chapter with respect to any expense which is taken into 
account in determining the credit under this section, and any increase 
in the basis of any property which would (but for this subsection) 
result from such expense shall be reduced by the amount of credit 
allowed under this section for such expense.
 ``(g) Termination.--This section shall not apply to amounts paid or 
incurred with respect any water conservation system the installation of 
which is completed after December 31, 2006.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016, as 
amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
paragraph (30), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (31) and 
inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(32) to the extent provided in section 30B(f), in the 
 case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed 
 under section 30B.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new item:

 ``Sec. 30B. Purchase and installation of 
 agricultural water conservation 
 systems.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of 
this Act with respect any water conservation system the installation of 
which is completed after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 659. MODIFICATION OF INVOLUNTARY CONVERSION RULES FOR BUSINESSES 
 AFFECTED BY THE SEPTEMBER 11TH TERRORIST ATTACKS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (g) of section 1400L is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(g) Modification of Rules Applicable to Nonrecognition of Gain.--
In the case of property which is compulsorily or involuntarily 
converted as a result of the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, 
in the New York Liberty Zone--
 ``(1) which was held by a corporation which is a member of 
 an affiliated group filing a consolidated return, such 
 corporation shall be treated as satisfying the purchase 
 requirement of section 1033(a)(2) with respect to such property 
 to the extent such requirement is satisfied by another member 
 of the group, and
 ``(2) notwithstanding subsections (g) and (h) of section 
 1033, clause (i) of section 1033(a)(2)(B) shall be applied by 
 substituting `5 years' for `2 years' with respect to property 
 which is compulsorily or involuntarily converted as a result of 
 the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, in the New York 
 Liberty Zone but only if substantially all of the use of the 
 replacement property is in the City of New York, New York.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to 
involuntary conversions occurring on or after September 11, 2001.

SEC. 660. REPEAL OF APPLICATION OF BELOW-MARKET LOAN RULES TO AMOUNTS 
 PAID TO CERTAIN CONTINUING CARE FACILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 7872(c)(1) (relating to below-market loans 
to which section applies) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (F), and
 (2) by striking ``(C), or (F)'' in subparagraph (E) and 
 inserting ``or (C)''.
 (b) Full Exception.--Section 7872(g) (relating to exception for 
certain loans to qualified continuing care facilities) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``made by a lender to a qualified 
 continuing care facility pursuant to a continuing care 
 contract'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``owed by a facility 
 which on the last day of such year is a qualified continuing 
 care facility, if such loan was made pursuant to a continuing 
 care contract and'',
 (2) by striking ``increased personal care services or'' in 
 paragraph (3)(C),
 (3) by adding at the end of paragraph (3) the following new 
 flush sentence:
 ``The Secretary shall issue guidance which limits such term to 
 contracts which provide to an individual or individual's spouse 
 only facilities, care, and services described in this paragraph 
 which are customarily offered by continuing care facilities.'',
 (4) by inserting ``independent living unit'' after ``all of 
 the'' in paragraph (4)(A)(ii),
 (5) by striking paragraphs (2) and (5),
 (6) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (2) and (3), respectively, and
 (7) by striking ``Certain'' in the heading thereof.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to calendar years beginning after 2004.

SEC. 661. GOLD, SILVER, PLATINUM, AND PALLADIUM TREATED IN THE SAME 
 MANNER AS STOCKS AND BONDS FOR MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE 
 FOR INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1(h)(5) (relating to definition of 
collectibles gain and loss) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(as defined in section 408(m) without 
 regard to paragraph (3) thereof)'' in subparagraph (A) thereof, 
 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Collectible.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the term `collectible' has the meaning given such term 
 by section 408(m), except that in applying paragraph 
 (3)(B) thereof the determination of whether any bullion 
 is excluded from treatment as a collectible shall be 
 made without regard to the person who is in physical 
 possession of the bullion.''
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 662. INCLUSION OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY MEDICAL STRATEGIES FOR 
 CHILDREN AND ADULTS WITH SICKLE CELL DISEASE AS MEDICAL 
 ASSISTANCE UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.

 (a) Optional Medical Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of 
 paragraph (26);
 (ii) by redesignating paragraph (27) as 
 paragraph (28); and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (26), 
 the following:
 ``(27) subject to subsection (x), primary and secondary 
 medical strategies and treatment and services for individuals 
 who have Sickle Cell Disease; and''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(x) For purposes of subsection (a)(27), the strategies, 
treatment, and services described in that subsection include the 
following:
 ``(1) Chronic blood transfusion (with deferoxamine 
 chelation) to prevent stroke in individuals with Sickle Cell 
 Disease who have been identified as being at high risk for 
 stroke.
 ``(2) Genetic counseling and testing for individuals with 
 Sickle Cell Disease or the sickle cell trait to allow health 
 care professionals to treat such individuals and to prevent 
 symptoms of Sickle Cell Disease.
 ``(3) Other treatment and services to prevent individuals 
 who have Sickle Cell Disease and who have had a stroke from 
 having another stroke.''.
 (2) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in subsections (a)(27) 
 or (x) of section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396d), as added by paragraph (1), shall be construed as 
 implying that a State medicaid program under title XIX of such 
 Act could not have treated, prior to the date of enactment of 
 this Act, any of the primary and secondary medical strategies 
 and treatment and services described in such subsections as 
 medical assistance under such program, including as early and 
 periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment services under 
 section 1905(r) of such Act.
 (b) Federal Reimbursement for Education and Other Services Related 
to the Prevention and Treatment of Sickle Cell Disease.--Section 
1903(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(3)) is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``plus'' at the end 
 and inserting ``and''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) 50 percent of the sums expended with respect 
 to costs incurred during such quarter as are 
 attributable to providing--
 ``(i) services to identify and educate 
 individuals who are likely to be eligible for 
 medical assistance under this title and who 
 have Sickle Cell Disease or who are carriers of 
 the sickle cell gene, including education 
 regarding how to identify such individuals; or
 ``(ii) education regarding the risks of 
 stroke and other complications, as well as the 
 prevention of stroke and other complications, 
 in individuals who are likely to be eligible 
 for medical assistance under this title and who 
 have Sickle Cell Disease; plus''.
 (c) Demonstration Program for the Development and Establishment of 
Systemic Mechanisms for the Prevention and Treatment of Sickle Cell 
Disease.--
 (1) Authority to conduct demonstration program.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator, through the 
 Bureau of Primary Health Care and the Maternal and 
 Child Health Bureau, shall conduct a demonstration 
 program by making grants to up to 40 eligible entities 
 for each fiscal year in which the program is conducted 
 under this section for the purpose of developing and 
 establishing systemic mechanisms to improve the 
 prevention and treatment of Sickle Cell Disease, 
 including through--
 (i) the coordination of service delivery 
 for individuals with Sickle Cell Disease;
 (ii) genetic counseling and testing;
 (iii) bundling of technical services 
 related to the prevention and treatment of 
 Sickle Cell Disease;
 (iv) training of health professionals; and
 (v) identifying and establishing other 
 efforts related to the expansion and 
 coordination of education, treatment, and 
 continuity of care programs for individuals 
 with Sickle Cell Disease.
 (B) Grant award requirements.--
 (i) Geographic diversity.--The 
 Administrator shall, to the extent practicable, 
 award grants under this section to eligible 
 entities located in different regions of the 
 United States.
 (ii) Priority.--In awarding grants under 
 this subsection, the Administrator shall give 
 priority to awarding grants to eligible 
 entities that are--
 (I) Federally-qualified health 
 centers that have a partnership or 
 other arrangement with a comprehensive 
 Sickle Cell Disease treatment center 
 that does not receive funds from the 
 National Institutes of Health; or
 (II) Federally-qualified health 
 centers that intend to develop a 
 partnership or other arrangement with a 
 comprehensive Sickle Cell Disease 
 treatment center that does not receive 
 funds from the National Institutes of 
 Health.
 (2) Additional requirements.--An eligible entity awarded a 
 grant under this subsection shall use funds made available 
 under the grant to carry out, in addition to the activities 
 described in paragraph (1)(A), the following activities:
 (A) To facilitate and coordinate the delivery of 
 education, treatment, and continuity of care for 
 individuals with Sickle Cell Disease under--
 (i) the entity's collaborative agreement 
 with a community-based Sickle Cell Disease 
 organization or a nonprofit entity that works 
 with individuals who have Sickle Cell Disease;
 (ii) the Sickle Cell Disease newborn 
 screening program for the State in which the 
 entity is located; and
 (iii) the maternal and child health program 
 under title V of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) for the State in which the 
 entity is located.
 (B) To train nursing and other health staff who 
 provide care for individuals with Sickle Cell Disease.
 (C) To enter into a partnership with adult or 
 pediatric hematologists in the region and other 
 regional experts in Sickle Cell Disease at tertiary and 
 academic health centers and State and county health 
 offices.
 (D) To identify and secure resources for ensuring 
 reimbursement under the medicaid program, State 
 children's health insurance program, and other health 
 programs for the prevention and treatment of Sickle 
 Cell Disease.
 (3) National coordinating center.--
 (A) Establishment.--The Administrator shall enter 
 into a contract with an entity to serve as the National 
 Coordinating Center for the demonstration program 
 conducted under this subsection.
 (B) Activities described.--The National 
 Coordinating Center shall--
 (i) collect, coordinate, monitor, and 
 distribute data, best practices, and findings 
 regarding the activities funded under grants 
 made to eligible entities under the 
 demonstration program;
 (ii) develop a model protocol for eligible 
 entities with respect to the prevention and 
 treatment of Sickle Cell Disease;
 (iii) develop educational materials 
 regarding the prevention and treatment of 
 Sickle Cell Disease; and
 (iv) prepare and submit to Congress a final 
 report that includes recommendations regarding 
 the effectiveness of the demonstration program 
 conducted under this subsection and such direct 
 outcome measures as--
 (I) the number and type of health 
 care resources utilized (such as 
 emergency room visits, hospital visits, 
 length of stay, and physician visits 
 for individuals with Sickle Cell 
 Disease); and
 (II) the number of individuals that 
 were tested and subsequently received 
 genetic counseling for the sickle cell 
 trait.
 (4) Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under 
 this subsection shall submit an application to the 
 Administrator at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Administrator may require.
 (5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' 
 means the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration.
 (B) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' 
 means a Federally-qualified health center, a nonprofit 
 hospital or clinic, or a university health center that 
 provides primary health care, that--
 (i) has a collaborative agreement with a 
 community-based Sickle Cell Disease 
 organization or a nonprofit entity with 
 experience in working with individuals who have 
 Sickle Cell Disease; and
 (ii) demonstrates to the Administrator that 
 either the Federally-qualified health center, 
 the nonprofit hospital or clinic, the 
 university health center, the organization or 
 entity described in clause (i), or the experts 
 described in paragraph (2)(C), has at least 5 
 years of experience in working with individuals 
 who have Sickle Cell Disease.
 (C) Federally-qualified health center.--The term 
 ``Federally-qualified health center'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(l)(2)(B)).
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, $10,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2005 through 2009.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
take effect on the date of enactment of this Act and apply to medical 
assistance and services provided under title XIX of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) on or after that date.

 Subtitle F--Revenue Provisions

 PART I--GENERAL REVENUE PROVISIONS

SEC. 661A. TREASURY REGULATIONS ON FOREIGN TAX CREDIT.

 Section 901, as amended by this Act, is amended by redesignating 
subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(m) Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe regulations 
disallowing a credit under subsection (a) for all or a portion of any 
foreign tax, or allocating a foreign tax among 2 or more persons, in 
cases where the foreign tax is imposed on any person in respect of 
income of another person or in other cases involving the inappropriate 
separation of the foreign tax from the related foreign income.''.

SEC. 662B. FREEZE OF PROVISIONS REGARDING SUSPENSION OF INTEREST WHERE 
 SECRETARY FAILS TO CONTACT TAXPAYER.

 (a) In General.--Section 6404(g) (relating to suspension of 
interest and certain penalties where Secretary fails to contact 
taxpayer) is amended by striking ``1-year period (18-month period in 
the case of taxable years beginning before January 1, 2004)'' both 
places it appears and inserting ``18-month period''.
 (b) Exception for Gross Misstatement.--Section 6404(g)(2) (relating 
to exceptions) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
(C), by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E), and by 
inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) any interest, penalty, addition to tax, or 
 additional amount with respect to any gross 
 misstatement; or''.
 (c) Exception for Listed and Reportable Transactions.--Section 
6404(g)(2) (relating to exceptions), as amended by subsection (b), is 
amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by 
redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F), and by inserting 
after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) any interest, penalty, addition to tax, or 
 additional amount with respect to any reportable 
 transaction or listed transaction (as defined in 
 6707A(c)); or''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years 
 beginning after December 31, 2003.
 (2) Exception for reportable or listed transactions.--The 
 amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply with respect to 
 interest accruing after May 5, 2004.

 PART II--PENSION AND DEFERRED COMPENSATION

SEC. 671. TREATMENT OF NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 
is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 409A. INCLUSION IN GROSS INCOME OF DEFERRED COMPENSATION UNDER 
 NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLANS.

 ``(a) Rules Relating to Constructive Receipt.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Gross income inclusion.--If at any time 
 during a taxable year a nonqualified deferred 
 compensation plan--
 ``(i) fails to meet the requirements of 
 paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5), or
 ``(ii) is not operated in accordance with 
 such requirements,
 all compensation deferred under the plan for the 
 taxable year and all preceding taxable years shall be 
 includible in gross income for the taxable year to the 
 extent not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture 
 and not previously included in gross income.
 ``(B) Interest and additional tax payable with 
 respect to previously deferred compensation.--
 ``(i) In general.--If compensation is 
 required to be included in gross income under 
 subparagraph (A) for a taxable year, the tax 
 imposed by this chapter for the taxable year of 
 inclusion shall be increased by the sum of--
 ``(I) the amount of interest 
 determined under clause (ii), and
 ``(II) an amount equal to 10 
 percent of the compensation which is 
 required to be included in gross 
 income.
 ``(ii) Interest.--For purposes of clause 
 (i), the interest determined under this clause 
 for any taxable year is the amount of interest 
at the underpayment rate on the underpayments that would have occurred 
had the deferred compensation been includible in gross income for the 
taxable year in which first deferred or, if later, the first taxable 
year in which such deferred compensation is not subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture.
 ``(2) Distributions.--
 ``(A) In general.--The requirements of this 
 paragraph are met if the plan provides that 
 compensation deferred under the plan may not be 
 distributed earlier than--
 ``(i) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B)(i), separation from service (as determined 
 by the Secretary),
 ``(ii) the date the participant becomes 
 disabled (within the meaning of subparagraph 
 (C)),
 ``(iii) death,
 ``(iv) a specified time (or pursuant to a 
 fixed schedule) specified under the plan as of 
 the date of the deferral of such compensation,
 ``(v) to the extent provided by the 
 Secretary, a change in the ownership or 
 effective control of the corporation, or in the 
 ownership of a substantial portion of the 
 assets of the corporation, or
 ``(vi) the occurrence of an unforeseeable 
 emergency.
 ``(B) Special rules.--
 ``(i) Separation from service of specified 
 employees.--In the case of specified employees, 
 the requirement of subparagraph (A)(i) is met 
 only if distributions may not be made earlier 
 than 6 months after the date of separation from 
 service. For purposes of the preceding 
 sentence, a specified employee is a key 
 employee (as defined in section 416(i)) of a 
 corporation the stock in which is publicly 
 traded on an established securities market or 
 otherwise.
 ``(ii) Changes in ownership or control.--In 
 the case of a participant who is subject to the 
 requirements of section 16(a) of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934, the requirement of 
 subparagraph (A)(v) is met only if 
 distributions may not be made earlier than 1 
 year after the date of the change in ownership 
 or effective control.
 ``(iii) Unforeseeable emergency.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(vi)--
 ``(I) In general.--The term 
 `unforeseeable emergency' means a 
 severe financial hardship to the 
 participant or beneficiary resulting 
 from a sudden and unexpected illness or 
 accident of the participant or 
 beneficiary, the participant's or 
 beneficiary's spouse, or the 
 participant's or beneficiary's 
 dependent (as defined in section 
 152(a)), loss of the participant's or 
 beneficiary's property due to casualty, 
 or other similar extraordinary and 
 unforeseeable circumstances arising as 
 a result of events beyond the control 
 of the participant or beneficiary.
 ``(II) Limitation on 
 distributions.--The requirement of 
 subparagraph (A)(vi) is met only if, as 
 determined under regulations of the 
 Secretary, the amounts distributed with 
 respect to an emergency do not exceed 
 the amounts necessary to satisfy such 
 emergency plus amounts necessary to pay 
 taxes reasonably anticipated as a 
 result of the distribution, after 
 taking into account the extent to which 
 such hardship is or may be relieved 
 through reimbursement or compensation 
 by insurance or otherwise or by 
 liquidation of the participant's or 
 beneficiary's assets (to the extent the 
 liquidation of such assets would not 
 itself cause severe financial 
 hardship).
 ``(C) Disabled.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), a participant shall be considered disabled if 
 the participant--
 ``(i) is unable to engage in any 
 substantial gainful activity by reason of any 
 medically determinable physical or mental 
 impairment which can be expected to result in 
 death or can be expected to last for a 
 continuous period of not less than 12 months, 
 or
 ``(ii) is, by reason of any medically 
 determinable physical or mental impairment 
 which can be expected to result in death or can 
 be expected to last for a continuous period of 
 not less than 12 months, receiving income 
 replacement benefits for a period of not less 
 than 3 months under an accident and health plan 
 covering employees of the participant's 
 employer.
 ``(3) Investment options.--The requirements of this 
 paragraph are met if the plan provides that the investment 
 options a participant may elect under the plan--
 ``(A) are comparable to the investment options 
 which a participant may elect under the defined 
 contribution plan of the employer which--
 ``(i) meets the requirement of section 
 401(a) and includes a trust exempt from 
 taxation under section 501(a), and
 ``(ii) has the fewest investment options, 
 or
 ``(B) if there is no such defined contribution 
 plan, meet such requirements as the Secretary may 
 prescribe (including requirements limiting such options 
 to permissible investment options specified by the 
 Secretary).
 ``(4) Acceleration of benefits.--The requirements of this 
 paragraph are met if the plan does not permit the acceleration 
 of the time or schedule of any payment under the plan, except 
 as provided by the Secretary in regulations.
 ``(5) Elections.--
 ``(A) In general.--The requirements of this 
 paragraph are met if the requirements of subparagraphs 
 (B) and (C) are met.
 ``(B) Initial deferral decision.--The requirements 
 of this subparagraph are met if the plan provides that 
 compensation for services performed during a taxable 
 year may be deferred at the participant's election only 
 if the election to defer such compensation is made 
 during the preceding taxable year or at such other time 
 as provided in regulations. In the case of the first 
 year in which a participant becomes eligible to 
 participate in the plan, such election may be made with 
 respect to services to be performed subsequent to the 
 election within 30 days after the date the participant 
 becomes eligible to participate in such plan.
 ``(C) Changes in time and form of distribution.--
 The requirements of this subparagraph are met if, in 
 the case of a plan which permits under a subsequent 
 election a delay in a payment or a change in the form 
 of payment--
 ``(i) the plan requires that such election 
 may not take effect until at least 12 months 
 after the date on which the election is made,
 ``(ii) in the case an election related to a 
 payment not described in clause (ii), (iii), or 
 (vi) of paragraph (2)(A), the plan requires 
 that the first payment with respect to which 
 such election is made be deferred for a period 
 of not less than 5 years from the date such 
 payment would otherwise have been made, and
 ``(iii) the plan requires that any election 
 related to a payment described in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(iv) may not be made less than 12 months 
 prior to the date of the first scheduled 
 payment under such paragraph.
 A plan shall be treated as failing to meet the 
 requirements of this subparagraph if the plan permits 
 more than 1 subsequent election to delay any payment.
 ``(b) Rules Relating to Funding.--
 ``(1) Offshore property in a trust.--In the case of assets 
 set aside (directly or indirectly) in a trust (or other 
 arrangement determined by the Secretary) for purposes of paying 
 deferred compensation under a nonqualified deferred 
 compensation plan, such assets shall be treated for purposes of 
 section 83 as property transferred in connection with the 
 performance of services whether or not such assets are 
 available to satisfy claims of general creditors--
 ``(A) at the time set aside if such assets are 
 located outside of the United States, or
 ``(B) at the time transferred if such assets are 
 subsequently transferred outside of the United States.
 This paragraph shall not apply to assets located in a foreign 
 jurisdiction if substantially all of the services to which the 
 nonqualified deferred compensation relates are performed in 
 such jurisdiction.
 ``(2) Employer's financial health.--In the case of a 
 nonqualified deferred compensation plan, there is a transfer of 
 property within the meaning of section 83 as of the earlier 
 of--
 ``(A) the date on which the plan first provides 
 that assets will become restricted to the provision of 
 benefits under the plan in connection with a change in 
 the employer's financial health, or
 ``(B) the date on which assets are so restricted.
 ``(3) Income inclusion for offshore trusts and employer's 
 financial health.--For each taxable year that assets treated as 
 transferred under this subsection remain set aside in a trust 
 or other arrangement subject to paragraph (1) or (2), any 
 increase in value in, or earnings with respect to, such assets 
 shall be treated as an additional transfer of property under 
 this subsection (to the extent not previously included in 
 income).
 ``(4) Interest on tax liability payable with respect to 
 transferred property.--
 ``(A) In general.--If amounts are required to be 
 included in gross income by reason of paragraph (1) or 
 (2) for a taxable year, the tax imposed by this chapter 
 for such taxable year shall be increased by the sum 
 of--
 ``(i) the amount of interest determined 
 under subparagraph (B), and
 ``(ii) an amount equal to 10 percent of the 
 amounts required to be included in gross 
 income.
 ``(B) Interest.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), 
 the interest determined under this subparagraph for any 
 taxable year is the amount of interest at the 
 underpayment rate on the underpayments that would have 
 occurred had the amounts so required to be included in 
 gross income by paragraph (1) or (2) been includible in 
 gross income for the taxable year in which first 
 deferred or, if later, the first taxable year in which 
 such amounts are not subject to a substantial risk of 
 forfeiture.
 ``(c) No Inference on Earlier Income Inclusion.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to prevent the inclusion of amounts in gross 
income under any other provision of this chapter or any other rule of 
law earlier than the time provided in this section. Any amount included 
in gross income under this section shall not be required to be included 
in gross income under any other provision of this chapter or any other 
rule of law later than the time provided in this section.
 ``(d) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Nonqualified deferred compensation plan.--The term 
 `nonqualified deferred compensation plan' means any plan that 
 provides for the deferral of compensation, other than--
 ``(A) a qualified employer plan, and
 ``(B) any bona fide vacation leave, sick leave, 
 compensatory time, disability pay, or death benefit 
 plan.
 ``(2) Qualified employer plan.--The term `qualified 
 employer plan' means--
 ``(A) any plan, contract, pension, account, or 
 trust described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 
 219(g)(5), and
 ``(B) any eligible deferred compensation plan 
 (within the meaning of section 457(b)) of an employer 
 described in section 457(e)(1)(A).
 ``(3) Plan includes arrangements, etc.--The term `plan' 
 includes any agreement or arrangement, including an agreement 
 or arrangement that includes one person.
 ``(4) Substantial risk of forfeiture.--The rights of a 
 person to compensation are subject to a substantial risk of 
 forfeiture if such person's rights to such compensation are 
 conditioned upon the future performance of substantial services 
 by any individual.
 ``(5) Treatment of earnings.--References to deferred 
 compensation shall be treated as including references to income 
 (whether actual or notional) attributable to such compensation 
 or such income.
 ``(6) Exception for nonelective deferred compensation.--
 This section shall not apply to any nonelective deferred 
 compensation to which section 457 does not apply by reason of 
 section 457(e)(12), but only if such compensation is provided 
 under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan which was in 
 existence on May 1, 2004, and which was providing nonelective 
 deferred compensation described in section 457(e)(12) on such 
 date. If, after May 1, 2004, a plan described in the preceding 
 sentence adopts a plan amemdment which provides a material 
 change in the classes of individuals eligible to participate in 
 the plan, this paragraph shall not apply to any nonelective 
 deferred compensation provided under the plan on or after the 
 date of the adoption of the amendment.
 ``(e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
section, including regulations--
 ``(1) providing for the determination of amounts of 
 deferral in the case of a nonqualified deferred compensation 
 plan which is a defined benefit plan,
 ``(2) relating to changes in the ownership and control of a 
 corporation or assets of a corporation for purposes of 
 subsection (a)(2)(A)(v),
 ``(3) exempting arrangements from the application of 
 subsection (b) if such arrangements will not result in an 
 improper deferral of United States tax and will not result in 
 assets being effectively beyond the reach of creditors,
 ``(4) defining financial health for purposes of subsection 
 (b)(2), and
 ``(5) disregarding a substantial risk of forfeiture in 
 cases where necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
 section.''.
 (b) Application of Golden Parachute Payment Provisions.--Section 
280G of such Code (relating to golden parachute payments) is amended by 
redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f) and by inserting after 
subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Special Rules for Certain Payments From Nonqualified Deferred 
Compensation Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this section, an applicable payment shall be treated as an 
 excess parachute payment for purposes of this section and 
 section 4999.
 ``(2) Coordination with other payments.--
 ``(A) Applicable payments which are parachute 
 payments.--If any applicable payment is a parachute 
 payment (determined without regard to subsection 
 (b)(2)(A)(ii))--
 ``(i) except as provided in paragraph (4), 
 this section shall be applied to such payment 
 in the same manner as if this subsection had 
 not been enacted, and
 ``(ii) if such application results in an 
 excess parachute payment, any tax under section 
 4999 on the excess parachute payment shall be 
 in addition to the tax imposed by reason of 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Applicable payments which are not parachute 
 payments.--An applicable payment not described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall be taken into account in 
 determining whether any payment described in 
 subparagraph (A) or any payment which is not an 
 applicable payment is a parachute payment under 
 subsection (b)(2).
 ``(3) Applicable payment.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `applicable payment' means any distribution (including 
 any distribution treated as a parachute payment without regard 
 to this subsection) from a nonqualified deferred compensation 
 plan (as defined in section 409A(d)) which is made--
 ``(A) to a participant who is subject to the 
 requirements of section 16(a) of the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934, and
 ``(B) during the 1-year period following a change 
 in the ownership or effective control of the 
 corporation or in the ownership of a substantial 
 portion of the assets of the corporation.
 Such terms shall not include any distribution by reason of the 
 death of the participant or the participant becoming disabled 
 (within the meaning of section 409A(a)(2)(C)).
 ``(4) No double counting.--Under regulations, proper 
 adjustments shall be made in the application of this subsection 
 to prevent a deduction from being disallowed more than once.''.
 (c) W-2 Forms.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 6051 (relating 
 to receipts for employees) is amended by striking ``and'' at 
 the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (12) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after 
 paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 ``(13) the total amount of deferrals under a nonqualified 
 deferred compensation plan (within the meaning of section 
 409A(d)).''.
 (2) Threshold.--Subsection (a) of section 6051 is amended 
 by adding at the end the following: ``In the case of the 
 amounts required to be shown by paragraph (13), the Secretary 
 may (by regulation) establish a minimum amount of deferrals 
 below which paragraph (13) does not apply.''.
 (d) Conforming and Clerical Amendments.--
 (1) Section 414(b) is amended by inserting ``409A,'' after 
 ``408(p),''.
 (2) Section 414(c) is amended by inserting ``409A,'' after 
 ``408(p),''.
 (3) The table of sections for such subpart A is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 409A. Inclusion in gross income of 
 deferred compensation under 
 nonqualified deferred 
 compensation plans.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to amounts deferred in taxable years beginning after 
 December 31, 2004.
 (2) Earnings attributable to amount previously deferred.--
 The amendments made by this section shall apply to earnings on 
 deferred compensation only to the extent that such amendments 
 apply to such compensation.
 (f) Guidance Relating to Change of Ownership or Control.--Not later 
than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall issue guidance on what constitutes a change in 
ownership or effective control for purposes of section 409A of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section.
 (g) Guidance Relating to Termination of Certain Existing 
Arrangements.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue guidance 
providing a limited period during which an individual participating in 
a nonqualified deferred compensation plan adopted on or before December 
31, 2004, may, without violating the requirements of paragraphs (2), 
(3), (4), and (5) of section 409A(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (as added by this section), terminate participation or cancel an 
outstanding deferral election with regard to amounts earned after 
December 31, 2004, if such amounts are includible in income as earned.

SEC. 672. PROHIBITION ON DEFERRAL OF GAIN FROM THE EXERCISE OF STOCK 
 OPTIONS AND RESTRICTED STOCK GAINS THROUGH DEFERRED 
 COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 83 (relating to property transferred in 
connection with performance of services) is amending by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Prohibition on Additional Deferral Through Deferred 
Compensation Arrangements.--If a taxpayer exchanges--
 ``(1) an option to purchase employer securities--
 ``(A) to which subsection (a) applies, or
 ``(B) which is described in subsection (e)(3), or
 ``(2) employer securities or any other property based on 
 employer securities transferred to the taxpayer,
for a right to receive future payments, then, notwithstanding any other 
provision of this title, there shall be included in gross income for 
the taxable year of the exchange an amount equal to the present value 
of such right (or such other amount as the Secretary may by regulations 
specify). For purposes of this subsection, the term `employer 
securities' includes any security issued by the employer.''.
 (b) Controlled Group Rules.--Section 414(t)(2) is amended by 
inserting ``83(i),'' after ``79,''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to any exchange after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 673. INCREASE IN WITHHOLDING FROM SUPPLEMENTAL WAGE PAYMENTS IN 
 EXCESS OF $1,000,000.

 (a) In General.--If an employer elects under Treasury Regulation 
31.3402(g)-1 to determine the amount to be deducted and withheld from 
any supplemental wage payment by using a flat percentage rate, the rate 
to be used in determining the amount to be so deducted and withheld 
shall not be less than 28 percent (or the corresponding rate in effect 
under section 1(i)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for taxable 
years beginning in the calendar year in which the payment is made).
 (b) Special Rule for Large Payments.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), if the 
 supplemental wage payment, when added to all such payments 
 previously made by the employer to the employee during the 
 calendar year, exceeds $1,000,000, the rate used with respect 
 to such excess shall be equal to the maximum rate of tax in 
 effect under section 1 of such Code for taxable years beginning 
 in such calendar year.
 (2) Aggregation.--All persons treated as a single employer 
 under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as a single employer for 
 purposes of this subsection.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 13273 of the Revenue 
Reconciliation Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-66) is repealed.
 (d) Effective Date.--The provisions of, and the amendment made by, 
this section shall apply to payments made after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 674. TREATMENT OF SALE OF STOCK ACQUIRED PURSUANT TO EXERCISE OF 
 STOCK OPTIONS TO COMPLY WITH CONFLICT-OF-INTEREST 
 REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 421 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to general rules for certain stock options) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Certain Sales To Comply With Conflict-of-Interest 
Requirements.--If--
 ``(1) a share of stock is transferred to an eligible person 
 (as defined in section 1043(b)(1)) pursuant to such person's 
 exercise of an option to which this part applies, and
 ``(2) such share is disposed of by such person pursuant to 
 a certificate of divestiture (as defined in section 
 1043(b)(2)),
such disposition shall be treated as meeting the requirements of 
section 422(a)(1) or 423(a)(1), whichever is applicable.''
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to sales after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 675. APPLICATION OF BASIS RULES TO EMPLOYER AND EMPLOYEE 
 CONTRIBUTIONS ON BEHALF OF NONRESIDENT ALIENS.

 (a) In General.--Section 72 (relating to annuities and certain 
proceeds of endowment and life insurance contracts) is amended by 
redesignating subsection (w) as subsection (x) and by inserting after 
subsection (v) the following new subsection:
 ``(w) Application of Basis Rules to Employer and Employee 
Contributions Made on Behalf of Nonresident Aliens.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this section, for purposes of determining the portion of any 
 distribution which is includible in gross income of a 
 distributee who is a citizen or resident of the United States, 
 the investment in the contract shall not include any applicable 
 nontaxable contributions.
 ``(2) Applicable nontaxable contribution.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `applicable nontaxable contribution' 
 means any employer or employee contribution--
 ``(A) which was made with respect to compensation 
 for labor or personal services by an employee who, at 
 the time the services were performed, was a nonresident 
 alien for purposes of the laws of the United States in 
 effect at such time, but only if such compensation is 
 treated as from sources without the United States, and
 ``(B) which was not subject to income tax under the 
 laws of the United States or any foreign country.
 ``(3) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such 
 regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of 
 this subsection, including regulations treating contributions 
 as not subject to tax under the laws of any foreign country 
 where appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
 subsection.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to distributions on or after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

 TITLE VII--EXTENSIONS OF CERTAIN EXPIRING PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Extensions

SEC. 701. PARITY IN THE APPLICATION OF CERTAIN LIMITS TO MENTAL HEALTH 
 BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--Section 9812(f) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), and
 (2) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(2) on or after January 1, 2004, and before the date of 
 the enactment of the Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) 
 Act, and
 ``(3) after December 31, 2005.''.
 (b) ERISA.--Section 712(f) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185a(f)) is amended by striking ``on 
or after December 31, 2004'' and inserting ``after December 31, 2005''.
 (c) PHSA.--Section 2705(f) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-5(f)) is amended by striking ``on or after December 31, 
2004'' and inserting ``after December 31, 2005''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Subsection (a).--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall apply to benefits for services furnished on or after 
 December 31, 2003.
 (2) Subsections (b) and (c).--The amendments made by 
 subsections (b) and (c) shall apply to benefits for services 
 furnished on or after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 702. MODIFICATIONS TO WORK OPPORTUNITY CREDIT AND WELFARE-TO-WORK 
 CREDIT.

 (a) Permanent Extension of Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Section 51(c) is amended by striking 
 paragraph (4).
 (2) Long-term family assistance recipients.--
 (A) In general.--Section 51A is amended by striking 
 subsection (f).
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) The heading for section 51A is amended 
 by striking ``temporary''.
 (ii) The item relating to section 51A in 
 the table of sections for subpart F of part IV 
 of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by 
 striking ``Temporary incentives'' and inserting 
 ``Incentives''.
 (b) Eligibility of Ex-Felons Determined Without Regard to Family 
Income.--Paragraph (4) of section 51(d) is amended by adding ``and'' at 
the end of subparagraph (A), by striking ``, and'' at the end of 
subparagraph (B) and inserting a period, and by striking all that 
follows subparagraph (B).
 (c) Increase in Maximum Age for Eligibility of Food Stamp 
Recipients.--Clause (i) of section 51(d)(8)(A) is amended by striking 
``25'' and inserting ``40''.
 (d) Increase in Maximum Age for Designated Community residents.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (5) of section 51(d) is amended 
 to read as follows:
 ``(5) Designated community residents.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `designated community 
 resident' means any individual who is certified by the 
 designated local agency--
 ``(i) as having attained age 18 but not age 
 40 on the hiring date, and
 ``(ii) as having his principal place of 
 abode within an empowerment zone, enterprise 
 community, or renewal community.
 ``(B) Individual must continue to reside in zone or 
 community.--In the case of a designated community 
 resident, the term `qualified wages' shall not include 
 wages paid or incurred for services performed while the 
 individual's principal place of abode is outside an 
 empowerment zone, enterprise community, or renewal 
 community.''
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (D) of section 
 51(d)(1) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(D) a designated community resident,''.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Extension of credits.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (a) shall apply to individuals who begin work for 
 the employer after December 31, 2003.
 (2) Modifications.--The amendments made by subsections (b), 
 (c), and (d) shall apply to individuals who begin work for the 
 employer after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 703. CONSOLIDATION OF WORK OPPORTUNITY CREDIT WITH WELFARE-TO-WORK 
 CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 51(d) is amended by 
striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period 
at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) a long-term family assistance recipient.''
 (b) Long-Term Family Assistance Recipient.--Subsection (d) of 
section 51 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (10) through (12) as 
paragraphs (11) through (13), respectively, and by inserting after 
paragraph (9) the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Long-term family assistance recipient.--The term 
 `long-term family assistance recipient' means any individual 
 who is certified by the designated local agency--
 ``(A) as being a member of a family receiving 
 assistance under a IV-A program (as defined in 
 paragraph (2)(B)) for at least the 18-month period 
 ending on the hiring date,
 ``(B)(i) as being a member of a family receiving 
 such assistance for 18 months beginning after August 5, 
 1997, and
 ``(ii) as having a hiring date which is not more 
 than 2 years after the end of the earliest such 18-
 month period, or
 ``(C)(i) as being a member of a family which ceased 
 to be eligible for such assistance by reason of any 
 limitation imposed by Federal or State law on the 
 maximum period such assistance is payable to a family, 
 and
 ``(ii) as having a hiring date which is not more 
 than 2 years after the date of such cessation.''
 (c) Increased Credit for Employment of Long-Term Family Assistance 
Recipients.--Section 51 is amended by inserting after subsection (d) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Credit for Employment of Long-Term Family Assistance 
Recipients.--
 ``(1) In general.--With respect to the employment of a 
 long-term family assistance recipient--
 ``(A) the amount of the work opportunity credit 
 determined under this section for the taxable year 
 shall include 50 percent of the qualified second-year 
 wages for such year, and
 ``(B) in lieu of applying subsection (b)(3), the 
 amount of the qualified first-year wages, and the 
 amount of qualified second-year wages, which may be 
 taken into account with respect to such a recipient 
 shall not exceed $10,000 per year.
 ``(2) Qualified second-year wages.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `qualified second-year wages' means 
 qualified wages--
 ``(A) which are paid to a long-term family 
 assistance recipient, and
 ``(B) which are attributable to service rendered 
 during the 1-year period beginning on the day after the 
 last day of the 1-year period with respect to such 
 recipient determined under subsection (b)(2).
 ``(3) Special rules for agricultural and railway labor.--If 
 such recipient is an employee to whom subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 of subsection (h)(1) applies, rules similar to the rules of 
 such subparagraphs shall apply except that--
 ``(A) such subparagraph (A) shall be applied by 
 substituting `$10,000' for `$6,000', and
 ``(B) such subparagraph (B) shall be applied by 
 substituting `$833.33' for `$500'.''
 (d) Repeal of Separate Welfare-to-Work Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Section 51A is hereby repealed.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subpart 
 F of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by 
 striking the item relating to section 51A.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to individuals who begin work for the employer after December 31, 
2004.

SEC. 704. QUALIFIED ZONE ACADEMY BONDS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 1397E(e) is amended by 
striking ``and 2003'' and inserting ``2003, 2004, and 2005''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to obligations issued after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 705. COVER OVER OF TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 7652(f) is amended by 
striking ``January 1, 2004'' and inserting ``January 1, 2006''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to articles brought into the United States after December 31, 
2003.

SEC. 706. DEDUCTION FOR CORPORATE DONATIONS OF SCIENTIFIC PROPERTY AND 
 COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Scientific Property Used for Research.--
 (1) In general.--Clause (ii) of section 170(e)(4)(B) 
 (defining qualified research contributions) is amended by 
 inserting ``or assembled'' after ``constructed''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Clause (iii) of section 
 170(e)(4)(B) is amended by inserting ``or assembling'' after 
 ``construction''.
 (b) Computer Technology and Equipment for Educational Purposes.--
 (1) In general.--Clause (ii) of section 170(e)(6)(B) is 
 amended by inserting ``or assembled'' after ``constructed'' and 
 ``or assembling'' after ``construction''.
 (2) Special rule extended.--Section 170(e)(6)(G) is amended 
 by striking ``2003'' and inserting ``2005''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--Subparagraph (D) of section 
 170(e)(6) is amended by inserting ``or assembled'' after 
 ``constructed'' and ``or assembling'' after ``construction''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to contributions made in taxable years beginning after December 
31, 2003.

SEC. 707. DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN EXPENSES OF SCHOOL TEACHERS.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (D) of section 62(a)(2) is amended by 
striking ``or 2003'' and inserting ``, 2003, 2004, or 2005''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to expenses paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2003.

SEC. 708. EXPENSING OF ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION COSTS.

 (a) Extension of Termination Date.--Subsection (h) of section 198 
is amended by striking ``December 31, 2003'' and inserting ``December 
31, 2005''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to expenditures paid or incurred after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 709. EXPANSION OF CERTAIN NEW YORK LIBERTY ZONE BENEFITS.

 (a) Extension of Tax-Exempt Bond Financing.--Subparagraph (D) of 
section 1400L(d)(2) is amended by striking ``2005'' and inserting 
``2006''.
 (b) Clarification of Bonds Eligible for Advance Refunding.--Section 
1400L(e)(2)(B) (relating to bonds described) is amended by striking ``, 
or'' and inserting ``or the Municipal Assistance Corporation, or''.
 (c) Election Out Technical Amendment.--Subsection (c) of section 
1400L is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Election out.--For purposes of this subsection, rules 
 similar to the rules of section 168(k)(2)(C)(iii) shall 
 apply.''.
 (d) Effective date.--The amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) 
shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by section 301 
of the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of 2002.

SEC. 710. REPEAL OF REDUCTION OF DEDUCTIONS FOR MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE 
 COMPANIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 809 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to reductions in certain deduction of mutual life insurance 
companies) is hereby repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b)(1)(B) of section 807 of 
 such Code are each amended by striking ``the sum of (i)'' and 
 by striking ``plus (ii) any excess described in section 
 809(a)(2) for the taxable year,''.
 (2)(A) The last sentence of section 807(d)(1) of such Code 
 is amended by striking ``section 809(b)(4)(B)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (6)''.
 (B) Subsection (d) of section 807 of such Code is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Statutory reserves.--The term `statutory reserves' 
 means the aggregate amount set forth in the annual statement 
 with respect to items described in section 807(c). Such term 
 shall not include any reserve attributable to a deferred and 
 uncollected premium if the establishment of such reserve is not 
 permitted under section 811(c).''
 (3) Subsection (c) of section 808 of such Code is amended 
 to read as follows:
 ``(c) Amount of Deduction.--The deduction for policyholder 
dividends for any taxable year shall be an amount equal to the 
policyholder dividends paid or accrued during the taxable year.''
 (4) Subparagraph (A) of section 812(b)(3) of such Code is 
 amended by striking ``sections 808 and 809'' and inserting 
 ``section 808''.
 (5) Subsection (c) of section 817 of such Code is amended 
 by striking ``(other than section 809)''.
 (6) Subsection (c) of section 842 of such Code is amended 
 by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
 paragraph (3).
 (7) The table of sections for subpart C of part I of 
 subchapter L of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking 
 the item relating to section 809.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 711. TAX INCENTIVES FOR INVESTMENT IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

 (a) Designation of Zone.--Subsection (f) of section 1400 is amended 
by striking ``December 31, 2003'' both places it appears and inserting 
``December 31, 2005''.
 (b) Tax-Exempt Economic Development Bonds.--Subsection (b) of 
section 1400A is amended by striking ``December 31, 2003'' and 
inserting ``December 31, 2005''.
 (c) Zero Percent Capital Gains Rate.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 1400B is amended 
 by striking ``January 1, 2004'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``January 1, 2006''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 1400B(e)(2) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``December 31, 2008'' and 
 inserting ``December 31, 2010'', and
 (ii) by striking ``2008'' in the heading 
 and inserting ``2010''.
 (B) Section 1400B(g)(2) is amended by striking 
 ``December 31, 2008'' and inserting ``December 31, 
 2010''.
 (C) Section 1400F(d) is amended by striking 
 ``December 31, 2008'' and inserting ``December 31, 
 2010''.
 (d) First-Time Homebuyer Credit.--Subsection (i) of section 1400C 
is amended by striking ``January 1, 2004'' and inserting ``January 1, 
2006''.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 
 2004.
 (2) Tax-exempt economic development bonds.--The amendment 
 made by subsection (b) shall apply to obligations issued after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 712. DISCLOSURE OF TAX INFORMATION TO FACILITATE COMBINED 
 EMPLOYMENT TAX REPORTING.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (5) of section 6103(d) (relating to 
disclosure to State tax officials and State and local law enforcement 
agencies) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(5) Disclosure for combined employment tax reporting.--
 The Secretary may disclose taxpayer identity information and 
 signatures to any agency, body, or commission of any State for 
 the purpose of carrying out with such agency, body, or 
 commission a combined Federal and State employment tax 
 reporting program approved by the Secretary. Subsections (a)(2) 
 and (p)(4) and sections 7213 and 7213A shall not apply with 
 respect to disclosures or inspections made pursuant to this 
 paragraph.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 713. ALLOWANCE OF NONREFUNDABLE PERSONAL CREDITS AGAINST REGULAR 
 AND MINIMUM TAX LIABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 26(a) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``rule for 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003.--'' 
 and inserting ``rule for taxable years 2000 through 2004.--'', 
 and
 (2) by striking ``or 2003'' and inserting ``2003, or 
 2004''.
 (b) Conforming Provisions.--
 (1) Section 904(i), as redesignated by this Act, is amended 
 by striking ``or 2003'' and inserting ``2003, or 2004''.
 (2) The amendments made by sections 201(b), 202(f), and 
 618(b) of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act 
 of 2001 shall not apply to taxable years beginning during 2004.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 714. CREDIT FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCED FROM CERTAIN RENEWABLE 
 RESOURCES.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 
45(c)(3) are each amended by striking ``January 1, 2004'' and inserting 
``January 1, 2005''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to facilities placed in service after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 715. TAXABLE INCOME LIMIT ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION FOR OIL AND 
 NATURAL GAS PRODUCED FROM MARGINAL PROPERTIES.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (H) of section 613A(c)(6) is amended 
by striking ``January 1, 2004'' and inserting ``January 1, 2005''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 716. INDIAN EMPLOYMENT TAX CREDIT.

 Section 45A(f) (relating to termination) is amended by striking 
``December 31, 2004'' and inserting ``December 31, 2005''.

SEC. 717. ACCELERATED DEPRECIATION FOR BUSINESS PROPERTY ON INDIAN 
 RESERVATION.

 Section 168(j)(8) (relating to termination) is amended by striking 
``December 31, 2004'' and inserting ``December 31, 2005''.

SEC. 718. DISCLOSURE OF RETURN INFORMATION RELATING TO STUDENT LOANS.

 Section 6103(l)(13)(D) (relating to termination) is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 2004'' and inserting ``December 31, 2005''.

SEC. 719. EXTENSION OF TRANSFERS OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS TO RETIREE 
 HEALTH ACCOUNTS.

 (a) Amendments of ERISA.--
 (1) Section 101(e)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1021(e)(3)) is amended by 
 striking ``Pension Funding Equity Act of 2004'' and inserting 
 ``Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act''.
 (2) Section 403(c)(1) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1103(c)(1)) is 
 amended by striking ``Pension Funding Equity Act of 2004'' and 
 inserting ``Jumpstart Our Business Strength (JOBS) Act''.
 (3) Paragraph (13) of section 408(b) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1108(b)(3)) is amended by striking ``Pension Funding Equity Act 
 of 2004'' and inserting ``Jumpstart Our Business Strength 
 (JOBS) Act''.
 (b) Minimum Cost Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 420(c)(3)(E) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new clause:
 ``(ii) Insignificant cost reductions 
 permitted.--
 ``(I) In general.--An eligible 
 employer shall not be treated as 
 failing to meet the requirements of 
 this paragraph for any taxable year if, 
 in lieu of any reduction of retiree 
 health coverage permitted under the 
 regulations prescribed under clause 
 (i), the employer reduces applicable 
 employer cost by an amount not in 
 excess of the reduction in costs which 
 would have occurred if the employer had 
 made the maximum permissible reduction 
 in retiree health coverage under such 
 regulations. In applying such 
 regulations to any subsequent taxable 
 year, any reduction in applicable 
 employer cost under this clause shall 
 be treated as if it were an equivalent 
 reduction in retiree health coverage.
 ``(II) Eligible employer.--For 
 purposes of subclause (I), an employer 
 shall be treated as an eligible 
 employer for any taxable year if, for 
 the preceding taxable year, the 
 qualified current retiree health 
 liabilities of the employer were at 
 least 5 percent of the gross receipts 
 of the employer. For purposes of this 
 subclause, the rules of paragraphs (2), 
 (3)(B), and (3)(C) of section 448(c) 
 shall apply in determining the amount 
 of an employer's gross receipts.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 420(c)(3)(E) is amended 
 by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting:
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 720. ELIMINATION OF PHASEOUT OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED ELECTRIC 
 VEHICLES.

 (a) In General.--Section 30(b) is amended by striking paragraph (2) 
and by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 53(d)(1)(B)(iii) is amended by striking 
 ``section 30(b)(3)(B)'' and inserting ``section 30(b)(2)(B)''.
 (2) Section 55(c)(2) is amended by striking ``30(b)(3)'' 
 and inserting ``30(b)(2)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2003.

SEC. 721. ELIMINATION OF PHASEOUT FOR DEDUCTION FOR CLEAN-FUEL VEHICLE 
 PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 179A(b) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(1) Qualified clean-fuel vehicle property.--The cost 
 which may be taken into account under subsection (a)(1)(A) with 
 respect to any motor vehicle shall not exceed--
 ``(A) in the case of a motor vehicle not described 
 in subparagraph (B) or (C), $2,000,
 ``(B) in the case of any truck or van with a gross 
 vehicle weight rating greater than 10,000 pounds but 
 not greater than 26,000 pounds, $5,000, or
 ``(C) $50,000 in the case of--
 ``(i) a truck or van with a gross vehicle 
 weight rating greater than 26,000 pounds, or
 ``(ii) any bus which has a seating capacity 
 of at least 20 adults (not including the 
 driver).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2003.

 Subtitle B--Revenue Provisions

SEC. 731. DONATIONS OF MOTOR VEHICLES, BOATS, AND AIRPLANES.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (f) of section 170 (relating to 
disallowance of deduction in certain cases and special rules) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11) Contributions of used motor vehicles, boats, and 
 airplanes.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a contribution of 
 a qualified vehicle in excess of $500--
 ``(i) paragraph (8) shall not apply and no 
 deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) 
 for such contribution unless the taxpayer 
 substantiates the contribution by a 
 contemporaneous written acknowledgement of the 
 contribution by the donee organization that 
 meets the requirements of subparagraph (B) and 
 includes the acknowledgement with the 
 taxpayer's return of tax which includes the 
 deduction, and
 ``(ii) if the organization sells the 
 vehicle without any significant intervening use 
 or material improvement of such vehicle by the 
 organization, the amount of the deduction 
 allowed under subsection (a) shall not exceed 
 the gross proceeds received from such sale.
 ``(B) Content of acknowledgement.--An 
 acknowledgement meets the requirements of this 
 subparagraph if it includes the following information:
 ``(i) The name and taxpayer identification 
 number of the donor.
 ``(ii) The vehicle identification number or 
 similar number.
 ``(iii) In the case of a qualified vehicle 
 to which subparagraph (A)(ii) applies and which 
 is sold by the donee organization--
 ``(I) a certification that the 
 vehicle was sold in an arm's length 
 transaction between unrelated parties,
 ``(II) the gross proceeds from the 
 sale, and
 ``(III) that the deductible amount 
 may not exceed the amount of such gross 
 proceeds.
 ``(iv) In the case of a qualified vehicle 
 to which subparagraph (A)(ii) does not apply--
 ``(I) a certification of the 
 intended use or material improvement of 
 the vehicle and the intended duration 
 of such use, and
 ``(II) a certification that the 
 vehicle would not be transferred in 
 exchange for money, other property, or 
 services before completion of such use 
 or improvement.
 ``(C) Contemporaneous.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), an acknowledgement shall be 
 considered to be contemporaneous if the donee 
 organization provides it within 30 days of--
 ``(i) the sale of the qualified vehicle, or
 ``(ii) in the case of an acknowledgement 
 including a certification described in 
 subparagraph (B)(iv), the contribution of the 
 qualified vehicle.
 ``(D) Information to secretary.--A donee 
 organization required to provide an acknowledgement 
 under this paragraph shall provide to the Secretary the 
 information contained in the acknowledgement. Such 
 information shall be provided at such time and in such 
 manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(E) Qualified vehicle.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `qualified vehicle' means any--
 ``(i) self-propelled vehicle manufactured 
 primarily for use on public streets, roads, and 
 highways,
 ``(ii) boat, or
 ``(iii) airplane.
 Such term shall not include any property which is 
 described in section 1221(a)(1).
 ``(F) Regulations or other guidance.--The Secretary 
 shall prescribe such regulations or other guidance as 
 may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
 paragraph.''.
 (b) Penalty for Fraudulent Acknowledgments.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalities), as amended by section 
 882(c) of this Act, is amended adding at the end the following 
 new section:

``SEC. 6720A. FRAUDULENT ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WITH RESPECT TO DONATIONS OF 
 MOTOR VEHICLES, BOATS, AND AIRPLANES.

 ``Any donee organization required under section 170(f)(11)(A) to 
furnish a contemporaneous written acknowledgment to a donor which 
knowingly furnishes a false or fraudulent acknowledgment, or which 
knowingly fails to furnish such acknowledgment in the manner, at the 
time, and showing the information required under section 170(f)(11), or 
regulations prescribed thereunder, shall for each such act, or for each 
such failure, be subject to a penalty equal to--
 ``(1) in the case of an acknowledgment with respect to a 
 qualified vehicle to which section 170(f)(11)(A)(ii) applies, 
 the greater of the value of the tax benefit to the donor or the 
 gross proceeds from the sale of such vehicle, and
 ``(2) in the case of an acknowledgment with respect to any 
 other qualified vehicle to which section 170(f)(11) applies, 
 the greater of the value of the tax benefit to the donor or 
 $5,000.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68, as amended by section 882(c) of 
 this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 item:

 ``Sec. 6720A. Fraudulent acknowledgments 
 with respect to donations of 
 motor vehicles, boats, and 
 airplanes.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to contributions after June 30, 2004.

SEC. 732. ADDITION OF VACCINES AGAINST INFLUENZA TO LIST OF TAXABLE 
 VACCINES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4132(a)(1) (defining taxable vaccine), as 
amended by this Act, is amended adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(N) Any trivalent vaccine against influenza.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--
 (1) Sales, etc.--The amendment made by this section shall 
 apply to sales and uses on or after the later of--
 (A) the first day of the first month which begins 
 more than 4 weeks after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, or
 (B) the date on which the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services lists any vaccine against influenza for 
 purposes of compensation for any vaccine-related injury 
 or death through the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust 
 Fund.
 (2) Deliveries.--For purposes of paragraph (1) and section 
 4131 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in the case of sales 
 on or before the effective date described in such paragraph for 
 which delivery is made after such date, the delivery date shall 
 be considered the sale date.

SEC. 733. TREATMENT OF CONTINGENT PAYMENT CONVERTIBLE DEBT INSTRUMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1275(d) (relating to regulation authority) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Treatment of contingent payment convertible debt.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a debt instrument 
 which--
 ``(i) is convertible into stock of the 
 issuing corporation, into stock or debt of a 
 related party (within the meaning of section 
 267(b) or 707(b)(1)), or into cash or other 
 property in an amount equal to the approximate 
 value of such stock or debt, and
 ``(ii) provides for contingent payments,
 any regulations which require original issue discount 
 to be determined by reference to the comparable yield 
 of a noncontingent fixed rate debt instrument shall be 
 applied as requiring that such comparable yield be 
 determined by reference to a noncontingent fixed rate 
 debt instrument which is convertible into stock.
 ``(B) Special rule.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the comparable yield shall be determined without 
 taking into account the yield resulting from the 
 conversion of a debt instrument into stock.''.
 (b) Cross Reference.--Section 163(e)(6) (relating to cross 
references) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``For the treatment of contingent payment convertible debt, 
 see section 1275(d)(2).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to debt instruments issued after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 734. MODIFICATION OF CONTINUING LEVY ON PAYMENTS TO FEDERAL 
 VENDERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 6331(h) (relating to continuing levy on 
certain payments) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(3) Increase in levy for certain payments.--Paragraph (1) 
 shall be applied by substituting `100 percent' for `15 percent' 
 in the case of any specified payment due to a vendor of goods 
 or services sold or leased to the Federal Government.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE VIII--ENERGY TAX INCENTIVES

SEC. 800. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Energy Tax Incentives Act''.

 Subtitle A--Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit

SEC. 801. EXTENSION AND EXPANSION OF CREDIT FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCED 
 FROM CERTAIN RENEWABLE RESOURCES.

 (a) Expansion of Qualified Energy Resources.--Subsection (c) of 
section 45 (relating to electricity produced from certain renewable 
resources) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Qualified Energy Resources.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified energy resources' 
 means--
 ``(A) wind,
 ``(B) closed-loop biomass,
 ``(C) open-loop biomass,
 ``(D) geothermal energy,
 ``(E) solar energy,
 ``(F) small irrigation power,
 ``(G) biosolids and sludge, and
 ``(H) municipal solid waste.
 ``(2) Closed-loop biomass.--The term `closed-loop biomass' 
 means any organic material from a plant which is planted 
 exclusively for purposes of being used at a qualified facility 
 to produce electricity.
 ``(3) Open-loop biomass.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `open-loop biomass' 
 means--
 ``(i) any agricultural livestock waste 
 nutrients, or
 ``(ii) any solid, nonhazardous, cellulosic 
 waste material which is segregated from other 
 waste materials and which is derived from--
 ``(I) any of the following forest-
 related resources: mill and harvesting 
 residues, precommercial thinnings, 
 slash, and brush; but not including 
 spent chemicals from pulp 
 manufacturing,
 ``(II) solid wood waste materials, 
 including waste pallets, crates, 
 dunnage, manufacturing and construction 
 wood wastes (other than pressure-
 treated, chemically-treated, or painted 
 wood wastes), and landscape or right-
 of-way tree trimmings, but not 
 including municipal solid waste, gas 
 derived from the biodegradation of 
 solid waste, or paper which is commonly 
 recycled, or
 ``(III) agriculture sources, 
 including orchard tree crops, vineyard, 
 grain, legumes, sugar, and other crop 
 by-products or residues.
 ``(B) Agricultural livestock waste nutrients.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `agricultural 
 livestock waste nutrients' means agricultural 
 livestock manure and litter, including wood 
 shavings, straw, rice hulls, and other bedding 
 material for the disposition of manure.
 ``(ii) Agricultural livestock.--The term 
 `agricultural livestock' includes bovine, 
 swine, poultry, and sheep.
 ``(C) Exceptions.--The term `open-loop biomass' 
 does not include--
 ``(i) closed-loop biomass, or
 ``(ii) biomass burned in conjunction with 
 fossil fuel (cofiring) beyond such fossil fuel 
 required for startup and flame stabilization.
 ``(4) Geothermal energy.--The term `geothermal energy' 
 means energy derived from a geothermal deposit (within the 
 meaning of section 613(e)(2)).
 ``(5) Small irrigation power.--The term `small irrigation 
 power' means power--
 ``(A) generated without any dam or impoundment of 
 water through an irrigation system canal or ditch, and
 ``(B) the installed capacity of which is less than 
 5 megawatts.
 ``(6) Biosolids and sludge.--The term `biosolids and 
 sludge' means the residue or solids removed in the treatment of 
 commercial, industrial, or municipal wastewater.
 ``(7) Municipal solid waste.--The term `municipal solid 
 waste' has the meaning given the term `solid waste' under 
 section 2(27) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 
 6903).''.
 (b) Extension and Expansion of Qualified Facilities.--
 (1) In general.--Section 45 is amended by redesignating 
 subsection (d) as subsection (e) and by inserting after 
 subsection (c) the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Qualified Facilities.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Wind facility.--In the case of a facility using wind 
 to produce electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any 
 facility owned by the taxpayer which is originally placed in 
 service after December 31, 1993, and before January 1, 2007.
 ``(2) Closed-loop biomass facility.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility using 
 closed-loop biomass to produce electricity, the term 
 `qualified facility' means any facility--
 ``(i) owned by the taxpayer which is 
 originally placed in service after December 31, 
 1992, and before January 1, 2007, or
 ``(ii) owned by the taxpayer which before 
 January 1, 2007, is originally placed in 
 service and modified to use closed-loop biomass 
 to co-fire with coal, with other biomass, or 
 with both, but only if the modification is 
 approved under the Biomass Power for Rural 
 Development Programs or is part of a pilot 
 project of the Commodity Credit Corporation as 
 described in 65 Fed. Reg. 63052.
 ``(B) Special rules.--In the case of a qualified 
 facility described in subparagraph (A)(ii)--
 ``(i) the 10-year period referred to in 
 subsection (a) shall be treated as beginning no 
 earlier than January 1, 2005,
 ``(ii) the amount of the credit determined 
 under subsection (a) with respect to the 
 facility shall be an amount equal to the amount 
 determined without regard to this clause 
 multiplied by the ratio of the thermal content 
 of the closed-loop biomass used in such 
 facility to the thermal content of all fuels 
 used in such facility, and
 ``(iii) if the owner of such facility is 
 not the producer of the electricity, the person 
 eligible for the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) shall be the lessee or the 
 operator of such facility.
 ``(3) Open-loop biomass facility.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility using 
 open-loop biomass to produce electricity for grid sale 
 in excess of its internal requirements, the term 
 `qualified facility' means any facility owned by the 
 taxpayer which--
 ``(i) in the case of a facility using 
 agricultural livestock waste nutrients, is 
 originally placed in service after December 31, 
 2004, and before January 1, 2007, and
 ``(ii) in the case of any other facility, 
 is originally placed in service before January 
 1, 2005.
 ``(B) Special rules for preeffective date 
 facilities.--In the case of any facility described in 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) which is placed in service before 
 January 1, 2005--
 ``(i) subsection (a)(1) shall be applied by 
 substituting `1.2 cents' for `1.5 cents', and
 ``(ii) the 5-year period beginning on 
 January 1, 2005, shall be substituted for the 
 10-year period in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii).
 ``(C) Credit eligibility.--In the case of any 
 facility described in subparagraph (A), if the owner of 
 such facility is not the producer of the electricity, 
 the person eligible for the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) shall be the lessee or the operator of 
 such facility.
 ``(4) Geothermal or solar energy facility.--In the case of 
 a facility using geothermal or solar energy to produce 
 electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any facility 
 owned by the taxpayer which is originally placed in service 
 after December 31, 2004, and before January 1, 2007. Such term 
 shall not include any property described in section 48(a)(3) 
 the basis of which is taken into account by the taxpayer for 
 purposes of determining the energy credit under section 48.
 ``(5) Small irrigation power facility.--In the case of a 
 facility using small irrigation power to produce electricity, 
 the term `qualified facility' means any facility owned by the 
 taxpayer which is originally placed in service after December 
 31, 2004, and before January 1, 2007.
 ``(6) Biosolids and sludge facility.--In the case of a 
 facility using waste heat from the incineration of biosolids 
 and sludge to produce electricity, the term `qualified 
 facility' means any facility owned by the taxpayer which is 
 originally placed in service after December 31, 2004, and 
 before January 1, 2007. Such term shall not include any 
 property described in section 48(a)(3) the basis of which is 
 taken into account for purposes of the energy credit under 
 section 46.
 ``(7) Municipal solid waste facility.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility or 
 unit incinerating municipal solid waste to produce 
 electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any 
 facility or unit owned by the taxpayer which is 
 originally placed in service after December 31, 2004, 
 and before January 1, 2007.
 ``(B) Special rule.--In the case of any facility or 
 unit described in subparagraph (A), the 5-year period 
 beginning on the date the facility or unit was 
 originally placed in service shall be substituted for 
 the 10-year period in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii).
 ``(C) Credit eligibility.--In the case of any 
 qualified facility described in subparagraph (A), if 
 the owner of such facility is not the producer of the 
 electricity, the person eligible for the credit 
 allowable under subsection (a) shall be the lessee or 
 the operator of such facility.''.
 (2) No credit for certain production.--Section 45(e) 
 (relating to definitions and special rules), as redesignated by 
 paragraph (1), is amended by striking paragraph (6) and 
 inserting the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Operations inconsistent with solid waste disposal 
 act.--In the case of a qualified facility described in 
 subsection (d)(6)(A), subsection (a) shall not apply to 
 electricity produced at such facility during any taxable year 
 if, during a portion of such year, there is a certification in 
 effect by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency that such facility was permitted to operate in a manner 
 inconsistent with section 4003(d) of the Solid Waste Disposal 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6943(d)).''.
 (3) Conforming amendment.--Section 45(e), as so 
 redesignated, is amended by striking ``subsection (c)(3)(A)'' 
 in paragraph (7)(A)(i) and inserting ``subsection (d)(1)''.
 (c) Credit Rate for Electricity Produced From New Facilities.--
 (1) In general.--Section 45(a) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new flush sentence:
``In the case of electricity produced after December 31, 2004, at any 
qualified facility originally placed in service after such date, 
paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `1.8 cents' for `1.5 
cents'.''.
 (2) New rate not subject to inflation adjustment.--Section 
 45(b)(2) (relating to credit and phaseout adjustment based on 
 inflation) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``This paragraph shall not apply to any amount which 
 is substituted for the 1.5 cent amount in subsection (a) by 
 reason of any provision of this section.''.
 (d) Elimination of Certain Credit Reductions.--Section 45(b)(3)(A) 
(relating to credit reduced for grants, tax-exempt bonds, subsidized 
energy financing, and other credits) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (ii),
 (2) by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses (ii) 
 and (iii),
 (3) by inserting ``(other than proceeds of an issue of 
 State or local government obligations the interest on which is 
 exempt from tax under section 103, or any loan, debt, or other 
 obligation incurred under subchapter I of chapter 31 of title 7 
 of the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et 
 seq.), as in effect on the date of the enactment of the Energy 
 Tax Incentives Act)'' after ``project'' in clause (ii) (as so 
 redesignated),
 (4) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``This 
 paragraph shall not apply with respect to any facility 
 described in subsection (d)(2)(A)(ii).'', and
 (5) by striking ``tax-exempt bonds,'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``certain''.
 (e) Treatment of Persons Not Able To Use Entire Credit.--Section 
45(e) (relating to definitions and special rules), as redesignated by 
subsection (b)(1), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(8) Treatment of persons not able to use entire credit.--
 ``(A) Allowance of credit.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as otherwise 
 provided in this subsection--
 ``(I) any credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) with respect to a 
 qualified facility owned by a person 
 described in clause (ii) may be 
 transferred or used as provided in this 
 paragraph, and
 ``(II) the determination as to 
 whether the credit is allowable shall 
 be made without regard to the tax-
 exempt status of the person.
 ``(ii) Persons described.--A person is 
 described in this clause if the person is--
 ``(I) an organization described in 
 section 501(c)(12)(C) and exempt from 
 tax under section 501(a),
 ``(II) an organization described in 
 section 1381(a)(2)(C),
 ``(III) a public utility (as 
 defined in section 136(c)(2)(B)), which 
 is exempt from income tax under this 
 subtitle,
 ``(IV) any State or political 
 subdivision thereof, the District of 
 Columbia, any possession of the United 
 States, or any agency or 
 instrumentality of any of the 
 foregoing,
 ``(V) any Indian tribal government 
 (within the meaning of section 7871) or 
 any agency or instrumentality thereof, 
 or
 ``(VI) the Tennessee Valley 
 Authority.
 ``(B) Transfer of credit.--
 ``(i) In general.--A person described in 
 subclause (I), (II), (III), (IV), or (V) of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) may transfer any credit to 
 which subparagraph (A)(i) applies through an 
 assignment to any other person not described in 
 subparagraph (A)(ii). Such transfer may be 
 revoked only with the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Regulations.--The Secretary shall 
 prescribe such regulations as necessary to 
 ensure that any credit described in clause (i) 
 is assigned once and not reassigned by such 
 other person.
 ``(iii) Transfer proceeds treated as 
 arising from essential government function.--
 Any proceeds derived by a person described in 
 subclause (III), (IV), or (V) of subparagraph 
 (A)(ii) from the transfer of any credit under 
 clause (i) shall be treated as arising from the 
 exercise of an essential government function.
 ``(C) Use of credit as an offset.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, in the case of a person 
 described in subclause (I), (II), or (V) of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), any credit to which subparagraph 
 (A)(i) applies may be applied by such person, to the 
 extent provided by the Secretary of Agriculture, as a 
 prepayment of any loan, debt, or other obligation the 
 entity has incurred under subchapter I of chapter 31 of 
 title 7 of the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (7 
 U.S.C. 901 et seq.), as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of the Energy Tax Incentives Act.
 ``(D) Use by tva.--
 ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, in the case of a person 
 described in subparagraph (A)(ii)(VI), any 
 credit to which subparagraph (A)(i) applies may 
 be applied as a credit against the payments 
 required to be made in any fiscal year under 
 section 15d(e) of the Tennessee Valley 
 Authority Act of 1933 (16 U.S.C. 831n-4(e)) as 
 an annual return on the appropriations 
 investment and an annual repayment sum.
 ``(ii) Treatment of credits.--The aggregate 
 amount of credits described in subparagraph 
 (A)(i) with respect to such person shall be 
 treated in the same manner and to the same 
 extent as if such credits were a payment in 
 cash and shall be applied first against the 
 annual return on the appropriations investment.
 ``(iii) Credit carryover.--With respect to 
 any fiscal year, if the aggregate amount of 
 credits described subparagraph (A)(i) with 
 respect to such person exceeds the aggregate 
 amount of payment obligations described in 
 clause (i), the excess amount shall remain 
 available for application as credits against 
 the amounts of such payment obligations in 
 succeeding fiscal years in the same manner as 
 described in this subparagraph.
 ``(E) Credit not income.--Any transfer under 
 subparagraph (B) or use under subparagraph (C) of any 
 credit to which subparagraph (A)(i) applies shall not 
 be treated as income for purposes of section 
 501(c)(12).
 ``(F) Treatment of unrelated persons.--For purposes 
 of subsection (a)(2)(B), sales of electricity among and 
 between persons described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall 
 be treated as sales between unrelated parties.''.
 (f) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to 
 electricity produced and sold after December 31, 2004, in 
 taxable years ending after such date.
 (2) Certain biomass facilities.--With respect to any 
 facility described in section 45(d)(3)(A)(ii) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986, as added by subsection (b)(1), which is 
 placed in service before the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 the amendments made by this section shall apply to electricity 
 produced and sold after December 31, 2004, in taxable years 
 ending after such date.
 (3) Credit rate for new facilities.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (c) shall apply to electricity produced and sold 
 after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending after such 
 date.
 (4) Nonapplication of amendments to preeffective date 
 poultry waste facilities.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall not apply with respect to any poultry waste facility 
 (within the meaning of section 45(c)(3)(C), as in effect on 
 December 31, 2004) placed in service on or before such date.

 Subtitle B--Alternative Motor Vehicles and Fuels Incentives

SEC. 811. ALTERNATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to foreign tax credit, etc.), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 30C. ALTERNATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE CREDIT.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit 
against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount 
equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) the new qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit 
 determined under subsection (b),
 ``(2) the new qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit 
 determined under subsection (c), and
 ``(3) the new qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle 
 credit determined under subsection (d).
 ``(b) New Qualified Fuel Cell Motor Vehicle Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the new 
 qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit determined under this 
 subsection with respect to a new qualified fuel cell motor 
 vehicle placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable 
 year is--
 ``(A) $4,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of not more than 8,500 pounds,
 ``(B) $10,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds but not more 
 than 14,000 pounds,
 ``(C) $20,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 14,000 pounds but not more 
 than 26,000 pounds, and
 ``(D) $40,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds.
 ``(2) Increase for fuel efficiency.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amount determined under 
 paragraph (1)(A) with respect to a new qualified fuel 
 cell motor vehicle which is a passenger automobile or 
 light truck shall be increased by--
 ``(i) $1,000, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 150 percent but less than 175 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy,
 ``(ii) $1,500, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 175 percent but less than 200 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy,
 ``(iii) $2,000, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 200 percent but less than 225 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy,
 ``(iv) $2,500, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 225 percent but less than 250 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy,
 ``(v) $3,000, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 250 percent but less than 275 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy,
 ``(vi) $3,500, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 275 percent but less than 300 percent of 
 the 2002 model year city fuel economy, and
 ``(vii) $4,000, if such vehicle achieves at 
 least 300 percent of the 2002 model year city 
 fuel economy.
 ``(B) 2002 model year city fuel economy.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A), the 2002 model year city 
 fuel economy with respect to a vehicle shall be 
 determined in accordance with the following tables:
 ``(i) In the case of a passenger 
 automobile:
 The 2002 model year city
``If vehicle inertia weight class fuel economy is:
 is:
 1,500 or 1,750 lbs............................ 45.2 mpg 
 2,000 lbs..................................... 39.6 mpg 
 2,250 lbs..................................... 35.2 mpg 
 2,500 lbs..................................... 31.7 mpg 
 2,750 lbs..................................... 28.8 mpg 
 3,000 lbs..................................... 26.4 mpg 
 3,500 lbs..................................... 22.6 mpg 
 4,000 lbs..................................... 19.8 mpg 
 4,500 lbs..................................... 17.6 mpg 
 5,000 lbs..................................... 15.9 mpg 
 5,500 lbs..................................... 14.4 mpg 
 6,000 lbs..................................... 13.2 mpg 
 6,500 lbs..................................... 12.2 mpg 
 7,000 to 8,500 lbs............................ 11.3 mpg.
 ``(ii) In the case of a light truck:

 The 2002 model year city
``If vehicle inertia weight class fuel economy is:
 is:
 1,500 or 1,750 lbs............................ 39.4 mpg 
 2,000 lbs..................................... 35.2 mpg 
 2,250 lbs..................................... 31.8 mpg 
 2,500 lbs..................................... 29.0 mpg 
 2,750 lbs..................................... 26.8 mpg 
 3,000 lbs..................................... 24.9 mpg 
 3,500 lbs..................................... 21.8 mpg 
 4,000 lbs..................................... 19.4 mpg 
 4,500 lbs..................................... 17.6 mpg 
 5,000 lbs..................................... 16.1 mpg 
 5,500 lbs..................................... 14.8 mpg 
 6,000 lbs..................................... 13.7 mpg 
 6,500 lbs..................................... 12.8 mpg 
 7,000 to 8,500 lbs............................ 12.1 mpg.
 ``(C) Vehicle inertia weight class.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (B), the term `vehicle inertia weight 
 class' has the same meaning as when defined in 
 regulations prescribed by the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency for purposes of the 
 administration of title II of the Clean Air Act (42 
 U.S.C. 7521 et seq.).
 ``(3) New qualified fuel cell motor vehicle.--For purposes 
 of this subsection, the term `new qualified fuel cell motor 
 vehicle' means a motor vehicle--
 ``(A) which is propelled by power derived from 1 or 
 more cells which convert chemical energy directly into 
 electricity by combining oxygen with hydrogen fuel 
 which is stored on board the vehicle in any form and 
 may or may not require reformation prior to use,
 ``(B) which, in the case of a passenger automobile 
 or light truck--
 ``(i) for 2002 and later model vehicles, 
 has received a certificate of conformity under 
 the Clean Air Act and meets or exceeds the 
 equivalent qualifying California low emission 
 vehicle standard under section 243(e)(2) of the 
 Clean Air Act for that make and model year, and
 ``(ii) for 2004 and later model vehicles, 
 has received a certificate that such vehicle 
 meets or exceeds the Bin 5 Tier II emission 
 level established in regulations prescribed by 
 the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency under section 202(i) of the 
 Clean Air Act for that make and model year 
 vehicle,
 ``(C) the original use of which commences with the 
 taxpayer,
 ``(D) which is acquired for use or lease by the 
 taxpayer and not for resale, and
 ``(E) which is made by a manufacturer.
 ``(c) New Qualified Hybrid Motor Vehicle Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the new 
 qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit determined under this 
 subsection with respect to a new qualified hybrid motor vehicle 
 placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year is 
 the credit amount determined under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Credit amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--The credit amount determined 
 under this paragraph shall be determined in accordance 
 with the following tables:
 ``(i) In the case of a new qualified hybrid 
 motor vehicle which is a passenger automobile, 
 medium duty passenger vehicle, or light truck 
 and which provides the following percentage of 
 the maximum available power:

``If percentage of the maximum
 available power is: The credit amount is:
 At least 4 percent but less than 10 percent... $250 
 At least 10 percent but less than 20 percent.. $500 
 At least 20 percent but less than 30 percent.. $750 
 At least 30 percent........................... $1,000.
 ``(ii) In the case of a new qualified 
 hybrid motor vehicle which is a heavy duty 
 hybrid motor vehicle and which provides the 
 following percentage of the maximum available 
 power:
 ``(I) If such vehicle has a gross 
 vehicle weight rating of not more than 
 14,000 pounds:

``If percentage of the maximum
 available power is: The credit amount is:
 At least 20 percent but less than 30 percent.. $1,000 
 At least 30 percent but less than 40 percent.. $1,750 
 At least 40 percent but less than 50 percent.. $2,000 
 At least 50 percent but less than 60 percent.. $2,250 
 At least 60 percent........................... $2,500.
 ``(II) If such vehicle has a gross 
 vehicle weight rating of more than 
 14,000 but not more than 26,000 pounds:

``If percentage of the maximum
 available power is: The credit amount is:
 At least 20 percent but less than 30 percent.. $4,000 
 At least 30 percent but less than 40 percent.. $4,500 
 At least 40 percent but less than 50 percent.. $5,000 
 At least 50 percent but less than 60 percent.. $5,500 
 At least 60 percent........................... $6,000.
 ``(III) If such vehicle has a gross 
 vehicle weight rating of more than 
 26,000 pounds:

``If percentage of the maximum
 available power is: The credit amount is:
 At least 20 percent but less than 30 percent.. $6,000 
 At least 30 percent but less than 40 percent.. $7,000 
 At least 40 percent but less than 50 percent.. $8,000 
 At least 50 percent but less than 60 percent.. $9,000 
 At least 60 percent........................... $10,000.
 ``(B) Increase for fuel efficiency.--
 ``(i) Amount.--The amount determined under 
 subparagraph (A)(i) with respect to a new 
 qualified hybrid motor vehicle which is a 
 passenger automobile or light truck shall be 
 increased by--
 ``(I) $500, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 125 percent but less 
 than 150 percent of the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy,
 ``(II) $1,000, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 150 percent but less 
 than 175 percent of the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy,
 ``(III) $1,500, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 175 percent but less 
 than 200 percent of the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy,
 ``(IV) $2,000, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 200 percent but less 
 than 225 percent of the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy,
 ``(V) $2,500, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 225 percent but less 
 than 250 percent of the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy, and
 ``(VI) $3,000, if such vehicle 
 achieves at least 250 percent of the 
 2002 model year city fuel economy.
 ``(ii) 2002 model year city fuel economy.--
 For purposes of clause (i), the 2002 model year 
 city fuel economy with respect to a vehicle 
 shall be determined on a gasoline gallon 
 equivalent basis as determined by the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency using the tables provided in subsection 
 (b)(2)(B) with respect to such vehicle.
 ``(C) Increase for accelerated emissions 
 performance.--The amount determined under subparagraph 
 (A)(ii) with respect to an applicable heavy duty hybrid 
 motor vehicle shall be increased by the increased 
 credit amount determined in accordance with the 
 following tables:
 ``(i) In the case of a vehicle which has a 
 gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 
 14,000 pounds:

``If the model year is: The increased credit amount is:
 2004.......................................... $2,500 
 2005.......................................... $2,000 
 2006.......................................... $1,500.
 ``(ii) In the case of a vehicle which has a 
 gross vehicle weight rating of more than 14,000 
 pounds but not more than 26,000 pounds:

``If the model year is: The increased credit amount is:
 2004.......................................... $6,500 
 2005.......................................... $5,250 
 2006.......................................... $4,000.
 ``(iii) In the case of a vehicle which has 
 a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 
 26,000 pounds:

``If the model year is: The increased credit amount is:
 2004.......................................... $10,000 
 2005.......................................... $8,000 
 2006.......................................... $6,000.
 ``(D) Definitions relating to credit amount.--
 ``(i) Applicable heavy duty hybrid motor 
 vehicle.--For purposes of subparagraph (C), the 
 term `applicable heavy duty hybrid motor 
 vehicle' means a heavy duty hybrid motor 
 vehicle which is powered by an internal 
 combustion or heat engine which is certified as 
 meeting the emission standards set in the 
 regulations prescribed by the Administrator of 
 the Environmental Protection Agency for 2007 
 and later model year diesel heavy duty engines, 
 or for 2008 and later model year ottocycle 
 heavy duty engines, as applicable.
 ``(ii) Maximum available power.--
 ``(I) Passenger automobile, medium 
 duty passenger vehicle, or light 
 truck.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A)(i), the term `maximum available 
 power' means the maximum power 
 available from the rechargeable energy 
 storage system, during a standard 10 
 second pulse power or equivalent test, 
 divided by such maximum power and the 
 SAE net power of the heat engine.
 ``(II) Heavy duty hybrid motor 
 vehicle.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), the term `maximum available 
 power' means the maximum power 
 available from the rechargeable energy 
 storage system, during a standard 10 
 second pulse power or equivalent test, 
 divided by the vehicle's total traction 
 power. The term `total traction power' 
 means the sum of the peak power from 
 the rechargeable energy storage system 
 and the heat engine peak power of the 
 vehicle, except that if such storage 
 system is the sole means by which the 
 vehicle can be driven, the total 
 traction power is the peak power of 
 such storage system.
 ``(3) New qualified hybrid motor vehicle.--For purposes of 
 this subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `new qualified hybrid 
 motor vehicle' means a motor vehicle--
 ``(i) which draws propulsion energy from 
 onboard sources of stored energy which are 
 both--
 ``(I) an internal combustion or 
 heat engine using consumable fuel, and
 ``(II) a rechargeable energy 
 storage system,
 ``(ii) which, in the case of a passenger 
 automobile, medium duty passenger vehicle, or 
 light truck--
 ``(I) for 2002 and later model 
 vehicles, has received a certificate of 
 conformity under the Clean Air Act and 
 meets or exceeds the equivalent 
 qualifying California low emission 
 vehicle standard under section 
 243(e)(2) of the Clean Air Act for that 
 make and model year, and
 ``(II) for 2004 and later model 
 vehicles, has received a certificate 
 that such vehicle meets or exceeds the 
 Bin 5 Tier II emission level 
 established in regulations prescribed 
 by the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency under 
 section 202(i) of the Clean Air Act for 
 that make and model year vehicle,
 ``(iii) which, in the case of a heavy duty 
 hybrid motor vehicle, has an internal 
 combustion or heat engine which has received a 
 certificate of conformity under the Clean Air 
 Act as meeting the emission standards set in 
 the regulations prescribed by the Administrator 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency for 2004 
 through 2007 model year diesel heavy duty 
 engines or ottocycle heavy duty engines, as 
 applicable,
 ``(iv) the original use of which commences 
 with the taxpayer,
 ``(v) which is acquired for use or lease by 
 the taxpayer and not for resale, and
 ``(vi) which is made by a manufacturer.
 ``(B) Consumable fuel.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(i)(I), the term `consumable fuel' 
 means any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter which 
 releases energy when consumed by an auxiliary power 
 unit.
 ``(4) Heavy duty hybrid motor vehicle.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `heavy duty hybrid motor vehicle' 
 means a new qualified hybrid motor vehicle which has a gross 
 vehicle weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds. Such term does 
 not include a medium duty passenger vehicle.
 ``(d) New Qualified Alternative Fuel Motor Vehicle Credit.--
 ``(1) Allowance of credit.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (5), the new qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit 
 determined under this subsection is an amount equal to the 
 applicable percentage of the incremental cost of any new 
 qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle placed in service by 
 the taxpayer during the taxable year.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable percentage with respect to any new 
 qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle is--
 ``(A) 40 percent, plus
 ``(B) 30 percent, if such vehicle--
 ``(i) has received a certificate of 
 conformity under the Clean Air Act and meets or 
 exceeds the most stringent standard available 
 for certification under the Clean Air Act for 
 that make and model year vehicle (other than a 
 zero emission standard), or
 ``(ii) has received an order certifying the 
 vehicle as meeting the same requirements as 
 vehicles which may be sold or leased in 
 California and meets or exceeds the most 
 stringent standard available for certification 
 under the State laws of California (enacted in 
 accordance with a waiver granted under section 
 209(b) of the Clean Air Act) for that make and 
 model year vehicle (other than a zero emission 
 standard).
 For purposes of the preceding sentence, in the case of any new 
 qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle which weighs more than 
 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating, the most stringent 
 standard available shall be such standard available for 
 certification on the date of the enactment of the Energy Tax 
 Incentives Act.
 ``(3) Incremental cost.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the incremental cost of any new qualified alternative fuel 
 motor vehicle is equal to the amount of the excess of the 
 manufacturer's suggested retail price for such vehicle over 
 such price for a gasoline or diesel fuel motor vehicle of the 
 same model, to the extent such amount does not exceed--
 ``(A) $5,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of not more than 8,500 pounds,
 ``(B) $10,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds but not more 
 than 14,000 pounds,
 ``(C) $25,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 14,000 pounds but not more 
 than 26,000 pounds, and
 ``(D) $40,000, if such vehicle has a gross vehicle 
 weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds.
 ``(4) New qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle.--For 
 purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `new qualified 
 alternative fuel motor vehicle' means any motor 
 vehicle--
 ``(i) which is only capable of operating on 
 an alternative fuel,
 ``(ii) the original use of which commences 
 with the taxpayer,
 ``(iii) which is acquired by the taxpayer 
 for use or lease, but not for resale, and
 ``(iv) which is made by a manufacturer.
 ``(B) Alternative fuel.--The term `alternative 
 fuel' means compressed natural gas, liquefied natural 
 gas, liquefied petroleum gas, hydrogen, and any liquid 
 at least 85 percent of the volume of which consists of 
 methanol.
 ``(5) Credit for mixed-fuel vehicles.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a mixed-fuel 
 vehicle placed in service by the taxpayer during the 
 taxable year, the credit determined under this 
 subsection is an amount equal to--
 ``(i) in the case of a 75/25 mixed-fuel 
 vehicle, 70 percent of the credit which would 
 have been allowed under this subsection if such 
 vehicle was a qualified alternative fuel motor 
 vehicle, and
 ``(ii) in the case of a 90/10 mixed-fuel 
 vehicle, 90 percent of the credit which would 
 have been allowed under this subsection if such 
 vehicle was a qualified alternative fuel motor 
 vehicle.
 ``(B) Mixed-fuel vehicle.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `mixed-fuel vehicle' means any 
 motor vehicle described in subparagraph (C) or (D) of 
 paragraph (3), which--
 ``(i) is certified by the manufacturer as 
 being able to perform efficiently in normal 
 operation on a combination of an alternative 
 fuel and a petroleum-based fuel,
 ``(ii) either--
 ``(I) has received a certificate of 
 conformity under the Clean Air Act, or
 ``(II) has received an order 
 certifying the vehicle as meeting the 
 same requirements as vehicles which may 
 be sold or leased in California and 
 meets or exceeds the low emission 
 vehicle standard under section 88.105-
 94 of title 40, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, for that make and model 
 year vehicle,
 ``(iii) the original use of which commences 
 with the taxpayer,
 ``(iv) which is acquired by the taxpayer 
 for use or lease, but not for resale, and
 ``(v) which is made by a manufacturer.
 ``(C) 75/25 mixed-fuel vehicle.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `75/25 mixed-fuel vehicle' 
 means a mixed-fuel vehicle which operates using at 
 least 75 percent alternative fuel and not more than 25 
 percent petroleum-based fuel.
 ``(D) 90/10 mixed-fuel vehicle.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `90/10 mixed-fuel vehicle' 
 means a mixed-fuel vehicle which operates using at 
 least 90 percent alternative fuel and not more than 10 
 percent petroleum-based fuel.
 ``(e) Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed under 
subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if 
any) of--
 ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the 
 sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 
 29, and 30, over
 ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
 ``(f) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Motor vehicle.--The term `motor vehicle' has the 
 meaning given such term by section 30(c)(2).
 ``(2) City fuel economy.--The city fuel economy with 
 respect to any vehicle shall be measured in a manner which is 
 substantially similar to the manner city fuel economy is 
 measured in accordance with procedures under part 600 of 
 subchapter Q of chapter I of title 40, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 section.
 ``(3) Other terms.--The terms `automobile', `passenger 
 automobile', `medium duty passenger vehicle', `light truck', 
 and `manufacturer' have the meanings given such terms in 
 regulations prescribed by the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency for purposes of the 
 administration of title II of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7521 
 et seq.).
 ``(4) Reduction in basis.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
 the basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under 
 subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit so 
 allowed (determined without regard to subsection (e)).
 ``(5) No double benefit.--The amount of any deduction or 
 other credit allowable under this chapter--
 ``(A) for any incremental cost taken into account 
 in computing the amount of the credit determined under 
 subsection (d) shall be reduced by the amount of such 
 credit attributable to such cost, and
 ``(B) with respect to a vehicle described under 
 subsection (b) or (c), shall be reduced by the amount 
 of credit allowed under subsection (a) for such vehicle 
 for the taxable year.
 ``(6) Property used by tax-exempt entities.--In the case of 
 a credit amount which is allowable with respect to a motor 
 vehicle which is acquired by an entity exempt from tax under 
 this chapter, the person which sells or leases such vehicle to 
 the entity shall be treated as the taxpayer with respect to the 
 vehicle for purposes of this section and the credit shall be 
 allowed to such person, but only if the person clearly 
 discloses to the entity at the time of any sale or lease the 
 specific amount of any credit otherwise allowable to the entity 
 under this section.
 ``(7) Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, 
 provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable 
 under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases 
 to be property eligible for such credit (including recapture in 
 the case of a lease period of less than the economic life of a 
 vehicle).
 ``(8) Property used outside united states, etc., not 
 qualified.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) 
 with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b) or 
 with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken 
 into account under section 179.
 ``(9) Election to not take credit.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under subsection (a) for any vehicle if the taxpayer 
 elects to not have this section apply to such vehicle.
 ``(10) Carryback and carryforward allowed.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) for a taxable year exceeds the amount of 
 the limitation under subsection (e) for such taxable 
 year (in this paragraph referred to as the `unused 
 credit year'), such excess shall be a credit carryback 
 to each of the 3 taxable years preceding the unused 
 credit year and a credit carryforward to each of the 20 
 taxable years following the unused credit year, except 
 that no excess may be carried to a taxable year 
 beginning before January 1, 2005.
 ``(B) Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 
 39 shall apply with respect to the credit carryback and 
 credit carryforward under subparagraph (A).
 ``(11) Interaction with air quality and motor vehicle 
 safety standards.--Unless otherwise provided in this section, a 
 motor vehicle shall not be considered eligible for a credit 
 under this section unless such vehicle is in compliance with--
 ``(A) the applicable provisions of the Clean Air 
 Act for the applicable make and model year of the 
 vehicle (or applicable air quality provisions of State 
 law in the case of a State which has adopted such 
 provision under a waiver under section 209(b) of the 
 Clean Air Act), and
 ``(B) the motor vehicle safety provisions of 
 sections 30101 through 30169 of title 49, United States 
 Code.
 ``(g) Regulations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as necessary to 
 carry out the provisions of this section.
 ``(2) Coordination in prescription of certain 
 regulations.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of Transportation and the Administrator of 
 the Environmental Protection Agency, shall prescribe such 
 regulations as necessary to determine whether a motor vehicle 
 meets the requirements to be eligible for a credit under this 
 section.
 ``(h) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any property 
purchased after--
 ``(1) in the case of a new qualified fuel cell motor 
 vehicle (as described in subsection (b)), December 31, 2011, 
 and
 ``(2) in the case of any other property, December 31, 
 2006.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1016(a) is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
 end of paragraph (31), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (32) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the 
 end the following new paragraph:
 ``(33) to the extent provided in section 30C(f)(4).''.
 (2) Section 55(c)(2), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 inserting ``30C(e),'' after ``30(b)(2),''.
 (3) Section 6501(m) is amended by inserting ``30C(f)(9),'' 
 after ``30(d)(4),''.
 (4) The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is amended 
 by inserting after the item relating to section 30B the 
 following new item:

 ``Sec. 30C. Alternative motor vehicle credit.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 812. MODIFICATION OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED ELECTRIC VEHICLES.

 (a) Amount of Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Section 30(a) (relating to allowance of 
 credit) is amended by striking ``10 percent of''.
 (2) Limitation of credit according to type of vehicle.--
 Paragraph (1) of section 30(b) (relating to limitations) is 
 amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) Limitation according to type of vehicle.--The amount 
 of the credit allowed under subsection (a) for any vehicle 
 shall not exceed the greatest of the following amounts 
 applicable to such vehicle:
 ``(A) In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle 
 weight rating not exceeding 8,500 pounds--
 ``(i) except as provided in clause (ii) or 
 (iii), $3,500,
 ``(ii) $6,000, if such vehicle is--
 ``(I) capable of a driving range of 
 at least 100 miles on a single charge 
 of the vehicle's rechargeable batteries 
 as measured pursuant to the urban 
 dynamometer schedules under appendix I 
 to part 86 of title 40, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, or
 ``(II) capable of a payload 
 capacity of at least 1,000 pounds, and
 ``(iii) if such vehicle is a low-speed 
 vehicle which conforms to Standard 500 
 prescribed by the Secretary of Transportation 
 (49 C.F.R. 571.500), as in effect on the date 
 of the enactment of the Energy Tax Incentives 
 Act, the lesser of--
 ``(I) 10 percent of the 
 manufacturer's suggested retail price 
 of the vehicle, or
 ``(II) $1,500.
 ``(B) In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle 
 weight rating exceeding 8,500 but not exceeding 14,000 
 pounds, $10,000.
 ``(C) In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle 
 weight rating exceeding 14,000 but not exceeding 26,000 
 pounds, $20,000.
 ``(D) In the case of a vehicle with a gross vehicle 
 weight rating exceeding 26,000 pounds, $40,000.''.
 (b) Qualified Battery Electric Vehicle.--
 (1) In general.--Section 30(c)(1)(A) (defining qualified 
 electric vehicle) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) which is--
 ``(i) operated solely by use of a battery 
 or battery pack, or
 ``(ii) powered primarily through the use of 
 an electric battery or battery pack using a 
 flywheel or capacitor which stores energy 
 produced by an electric motor through 
 regenerative braking to assist in vehicle 
 operation,''.
 (2) Leased vehicles.--Section 30(c)(1)(C) is amended by 
 inserting ``or lease'' after ``use''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Subsections (a), (b)(2), and (c) of section 30 
 are each amended by inserting ``battery'' after 
 ``qualified'' each place it appears.
 (B) The heading of subsection (c) of section 30 is 
 amended by inserting ``Battery'' after ``Qualified''.
 (C) The heading of section 30 is amended by 
 inserting ``battery'' after ``qualified''.
 (D) The item relating to section 30 in the table of 
 sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 is amended by inserting ``battery'' after 
 ``qualified''.
 (E) Section 179A(c)(3) is amended by inserting 
 ``battery'' before ``electric''.
 (F) The heading of paragraph (3) of section 179A(c) 
 is amended by inserting ``battery'' before 
 ``electric''.
 (c) Additional Special Rules.--Section 30(d) (relating to special 
rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(5) No double benefit.--The amount of any deduction or 
 other credit allowable under this chapter for any cost taken 
 into account in computing the amount of the credit determined 
 under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such 
 credit attributable to such cost.
 ``(6) Property used by tax-exempt entities.--In the case of 
 a credit amount which is allowable with respect to a vehicle 
 which is acquired by an entity exempt from tax under this 
 chapter, the person which sells or leases such vehicle to the 
 entity shall be treated as the taxpayer with respect to the 
 vehicle for purposes of this section and the credit shall be 
 allowed to such person, but only if the person clearly 
 discloses to the entity at the time of any sale or lease the 
 specific amount of any credit otherwise allowable to the entity 
 under this section.
 ``(7) Carryback and carryforward allowed.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) for a taxable year exceeds the amount of 
 the limitation under subsection (b)(2) for such taxable 
 year (in this paragraph referred to as the `unused 
 credit year'), such excess shall be a credit carryback 
 to each of the 3 taxable years preceding the unused 
 credit year and a credit carryforward to each of the 20 
 taxable years following the unused credit year, except 
 that no excess may be carried to a taxable year 
 beginning before January 1, 2005.
 ``(B) Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 
 39 shall apply with respect to the credit carryback and 
 credit carryforward under subparagraph (A).''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 813. CREDIT FOR INSTALLATION OF ALTERNATIVE FUELING STATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to foreign tax credit, etc.), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 30D. CLEAN-FUEL VEHICLE REFUELING PROPERTY CREDIT.

 ``(a) Credit Allowed.--There shall be allowed as a credit against 
the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 
50 percent of the amount paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the 
taxable year for the installation of qualified clean-fuel vehicle 
refueling property.
 ``(b) Limitation.--The credit allowed under subsection (a)--
 ``(1) with respect to any retail clean-fuel vehicle 
 refueling property, shall not exceed $30,000, and
 ``(2) with respect to any residential clean-fuel vehicle 
 refueling property, shall not exceed $1,000.
 ``(c) Year Credit Allowed.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), no 
credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any 
qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property before the taxable year 
in which the property is placed in service by the taxpayer.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.--The 
 term `qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property' has the 
 same meaning given such term by section 179A(d).
 ``(2) Residential clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.--
 The term `residential clean-fuel vehicle refueling property' 
 means qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property which is 
 installed on property which is used as the principal residence 
 (within the meaning of section 121) of the taxpayer.
 ``(3) Retail clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.--The 
 term `retail clean-fuel vehicle refueling property' means 
 qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property which is 
 installed on property (other than property described in 
 paragraph (2)) used in a trade or business of the taxpayer.
 ``(e) Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed under 
subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if 
any) of--
 ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the 
 sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 
 29, 30, and 30C, over
 ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
 ``(f) Basis Reduction.--For purposes of this title, the basis of 
any property shall be reduced by the portion of the cost of such 
property taken into account under subsection (a).
 ``(g) No Double Benefit.--
 ``(1) Coordination with other deductions and credits.--
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amount of any 
 deduction or other credit allowable under this chapter for any 
 cost taken into account in computing the amount of the credit 
 determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount 
 of such credit attributable to such cost.
 ``(2) No deduction allowed under section 179a.--No 
 deduction shall be allowed under section 179A with respect to 
 any property with respect to which a credit is allowed under 
 subsection (a).
 ``(h) Refueling Property Installed for Tax-Exempt Entities.--In the 
case of qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property installed on 
property owned or used by an entity exempt from tax under this chapter, 
the person which installs such refueling property for the entity shall 
be treated as the taxpayer with respect to the refueling property for 
purposes of this section (and such refueling property shall be treated 
as retail clean-fuel vehicle refueling property) and the credit shall 
be allowed to such person, but only if the person clearly discloses to 
the entity in any installation contract the specific amount of the 
credit allowable under this section.
 ``(i) Carryforward Allowed.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the credit allowable under subsection 
 (a) for a taxable year exceeds the amount of the limitation 
 under subsection (e) for such taxable year, such excess shall 
 be a credit carryforward to each of the 20 taxable years 
 following such taxable year.
 ``(2) Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of section 39 
 shall apply with respect to the credit carryforward under 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(j) Special Rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (4) 
and (5) of section 179A(e) shall apply.
 ``(k) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
 ``(l) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any property 
placed in service--
 ``(1) in the case of property relating to hydrogen, after 
 December 31, 2011, and
 ``(2) in the case of any other property, after December 31, 
 2007.''.
 (b) Modifications to Extension of Deduction for Certain Refueling 
Property.--Subsection (f) of section 179A is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(f) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any property 
placed in service--
 ``(1) in the case of property relating to hydrogen, after 
 December 31, 2011, and
 ``(2) in the case of any other property, after December 31, 
 2007.''.
 (c) Incentive for Production of Hydrogen at Qualified Clean-Fuel 
Vehicle Refueling Property.--Section 179A(d) (defining qualified clean-
fuel vehicle refueling property) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new flush sentence:
``In the case of clean-burning fuel which is hydrogen produced from 
another clean-burning fuel, paragraph (3)(A) shall be applied by 
substituting `production, storage, or dispensing' for `storage or 
dispensing' both places it appears.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1016(a), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (32), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (33) and inserting ``, and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(34) to the extent provided in section 30D(f).''.
 (2) Section 55(c)(2), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 inserting ``30D(e),'' after ``30C(e),''.
 (3) The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is amended 
 by inserting after the item relating to section 30C the 
 following new item:

 ``Sec. 30D. Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property credit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 814. CREDIT FOR RETAIL SALE OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS AS MOTOR VEHICLE 
 FUEL.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits) is amended by inserting after 
section 40 the following new section:

``SEC. 40A. CREDIT FOR RETAIL SALE OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS AS MOTOR 
 VEHICLE FUEL.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the alternative 
fuel retail sales credit for any taxable year is the applicable amount 
for each gasoline gallon equivalent of alternative fuel sold at retail 
by the taxpayer during such year as a fuel to propel any qualified 
motor vehicle.
 ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Applicable amount.--The term `applicable amount' 
 means the amount determined in accordance with the following 
 table:

``In the case of any taxable year
 ending in-- The applicable amount is--
 2005 and 2006................................. 50 cents.
 ``(2) Alternative fuel.--The term `alternative fuel' means 
 compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, liquefied 
 petroleum gas, hydrogen, or any liquid at least 85 percent of 
 the volume of which consists of methanol or ethanol.
 ``(3) Gasoline gallon equivalent.--The term `gasoline 
 gallon equivalent' means, with respect to any alternative fuel, 
 the amount (determined by the Secretary) of such fuel having a 
 Btu content of 114,000.
 ``(4) Qualified motor vehicle.--The term `qualified motor 
 vehicle' means any motor vehicle (as defined in section 
 30(c)(2)) which meets any applicable Federal or State emissions 
 standards with respect to each fuel by which such vehicle is 
 designed to be propelled.
 ``(5) Sold at retail.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `sold at retail' means 
 the sale, for a purpose other than resale, after 
 manufacture, production, or importation.
 ``(B) Use treated as sale.--If any person uses 
 alternative fuel (including any use after importation) 
 as a fuel to propel any new qualified alternative fuel 
 motor vehicle (as defined in section 30C(d)(4)) before 
 such fuel is sold at retail, then such use shall be 
 treated in the same manner as if such fuel were sold at 
 retail as a fuel to propel such a vehicle by such 
 person.
 ``(c) No Double Benefit.--The amount of any deduction or other 
credit allowable under this chapter for any fuel taken into account in 
computing the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) 
shall be reduced by the amount of such credit attributable to such 
fuel.
 ``(d) Pass-Thru in the Case of Estates and Trusts.--Under 
regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of 
subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(e) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any fuel sold 
at retail after December 31, 2006.''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (relating to 
current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the 
end of paragraph (20), by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
(21) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
 ``(22) the alternative fuel retail sales credit determined 
 under section 40A(a).''.
 (c) Limitation on Carryback.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (d) of section 39, as amended 
 by this Act, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Transitional Rule.--No portion of the unused business credit 
for any taxable year which is attributable to a credit specified in 
section 38(b) may be carried back to any taxable year before the first 
taxable year for which such specified credit is allowable.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply with respect to taxable years beginning after 
 December 31, 2003.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 40 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 40A. Credit for retail sale of alternative fuels as 
 motor vehicle fuel.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided, the amendments 
made by this section shall apply to fuel sold at retail after December 
31, 2004, in taxable years ending after such date.

SEC. 815. SMALL ETHANOL PRODUCER CREDIT.

 (a) Allocation of Alcohol Fuels Credit to Patrons of a 
Cooperative.--Section 40(g) (relating to definitions and special rules 
for eligible small ethanol producer credit) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Allocation of small ethanol producer credit to 
 patrons of cooperative.--
 ``(A) Election to allocate.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of a 
 cooperative organization described in section 
 1381(a), any portion of the credit determined 
 under subsection (a)(3) for the taxable year 
 may, at the election of the organization, be 
 apportioned pro rata among patrons of the 
 organization on the basis of the quantity or 
 value of business done with or for such patrons 
 for the taxable year.
 ``(ii) Form and effect of election.--An 
 election under clause (i) for any taxable year 
 shall be made on a timely filed return for such 
 year. Such election, once made, shall be 
 irrevocable for such taxable year.
 ``(B) Treatment of organizations and patrons.--The 
 amount of the credit apportioned to patrons under 
 subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) shall not be included in the amount 
 determined under subsection (a) with respect to 
 the organization for the taxable year, and
 ``(ii) shall be included in the amount 
 determined under subsection (a) for the taxable 
 year of each patron for which the patronage 
 dividends for the taxable year described in 
 subparagraph (A) are included in gross income.
 ``(C) Special rules for decrease in credits for 
 taxable year.--If the amount of the credit of a 
 cooperative organization determined under subsection 
 (a)(3) for a taxable year is less than the amount of 
 such credit shown on the return of the cooperative 
 organization for such year, an amount equal to the 
 excess of--
 ``(i) such reduction, over
 ``(ii) the amount not apportioned to such 
 patrons under subparagraph (A) for the taxable 
 year,
 shall be treated as an increase in tax imposed by this 
 chapter on the organization. Such increase shall not be 
 treated as tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of 
 determining the amount of any credit under this chapter 
 or for purposes of section 55.''.
 (b) Improvements to Small Ethanol Producer Credit.--
 (1) Definition of small ethanol producer.--Section 40(g) 
 (relating to definitions and special rules for eligible small 
 ethanol producer credit) is amended by striking ``30,000,000'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``60,000,000''.
 (2) Small ethanol producer credit not a passive activity 
 credit.--Clause (i) of section 469(d)(2)(A) is amended by 
 striking ``subpart D'' and inserting ``subpart D, other than 
 section 40(a)(3),''.
 (3) Small ethanol producer credit not added back to income 
 under section 87.--Section 87 (relating to income inclusion of 
 alcohol fuel credit) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 87. ALCOHOL FUEL CREDIT.

 ``Gross income includes an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) the amount of the alcohol mixture credit determined 
 with respect to the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 
 40(a)(1), and
 ``(2) the alcohol credit determined with respect to the 
 taxpayer for the taxable year under section 40(a)(2).''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1388 (relating to definitions 
and special rules for cooperative organizations), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Cross Reference.--For provisions relating to the 
apportionment of the alcohol fuels credit between cooperative 
organizations and their patrons, see section 40(g)(6).''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

 Subtitle C--Conservation and Energy Efficiency Provisions

SEC. 821. CREDIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF NEW ENERGY EFFICIENT HOME.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45K. NEW ENERGY EFFICIENT HOME CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an 
eligible contractor, the credit determined under this section for the 
taxable year is an amount equal to the aggregate adjusted bases of all 
energy efficient property installed in a qualifying new home during 
construction of such home.
 ``(b) Limitations.--
 ``(1) Maximum credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--The credit allowed by this 
 section with respect to a qualifying new home shall not 
 exceed--
 ``(i) in the case of a 30-percent home, 
 $1,000, and
 ``(ii) in the case of a 50-percent home, 
 $2,000.
 ``(B) 30- or 50-percent home.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) 30-percent home.--The term `30-
 percent home' means--
 ``(I) a qualifying new home which 
 is certified to have a projected level 
 of annual heating and cooling energy 
 consumption, measured in terms of 
 average annual energy cost to the 
 homeowner, which is at least 30 percent 
 less than the annual level of heating 
 and cooling energy consumption of a 
 qualifying new home constructed in 
 accordance with the latest standards of 
 chapter 4 of the International Energy 
 Conservation Code approved by the 
 Department of Energy before the 
 construction of such qualifying new 
 home and any applicable Federal minimum 
 efficiency standards for equipment, or
 ``(II) in the case of a qualifying 
 new home which is a manufactured home, 
 a home which meets the applicable 
 standards required by the Administrator 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency 
 under the Energy Star Labeled Homes 
 program.
 ``(ii) 50-percent home.--The term `50-
 percent home' means a qualifying new home which 
 would be described in clause (i)(I) if 50 
 percent were substituted for 30 percent.
 ``(C) Prior credit amounts on same home taken into 
 account.--The amount of the credit otherwise allowable 
 for the taxable year with respect to a qualifying new 
 home under clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (A) shall 
 be reduced by the sum of the credits allowed under 
 subsection (a) to any taxpayer with respect to the home 
 for all preceding taxable years.
 ``(2) Coordination with certain credits.--For purposes of 
 this section--
 ``(A) the basis of any property referred to in 
 subsection (a) shall be reduced by that portion of the 
 basis of any property which is attributable to the 
 rehabilitation credit (as determined under section 
 47(a)) or to the energy credit (as determined under 
 section 48(a)), and
 ``(B) expenditures taken into account under section 
 25D, 47, or 48(a) shall not be taken into account under 
 this section.
 ``(3) Provider limitation.--Any eligible contractor who 
 directly or indirectly provides the guarantee of energy savings 
 under a guarantee-based method of certification described in 
 subsection (d)(1)(D) shall not be eligible to receive the 
 credit allowed by this section.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Eligible contractor.--The term `eligible contractor' 
 means--
 ``(A) the person who constructed the qualifying new 
 home, or
 ``(B) in the case of a qualifying new home which is 
 a manufactured home, the manufactured home producer of 
 such home.
 If more than 1 person is described in subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 with respect to any qualifying new home, such term means the 
 person designated as such by the owner of such home.
 ``(2) Energy efficient property.--The term `energy 
 efficient property' means any energy efficient building 
 envelope component, and any energy efficient heating or cooling 
 equipment or system which can, individually or in combination 
 with other components, meet the requirements of this section.
 ``(3) Qualifying new home.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualifying new home' 
 means a dwelling--
 ``(i) located in the United States,
 ``(ii) the construction of which is 
 substantially completed after December 31, 
 2004, and
 ``(iii) the first use of which after 
 construction is as a principal residence 
 (within the meaning of section 121).
 ``(B) Manufactured home included.--The term 
 `qualifying new home' includes a manufactured home 
 conforming to Federal Manufactured Home Construction 
 and Safety Standards (24 C.F.R. 3280).
 ``(4) Construction.--The term `construction' includes 
 reconstruction and rehabilitation.
 ``(5) Building envelope component.--The term `building 
 envelope component' means--
 ``(A) any insulation material or system which is 
 specifically and primarily designed to reduce the heat 
 loss or gain of a qualifying new home when installed in 
 or on such home,
 ``(B) exterior windows (including skylights), and
 ``(C) exterior doors.
 ``(d) Certification.--
 ``(1) Method of certification.--
 ``(A) In general.--A certification described in 
 subsection (b)(1)(B) shall be determined either by a 
 component-based method, a performance-based method, or 
 a guarantee-based method, or, in the case of a 
 qualifying new home which is a manufactured home, by a 
 method prescribed by the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency under the Energy Star 
 Labeled Homes program.
 ``(B) Component-based method.--A component-based 
 method is a method which uses the applicable technical 
 energy efficiency specifications or ratings (including 
 product labeling requirements) for the energy efficient 
 building envelope component or energy efficient heating 
 or cooling equipment. The Secretary shall, in 
 consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, develop prescriptive 
 component-based packages which are equivalent in energy 
 performance to properties which qualify under 
 subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) Performance-based method.--
 ``(i) In general.--A performance-based 
 method is a method which calculates projected 
 energy usage and cost reductions in the 
 qualifying new home in relation to a new home--
 ``(I) heated by the same fuel type, 
 and
 ``(II) constructed in accordance 
 with the latest standards of chapter 4 
 of the International Energy 
 Conservation Code approved by the 
 Department of Energy before the 
 construction of such qualifying new 
 home and any applicable Federal minimum 
 efficiency standards for equipment.
 ``(ii) Computer software.--Computer 
 software shall be used in support of a 
 performance-based method certification under 
 clause (i). Such software shall meet procedures 
 and methods for calculating energy and cost 
 savings in regulations promulgated by the 
 Secretary of Energy.
 ``(D) Guarantee-based method.--
 ``(i) In general.--A guarantee-based method 
 is a method which guarantees in writing to the 
 homeowner energy savings of either 30 percent 
 or 50 percent over the 2000 International 
 Energy Conservation Code for heating and 
 cooling costs. The guarantee shall be provided 
 for a minimum of 2 years and shall fully 
 reimburse the homeowner any heating and cooling 
 costs in excess of the guaranteed amount.
 ``(ii) Computer software.--Computer 
 software shall be selected by the provider to 
 support the guarantee-based method 
 certification under clause (i). Such software 
 shall meet procedures and methods for 
 calculating energy and cost savings in 
 regulations promulgated by the Secretary of 
 Energy.
 ``(2) Provider.--A certification described in subsection 
 (b)(1)(B) shall be provided by--
 ``(A) in the case of a component-based method, a 
 local building regulatory authority, a utility, or a 
 home energy rating organization,
 ``(B) in the case of a performance-based method or 
 a guarantee-based method, an individual recognized by 
 an organization designated by the Secretary for such 
 purposes, or
 ``(C) in the case of a qualifying new home which is 
 a manufactured home, a manufactured home primary 
 inspection agency.
 ``(3) Form.--
 ``(A) In general.--A certification described in 
 subsection (b)(1)(B) shall be made in writing in a 
 manner which specifies in readily verifiable fashion 
 the energy efficient building envelope components and 
 energy efficient heating or cooling equipment installed 
 and their respective rated energy efficiency 
 performance, and
 ``(i) in the case of a performance-based 
 method, accompanied by a written analysis 
 documenting the proper application of a 
 permissible energy performance calculation 
 method to the specific circumstances of such 
 qualifying new home, and
 ``(ii) in the case of a qualifying new home 
 which is a manufactured home, accompanied by 
 such documentation as required by the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency under the Energy Star Labeled Homes 
 program.
 ``(B) Form provided to buyer.--A form documenting 
 the energy efficient building envelope components and 
 energy efficient heating or cooling equipment installed 
 and their rated energy efficiency performance shall be 
 provided to the buyer of the qualifying new home. The 
 form shall include labeled R-value for insulation 
 products, NFRC-labeled U-factor and solar heat gain 
 coefficient for windows, skylights, and doors, labeled 
 annual fuel utilization efficiency (AFUE) ratings for 
 furnaces and boilers, labeled heating seasonal 
 performance factor (HSPF) ratings for electric heat 
 pumps, and labeled seasonal energy efficiency ratio 
 (SEER) ratings for air conditioners.
 ``(C) Ratings label affixed in dwelling.--A 
 permanent label documenting the ratings in subparagraph 
 (B) shall be affixed to the front of the electrical 
 distribution panel of the qualifying new home, or shall 
 be otherwise permanently displayed in a readily 
 inspectable location in such home.
 ``(4) Regulations.--
 ``(A) In general.--In prescribing regulations under 
 this subsection for performance-based and guarantee-
 based certification methods, the Secretary shall 
 prescribe procedures for calculating annual energy 
 usage and cost reductions for heating and cooling and 
 for the reporting of the results. Such regulations 
 shall--
 ``(i) provide that any calculation 
 procedures be fuel neutral such that the same 
 energy efficiency measures allow a qualifying 
 new home to be eligible for the credit under 
 this section regardless of whether such home 
 uses a gas or oil furnace or boiler or an 
 electric heat pump, and
 ``(ii) require that any computer software 
 allow for the printing of the Federal tax forms 
 necessary for the credit under this section and 
 for the printing of forms for disclosure to the 
 homebuyer.
 ``(B) Providers.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(B), 
 the Secretary shall establish requirements for the 
 designation of individuals based on the requirements 
 for energy consultants and home energy raters specified 
 by the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating 
 Standards.
 ``(e) Application.--Subsection (a) shall apply to qualifying new 
homes the construction of which is substantially completed after 
December 31, 2004, and purchased during the period beginning on such 
date and ending on--
 ``(1) in the case of any 30-percent home, December 31, 
 2005, and
 ``(2) in the case of any 50-percent home, December 31, 
 2007.''.
 (b) Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) 
(relating to current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (21), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (22) and inserting ``, plus'', and 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(23) the new energy efficient home credit determined 
 under section 45K(a).''.
 (c) Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C (relating to certain 
expenses for which credits are allowable) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) New Energy Efficient Home Expenses.--No deduction shall be 
allowed for that portion of expenses for a qualifying new home 
otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal 
to the amount of the credit determined for such taxable year under 
section 45K(a).''.
 (d) Deduction for Certain Unused Business Credits.--Section 196(c) 
(defining qualified business credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (10), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
adding after paragraph (11) the following new paragraph:
 ``(12) the new energy efficient home credit determined 
 under section 45K(a).''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45K. New energy efficient home 
 credit.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to homes the construction of which is substantially completed 
after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 822. CREDIT FOR ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business-related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45L. ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCE CREDIT.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 38, the energy 
 efficient appliance credit determined under this section for 
 the taxable year is an amount equal to the sum of the amounts 
 determined under paragraph (2) for qualified energy efficient 
 appliances produced by the taxpayer during the calendar year 
 ending with or within the taxable year.
 ``(2) Amount.--The amount determined under this paragraph 
 for any category described in subsection (b)(2)(B) shall be the 
 product of the applicable amount for appliances in the category 
 and the eligible production for the category.
 ``(b) Applicable Amount; Eligible Production.--For purposes of 
subsection (a)--
 ``(1) Applicable amount.--The applicable amount is--
 ``(A) $50, in the case of--
 ``(i) a clothes washer which is 
 manufactured with at least a 1.42 MEF, or
 ``(ii) a refrigerator which consumes at 
 least 10 percent less kilowatt hours per year 
 than the energy conservation standards for 
 refrigerators promulgated by the Department of 
 Energy and effective on July 1, 2001,
 ``(B) $100, in the case of--
 ``(i) a clothes washer which is 
 manufactured with at least a 1.50 MEF, or
 ``(ii) a refrigerator which consumes at 
 least 15 percent (20 percent in the case of a 
 refrigerator manufactured after 2006) less 
 kilowatt hours per year than such energy 
 conservation standards, and
 ``(C) $150, in the case of a refrigerator 
 manufactured before 2007 which consumes at least 20 
 percent less kilowatt hours per year than such energy 
 conservation standards.
 ``(2) Eligible production.--
 ``(A) In general.--The eligible production of each 
 category of qualified energy efficient appliances is 
 the excess of--
 ``(i) the number of appliances in such 
 category which are produced by the taxpayer 
 during such calendar year, over
 ``(ii) the average number of appliances in 
 such category which were produced by the 
 taxpayer during calendar years 2001, 2002, and 
 2003.
 ``(B) Categories.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the categories are--
 ``(i) clothes washers described in 
 paragraph (1)(A)(i),
 ``(ii) clothes washers described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(i),
 ``(iii) refrigerators described in 
 paragraph (1)(A)(ii),
 ``(iv) refrigerators described in paragraph 
 (1)(B)(ii), and
 ``(v) refrigerators described in paragraph 
 (1)(C).
 ``(c) Limitation on Maximum Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of credit allowed under 
 subsection (a) with respect to a taxpayer for all taxable years 
 shall not exceed $60,000,000, of which not more than 
 $30,000,000 may be allowed with respect to the credit 
 determined by using the applicable amount under subsection 
 (b)(1)(A).
 ``(2) Limitation based on gross receipts.--The credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) with respect to a taxpayer for the 
 taxable year shall not exceed an amount equal to 2 percent of 
 the average annual gross receipts of the taxpayer for the 3 
 taxable years preceding the taxable year in which the credit is 
 determined.
 ``(3) Gross receipts.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 rules of paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 448(c) shall apply.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified energy efficient appliance.--The term 
 `qualified energy efficient appliance' means--
 ``(A) a clothes washer described in subparagraph 
 (A)(i) or (B)(i) of subsection (b)(1), or
 ``(B) a refrigerator described in subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), (B)(ii), or (C) of subsection (b)(1).
 ``(2) Clothes washer.--The term `clothes washer' means a 
 residential clothes washer, including a residential style coin 
 operated washer.
 ``(3) Refrigerator.--The term `refrigerator' means an 
 automatic defrost refrigerator-freezer which has an internal 
 volume of at least 16.5 cubic feet.
 ``(4) MEF.--The term `MEF' means Modified Energy Factor (as 
 determined by the Secretary of Energy).
 ``(e) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) In general.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 subsections (c), (d), and (e) of section 52 shall apply for 
 purposes of this section.
 ``(2) Aggregation rules.--All persons treated as a single 
 employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 or 
 subsection (m) or (o) of section 414 shall be treated as 1 
 person for purposes of subsection (a).
 ``(f) Verification.--The taxpayer shall submit such information or 
certification as the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Energy, determines necessary to claim the credit amount under 
subsection (a).
 ``(g) Termination.--This section shall not apply--
 ``(1) with respect to refrigerators described in subsection 
 (b)(1)(A)(ii) produced after December 31, 2005, and
 ``(2) with respect to all other qualified energy efficient 
 appliances produced after December 31, 2007.''.
 (b) Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) 
(relating to current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (22), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (23) and inserting ``, plus'', and 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(24) the energy efficient appliance credit determined 
 under section 45L(a).''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45L. Energy efficient appliance 
 credit.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to appliances produced after December 31, 2004, in taxable years 
ending after such date.

SEC. 823. CREDIT FOR RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENT PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting 
after section 25B the following new section:

``SEC. 25C. RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENT PROPERTY.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there 
shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter 
for the taxable year an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) 15 percent of the qualified photovoltaic property 
 expenditures made by the taxpayer during such year,
 ``(2) 15 percent of the qualified solar water heating 
 property expenditures made by the taxpayer during such year,
 ``(3) 30 percent of the qualified fuel cell property 
 expenditures made by the taxpayer during such year,
 ``(4) 30 percent of the qualified wind energy property 
 expenditures made by the taxpayer during such year, and
 ``(5) the sum of the qualified Tier 2 energy efficient 
 building property expenditures made by the taxpayer during such 
 year.
 ``(b) Limitations.--
 ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed under subsection 
 (a) shall not exceed--
 ``(A) $2,000 for property described in paragraph 
 (1), (2), or (5) of subsection (d),
 ``(B) $500 for each 0.5 kilowatt of capacity of 
 property described in subsection (d)(4), and
 ``(C) for property described in subsection (d)(6)--
 ``(i) $150 for each electric heat pump 
 water heater,
 ``(ii) $125 for each advanced natural gas, 
 oil, propane furnace, or hot water boiler,
 ``(iii) $150 for each advanced natural gas, 
 oil, or propane water heater,
 ``(iv) $50 for each natural gas, oil, or 
 propane water heater,
 ``(v) $50 for an advanced main air 
 circulating fan,
 ``(vi) $150 for each advanced combination 
 space and water heating system,
 ``(vii) $50 for each combination space and 
 water heating system, and
 ``(viii) $250 for each geothermal heat 
 pump.
 ``(2) Safety certifications.--No credit shall be allowed 
 under this section for an item of property unless--
 ``(A) in the case of solar water heating property, 
 such property is certified for performance and safety 
 by the non-profit Solar Rating Certification 
 Corporation or a comparable entity endorsed by the 
 government of the State in which such property is 
 installed,
 ``(B) in the case of a photovoltaic property, a 
 fuel cell property, or a wind energy property, such 
 property meets appropriate fire and electric code 
 requirements, and
 ``(C) in the case of property described in 
 subsection (d)(6), such property meets the performance 
 and quality standards, and the certification 
 requirements (if any), which--
 ``(i) have been prescribed by the Secretary 
 by regulations (after consultation with the 
 Secretary of Energy or the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, as 
 appropriate),
 ``(ii) in the case of the energy efficiency 
 ratio (EER) for property described in 
 subsection (d)(6)(B)(viii)--
 ``(I) require measurements to be 
 based on published data which is tested 
 by manufacturers at 95 degrees 
 Fahrenheit, and
 ``(II) do not require ratings to be 
 based on certified data of the Air 
 Conditioning and Refrigeration 
 Institute, and
 ``(iii) are in effect at the time of the 
 acquisition of the property.
 ``(c) Carryforward of Unused Credit.--If the credit allowable under 
subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such 
taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this 
subpart (other than this section and section 25D), such excess shall be 
carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit 
allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified solar water heating property expenditure.--
 The term `qualified solar water heating property expenditure' 
 means an expenditure for property to heat water for use in a 
 dwelling unit located in the United States and used as a 
 residence by the taxpayer if at least half of the energy used 
 by such property for such purpose is derived from the sun.
 ``(2) Qualified photovoltaic property expenditure.--The 
 term `qualified photovoltaic property expenditure' means an 
 expenditure for property which uses solar energy to generate 
 electricity for use in a dwelling unit located in the United 
 States and used as a residence by the taxpayer.
 ``(3) Solar panels.--No expenditure relating to a solar 
 panel or other property installed as a roof (or portion 
 thereof) shall fail to be treated as property described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2) solely because it constitutes a structural 
 component of the structure on which it is installed.
 ``(4) Qualified fuel cell property expenditure.--The term 
 `qualified fuel cell property expenditure' means an expenditure 
 for qualified fuel cell property (as defined in section 
 48(a)(4)) installed on or in connection with a dwelling unit 
 located in the United States and used as a principal residence 
 (within the meaning of section 121) by the taxpayer.
 ``(5) Qualified wind energy property expenditure.--The term 
 `qualified wind energy property expenditure' means an 
 expenditure for property which uses wind energy to generate 
 electricity for use in a dwelling unit located in the United 
 States and used as a residence by the taxpayer.
 ``(6) Qualified tier 2 energy efficient building property 
 expenditure.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified Tier 2 
 energy efficient building property expenditure' means 
 an expenditure for any Tier 2 energy efficient building 
 property.
 ``(B) Tier 2 energy efficient building property.--
 The term `Tier 2 energy efficient building property' 
 means--
 ``(i) an electric heat pump water heater 
 which yields an energy factor of at least 1.7 
 in the standard Department of Energy test 
 procedure,
 ``(ii) an advanced natural gas, oil, 
 propane furnace, or hot water boiler which 
 achieves at least 95 percent annual fuel 
 utilization efficiency (AFUE),
 ``(iii) an advanced natural gas, oil, or 
 propane water heater which has an energy factor 
 of at least 0.80 in the standard Department of 
 Energy test procedure,
 ``(iv) a natural gas, oil, or propane water 
 heater which has an energy factor of at least 
 0.65 but less than 0.80 in the standard 
 Department of Energy test procedure,
 ``(v) an advanced main air circulating fan 
 used in a new natural gas, propane, or oil-
 fired furnace, including main air circulating 
 fans that use a brushless permanent magnet 
 motor or another type of motor which achieves 
 similar or higher efficiency at half and full 
 speed, as determined by the Secretary,
 ``(vi) an advanced combination space and 
 water heating system which has a combined 
 energy factor of at least 0.80 and a combined 
 annual fuel utilization efficiency (AFUE) of at 
 least 78 percent in the standard Department of 
 Energy test procedure,
 ``(vii) a combination space and water 
 heating system which has a combined energy 
 factor of at least 0.65 but less than 0.80 and 
 a combined annual fuel utilization efficiency 
 (AFUE) of at least 78 percent in the standard 
 Department of Energy test procedure, and
 ``(viii) a geothermal heat pump which has 
 an energy efficiency ratio (EER) of at least 
 21.
 ``(7) Labor costs.--Expenditures for labor costs properly 
 allocable to the onsite preparation, assembly, or original 
 installation of the property described in paragraph (1), (2), 
 (4), (5), or (6) and for piping or wiring to interconnect such 
 property to the dwelling unit shall be taken into account for 
 purposes of this section.
 ``(8) Swimming pools, etc., used as storage medium.--
 Expenditures which are properly allocable to a swimming pool, 
 hot tub, or any other energy storage medium which has a 
 function other than the function of such storage shall not be 
 taken into account for purposes of this section.
 ``(e) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Dollar amounts in case of joint occupancy.--In the 
 case of any dwelling unit which is jointly occupied and used 
 during any calendar year as a residence by 2 or more 
 individuals the following rules shall apply:
 ``(A) The amount of the credit allowable, under 
 subsection (a) by reason of expenditures (as the case 
 may be) made during such calendar year by any of such 
 individuals with respect to such dwelling unit shall be 
 determined by treating all of such individuals as 1 
 taxpayer whose taxable year is such calendar year.
 ``(B) There shall be allowable, with respect to 
 such expenditures to each of such individuals, a credit 
 under subsection (a) for the taxable year in which such 
 calendar year ends in an amount which bears the same 
 ratio to the amount determined under subparagraph (A) 
 as the amount of such expenditures made by such 
 individual during such calendar year bears to the 
 aggregate of such expenditures made by all of such 
 individuals during such calendar year.
 ``(2) Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing 
 corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant-
 stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative 
 housing corporation (as defined in such section), such 
 individual shall be treated as having made his tenant-
 stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 
 216(b)(3)) of any expenditures of such corporation.
 ``(3) Condominiums.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who 
 is a member of a condominium management association 
 with respect to a condominium which the individual 
 owns, such individual shall be treated as having made 
 the individual's proportionate share of any 
 expenditures of such association.
 ``(B) Condominium management association.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium 
 management association' means an organization which 
 meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 
 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with 
 respect to a condominium project substantially all of 
 the units of which are used as residences.
 ``(4) Allocation in certain cases.--Except in the case of 
 qualified wind energy property expenditures, if less than 80 
 percent of the use of an item is for nonbusiness purposes, only 
 that portion of the expenditures for such item which is 
 properly allocable to use for nonbusiness purposes shall be 
 taken into account.
 ``(5) When expenditure made; amount of expenditure.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), an expenditure with respect to an 
 item shall be treated as made when the original 
 installation of the item is completed.
 ``(B) Expenditures part of building construction.--
 In the case of an expenditure in connection with the 
 construction or reconstruction of a structure, such 
 expenditure shall be treated as made when the original 
 use of the constructed or reconstructed structure by 
 the taxpayer begins.
 ``(C) Amount.--The amount of any expenditure shall 
 be the cost thereof.
 ``(6) Property financed by subsidized energy financing.--
 For purposes of determining the amount of expenditures made by 
 any individual with respect to any dwelling unit, there shall 
 not be taken into account expenditures which are made from 
 subsidized energy financing (as defined in section 
 48(a)(5)(C)).
 ``(f) Basis Adjustments.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect 
to any property, the increase in the basis of such property which would 
(but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced 
by the amount of the credit so allowed.
 ``(g) Termination.--The credit allowed under this section shall not 
apply to expenditures after December 31, 2007.''.
 (b) Credit Allowed Against Regular Tax and Alternative Minimum 
Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Section 25C(b), as added by subsection 
 (a), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not 
 exceed the excess of--
 ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as 
 defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by 
 section 55, over
 ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this 
 subpart (other than this section and section 25D) and 
 section 27 for the taxable year.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 25C(c), as added by subsection (a), is 
 amended by striking ``section 26(a) for such taxable 
 year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under 
 this subpart (other than this section and section 
 25D)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)(3)''.
 (B) Section 23(b)(4)(B) is amended by inserting 
 ``and section 25C'' after ``this section''.
 (C) Section 24(b)(3)(B) is amended by striking ``23 
 and 25B'' and inserting ``23, 25B, and 25C''.
 (D) Section 25(e)(1)(C) is amended by inserting 
 ``25C,'' after ``25B,''.
 (E) Section 25B(g)(2) is amended by striking 
 ``section 23'' and inserting ``sections 23 and 25C''.
 (F) Section 26(a)(1) is amended by striking ``and 
 25B'' and inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
 (G) Section 904(i), as redesignated and amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``and 25B'' and 
 inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
 (H) Section 1400C(d) is amended by striking ``and 
 25B'' and inserting ``25B, and 25C''.
 (c) Additional Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1016(a), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (33), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (34) and inserting ``, and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(35) to the extent provided in section 25C(f), in the 
 case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed 
 under section 25C.''.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 25B the following new item:

 ``Sec. 25C. Residential energy efficient 
 property.''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures 
 after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending after such 
 date.
 (2) Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 824. CREDIT FOR BUSINESS INSTALLATION OF QUALIFIED FUEL CELLS AND 
 STATIONARY MICROTURBINE POWER PLANTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 48(a)(3)(A) (defining energy property) is 
amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by adding ``or'' 
at the end of clause (ii), and by inserting after clause (ii) the 
following new clause:
 ``(iii) qualified fuel cell property or 
 qualified microturbine property,''.
 (b) Qualified Fuel Cell Property; Qualified Microturbine 
Property.--Section 48(a) (relating to energy credit) is amended by 
redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6), 
respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Qualified fuel cell property; qualified microturbine 
 property.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Qualified fuel cell property.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified fuel 
 cell property' means a fuel cell power plant 
 which--
 ``(I) generates at least 0.5 
 kilowatt of electricity using an 
 electrochemical process, and
 ``(II) has an electricity-only 
 generation efficiency greater than 30 
 percent.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--In the case of 
 qualified fuel cell property placed in service 
 during the taxable year, the credit otherwise 
 determined under paragraph (1) for such year 
 with respect to such property shall not exceed 
 an amount equal to $500 for each 0.5 kilowatt 
 of capacity of such property.
 ``(iii) Fuel cell power plant.--The term 
 `fuel cell power plant' means an integrated 
 system comprised of a fuel cell stack assembly 
 and associated balance of plant components 
 which converts a fuel into electricity using 
 electrochemical means.
 ``(iv) Termination.--The term `qualified 
 fuel cell property' shall not include any 
 property placed in service after December 31, 
 2007.
 ``(B) Qualified microturbine property.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `qualified 
 microturbine property' means a stationary 
 microturbine power plant which--
 ``(I) has a capacity of less than 
 2,000 kilowatts, and
 ``(II) has an electricity-only 
 generation efficiency of not less than 
 26 percent at International Standard 
 Organization conditions.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--In the case of 
 qualified microturbine property placed in 
 service during the taxable year, the credit 
 otherwise determined under paragraph (1) for 
 such year with respect to such property shall 
 not exceed an amount equal $200 for each 
 kilowatt of capacity of such property.
 ``(iii) Stationary microturbine power 
 plant.--The term `stationary microturbine power 
 plant' means an integrated system comprised of 
 a gas turbine engine, a combustor, a 
 recuperator or regenerator, a generator or 
 alternator, and associated balance of plant 
 components which converts a fuel into 
 electricity and thermal energy. Such term also 
 includes all secondary components located 
 between the existing infrastructure for fuel 
 delivery and the existing infrastructure for 
 power distribution, including equipment and 
 controls for meeting relevant power standards, 
 such as voltage, frequency, and power factors.
 ``(iv) Termination.--The term `qualified 
 microturbine property' shall not include any 
 property placed in service after December 31, 
 2006.''.
 (c) Energy Percentage.--Section 48(a)(2)(A) (relating to energy 
percentage) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) In general.--The energy percentage is--
 ``(i) in the case of qualified fuel cell 
 property, 30 percent, and
 ``(ii) in the case of any other energy 
 property, 10 percent.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (A) Section 29(b)(3)(A)(i)(III) is amended by 
 striking ``section 48(a)(4)(C)'' and inserting 
 ``section 48(a)(5)(C)''.
 (B) Section 48(a)(1) is amended by inserting 
 ``except as provided in subparagraph (A)(ii) or (B)(ii) 
 of paragraph (4),'' before ``the energy''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date, under rules similar to the rules of 
section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the 
day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act 
of 1990).

SEC. 825. ENERGY EFFICIENT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS DEDUCTION.

 (a) In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to 
itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by 
inserting after section 179A the following new section:

``SEC. 179B. ENERGY EFFICIENT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS DEDUCTION.

 ``(a) In General.--There shall be allowed as a deduction for the 
taxable year in which a building is placed in service by a taxpayer, an 
amount equal to the energy efficient commercial building property 
expenditures made by such taxpayer with respect to the construction or 
reconstruction of such building for the taxable year or any preceding 
taxable year.
 ``(b) Maximum Amount of Deduction.--The amount of energy efficient 
commercial building property expenditures taken into account under 
subsection (a) shall not exceed an amount equal to the product of--
 ``(1) $2.25, and
 ``(2) the square footage of the building with respect to 
 which the expenditures are made.
 ``(c) Energy Efficient Commercial Building Property Expenditures.--
For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `energy efficient commercial 
 building property expenditures' means amounts paid or incurred 
 for energy efficient property installed on or in connection 
 with the construction or reconstruction of a building--
 ``(A) for which depreciation is allowable under 
 section 167,
 ``(B) which is located in the United States, and
 ``(C) which is the type of structure to which the 
 Standard 90.1-2001 of the American Society of Heating, 
 Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers and the 
 Illuminating Engineering Society of North America is 
 applicable.
 Such term includes expenditures for labor costs properly 
 allocable to the onsite preparation, assembly, or original 
 installation of the property.
 ``(2) Energy efficient property.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `energy efficient 
 property' means any property which reduces total annual 
 energy and power costs with respect to the lighting, 
 heating, cooling, ventilation, and hot water supply 
 systems of the building by 50 percent or more in 
 comparison to a building which meets the minimum 
 requirements of Standard 90.1-2001 of the American 
 Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning 
 Engineers and the Illuminating Engineering Society of 
 North America, using methods of calculation described 
 in subparagraph (B) and certified by qualified 
 individuals as provided under paragraph (5).
 ``(B) Methods of calculation.--The Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Energy, shall 
 promulgate regulations which describe in detail methods 
 for calculating and verifying energy and power costs.
 ``(C) Computer software.--
 ``(i) In general.--Any calculation 
 described in subparagraph (B) shall be prepared 
 by qualified computer software.
 ``(ii) Qualified computer software.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `qualified computer software' means software--
 ``(I) for which the software 
 designer has certified that the 
 software meets all procedures and 
 detailed methods for calculating energy 
 and power costs as required by the 
 Secretary,
 ``(II) which provides such forms as 
 required to be filed by the Secretary 
 in connection with energy efficiency of 
 property and the deduction allowed 
 under this section, and
 ``(III) which provides a notice 
 form which summarizes the energy 
 efficiency features of the building and 
 its projected annual energy costs.
 ``(3) Allocation of deduction for public property.--In the 
 case of energy efficient commercial building property 
 expenditures made by a public entity with respect to the 
 construction or reconstruction of a public building, the 
 Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which the value of 
 the deduction with respect to such expenditures which would be 
 allowable to the public entity under this section (determined 
 without regard to the tax-exempt status of such entity) may be 
 allocated to the person primarily responsible for designing the 
 energy efficient property. Such person shall be treated as the 
 taxpayer for purposes of this section.
 ``(4) Notice to owner.--Any qualified individual providing 
 a certification under paragraph (5) shall provide an 
 explanation to the owner of the building regarding the energy 
 efficiency features of the building and its projected annual 
 energy costs as provided in the notice under paragraph 
 (2)(C)(ii)(III).
 ``(5) Certification.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 procedures for the inspection and testing for 
 compliance of buildings by qualified individuals 
 described in subparagraph (B). Such procedures shall 
 be--
 ``(i) comparable, given the difference 
 between commercial and residential buildings, 
 to the requirements in the Mortgage Industry 
 National Home Energy Rating Standards, and
 ``(ii) fuel neutral such that the same 
 energy efficiency measures allow a building to 
 be eligible for the credit under this section 
 regardless of whether such building uses a gas 
 or oil furnace or boiler or an electric heat 
 pump.
 ``(B) Qualified individuals.--Individuals qualified 
 to determine compliance shall be only those individuals 
 who are recognized by an organization certified by the 
 Secretary for such purposes. The Secretary may qualify 
 a home energy ratings organization, a local building 
 regulatory authority, a State or local energy office, a 
 utility, or any other organization which meets the 
 requirements prescribed under this paragraph.
 ``(C) Proficiency of qualified individuals.--The 
 Secretary shall consult with nonprofit organizations 
 and State agencies with expertise in energy efficiency 
 calculations and inspections to develop proficiency 
 tests and training programs to qualify individuals to 
 determine compliance.
 ``(d) Basis Reduction.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
deduction is allowed under this section with respect to any energy 
efficient property, the basis of such property shall be reduced by the 
amount of the deduction so allowed.
 ``(e) Interim Rules for Lighting Systems.--Until such time as the 
Secretary issues final regulations under subsection (c)(2)(B) with 
respect to property which is part of a lighting system--
 ``(1) In general.--The lighting system target under 
 subsection (d)(1)(A)(ii) shall be a reduction in lighting power 
 density of 25 percent (50 percent in the case of a warehouse) 
 of the minimum requirements in Table 9.3.1.1 or Table 9.3.1.2 
 (not including additional interior lighting power allowances) 
 of Standard 90.1-2001.
 ``(2) Reduction in credit if reduction less than 40 
 percent.--
 ``(A) In general.--If, with respect to the lighting 
 system of any building other than a warehouse, the 
 reduction of lighting power density of the lighting 
 system is not at least 40 percent, only the applicable 
 percentage of the amount of credit otherwise allowable 
 under this section with respect to such property shall 
 be allowed.
 ``(B) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage is the 
 number of percentage points (not greater than 100) 
 equal to the sum of--
 ``(i) 50, and
 ``(ii) the amount which bears the same 
 ratio to 50 as the excess of the reduction of 
 lighting power density of the lighting system 
 over 25 percentage points bears to 15.
 ``(C) Exceptions.--This subsection shall not apply 
 to any system--
 ``(i) the controls and circuiting of which 
 do not comply fully with the mandatory and 
 prescriptive requirements of Standard 90.1-2001 
 and which do not include provision for bilevel 
 switching in all occupancies except hotel and 
 motel guest rooms, store rooms, restrooms, and 
 public lobbies, or
 ``(ii) which does not meet the minimum 
 requirements for calculated lighting levels as 
 set forth in the Illuminating Engineering 
 Society of North America Lighting Handbook, 
 Performance and Application, Ninth Edition, 
 2000.
 ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations 
as necessary to take into account new technologies regarding energy 
efficiency and renewable energy for purposes of determining energy 
efficiency and savings under this section.
 ``(g) Termination.--This section shall not apply with respect to 
any energy efficient commercial building property expenditures in 
connection with a building the construction of which is not completed 
on or before December 31, 2009.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1016(a), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (34), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (35) and inserting ``, and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(36) to the extent provided in section 179B(d).''.
 (2) Section 1245(a) is amended by inserting ``179B,'' after 
 ``179A,'' both places it appears in paragraphs (2)(C) and 
 (3)(C).
 (3) Section 1250(b)(3) is amended by inserting before the 
 period at the end of the first sentence ``or by section 179B''.
 (4) Section 263(a)(1), as amended by this Act, is amended 
 by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (H), by striking 
 the period at the end of subparagraph (I) and inserting ``, 
 or'', and by inserting after subparagraph (I) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(J) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed 
 under section 179B.''.
 (5) Section 312(k)(3)(B) is amended by striking ``or 179A'' 
 each place it appears in the heading and text and inserting ``, 
 179A, or 179B''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VI of 
subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after section 179A 
the following new item:

 ``Sec. 179B. Energy efficient commercial 
 buildings deduction.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 826. THREE-YEAR APPLICABLE RECOVERY PERIOD FOR DEPRECIATION OF 
 QUALIFIED ENERGY MANAGEMENT DEVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(e)(3)(A) (defining 3-year property) is 
amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the 
period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) any qualified energy management 
 device.''.
 (b) Definition of Qualified Energy Management Device.--Section 
168(i) (relating to definitions and special rules), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by inserting at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(17) Qualified energy management device.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified energy 
 management device' means any energy management device 
 which is placed in service before January 1, 2008, by a 
 taxpayer who is a supplier of electric energy or a 
 provider of electric energy services.
 ``(B) Energy management device.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `energy management device' 
 means any meter or metering device which is used by the 
 taxpayer--
 ``(i) to measure and record electricity 
 usage data on a time-differentiated basis in at 
 least 4 separate time segments per day, and
 ``(ii) to provide such data on at least a 
 monthly basis to both consumers and the 
 taxpayer.''.
 (c) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
subparagraph (A)(iii) the following:

``(A)(iv)...................................................... 20''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 827. THREE-YEAR APPLICABLE RECOVERY PERIOD FOR DEPRECIATION OF 
 QUALIFIED WATER SUBMETERING DEVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(e)(3)(A) (defining 3-year property), 
as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
clause (iii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and 
inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) any qualified water submetering 
 device.''.
 (b) Definition of Qualified Water Submetering Device.--Section 
168(i) (relating to definitions and special rules), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by inserting at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(16) Qualified water submetering device.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified water 
 submetering device' means any water submetering device 
 which is placed in service before January 1, 2008, by a 
 taxpayer who is an eligible resupplier with respect to 
 the unit for which the device is placed in service.
 ``(B) Water submetering device.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `water submetering device' 
 means any submetering device which is used by the 
 taxpayer--
 ``(i) to measure and record water usage 
 data, and
 ``(ii) to provide such data on at least a 
 monthly basis to both consumers and the 
 taxpayer.
 ``(C) Eligible resupplier.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `eligible resupplier' means 
 any taxpayer who purchases and installs qualified water 
 submetering devices in every unit in any multi-unit 
 property.''.
 (c) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B), as amended by this Act, is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to subparagraph (A)(iv) the following:

``(A)(v)....................................................... 20''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 828. ENERGY CREDIT FOR COMBINED HEAT AND POWER SYSTEM PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 48(a)(3)(A) (defining energy property), as 
amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause 
(ii), by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (iii), and by inserting 
after clause (iii) the following new clause:
 ``(iv) combined heat and power system 
 property,''.
 (b) Combined Heat and Power System Property.--Section 48 (relating 
to energy credit; reforestation credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Combined Heat and Power System Property.--For purposes of 
subsection (a)(3)(A)(iv)--
 ``(1) Combined heat and power system property.--The term 
 `combined heat and power system property' means property 
 comprising a system--
 ``(A) which uses the same energy source for the 
 simultaneous or sequential generation of electrical 
 power, mechanical shaft power, or both, in combination 
 with the generation of steam or other forms of useful 
 thermal energy (including heating and cooling 
 applications),
 ``(B) which has an electrical capacity of not more 
 than 15 megawatts or a mechanical energy capacity of 
 not more than 2,000 horsepower or an equivalent 
 combination of electrical and mechanical energy 
 capacities,
 ``(C) which produces--
 ``(i) at least 20 percent of its total 
 useful energy in the form of thermal energy 
 which is not used to produce electrical or 
 mechanical power (or combination thereof), and
 ``(ii) at least 20 percent of its total 
 useful energy in the form of electrical or 
 mechanical power (or combination thereof),
 ``(D) the energy efficiency percentage of which 
 exceeds 60 percent, and
 ``(E) which is placed in service before January 1, 
 2007.
 ``(2) Special rules.--
 ``(A) Energy efficiency percentage.--For purposes 
 of this subsection, the energy efficiency percentage of 
 a system is the fraction--
 ``(i) the numerator of which is the total 
 useful electrical, thermal, and mechanical 
 power produced by the system at normal 
 operating rates, and expected to be consumed in 
 its normal application, and
 ``(ii) the denominator of which is the 
 lower heating value of the fuel sources for the 
 system.
 ``(B) Determinations made on btu basis.--The energy 
 efficiency percentage and the percentages under 
 paragraph (1)(C) shall be determined on a Btu basis.
 ``(C) Input and output property not included.--The 
 term `combined heat and power system property' does not 
 include property used to transport the energy source to 
 the facility or to distribute energy produced by the 
 facility.
 ``(D) Public utility property.--
 ``(i) Accounting rule for public utility 
 property.--If the combined heat and power 
 system property is public utility property (as 
 defined in section 168(i)(10)), the taxpayer 
 may only claim the credit under subsection (a) 
 if, with respect to such property, the taxpayer 
 uses a normalization method of accounting.
 ``(ii) Certain exception not to apply.--The 
 matter in subsection (a)(3) which follows 
 subparagraph (D) thereof shall not apply to 
 combined heat and power system property.
 ``(3) Systems using bagasse.--If a system is designed to 
 use bagasse for at least 90 percent of the energy source--
 ``(A) paragraph (1)(D) shall not apply, but
 ``(B) the amount of credit determined under 
 subsection (a) with respect to such system shall not 
 exceed the amount which bears the same ratio to such 
 amount of credit (determined without regard to this 
 paragraph) as the energy efficiency percentage of such 
 system bears to 60 percent.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall 
apply to periods after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending after 
such date, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date 
of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).

SEC. 829. CREDIT FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING HOMES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to nonrefundable personal credits), as amended by this Act, 
is amended by inserting after section 25C the following new section:

``SEC. 25D. ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING HOMES.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there 
shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter 
for the taxable year an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount paid 
or incurred by the taxpayer for qualified energy efficiency 
improvements installed during such taxable year.
 ``(b) Limitation.--The credit allowed by this section with respect 
to a dwelling for any taxable year shall not exceed $300, reduced (but 
not below zero) by the sum of the credits allowed under subsection (a) 
to the taxpayer with respect to the dwelling for all preceding taxable 
years.
 ``(c) Carryforward of Unused Credit.--If the credit allowable under 
subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such 
taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this 
subpart (other than this section) for such taxable year, such excess 
shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit 
allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
 ``(d) Qualified Energy Efficiency Improvements.--For purposes of 
this section, the term `qualified energy efficiency improvements' means 
any energy efficient building envelope component which is certified to 
meet or exceed the latest prescriptive criteria for such component in 
the International Energy Conservation Code approved by the Department 
of Energy before the installation of such component, or any combination 
of energy efficiency measures which are certified as achieving at least 
a 30 percent reduction in heating and cooling energy usage for the 
dwelling (as measured in terms of energy cost to the taxpayer), if--
 ``(1) such component or combination of measures is 
 installed in or on a dwelling which--
 ``(A) is located in the United States,
 ``(B) has not been treated as a qualifying new home 
 for purposes of any credit allowed under section 45K, 
 and
 ``(C) is owned and used by the taxpayer as the 
 taxpayer's principal residence (within the meaning of 
 section 121),
 ``(2) the original use of such component or combination of 
 measures commences with the taxpayer, and
 ``(3) such component or combination of measures reasonably 
 can be expected to remain in use for at least 5 years.
 ``(e) Certification.--
 ``(1) Methods of certification.--
 ``(A) Component-based method.--The certification 
 described in subsection (d) for any component described 
 in such subsection shall be determined on the basis of 
 applicable energy efficiency ratings (including product 
 labeling requirements) for affected building envelope 
 components.
 ``(B) Performance-based method.--
 ``(i) In general.--The certification 
 described in subsection (d) for any combination 
 of measures described in such subsection shall 
 be--
 ``(I) determined by comparing the 
 projected heating and cooling energy 
 usage for the dwelling to such usage 
 for such dwelling in its original 
 condition, and
 ``(II) accompanied by a written 
 analysis documenting the proper 
 application of a permissible energy 
 performance calculation method to the 
 specific circumstances of such 
 dwelling.
 ``(ii) Computer software.--Computer 
 software shall be used in support of a 
 performance-based method certification under 
 clause (i). Such software shall meet procedures 
 and methods for calculating energy and cost 
 savings in regulations promulgated by the 
 Secretary of Energy.
 ``(2) Provider.--A certification described in subsection 
 (d) shall be provided by--
 ``(A) in the case of the method described in 
 paragraph (1)(A), a third party, such as a local 
 building regulatory authority, a utility, a 
 manufactured home primary inspection agency, or a home 
 energy rating organization, or
 ``(B) in the case of the method described in 
 paragraph (1)(B), an individual recognized by an 
 organization designated by the Secretary for such 
 purposes.
 ``(3) Form.--A certification described in subsection (d) 
 shall be made in writing on forms which specify in readily 
 inspectable fashion the energy efficient components and other 
 measures and their respective efficiency ratings, and which 
 include a permanent label affixed to the electrical 
 distribution panel of the dwelling.
 ``(4) Regulations.--
 ``(A) In general.--In prescribing regulations under 
 this subsection for certification methods described in 
 paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary, after examining the 
 requirements for energy consultants and home energy 
 ratings providers specified by the Mortgage Industry 
 National Home Energy Rating Standards, shall prescribe 
 procedures for calculating annual energy usage and cost 
 reductions for heating and cooling and for the 
 reporting of the results. Such regulations shall--
 ``(i) provide that any calculation 
 procedures be fuel neutral such that the same 
 energy efficiency measures allow a dwelling to 
 be eligible for the credit under this section 
 regardless of whether such dwelling uses a gas 
 or oil furnace or boiler or an electric heat 
 pump, and
 ``(ii) require that any computer software 
 allow for the printing of the Federal tax forms 
 necessary for the credit under this section and 
 for the printing of forms for disclosure to the 
 owner of the dwelling.
 ``(B) Providers.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(B), 
 the Secretary shall establish requirements for the 
 designation of individuals based on the requirements 
 for energy consultants and home energy raters specified 
 by the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating 
 Standards.
 ``(f) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Dollar amounts in case of joint occupancy.--In the 
 case of any dwelling unit which is jointly occupied and used 
 during any calendar year as a residence by 2 or more 
 individuals the following rules shall apply:
 ``(A) The amount of the credit allowable under 
 subsection (a) by reason of expenditures for the 
 qualified energy efficiency improvements made during 
 such calendar year by any of such individuals with 
 respect to such dwelling unit shall be determined by 
 treating all of such individuals as 1 taxpayer whose 
 taxable year is such calendar year.
 ``(B) There shall be allowable, with respect to 
 such expenditures to each of such individuals, a credit 
 under subsection (a) for the taxable year in which such 
 calendar year ends in an amount which bears the same 
 ratio to the amount determined under subparagraph (A) 
 as the amount of such expenditures made by such 
 individual during such calendar year bears to the 
 aggregate of such expenditures made by all of such 
 individuals during such calendar year.
 ``(2) Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing 
 corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant-
 stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative 
 housing corporation (as defined in such section), such 
 individual shall be treated as having paid his tenant-
 stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 
 216(b)(3)) of the cost of qualified energy efficiency 
 improvements made by such corporation.
 ``(3) Condominiums.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who 
 is a member of a condominium management association 
 with respect to a condominium which the individual 
 owns, such individual shall be treated as having paid 
 the individual's proportionate share of the cost of 
 qualified energy efficiency improvements made by such 
 association.
 ``(B) Condominium management association.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium 
 management association' means an organization which 
 meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 
 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with 
 respect to a condominium project substantially all of 
 the units of which are used as residences.
 ``(4) Building envelope component.--The term `building 
 envelope component' means--
 ``(A) any insulation material or system which is 
 specifically and primarily designed to reduce the heat 
 loss or gain or a dwelling when installed in or on such 
 dwelling,
 ``(B) exterior windows (including skylights), and
 ``(C) exterior doors.
 ``(5) Manufactured homes included.--For purposes of this 
 section, the term `dwelling' includes a manufactured home which 
 conforms to Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety 
 Standards (24 C.F.R. 3280).
 ``(g) Basis Adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit 
is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any 
property, the increase in the basis of such property which would (but 
for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by 
the amount of the credit so allowed.
 ``(h) Termination.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to qualified 
energy efficiency improvements installed after December 31, 2006.''.
 (b) Credit Allowed Against Regular Tax and Alternative Minimum 
Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Section 25D(b), as added by subsection 
 (a), is amended--
 (A) by striking ``The credit'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Dollar amount.--The credit'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not 
 exceed the excess of--
 ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as 
 defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by 
 section 55, over
 ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this 
 subpart (other than this section) and section 27 for 
 the taxable year.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 25D(c), as added by subsection (a), is 
 amended by striking ``section 26(a) for such taxable 
 year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under 
 this subpart (other than this section)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (b)(2)''.
 (B) Section 23(b)(4)(B), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``section 25C'' and inserting 
 ``sections 25C and 25D''.
 (C) Section 24(b)(3)(B), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``and 25C'' and inserting ``25C, 
 and 25D''.
 (D) Section 25(e)(1)(C), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by inserting ``25D,'' after ``25C,''.
 (E) Section 25B(g)(2), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``23 and 25C'' and inserting ``23, 
 25C, and 25D''.
 (F) Section 26(a)(1), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``and 25C'' and inserting ``25C, 
 and 25D''.
 (G) Section 904(i), as redesignated and amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking ``and 25C'' and 
 inserting ``25C, and 25D''.
 (H) Section 1400C(d), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``and 25C'' and inserting ``25C, 
 and 25D''.
 (c) Additional Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1016(a), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (35), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (36) and inserting ``; and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(37) to the extent provided in section 25D(g), in the 
 case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed 
 under section 25D.''.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is amended 
 by inserting after the item relating to section 25C the 
 following new item:

 ``Sec. 25D. Energy efficiency 
 improvements to existing 
 homes.''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to property 
 installed after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending 
 after such date.
 (2) Subsection (b).--The amendments made by subsection (b) 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

 Subtitle D--Clean Coal Incentives

 PART I--CREDIT FOR EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS IN 
 EXISTING COAL-BASED ELECTRICITY GENERATION FACILITIES

SEC. 831. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION FROM A QUALIFYING CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY 
 UNIT.

 (a) Credit for Production From a Qualifying Clean Coal Technology 
Unit.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to 
business related credits), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45M. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION FROM A QUALIFYING CLEAN COAL 
 TECHNOLOGY UNIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the qualifying 
clean coal technology production credit of any taxpayer for any taxable 
year is equal to--
 ``(1) the applicable amount of clean coal technology 
 production credit, multiplied by
 ``(2) the applicable percentage of the sum of--
 ``(A) the kilowatt hours of electricity, plus
 ``(B) each 3,413 Btu of fuels or chemicals,
 produced by the taxpayer during such taxable year at a 
 qualifying clean coal technology unit, but only if such 
 production occurs during the 10-year period beginning on the 
 date the unit was returned to service after becoming a 
 qualifying clean coal technology unit.
 ``(b) Applicable Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the 
 applicable amount of clean coal technology production credit is 
 equal to $0.0034.
 ``(2) Inflation adjustment.--For calendar years after 2005, 
 the applicable amount of clean coal technology production 
 credit shall be adjusted by multiplying such amount by the 
 inflation adjustment factor for the calendar year in which the 
 amount is applied. If any amount as increased under the 
 preceding sentence is not a multiple of 0.01 cent, such amount 
 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 0.01 cent.
 ``(c) Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of this section, with 
respect to any qualifying clean coal technology unit, the applicable 
percentage is the percentage equal to the ratio which the portion of 
the national megawatt capacity limitation allocated to the taxpayer 
with respect to such unit under subsection (e) bears to the total 
megawatt capacity of such unit.
 ``(d) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Qualifying clean coal technology unit.--The term 
 `qualifying clean coal technology unit' means a clean coal 
 technology unit of the taxpayer which--
 ``(A) on January 1, 2005--
 ``(i) was a coal-based electricity 
 generating steam generator-turbine unit which 
 was not a clean coal technology unit, and
 ``(ii) had a nameplate capacity rating of 
 not more than 300 megawatts,
 ``(B) becomes a clean coal technology unit as the 
 result of the retrofitting, repowering, or replacement 
 of the unit with clean coal technology during the 10-
 year period beginning on January 1, 2005,
 ``(C) is not receiving nor is scheduled to receive 
 funding under the Clean Coal Technology Program, the 
 Power Plant Improvement Initiative, or the Clean Coal 
 Power Initiative administered by the Secretary of 
 Energy, and
 ``(D) receives an allocation of a portion of the 
 national megawatt capacity limitation under subsection 
 (e).
 ``(2) Clean coal technology unit.--The term `clean coal 
 technology unit' means a unit which--
 ``(A) uses clean coal technology, including 
 advanced pulverized coal or atmospheric fluidized bed 
 combustion, pressurized fluidized bed combustion, 
 integrated gasification combined cycle, or any other 
 technology, for the production of electricity,
 ``(B) uses an input of at least 75 percent coal to 
 produce at least 50 percent of its thermal output as 
 electricity,
 ``(C) has a design net heat rate of at least 500 
 less than that of such unit as described in paragraph 
 (1)(A),
 ``(D) has a maximum design net heat rate of not 
 more than 9,500, and
 ``(E) meets the pollution control requirements of 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Pollution control requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--A unit meets the requirements of 
 this paragraph if--
 ``(i) its emissions of sulfur dioxide, 
 nitrogen oxide, or particulates meet the lower 
 of the emission levels for each such emission 
 specified in--
 ``(I) subparagraph (B), or
 ``(II) the new source performance 
 standards of the Clean Air Act (42 
 U.S.C. 7411) which are in effect for 
 the category of source at the time of 
 the retrofitting, repowering, or 
 replacement of the unit, and
 ``(ii) its emissions do not exceed any 
 relevant emission level specified by regulation 
 pursuant to the hazardous air pollutant 
 requirements of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
 7412) in effect at the time of the 
 retrofitting, repowering, or replacement.
 ``(B) Specific levels.--The levels specified in 
 this subparagraph are--
 ``(i) in the case of sulfur dioxide 
 emissions, 50 percent of the sulfur dioxide 
 emission levels specified in the new source 
 performance standards of the Clean Air Act (42 
 U.S.C. 7411) in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this section for the category of 
 source,
 ``(ii) in the case of nitrogen oxide 
 emissions--
 ``(I) 0.1 pound per million Btu of 
 heat input if the unit is not a 
 cyclone-fired boiler, and
 ``(II) if the unit is a cyclone-
 fired boiler, 15 percent of the 
 uncontrolled nitrogen oxide emissions 
 from such boilers, and
 ``(iii) in the case of particulate 
 emissions, 0.02 pound per million Btu of heat 
 input.
 ``(4) Design net heat rate.--The design net heat rate with 
 respect to any unit, measured in Btu per kilowatt hour (HHV)--
 ``(A) shall be based on the design annual heat 
 input to and the design annual net electrical power, 
 fuels, and chemicals output from such unit (determined 
 without regard to such unit's co-generation of steam),
 ``(B) shall be adjusted for the heat content of the 
 design coal to be used by the unit if it is less than 
 12,000 Btu per pound according to the following 
 formula:
 Design net heat rate = Unit net heat rate x [l- {((12,000-
 design coal heat content, Btu per pound)/1,000) x 0.013}],
 ``(C) shall be corrected for the site reference 
 conditions of--
 ``(i) elevation above sea level of 500 
 feet,
 ``(ii) air pressure of 14.4 pounds per 
 square inch absolute (psia),
 ``(iii) temperature, dry bulb of 63 deg.F,
 ``(iv) temperature, wet bulb of 54 deg.F, 
 and
 ``(v) relative humidity of 55 percent, and
 ``(D) if carbon capture controls have been 
 installed with respect to any qualifying unit and such 
 controls remove at least 50 percent of the unit's 
 carbon dioxide emissions, shall be adjusted up to the 
 design heat rate level which would have resulted 
 without the installation of such controls.
 ``(5) HHV.--The term `HHV' means higher heating value.
 ``(6) Application of certain rules.--The rules of 
 paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of section 45(e) shall apply.
 ``(7) Inflation adjustment factor.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `inflation adjustment 
 factor' means, with respect to a calendar year, a 
 fraction the numerator of which is the GDP implicit 
 price deflator for the preceding calendar year and the 
 denominator of which is the GDP implicit price deflator 
 for the calendar year 2003.
 ``(B) GDP implicit price deflator.--The term `GDP 
 implicit price deflator' means, for any calendar year, 
 the most recent revision of the implicit price deflator 
 for the gross domestic product as of June 30 of such 
 calendar year as computed by the Department of Commerce 
 before October 1 of such calendar year.
 ``(8) Noncompliance with pollution laws.--For purposes of 
 this section, a unit which is not in compliance with the 
 applicable State and Federal pollution prevention, control, and 
 permit requirements for any period of time shall not be 
 considered to be a qualifying clean coal technology unit during 
 such period.
 ``(e) National Limitation on the Aggregate Capacity of Qualifying 
Clean Coal Technology Units.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the 
 national megawatt capacity limitation for qualifying clean coal 
 technology units is 4,000 megawatts.
 ``(2) Allocation of limitation.--The Secretary shall 
 allocate the national megawatt capacity limitation for 
 qualifying clean coal technology units in such manner as the 
 Secretary may prescribe under the regulations under paragraph 
 (3).
 ``(3) Regulations.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prescribe 
 such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate--
 ``(A) to carry out the purposes of this subsection,
 ``(B) to limit the capacity of any qualifying clean 
 coal technology unit to which this section applies so 
 that the megawatt capacity allocated to any unit under 
 this subsection does not exceed 300 megawatts and the 
 combined megawatt capacity allocated to all such units 
 when all such units are placed in service during the 
 10-year period described in subsection (d)(1)(B), does 
 not exceed 4,000 megawatts,
 ``(C) to provide a certification process under 
 which the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of Energy, shall approve and allocate the national 
 megawatt capacity limitation--
 ``(i) to encourage that units with the 
 highest thermal efficiencies, when adjusted for 
 the heat content of the design coal and site 
 reference conditions described in subsection 
 (d)(4)(C), and environmental performance, be 
 placed in service as soon as possible, and
 ``(ii) to allocate capacity to taxpayers 
 which have a definite and credible plan for 
 placing into commercial operation a qualifying 
 clean coal technology unit, including--
 ``(I) a site,
 ``(II) contractual commitments for 
 procurement and construction or, in the 
 case of regulated utilities, the 
 agreement of the State utility 
 commission,
 ``(III) filings for all necessary 
 preconstruction approvals,
 ``(IV) a demonstrated record of 
 having successfully completed 
 comparable projects on a timely basis, 
 and
 ``(V) such other factors that the 
 Secretary determines are appropriate,
 ``(D) to allocate the national megawatt capacity 
 limitation to a portion of the capacity of a qualifying 
 clean coal technology unit if the Secretary determines 
 that such an allocation would maximize the amount of 
 efficient production encouraged with the available tax 
 credits,
 ``(E) to set progress requirements and conditional 
 approvals so that capacity allocations for clean coal 
 technology units which become unlikely to meet the 
 necessary conditions for qualifying can be reallocated 
 by the Secretary to other clean coal technology units, 
 and
 ``(F) to provide taxpayers with opportunities to 
 correct administrative errors and omissions with 
 respect to allocations and record keeping within a 
 reasonable period after discovery, taking into account 
 the availability of regulations and other 
 administrative guidance from the Secretary.''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (relating to 
current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (23), by striking the period 
at the end of paragraph (24) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(25) the qualifying clean coal technology production 
 credit determined under section 45M(a).''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``Sec. 45M. Credit for production from a qualifying clean coal 
 technology unit.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to production after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending 
after such date.

PART II--INCENTIVES FOR EARLY COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS OF ADVANCED CLEAN 
 COAL TECHNOLOGIES

SEC. 832. CREDIT FOR INVESTMENT IN QUALIFYING ADVANCED CLEAN COAL 
 TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Allowance of Qualifying Advanced Clean Coal Technology Unit 
Credit.--Section 46 (relating to amount of credit), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by 
striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, 
and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) the qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit 
 credit.''.
 (b) Amount of Qualifying Advanced Clean Coal Technology Unit 
Credit.--Subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to 
rules for computing investment credit) is amended by inserting after 
section 48 the following new section:

``SEC. 48A. QUALIFYING ADVANCED CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY UNIT CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 46, the qualifying 
advanced clean coal technology unit credit for any taxable year is an 
amount equal to 10 percent of the applicable percentage of the 
qualified investment in a qualifying advanced clean coal technology 
unit for such taxable year.
 ``(b) Qualifying Advanced Clean Coal Technology Unit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term 
 `qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit' means an 
 advanced clean coal technology unit of the taxpayer--
 ``(A)(i) in the case of a unit first placed in 
 service after December 31, 2004, the original use of 
 which commences with the taxpayer, or
 ``(ii) in the case of the retrofitting or 
 repowering of a unit first placed in service before 
 January 1, 2005, the retrofitting or repowering of 
 which is completed by the taxpayer after such date, or
 ``(B) which is depreciable under section 167,
 ``(C) which has a useful life of not less than 4 
 years,
 ``(D) which is located in the United States,
 ``(E) which is not receiving nor is scheduled to 
 receive funding under the Clean Coal Technology 
 Program, the Power Plant Improvement Initiative, or the 
 Clean Coal Power Initiative administered by the 
 Secretary of Energy,
 ``(F) which is not a qualifying clean coal 
 technology unit, and
 ``(G) which receives an allocation of a portion of 
 the national megawatt capacity limitation under 
 subsection (f).
 ``(2) Special rule for sale-leasebacks.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1), in the case of a unit 
 which--
 ``(A) is originally placed in service by a person, 
 and
 ``(B) is sold and leased back by such person, or is 
 leased to such person, within 3 months after the date 
 such unit was originally placed in service, for a 
 period of not less than 12 years,
 such unit shall be treated as originally placed in service not 
 earlier than the date on which such unit is used under the 
 leaseback (or lease) referred to in subparagraph (B). The 
 preceding sentence shall not apply to any property if the 
 lessee and lessor of such property make an election under this 
 sentence. Such an election, once made, may be revoked only with 
 the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(3) Noncompliance with pollution laws.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, a unit which is not in compliance with the 
 applicable State and Federal pollution prevention, control, and 
 permit requirements for any period of time shall not be 
 considered to be a qualifying advanced clean coal technology 
 unit during such period.
 ``(c) Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of this section, with 
respect to any qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit, the 
applicable percentage is the percentage equal to the ratio which the 
portion of the national megawatt capacity limitation allocated to the 
taxpayer with respect to such unit under subsection (f) bears to the 
total megawatt capacity of such unit.
 ``(d) Advanced Clean Coal Technology Unit.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `advanced clean coal technology 
 unit' means a new, retrofit, or repowering unit of the taxpayer 
 which--
 ``(A) is--
 ``(i) an eligible advanced pulverized coal 
 or atmospheric fluidized bed combustion 
 technology unit,
 ``(ii) an eligible pressurized fluidized 
 bed combustion technology unit,
 ``(iii) an eligible integrated gasification 
 combined cycle technology unit, or
 ``(iv) an eligible other technology unit, 
 and
 ``(B) meets the carbon emission rate requirements 
 of paragraph (6).
 ``(2) Eligible advanced pulverized coal or atmospheric 
 fluidized bed combustion technology unit.--The term `eligible 
 advanced pulverized coal or atmospheric fluidized bed 
 combustion technology unit' means a clean coal technology unit 
 using advanced pulverized coal or atmospheric fluidized bed 
 combustion technology which--
 ``(A) is placed in service after December 31, 2004, 
 and before January 1, 2013, and
 ``(B) has a design net heat rate of not more than 
 8,500 (8,900 in the case of units placed in service 
 before 2009).
 ``(3) Eligible pressurized fluidized bed combustion 
 technology unit.--The term `eligible pressurized fluidized bed 
 combustion technology unit' means a clean coal technology unit 
 using pressurized fluidized bed combustion technology which--
 ``(A) is placed in service after December 31, 2004, 
 and before January 1, 2017, and
 ``(B) has a design net heat rate of not more than 
 7,720 (8,900 in the case of units placed in service 
 before 2009, and 8,500 in the case of units placed in 
 service after 2008 and before 2013).
 ``(4) Eligible integrated gasification combined cycle 
 technology unit.--The term `eligible integrated gasification 
 combined cycle technology unit' means a clean coal technology 
 unit using integrated gasification combined cycle technology, 
 with or without fuel or chemical co-production, which--
 ``(A) is placed in service after December 31, 2004, 
 and before January 1, 2017,
 ``(B) has a design net heat rate of not more than 
 7,720 (8,900 in the case of units placed in service 
 before 2009, and 8,500 in the case of units placed in 
 service after 2008 and before 2013), and
 ``(C) has a net thermal efficiency (HHV) using coal 
 with fuel or chemical co-production of not less than 
 44.2 percent (38.4 percent in the case of units placed 
 in service before 2009, and 40.2 percent in the case of 
 units placed in service after 2008 and before 2013).
 ``(5) Eligible other technology unit.--The term `eligible 
 other technology unit' means a clean coal technology unit using 
 any other technology for the production of electricity which is 
 placed in service after December 31, 2004, and before January 
 1, 2017.
 ``(6) Carbon emission rate requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), a unit meets the requirements of this 
 paragraph if--
 ``(i) in the case of a unit using design 
 coal with a heat content of not more than 9,000 
 Btu per pound, the carbon emission rate is less 
 than 0.60 pound of carbon per kilowatt hour, 
 and
 ``(ii) in the case of a unit using design 
 coal with a heat content of more than 9,000 Btu 
 per pound, the carbon emission rate is less 
 than 0.54 pound of carbon per kilowatt hour.
 ``(B) Eligible other technology unit.--In the case 
 of an eligible other technology unit, subparagraph (A) 
 shall be applied by substituting `0.51' and `0.459' for 
 `0.60' and `0.54', respectively.
 ``(e) General Definitions.--Any term used in this section which is 
also used in section 45M shall have the meaning given such term in 
section 45M.
 ``(f) National Limitation on the Aggregate Capacity of Advanced 
Clean Coal Technology Units.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(G), 
 the national megawatt capacity limitation is--
 ``(A) for qualifying advanced clean coal technology 
 units using advanced pulverized coal or atmospheric 
 fluidized bed combustion technology, not more than 
 1,000 megawatts (not more than 500 megawatts in the 
 case of units placed in service before 2009),
 ``(B) for such units using pressurized fluidized 
 bed combustion technology, not more than 500 megawatts 
 (not more than 250 megawatts in the case of units 
 placed in service before 2009),
 ``(C) for such units using integrated gasification 
 combined cycle technology, with or without fuel or 
 chemical co-production, not more than 2,000 megawatts 
 (not more than 1,000 megawatts in the case of units 
 placed in service before 2009), and
 ``(D) for such units using other technology for the 
 production of electricity, not more than 500 megawatts 
 (not more than 250 megawatts in the case of units 
 placed in service before 2009).
 ``(2) Allocation of limitation.--The Secretary shall 
 allocate the national megawatt capacity limitation for 
 qualifying advanced clean coal technology units in such manner 
 as the Secretary may prescribe under the regulations under 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Regulations.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prescribe 
 such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate--
 ``(A) to carry out the purposes of this subsection 
 and section 45N,
 ``(B) to limit the capacity of any qualifying 
 advanced clean coal technology unit to which this 
 section applies so that the combined megawatt capacity 
 of all such units to which this section applies does 
 not exceed 4,000 megawatts,
 ``(C) to provide a certification process described 
 in section 45M(e)(3)(C),
 ``(D) to carry out the purposes described in 
 subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F) of section 45M(e)(3), 
 and
 ``(E) to reallocate capacity which is not allocated 
 to any technology described in subparagraphs (A) 
 through (D) of paragraph (1) because an insufficient 
 number of qualifying units request an allocation for 
 such technology, to another technology described in 
 such subparagraphs in order to maximize the amount of 
 energy efficient production encouraged with the 
 available tax credits.
 ``(4) Selection criteria.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the selection criteria for allocating the national megawatt 
 capacity limitation to qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology units--
 ``(A) shall be established by the Secretary of 
 Energy as part of a competitive solicitation,
 ``(B) shall include primary criteria of minimum 
 design net heat rate, maximum design thermal 
 efficiency, environmental performance, and lowest cost 
 to the Government, and
 ``(C) shall include supplemental criteria as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary of Energy.
 ``(g) Qualified Investment.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
term `qualified investment' means, with respect to any taxable year, 
the basis of a qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit placed in 
service by the taxpayer during such taxable year (in the case of a unit 
described in subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii), only that portion of the basis 
of such unit which is properly attributable to the retrofitting or 
repowering of such unit).
 ``(h) Qualified Progress Expenditures.--
 ``(1) Increase in qualified investment.--In the case of a 
 taxpayer who has made an election under paragraph (5), the 
 amount of the qualified investment of such taxpayer for the 
 taxable year (determined under subsection (g) without regard to 
 this subsection) shall be increased by an amount equal to the 
 aggregate of each qualified progress expenditure for the 
 taxable year with respect to progress expenditure property.
 ``(2) Progress expenditure property defined.--For purposes 
 of this subsection, the term `progress expenditure property' 
 means any property being constructed by or for the taxpayer and 
 which it is reasonable to believe will qualify as a qualifying 
 advanced clean coal technology unit which is being constructed 
 by or for the taxpayer when it is placed in service.
 ``(3) Qualified progress expenditures defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Self-constructed property.--In the case of 
 any self-constructed property, the term `qualified 
 progress expenditures' means the amount which, for 
 purposes of this subpart, is properly chargeable 
 (during such taxable year) to capital account with 
 respect to such property.
 ``(B) Nonself-constructed property.--In the case of 
 nonself-constructed property, the term `qualified 
 progress expenditures' means the amount paid during the 
 taxable year to another person for the construction of 
 such property.
 ``(4) Other definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Self-constructed property.--The term `self-
 constructed property' means property for which it is 
 reasonable to believe that more than half of the 
 construction expenditures will be made directly by the 
 taxpayer.
 ``(B) Nonself-constructed property.--The term 
 `nonself-constructed property' means property which is 
 not self-constructed property.
 ``(C) Construction, etc.--The term `construction' 
 includes reconstruction and erection, and the term 
 `constructed' includes reconstructed and erected.
 ``(D) Only construction of qualifying advanced 
 clean coal technology unit to be taken into account.--
 Construction shall be taken into account only if, for 
 purposes of this subpart, expenditures therefor are 
 properly chargeable to capital account with respect to 
 the property.
 ``(5) Election.--An election under this subsection may be 
 made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by 
 regulations prescribe. Such an election shall apply to the 
 taxable year for which made and to all subsequent taxable 
 years. Such an election, once made, may not be revoked except 
 with the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(i) Coordination With Other Credits.--This section shall not 
apply to any property with respect to which the rehabilitation credit 
under section 47 or the energy credit under section 48 is allowed 
unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credit to 
such property.''.
 (c) Recapture.--Section 50(a) (relating to other special rules) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Special rules relating to qualifying advanced clean 
 coal technology unit.--For purposes of applying this subsection 
 in the case of any credit allowable by reason of section 48A, 
 the following rules shall apply:
 ``(A) General rule.--In lieu of the amount of the 
 increase in tax under paragraph (1), the increase in 
 tax shall be an amount equal to the investment tax 
 credit allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable 
 years with respect to a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit (as defined by section 48A(b)(1)) 
 multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which is the 
 number of years remaining to fully depreciate under 
 this title the qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit disposed of, and the denominator of 
 which is the total number of years over which such unit 
 would otherwise have been subject to depreciation. For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, the year of 
 disposition of the qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit shall be treated as a year of remaining 
 depreciation.
 ``(B) Property ceases to qualify for progress 
 expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraph 
 (2) shall apply in the case of qualified progress 
 expenditures for a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit under section 48A, except that the 
 amount of the increase in tax under subparagraph (A) of 
 this paragraph shall be substituted for the amount 
 described in such paragraph (2).
 ``(C) Application of paragraph.--This paragraph 
 shall be applied separately with respect to the credit 
 allowed under section 38 regarding a qualifying 
 advanced clean coal technology unit.''.
 (d) Technical Amendments.--
 (1) Section 49(a)(1)(C) is amended by striking ``and'' at 
 the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of 
 clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end 
 the following new clause:
 ``(iv) the portion of the basis of any 
 qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit 
 attributable to any qualified investment (as 
 defined by section 48A(g)).''.
 (2) Section 50(a)(4) is amended by striking ``and (2)'' and 
 inserting ``, (2), and (6)''.
 (3) Section 50(c) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Nonapplication.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not 
 apply to any qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit 
 credit under section 48A.''.
 (4) The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 48 the following new item:

``Sec. 48A. Qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit credit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to periods after December 31, 2004, under rules similar to the 
rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in 
effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue 
Reconciliation Act of 1990).

SEC. 833. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION FROM A QUALIFYING ADVANCED CLEAN COAL 
 TECHNOLOGY UNIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45N. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION FROM A QUALIFYING ADVANCED CLEAN COAL 
 TECHNOLOGY UNIT.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the qualifying 
advanced clean coal technology production credit of any taxpayer for 
any taxable year is equal to--
 ``(1) the applicable amount of advanced clean coal 
 technology production credit, multiplied by
 ``(2) the applicable percentage (as determined under 
 section 48A(c)) of the sum of--
 ``(A) the kilowatt hours of electricity, plus
 ``(B) each 3,413 Btu of fuels or chemicals,
 produced by the taxpayer during such taxable year at a 
 qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit, but only if 
 such production occurs during the 10-year period beginning on 
 the date the unit was originally placed in service (or returned 
 to service after becoming a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit).
 ``(b) Applicable Amount.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 applicable amount of advanced clean coal technology production 
 credit with respect to production from a qualifying advanced 
 clean coal technology unit shall be determined as follows:
 ``(A) If the qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit is producing electricity only:
 ``(i) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service before 2009, if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ---------------------------------
 ``The design net heat rate is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not more than 8,500................... $.0060 $.0038
More than 8,500 but not more than $.0025 $.0010
 8,750................................
More than 8,750 but less than 8,900... $.0010 $.0010.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(ii) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service after 2008 and before 2013, 
 if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ---------------------------------
 ``The design net heat rate is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not more than 7,770................... $.0105 $.0090
More than 7,770 but not more than $.0085 $.0068
 8,125................................
More than 8,125 but less than 8,500... $.0075 $.0055.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(iii) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service after 2012 and before 2017, 
 if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ---------------------------------
 ``The design net heat rate is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not more than 7,380................... $.0140 $.0115
More than 7,380 but not more than $.0120 $.0090.
 7,720................................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(B) If the qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit is producing fuel or chemicals:
 ``(i) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service before 2009, if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ``The unit design net thermal ---------------------------------
 efficiency (HHV) is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not less than 40.2 percent............ $.0060 $.0038
Less than 40.2 but not less than 39 $.0025 $.0010
 percent..............................
Less than 39 but not less than 38.4 $.0010 $.0010.
 percent..............................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(ii) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service after 2008 and before 2013, 
 if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ``The unit design net thermal ---------------------------------
 efficiency (HHV) is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not less than 43.9 percent............ $.0105 $.0090
Less than 43.9 but not less than 42 $.0085 $.0068
 percent..............................
Less than 42 but not less than 40.2 $.0075 $.0055.
 percent..............................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(iii) In the case of a unit originally 
 placed in service after 2012 and before 2017, 
 if--

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The applicable amount is:
 ``The unit design net thermal ---------------------------------
 efficiency (HHV) is: For 1st 5 years For 2d 5 years
 of such service of such service
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not less than 46.3 percent............ $.0140 $.0115
Less than 46.3 but not less than 44.2 $.0120 $.0090.
 percent..............................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(2) Special rule for units qualifying for greater 
 applicable amount when placed in service.--If, at the time a 
 qualifying advanced clean coal technology unit is placed in 
 service, production from the unit would be entitled to a 
 greater applicable amount if such unit had been placed in 
 service at a later date, the applicable amount for such unit 
 shall be such greater amount.
 ``(c) Inflation Adjustment.--For calendar years after 2005, each 
dollar amount in subsection (b)(1) shall be adjusted by multiplying 
such amount by the inflation adjustment factor for the calendar year in 
which the amount is applied. If any amount as increased under the 
preceding sentence is not a multiple of 0.01 cent, such amount shall be 
rounded to the nearest multiple of 0.01 cent.
 ``(d) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) In general.--Any term used in this section which is 
 also used in section 45M or 48A shall have the meaning given 
 such term in such section.
 ``(2) Applicable rules.--The rules of paragraphs (3), (4), 
 and (5) of section 45(e) shall apply.''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (relating to 
current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (24), by striking the period 
at the end of paragraph (25) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(26) the qualifying advanced clean coal technology 
 production credit determined under section 45N(a).''.
 (c) Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 29(d) (relating to other 
definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(9) Denial of double benefit.--This section shall not 
 apply with respect to any qualified fuel the production of 
 which may be taken into account for purposes of determining the 
 credit under section 45N.''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``Sec. 45N. Credit for production from a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to production after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending 
after such date.

 PART III--TREATMENT OF PERSONS NOT ABLE TO USE ENTIRE CREDIT

SEC. 834. TREATMENT OF PERSONS NOT ABLE TO USE ENTIRE CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Section 45M, as added by this Act, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Treatment of Person Not Able To Use Entire Credit.--
 ``(1) Allowance of credits.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any credit allowable under this 
 section, section 45N, or section 48A with respect to a 
 facility owned by a person described in subparagraph 
 (B) may be transferred or used as provided in this 
 subsection, and the determination as to whether the 
 credit is allowable shall be made without regard to the 
 tax-exempt status of the person.
 ``(B) Persons described.--A person is described in 
 this subparagraph if the person is--
 ``(i) an organization described in section 
 501(c)(12)(C) and exempt from tax under section 
 501(a),
 ``(ii) an organization described in section 
 1381(a)(2)(C),
 ``(iii) a public utility (as defined in 
 section 136(c)(2)(B)),
 ``(iv) any State or political subdivision 
 thereof, the District of Columbia, or any 
 agency or instrumentality of any of the 
 foregoing,
 ``(v) any Indian tribal government (within 
 the meaning of section 7871) or any agency or 
 instrumentality thereof, or
 ``(vi) the Tennessee Valley Authority.
 ``(2) Transfer of credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--A person described in clause 
 (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of paragraph (1)(B) may 
 transfer any credit to which paragraph (1)(A) applies 
 through an assignment to any other person not described 
 in paragraph (1)(B). Such transfer may be revoked only 
 with the consent of the Secretary.
 ``(B) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe 
 such regulations as necessary to ensure that any credit 
 described in subparagraph (A) is claimed once and not 
 reassigned by such other person.
 ``(C) Transfer proceeds treated as arising from 
 essential government function.--Any proceeds derived by 
 a person described in clause (iii), (iv), or (v) of 
 paragraph (1)(B) from the transfer of any credit under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be treated as arising from the 
 exercise of an essential government function.
 ``(3) Use of credit as an offset.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, in the case of a person described in 
 clause (i), (ii), or (v) of paragraph (1)(B), any credit to 
 which paragraph (1)(A) applies may be applied by such person, 
 to the extent provided by the Secretary of Agriculture, as a 
 prepayment of any loan, debt, or other obligation the entity 
 has incurred under subchapter I of chapter 31 of title 7 of the 
 Rural Electrification Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.), as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this section.
 ``(4) Use by tva.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, in the case of a person described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(vi), any credit to which paragraph 
 (1)(A) applies may be applied as a credit against the 
 payments required to be made in any fiscal year under 
 section 15d(e) of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 
 1933 (16 U.S.C. 831n-4(e)) as an annual return on the 
 appropriations investment and an annual repayment sum.
 ``(B) Treatment of credits.--The aggregate amount 
 of credits described in paragraph (1)(A) with respect 
 to such person shall be treated in the same manner and 
 to the same extent as if such credits were a payment in 
 cash and shall be applied first against the annual 
 return on the appropriations investment.
 ``(C) Credit carryover.--With respect to any fiscal 
 year, if the aggregate amount of credits described 
 paragraph (1)(A) with respect to such person exceeds 
 the aggregate amount of payment obligations described 
 in subparagraph (A), the excess amount shall remain 
 available for application as credits against the 
 amounts of such payment obligations in succeeding 
 fiscal years in the same manner as described in this 
 paragraph.
 ``(5) Credit not income.--Any transfer under paragraph (2) 
 or use under paragraph (3) of any credit to which paragraph 
 (1)(A) applies shall not be treated as income for purposes of 
 section 501(c)(12).
 ``(6) Treatment of unrelated persons.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, transfers among and between persons described in 
 clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v) of paragraph (1)(B) 
 shall be treated as transfers between unrelated parties.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to production after December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending after 
such date.

 Subtitle E--Oil and Gas Provisions

SEC. 841. OIL AND GAS FROM MARGINAL WELLS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business credits), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45O. CREDIT FOR PRODUCING OIL AND GAS FROM MARGINAL WELLS.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the marginal well 
production credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the 
product of--
 ``(1) the credit amount, and
 ``(2) the qualified crude oil production and the qualified 
 natural gas production which is attributable to the taxpayer.
 ``(b) Credit Amount.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The credit amount is--
 ``(A) $3 per barrel of qualified crude oil 
 production, and
 ``(B) 50 cents per 1,000 cubic feet of qualified 
 natural gas production.
 ``(2) Reduction as oil and gas prices increase.--
 ``(A) In general.--The $3 and 50 cents amounts 
 under paragraph (1) shall each be reduced (but not 
 below zero) by an amount which bears the same ratio to 
 such amount (determined without regard to this 
 paragraph) as--
 ``(i) the excess (if any) of the applicable 
 reference price over $15 ($1.67 for qualified 
 natural gas production), bears to
 ``(ii) $3 ($0.33 for qualified natural gas 
 production).
 The applicable reference price for a taxable year is 
 the reference price of the calendar year preceding the 
 calendar year in which the taxable year begins.
 ``(B) Inflation adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of any 
 taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 
 2005, each of the dollar amounts contained in 
 subparagraph (A) shall be increased to an 
 amount equal to such dollar amount multiplied 
 by the inflation adjustment factor for such 
 calendar year.
 ``(ii) Inflation adjustment factor.--For 
 purposes of clause (i)--
 ``(I) In general.--The term 
 `inflation adjustment factor' means, 
 with respect to a calendar year, a 
 fraction the numerator of which is the 
 GDP implicit price deflator for the 
 preceding calendar year and the 
 denominator of which is the GDP 
 implicit price deflator for the 
 calendar year 2004.
 ``(II) GDP implicit price 
 deflator.--The term `GDP implicit price 
 deflator' means, for any calendar year, 
 the most recent revision of the 
 implicit price deflator for the gross 
 domestic product as of June 30 of such 
 calendar year as computed by the 
 Department of Commerce before October 1 
 of such calendar year.
 ``(C) Reference price.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `reference price' means, with 
 respect to any calendar year--
 ``(i) in the case of qualified crude oil 
 production, the reference price determined 
 under section 29(d)(2)(C), and
 ``(ii) in the case of qualified natural gas 
 production, the Secretary's estimate of the 
 annual average wellhead price per 1,000 cubic 
 feet for all domestic natural gas.
 ``(c) Qualified Crude Oil and Natural Gas Production.--For purposes 
of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The terms `qualified crude oil 
 production' and `qualified natural gas production' mean 
 domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas which is produced 
 from a qualified marginal well.
 ``(2) Limitation on amount of production which may 
 qualify.--
 ``(A) In general.--Crude oil or natural gas 
 produced during any taxable year from any well shall 
 not be treated as qualified crude oil production or 
 qualified natural gas production to the extent 
 production from the well during the taxable year 
 exceeds 1,095 barrels or barrel equivalents.
 ``(B) Proportionate reductions.--
 ``(i) Short taxable years.--In the case of 
 a short taxable year, the limitations under 
 this paragraph shall be proportionately reduced 
 to reflect the ratio which the number of days 
 in such taxable year bears to 365.
 ``(ii) Wells not in production entire 
 year.--In the case of a well which is not 
 capable of production during each day of a 
 taxable year, the limitations under this 
 paragraph applicable to the well shall be 
 proportionately reduced to reflect the ratio 
 which the number of days of production bears to 
 the total number of days in the taxable year.
 ``(3) Noncompliance with pollution laws.--Production from 
 any well during any period in which such well is not in 
 compliance with applicable Federal pollution prevention, 
 control, and permit requirements shall not be treated as 
 qualified crude oil production or qualified natural gas 
 production.
 ``(4) Definitions.--
 ``(A) Qualified marginal well.--The term `qualified 
 marginal well' means a domestic well--
 ``(i) the production from which during the 
 taxable year is treated as marginal production 
 under section 613A(c)(6), or
 ``(ii) which, during the taxable year--
 ``(I) has average daily production 
 of not more than 25 barrel equivalents, 
 and
 ``(II) produces water at a rate not 
 less than 95 percent of total well 
 effluent.
 ``(B) Crude oil, etc.--The terms `crude oil', 
 `natural gas', `domestic', and `barrel' have the 
 meanings given such terms by section 613A(e).
 ``(C) Barrel equivalent.--The term `barrel 
 equivalent' means, with respect to natural gas, a 
 conversation ratio of 6,000 cubic feet of natural gas 
 to 1 barrel of crude oil.
 ``(D) Domestic natural gas.--The term `domestic 
 natural gas' does not include Alaska natural gas (as 
 defined in section 45Q(c)(1)).
 ``(d) Other Rules.--
 ``(1) Production attributable to the taxpayer.--In the case 
 of a qualified marginal well in which there is more than 1 
 owner of operating interests in the well and the crude oil or 
 natural gas production exceeds the limitation under subsection 
 (c)(2), qualifying crude oil production or qualifying natural 
 gas production attributable to the taxpayer shall be determined 
 on the basis of the ratio which taxpayer's revenue interest in 
 the production bears to the aggregate of the revenue interests 
 of all operating interest owners in the production.
 ``(2) Operating interest required.--Any credit under this 
 section may be claimed only on production which is attributable 
 to the holder of an operating interest.
 ``(3) Production from nonconventional sources excluded.--In 
 the case of production from a qualified marginal well which is 
 eligible for the credit allowed under section 29 for the 
 taxable year, no credit shall be allowable under this section 
 unless the taxpayer elects not to claim the credit under 
 section 29 with respect to the well.''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (relating to 
current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (25), by striking the period 
at the end of paragraph (26) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(27) the marginal oil and gas well production credit 
 determined under section 45O(a).''.
 (c) Coordination With Section 29.--Section 29(a) (relating to 
allowance of credit) is amended by striking ``There'' and inserting 
``At the election of the taxpayer, there''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45O. Credit for producing oil and 
 gas from marginal wells.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to production in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 842. NATURAL GAS GATHERING LINES TREATED AS 7-YEAR PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(e)(3)(C) (defining 7-year property), 
as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
clause (ii), by redesignating clause (iii) as clause (iv), and by 
inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause:
 ``(iii) any natural gas gathering line, 
 and''.
 (b) Natural Gas Gathering Line.--Section 168(i) (relating to 
definitions and special rules), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(18) Natural gas gathering line.--The term `natural gas 
 gathering line' means--
 ``(A) the pipe, equipment, and appurtenances used 
 to deliver natural gas from the wellhead or a 
 commonpoint to the point at which such gas first 
 reaches--
 ``(i) a gas processing plant,
 ``(ii) an interconnection with a 
 transmission pipeline certificated by the 
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as an 
 interstate transmission pipeline,
 ``(iii) an interconnection with an 
 intrastate transmission pipeline, or
 ``(iv) a direct interconnection with a 
 local distribution company, a gas storage 
 facility, or an industrial consumer, or
 ``(B) any other pipe, equipment, or appurtenances 
 determined to be a gathering line by the Federal Energy 
 Regulatory Commission.
 (c) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) (relating to special rule for certain property assigned to 
classes) is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
subparagraph (C)(i) the following new item:

``(C)(iii)..................................................... 14''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 843. EXPENSING OF CAPITAL COSTS INCURRED IN COMPLYING WITH 
 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY SULFUR REGULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to 
itemized deductions for individuals and corporations), as amended by 
this Act, is amended by inserting after section 179B the following new 
section:

``SEC. 179C. DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL COSTS INCURRED IN COMPLYING WITH 
 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY SULFUR REGULATIONS.

 ``(a) Treatment as Expenses.--A small business refiner (as defined 
in section 45I(c)(1)) may elect to treat 75 percent of qualified 
capital costs (as defined in section 45I(c)(2)) which are paid or 
incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year as expenses which are 
not chargeable to capital account. Any cost so treated shall be allowed 
as a deduction for the taxable year in which paid or incurred.
 ``(b) Reduced Percentage.--In the case of a small business refiner 
with average daily domestic refinery runs for the 1-year period ending 
on December 31, 2002, in excess of 155,000 barrels, the number of 
percentage points described in subsection (a) shall be reduced (not 
below zero) by the product of such number (before the application of 
this subsection) and the ratio of such excess to 50,000 barrels. For 
purposes of calculating such average daily domestic refinery runs, only 
refineries of the refiner or a related person (within the meaning of 
section 613A(d)(3)) on April 1, 2003, shall be taken into account.
 ``(c) Basis Reduction.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the basis of 
 any property shall be reduced by the portion of the cost of 
 such property taken into account under subsection (a).
 ``(2) Ordinary income recapture.--For purposes of section 
 1245, the amount of the deduction allowable under subsection 
 (a) with respect to any property which is of a character 
 subject to the allowance for depreciation shall be treated as a 
 deduction allowed for depreciation under section 167.
 ``(d) Coordination With Other Provisions.--Section 280B shall not 
apply to amounts which are treated as expenses under this section.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 263(a)(1), as amended by this Act, is amended 
 by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (I), by striking 
 the period at the end of subparagraph (J) and inserting ``; 
 or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(K) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed 
 under section 179C.''.
 (2) Section 263A(c)(3) is amended by inserting ``179C,'' 
 after ``section''.
 (3) Section 312(k)(3)(B), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by striking ``or 179B'' each place it appears in the 
 heading and text and inserting ``179B, or 179C''.
 (4) Section 1016(a), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (36), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (37) and inserting ``, and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(38) to the extent provided in section 179C(c).''
 (5) Paragraphs (2)(C) and (3)(C) of section 1245(a), as 
 amended by this Act, are each amended by inserting ``179C,'' 
 after ``179B,''.
 (6) The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of 
 chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 179B the following new item:

 ``Sec. 179C. Deduction for capital costs 
 incurred in complying with 
 Environmental Protection Agency 
 sulfur regulations.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to expenses paid or incurred after December 31, 2002, in taxable years 
ending after such date.

SEC. 844. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION OF LOW SULFUR DIESEL FUEL.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business-related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45P. CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION OF LOW SULFUR DIESEL FUEL.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the 
low sulfur diesel fuel production credit determined under this section 
with respect to any facility of a small business refiner is an amount 
equal to 5 cents for each gallon of low sulfur diesel fuel produced 
during the taxable year by such small business refiner at such 
facility.
 ``(b) Maximum Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--The aggregate credit determined under 
 subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to any 
 facility shall not exceed--
 ``(A) 25 percent of the qualified capital costs 
 incurred by the small business refiner with respect to 
 such facility, reduced by
 ``(B) the aggregate credits determined under this 
 section for all prior taxable years with respect to 
 such facility.
 ``(2) Reduced percentage.--In the case of a small business 
 refiner with average daily domestic refinery runs for the 1-
 year period ending on December 31, 2002, in excess of 155,000 
 barrels, the number of percentage points described in paragraph 
 (1) shall be reduced (not below zero) by the product of such 
 number (before the application of this paragraph) and the ratio 
 of such excess to 50,000 barrels. For purposes of calculating 
 such average daily domestic refinery runs, only refineries of 
 the refiner or a related person (within the meaning of section 
 613A(d)(3)) on April 1, 2003, shall be taken into account.
 ``(c) Definitions and Special Rule.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Small business refiner.--The term `small business 
 refiner' means, with respect to any taxable year, a refiner of 
 crude oil--
 ``(A) with respect to which not more than 1,500 
 individuals are engaged in the refinery operations of 
 the business on any day during such taxable year, and
 ``(B) the average daily domestic refinery run or 
 average retained production of which for all facilities 
 of the taxpayer for the 1-year period ending on 
 December 31, 2002, did not exceed 205,000 barrels.
 For purposes of calculating such average daily domestic 
 refinery run or retained production, only refineries of the 
 refiner or a related person (within the meaning of section 
 613A(d)(3)) on April 1, 2003, shall be taken into account.
 ``(2) Qualified capital costs.--The term `qualified capital 
 costs' means, with respect to any facility, those costs paid or 
 incurred during the applicable period for compliance with the 
 applicable EPA regulations with respect to such facility, 
 including expenditures for the construction of new process 
 operation units or the dismantling and reconstruction of 
 existing process units to be used in the production of low 
 sulfur diesel fuel, associated adjacent or offsite equipment 
 (including tankage, catalyst, and power supply), engineering, 
 construction period interest, and sitework.
 ``(3) Applicable epa regulations.--The term `applicable EPA 
 regulations' means the Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control 
 Requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 ``(4) Applicable period.--The term `applicable period' 
 means, with respect to any facility, the period beginning on 
 January 1, 2003, and ending on the earlier of the date which is 
 1 year after the date on which the taxpayer must comply with 
 the applicable EPA regulations with respect to such facility or 
 December 31, 2009.
 ``(5) Low sulfur diesel fuel.--The term `low sulfur diesel 
 fuel' means diesel fuel with a sulfur content of 15 parts per 
 million or less.
 ``(6) Special rule for determination of refinery runs.--
 Refinery runs shall be determined under rules similar to the 
 rules under section 613A(d)(4).
 ``(d) Reduction in Basis.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
credit is determined under this section for any expenditure with 
respect to any property, the increase in basis of such property which 
would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be 
reduced by the amount of the credit so determined.
 ``(e) Certification.--
 ``(1) Required.--No credit shall be allowed unless, not 
 later than the date which is 30 months after the first day of 
 the first taxable year in which the low sulfur diesel fuel 
 production credit is allowed with respect to a facility, the 
 small business refiner obtains certification from the 
 Secretary, after consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, that the taxpayer's qualified 
 capital costs with respect to such facility will result in 
 compliance with the applicable EPA regulations.
 ``(2) Contents of application.--An application for 
 certification shall include relevant information regarding unit 
 capacities and operating characteristics sufficient for the 
 Secretary, after consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, to determine that such 
 qualified capital costs are necessary for compliance with the 
 applicable EPA regulations.
 ``(3) Review period.--Any application shall be reviewed and 
 notice of certification, if applicable, shall be made within 60 
 days of receipt of such application. In the event the Secretary 
 does not notify the taxpayer of the results of such 
 certification within such period, the taxpayer may presume the 
 certification to be issued until so notified.
 ``(4) Statute of limitations.--With respect to the credit 
 allowed under this section--
 ``(A) the statutory period for the assessment of 
 any deficiency attributable to such credit shall not 
 expire before the end of the 3-year period ending on 
 the date that the review period described in paragraph 
 (3) ends with respect to the taxpayer, and
 ``(B) such deficiency may be assessed before the 
 expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the 
 provisions of any other law or rule of law which would 
 otherwise prevent such assessment.
 ``(f) Cooperative Organizations.--
 ``(1) Apportionment of credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a cooperative 
 organization described in section 1381(a), any portion 
 of the credit determined under subsection (a) for the 
 taxable year may, at the election of the organization, 
 be apportioned among patrons eligible to share in 
 patronage dividends on the basis of the quantity or 
 value of business done with or for such patrons for the 
 taxable year.
 ``(B) Form and effect of election.--An election 
 under subparagraph (A) for any taxable year shall be 
 made on a timely filed return for such year. Such 
 election, once made, shall be irrevocable for such 
 taxable year.
 ``(2) Treatment of organizations and patrons.--
 ``(A) Organizations.--The amount of the credit not 
 apportioned to patrons pursuant to paragraph (1) shall 
 be included in the amount determined under subsection 
 (a) for the taxable year of the organization.
 ``(B) Patrons.--The amount of the credit 
 apportioned to patrons pursuant to paragraph (1) shall 
 be included in the amount determined under subsection 
 (a) for the first taxable year of each patron ending on 
 or after the last day of the payment period (as defined 
 in section 1382(d)) for the taxable year of the 
 organization or, if earlier, for the taxable year of 
 each patron ending on or after the date on which the 
 patron receives notice from the cooperative of the 
 apportionment.
 ``(3) Special rule.--If for any reason the tax imposed with 
 respect to any patron of a cooperative organization would, but 
 for this paragraph, be increased by any amount by reason of a 
 credit apportioned to such patron under this subsection--
 ``(A) the amount of such increase in tax shall not 
 be imposed on such patron, and
 ``(B) the tax imposed by this chapter on such 
 organization shall be increased by such amount.
 The increase under subparagraph (B) shall not be treated as tax 
 imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount 
 of any credit under this chapter or for purposes of section 
 55.''.
 (b) Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of 
section 38 (relating to general business credit), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (26), by 
striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``, 
plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(28) in the case of a small business refiner, the low 
 sulfur diesel fuel production credit determined under section 
 45P(a).''.
 (c) Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C (relating to certain 
expenses for which credits are allowable) is amended by adding after 
subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel Production Credit.--No deduction shall 
be allowed for that portion of the expenses otherwise allowable as a 
deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the 
credit determined for the taxable year under section 45P(a).''.
 (d) Basis Adjustment.--Section 1016(a) (relating to adjustments to 
basis), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
end of paragraph (37), by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
(38) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
 ``(39) in the case of a facility with respect to which a 
 credit was allowed under section 45P, to the extent provided in 
 section 45P(d).''.
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45P. Credit for production of low 
 sulfur diesel fuel.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to expenses paid or incurred after December 31, 2002, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 845. DETERMINATION OF SMALL REFINER EXCEPTION TO OIL DEPLETION 
 DEDUCTION.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (4) of section 613A(d) (relating to 
limitations on application of subsection (c)) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(4) Certain refiners excluded.--If the taxpayer or 1 or 
 more related persons engages in the refining of crude oil, 
 subsection (c) shall not apply to the taxpayer for a taxable 
 year if the average daily refinery runs of the taxpayer and 
 such persons for the taxable year exceed 60,000 barrels. For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the average daily refinery runs for 
 any taxable year shall be determined by dividing the aggregate 
 refinery runs for the taxable year by the number of days in the 
 taxable year.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to taxable years ending after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 846. MARGINAL PRODUCTION INCOME LIMIT EXTENSION.

 Section 613A(c)(6)(H) (relating to temporary suspension of taxable 
income limit with respect to marginal production), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by striking ``2005'' and inserting ``2007''.

SEC. 847. AMORTIZATION OF DELAY RENTAL PAYMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 167 (relating to depreciation) is amended 
by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) and by inserting 
after subsection (g) the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Amortization of Delay Rental Payments for Domestic Oil and 
Gas Wells.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any delay rental payment paid or 
 incurred in connection with the development of oil or gas wells 
 within the United States (as defined in section 638) shall be 
 allowed as a deduction ratably over the 24-month period 
 beginning on the date that such payment was paid or incurred.
 ``(2) Half-year convention.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 any payment paid or incurred during the taxable year shall be 
 treated as paid or incurred on the mid-point of such taxable 
 year.
 ``(3) Exclusive method.--Except as provided in this 
 subsection, no depreciation or amortization deduction shall be 
 allowed with respect to such payments.
 ``(4) Treatment upon abandonment.--If any property to which 
 a delay rental payment relates is retired or abandoned during 
 the 24-month period described in paragraph (1), no deduction 
 shall be allowed on account of such retirement or abandonment 
 and the amortization deduction under this subsection shall 
 continue with respect to such payment.
 ``(5) Delay rental payments.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `delay rental payment' means an amount 
 paid for the privilege of deferring development of an oil or 
 gas well under an oil or gas lease.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2004.

SEC. 848. AMORTIZATION OF GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL EXPENDITURES.

 (a) In General.--Section 167 (relating to depreciation), as amended 
by this Act, is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection 
(j) and by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Amortization of Geological and Geophysical Expenditures.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any geological and geophysical expenses 
 paid or incurred in connection with the exploration for, or 
 development of, oil or gas within the United States (as defined 
 in section 638) shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over 
 the 24-month period beginning on the date that such expense was 
 paid or incurred.
 ``(2) Special rules.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of 
 subsection (h) shall apply.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 263A(c)(3) is amended by 
inserting ``167(h), 167(i),'' after ``under section''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to costs paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2004.

SEC. 849. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF CREDIT FOR PRODUCING FUEL FROM 
 A NONCONVENTIONAL SOURCE.

 (a) In General.--Section 29 (relating to credit for producing fuel 
from a nonconventional source) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(h) Extension for Other Facilities.--
 ``(1) Oil and gas.--In the case of a well or facility for 
 producing qualified fuels described in subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 of subsection (c)(1) which was drilled or placed in service 
 after December 31, 2004, and before January 1, 2007, 
 notwithstanding subsection (f), this section shall apply with 
 respect to such fuels produced at such well or facility before 
 the close of the 3-year period beginning on the date that such 
 well is drilled or such facility is placed in service.
 ``(2) Facilities producing fuels from agricultural and 
 animal waste.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility for 
 producing liquid, gaseous, or solid fuels from 
 qualified agricultural and animal wastes, including 
 such fuels when used as feedstocks, which was placed in 
 service after December 31, 2004, and before January 1, 
 2007, this section shall apply with respect to fuel 
 produced at such facility before the close of the 3-
 year period beginning on the date such facility is 
 placed in service.
 ``(B) Qualified agricultural and animal waste.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified 
 agricultural and animal waste' means agriculture and 
 animal waste, including by-products, packaging, and any 
 materials associated with the processing, feeding, 
 selling, transporting, or disposal of agricultural or 
 animal products or wastes.
 ``(3) Wells producing viscous oil.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a well for 
 producing viscous oil which was placed in service after 
 December 31, 2004, and before January 1, 2007, this 
 section shall apply with respect to fuel produced at 
 such well before the close of the 3-year period 
 beginning on the date such well is placed in service.
 ``(B) Viscous oil.--The term `viscous oil' means 
 heavy oil, as defined in section 613A(c)(6), except 
 that--
 ``(i) `22 degrees' shall be substituted for 
 `20 degrees' in applying subparagraph (F) 
 thereof, and
 ``(ii) in all cases, the oil gravity shall 
 be measured from the initial well-head samples, 
 drill cuttings, or down hole samples.
 ``(C) Waiver of unrelated person requirement.--In 
 the case of viscous oil, the requirement under 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) of a sale to an unrelated person 
 shall not apply to any sale to the extent that the 
 viscous oil is not consumed in the immediate vicinity 
 of the wellhead.
 ``(4) Facilities producing refined coal.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a facility 
 described in subparagraph (C) for producing refined 
 coal which was placed in service after December 31, 
 2004, and before January 1, 2007, this section shall 
 apply with respect to fuel produced at such facility 
 before the close of the 5-year period beginning on the 
 date such facility is placed in service.
 ``(B) Refined coal.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `refined coal' means a fuel which 
 is a liquid, gaseous, or solid synthetic fuel produced 
 from coal (including lignite) or high carbon fly ash, 
 including such fuel used as a feedstock.
 ``(C) Covered facilities.--
 ``(i) In general.--A facility is described 
 in this subparagraph if such facility produces 
 refined coal using a technology which results 
 in--
 ``(I) a qualified emission 
 reduction, and
 ``(II) a qualified enhanced value.
 ``(ii) Qualified emission reduction.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `qualified emission reduction' means a 
 reduction of at least 20 percent of the 
 emissions of nitrogen oxide and either sulfur 
 dioxide or mercury released when burning the 
 refined coal (excluding any dilution caused by 
 materials combined or added during the 
 production process), as compared to the 
 emissions released when burning the feedstock 
 coal or comparable coal predominantly available 
 in the marketplace as of January 1, 2004.
 ``(iii) Qualified enhanced value.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `qualified enhanced value' means an increase of 
 at least 50 percent in the market value of the 
 refined coal (excluding any increase caused by 
 materials combined or added during the 
 production process), as compared to the value 
 of the feedstock coal.
 ``(iv) Qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology units excluded.--A facility 
 described in this subparagraph shall not 
 include a qualifying advanced clean coal 
 technology unit (as defined in section 48A(b)).
 ``(5) Coalmine gas.--
 ``(A) In general.--This section shall apply to 
 coalmine gas--
 ``(i) captured or extracted by the taxpayer 
 during the period beginning after December 31, 
 2004, and ending before January 1, 2007, and
 ``(ii) utilized as a fuel source or sold by 
 or on behalf of the taxpayer to an unrelated 
 person during such period.
 ``(B) Coalmine gas.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `coalmine gas' means any methane 
 gas which is--
 ``(i) liberated during or as a result of 
 coal mining operations, or
 ``(ii) extracted up to 10 years in advance 
 of coal mining operations as part of a specific 
 plan to mine a coal deposit.
 ``(C) Special rule for advanced extraction.--In the 
 case of coalmine gas which is captured in advance of 
 coal mining operations, the credit under subsection (a) 
 shall be allowed only after the date the coal 
 extraction occurs in the immediate area where the 
 coalmine gas was removed.
 ``(D) Noncompliance with pollution laws.--This 
 paragraph shall not apply to the capture or extraction 
 of coalmine gas from coal mining operations with 
 respect to any period in which such coal mining 
 operations are not in compliance with applicable State 
 and Federal pollution prevention, control, and permit 
 requirements.
 ``(6) Special rules.--In determining the amount of credit 
 allowable under this section solely by reason of this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) Fuels treated as qualified fuels.--Any fuel 
 described in paragraph (2), (3), (4), or (5) shall be 
 treated as a qualified fuel for purposes of this 
 section.
 ``(B) Daily limit.--The amount of qualified fuels 
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B)(i) of subsection 
 (c)(1) sold during any taxable year which may be taken 
 into account by reason of this subsection with respect 
 to any project shall not exceed an average barrel-of-
 oil equivalent of 200,000 cubic feet of natural gas per 
 day. Days before the date the project is placed in 
 service shall not be taken into account in determining 
 such average.
 ``(C) Extension period to commence with unadjusted 
 credit amount and new phaseout adjustment.--For 
 purposes of applying subsection (b)(2), in the case of 
 fuels sold after 2003--
 ``(i) paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) of 
 subsection (b) shall be applied by subtituting 
 `$35.00' for `$23.50', and
 ``(ii) subparagraph (B) of subsection 
 (d)(2) shall be applied by substituting `2002' 
 for `1979' in determining such dollar 
 amounts.''.
 (b) Extension for certain fuel produced at existing facilities.--
 (1) Extension.--Section 29(f)(2) (relating to application 
 of section) is amended by inserting ``(January 1, 2006, in the 
 case of any coke, coke gas, or natural gas and byproducts 
 produced by coal gasification from lignite in a facility 
 described in paragraph (1)(B))'' after ``January 1, 2003''.
 (2) Use of credit as an offset.--Section 29, as amended by 
 subsection (a), is amended by adding the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(i) Use of Credit as an Offset.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any credit allowable under subsection 
 (a) with respect to any natural gas and byproducts produced by 
 coal gasification from lignite in a facility described in 
 paragraph (1)(B) of subsection (f) owned by a person described 
 in section 1381(a)(2)(C) or subsidiaries of such person may be 
 used as provided in paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Use of credit as an offset.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, in the case of a person described in 
 paragraph (1), any credit to which paragraph (1) applies may be 
 applied by such person--
 ``(A) to the extent provided by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, as a prepayment of any loan, debt, or 
 other obligation the entity has incurred under 
 subchapter I of chapter 31 of title 7 of the Rural 
 Electrification Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.), as 
 in effect on the date of the enactment of the Energy 
 Tax Incentives Act of 2003, and
 ``(B) to the extent provided by the Secretary of 
 Energy, as a prepayment not to exceed 50 percent of any 
 obligation the person has incurred pursuant to an asset 
 purchase agreement entered into with the Secretary and 
 dated October 7, 1988.
 ``(3) Credit not income.--Any use under paragraph (2) of 
 any credit to which paragraph (1) applies shall not be treated 
 as income for purposes of this title.
 ``(4) Treatment of unrelated persons.--For purposes of 
 subsection (a)(2)(A), sales of qualified fuels among and 
 between persons described in paragraph (1) shall be treated as 
 sales between unrelated parties.''.
 (c) Treatment as Business Credit.--
 (1) Credit moved to subpart relating to business related 
 credits.--The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this 
 Act, is amended by redesignating section 29, as amended by this 
 Act, as section 45R and by moving section 45R (as so 
 redesignated) from subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1 to the end of subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of 
 chapter 1.
 (2) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b), as 
 amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end 
 of paragraph (29), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (30) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(31) the nonconventional source production credit 
 determined under section 45R(a).''.
 (3) Conforming Amendments.--
 (A) Section 30(b)(2)(A), as redesignated by this 
 Act, is amended by striking ``sections 27 and 29'' and 
 inserting ``section 27''.
 (B) Sections 43(b)(2) and 613A(c)(6)(C) are each 
 amended by striking ``section 29(d)(2)(C)'' and 
 inserting ``section 45R(d)(2)(C)''.
 (C) Section 45R(a), as redesignated by paragraph 
 (1), is amended by striking ``At the election of the 
 taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against 
 the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year'' 
 and inserting ``For purposes of section 38, if the 
 taxpayer elects to have this section apply, the 
 nonconventional source production credit determined 
 under this section for the taxable year is''.
 (D) Section 45R(b), as so redesignated, is amended 
 by striking paragraph (6).
 (E) Section 53(d)(1)(B)(iii) is amended by striking 
 ``under section 29'' and all that follows through ``or 
 not allowed''.
 (F) Section 55(c)(2) is amended by striking 
 ``29(b)(6),''.
 (G) Subsection (a) of section 772, as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking paragraph (10) and by 
 redesignating paragraphs (11) and (12) as paragraphs 
 (10) and (11), respectively.
 (H) Paragraph (5) of section 772(d) is amended by 
 striking ``the foreign tax credit, and the credit 
 allowable under section 29'' and inserting ``and the 
 foreign tax credit''.
 (I) The table of sections for subpart B of part IV 
 of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by striking the 
 item relating to section 29.
 (J) The table of sections for subpart D of part IV 
 of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, 
 is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
 section 45Q the following new item:

 ``Sec. 45R. Credit for producing fuel 
 from a nonconventional 
 source.''.
 (d) Study of Coalbed Methane.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 conduct a study regarding the effect of section 45R of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on the production of coalbed 
 methane.
 (2) Contents of study.--The study under paragraph (1) shall 
 estimate the total amount of credits under section 45R of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 claimed annually and in the 
 aggregate which are related to the production of coalbed 
 methane since the date of the enactment of such section 45R. 
 Such study shall report the annual value of such credits 
 allowable for coalbed methane compared to the average annual 
 wellhead price of natural gas (per thousand cubic feet of 
 natural gas). Such study shall also estimate the incremental 
 increase in production of coalbed methane which has resulted 
 from the enactment of such section 45R, and the cost to the 
 Federal Government, in terms of the net tax benefits claimed, 
 per thousand cubic feet of incremental coalbed methane produced 
 annually and in the aggregate since such enactment.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold after 
 December 31, 2004, in taxable years ending after such date.
 (2) Existing facilities.--The amendments made by subsection 
 (b) shall apply to fuel sold after December 31, 2002, in 
 taxable years ending after such date.
 (3) Treatment as business credit.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years ending after 
 December 31, 2003.

SEC. 850. NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION LINES TREATED AS 15-YEAR PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(e)(3)(E) (defining 15-year property), 
as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
clause (iii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and by 
inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) any natural gas distribution line.''.
 (b) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) (relating to special rule for certain property assigned to 
classes), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding after the item 
relating to subparagraph (E)(iii) the following new item:

``(E)(v)....................................................... 35''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004, in taxable 
years ending after such date.

SEC. 851. CREDIT FOR ALASKA NATURAL GAS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 45Q. ALASKA NATURAL GAS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, the Alaska natural 
gas credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the product of--
 ``(1) the credit amount, and
 ``(2) Alaska natural gas the production of which is 
 attributable to the taxpayer.
 ``(b) Credit Amount.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The credit amount is $0.52 per 1,000,000 
 Btu of Alaska natural gas.
 ``(2) Reduction as gas prices increase.--
 ``(A) In general.--The dollar amount under 
 paragraph (1) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by 
 an amount which bears the same ratio to such amount 
 (determined without regard to this paragraph) as--
 ``(i) the excess (if any) of the applicable 
 reference price over $0.83, bears to
 ``(ii) $0.52.
 ``(B) Applicable reference price.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph--
 ``(i) In general.--The applicable reference 
 price for any calendar month in a taxable year 
 is the reference price for the calendar month 
 in which production occurs.
 ``(ii) Reference price.--The term 
 `reference price' means, with respect to any 
 calendar month, a published market price for 
 natural gas in United States dollars per 
 1,000,000 Btu (reduced by any gas 
 transportation costs and gas processing costs 
 as determined by the appropriate national 
 regulatory body for natural gas transportation) 
 as determined under regulations by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(C) Inflation adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of any 
 taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 
 2005, each of the dollar amounts contained in 
 paragraph (1) and subparagraph (A) of this 
 paragraph shall be increased to an amount equal 
 to such dollar amount multiplied by the 
 inflation adjustment factor for such calendar 
 year.
 ``(ii) Inflation adjustment factor.--For 
 purposes of clause (i)--
 ``(I) In general.--The term 
 `inflation adjustment factor' means, 
 with respect to a calendar year, a 
 fraction the numerator of which is the 
 GDP implicit price deflator for the 
 preceding calendar year and the 
 denominator of which is the GDP 
 implicit price deflator for the 
 calendar year 2004.
 ``(II) GDP implicit price 
 deflator.--The term `GDP implicit price 
 deflator' means, for any calendar year, 
 the most recent revision of the 
 implicit price deflator for the gross 
 domestic product as of June 30 of such 
 calendar year as computed by the 
 Department of Commerce before October 1 
 of such calendar year.
 ``(c) Alaska Natural Gas.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `Alaska natural gas' means 
 natural gas entering the Alaska natural gas pipeline (as 
 defined in section 168(i)(19) (determined without regard to 
 subparagraph (B) thereof)) which is produced from a well--
 ``(A) located in the area of the State of Alaska 
 lying north of 64 degrees North latitude, determined by 
 excluding the area of the Alaska National Wildlife 
 Refuge (including the continental shelf thereof within 
 the meaning of section 638(1)), and
 ``(B) pursuant to the applicable State and Federal 
 pollution prevention, control, and permit requirements 
 from such area (including the continental shelf thereof 
 within the meaning of section 638(1)).
 ``(2) Natural gas.--The term `natural gas' has the meaning 
 given such term by section 613A(e)(2).
 ``(d) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Production attributable to the taxpayer.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a well in which 
 there is more than 1 person or entity--
 ``(i) entitled to production of Alaska 
 natural gas, or
 ``(ii) at the election of such person or 
 entity, entitled to the value of production as 
 either an operating interest owner or a royalty 
 interest owner,
 the portion of such production attributable to such 
 person or entity shall be determined on the basis of 
 the ratio which the person's or entity's interest in 
 the production or the value of production bears to the 
 aggregate of the interests of all such persons or 
 entities. Production otherwise attributable to a United 
 States tax-exempt person or entity by reason of a 
 royalty interest shall be attributable to such person 
 or entity with respect to whom royalty-in-value 
 production remains or to whom royalty-in-kind 
 production is sold.
 ``(B) Partnership properties.--In the case of a 
 partnership, for purposes of applying subparagraph (A), 
 production shall be attributable to its partners based 
 on each partner's distributive share of Alaska natural 
 gas which is produced from partnership properties and 
 attributable to the partnership or its partners under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Pass-Thru in the Case of Estates and Trusts.--Under 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the 
 rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(e) Application of Section.--This section shall apply to Alaska 
natural gas during the period--
 ``(1) beginning with the later of--
 ``(A) January 1, 2010, or
 ``(B) the initial date for the interstate 
 transportation of such Alaska natural gas, and
 ``(2) ending with the date which is 25 years after the date 
 described in paragraph (1).''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (relating to 
current year business credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period 
at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(29) The Alaska natural gas credit determined under 
 section 45Q(a).''.
 (c) Allowing Credit Against Entire Regular Tax and Minimum Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Section 38(c) (relating to limitation 
 based on amount of tax), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6) and by inserting 
 after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Special rules for alaska natural gas credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of the Alaska 
 natural gas credit--
 ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be 
 applied separately with respect to the credit, 
 and
 ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to the 
 credit--
 ``(I) the amounts in subparagraphs 
 (A) and (B) thereof shall be treated as 
 being zero, and
 ``(II) the limitation under 
 paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause 
 (I)) shall be reduced by the credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) for the 
 taxable year (other than the Alaska 
 natural gas credit).
 ``(B) Alaska Natural Gas Credit.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `Alaska natural gas credit' 
 means the credit allowable under subsection (a) by 
 reason of section 45Q(a).''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Subclause (II) of section 
 38(c)(2)(A)(ii), as amended by this Act, subclause (II) of 
 section 38(c)(3)(A)(ii), as amended by this Act, and subclause 
 (II) of section 38(c)(4)(A)(ii), as added by this Act, are each 
 amended by inserting ``or the Alaska natural gas credit'' after 
 ``specified credits''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1, as amended by this Act, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``Sec. 45Q. Alaska natural gas.''.

SEC. 852. CERTAIN ALASKA NATURAL GAS PIPELINE PROPERTY TREATED AS 7-
 YEAR PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Section 168(e)(3)(C) (defining 7-year property), 
as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of 
clause (iii), by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v), and by 
inserting after clause (iii) the following new clause:
 ``(iv) any Alaska natural gas pipeline, 
 and''.
 (b) Alaska Natural Gas Pipeline.--Section 168(i) (relating to 
definitions and special rules), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(19) Alaska natural gas pipeline.--The term `Alaska 
 natural gas pipeline' means the natural gas pipeline system 
 located in the State of Alaska which--
 ``(A) has a capacity of more than 500,000,000,000 
 Btu of natural gas per day, and
 ``(B) is--
 ``(i) placed in service after December 31, 
 2012, or
 ``(ii) treated as placed in service on 
 January 1, 2013, if the taxpayer who places 
 such system in service before January 1, 2013, 
 elects such treatment.
 Such term includes the pipe, trunk lines, related equipment, 
 and appurtenances used to carry natural gas, but does not 
 include any gas processing plant.''.
 (c) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) (relating to special rule for certain property assigned to 
classes), as amended by this Act, is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to subparagraph (C)(iii) the following new item:

``(C)(iv)...................................................... 22''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 853. EXTENSION OF ENHANCED OIL RECOVERY CREDIT TO CERTAIN ALASKA 
 FACILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 43(c)(1) (defining qualified enhanced oil 
recovery costs) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(D) Any amount which is paid or incurred during 
 the taxable year to construct a gas treatment plant 
 which--
 ``(i) is located in the area of the United 
 States (within the meaning of section 638(1)) 
 lying north of 64 degrees North latitude,
 ``(ii) prepares Alaska natural gas (as 
 defined in section 45Q(c)(1)) for 
 transportation through a pipeline with a 
 capacity of at least 2,000,000,000,000 Btu of 
 natural gas per day, and
 ``(iii) produces carbon dioxide which is 
 injected into hydrocarbon-bearing geological 
 formations.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to costs paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 
2004.

SEC. 854. ARBITRAGE RULES NOT TO APPLY TO PREPAYMENTS FOR NATURAL GAS.

 (a) In General.--Section 148(b) (relating to higher yielding 
investments) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Safe harbor for prepaid natural gas.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `investment-type 
 property' does not include a prepayment under a 
 qualified natural gas supply contract.
 ``(B) Qualified natural gas supply contract.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified natural 
 gas supply contract' means any contract to acquire 
 natural gas for resale by or for a utility owned by a 
 governmental unit if the amount of gas permitted to be 
 acquired under the contract for the utility during any 
 year does not exceed the sum of--
 ``(i) the annual average amount during the 
 testing period of natural gas purchased (other 
 than for resale) by customers of such utility 
 who are located within the service area of such 
 utility, and
 ``(ii) the amount of natural gas to be used 
 to transport the prepaid natural gas to the 
 utility during such year.
 ``(C) Natural gas used to generate electricity.--
 Natural gas used to generate electricity shall be taken 
 into account in determining the average under 
 subparagraph (B)(i)--
 ``(i) only if the electricity is generated 
 by a utility owned by a governmental unit, and
 ``(ii) only to the extent that the 
 electricity is sold (other than for resale) to 
 customers of such utility who are located 
 within the service area of such utility.
 ``(D) Adjustments for changes in customer base.--
 ``(i) New business customers.--If--
 ``(I) after the close of the 
 testing period and before the date of 
 issuance of the issue, the utility 
 owned by a governmental unit enters 
 into a contract to supply natural gas 
 (other than for resale) for use by a 
 business at a property within the 
 service area of such utility, and
 ``(II) the utility did not supply 
 natural gas to such property during the 
 testing period or the ratable amount of 
 natural gas to be supplied under the 
 contract is significantly greater than 
 the ratable amount of gas supplied to 
 such property during the testing 
 period,
 then a contract shall not fail to be treated as 
 a qualified natural gas supply contract by 
 reason of supplying the additional natural gas 
 under the contract referred to in subclause 
 (I).
 ``(ii) Overall limitation.--The average 
 under subparagraph (B)(i) shall not exceed the 
 annual amount of natural gas reasonably 
 expected to be purchased (other than for 
 resale) by persons who are located within the 
 service area of such utility and who, as of the 
 date of issuance of the issue, are customers of 
 such utility.
 ``(E) Ruling requests.--The Secretary may increase 
 the average under subparagraph (B)(i) for any period if 
 the utility owned by the governmental unit establishes 
 to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, based on 
 objective evidence of growth in natural gas consumption 
 or population, such average would otherwise be 
 insufficient for such period.
 ``(F) Adjustment for natural gas otherwise on 
 hand.--
 ``(i) In general.--The amount otherwise 
 permitted to be acquired under the contract for 
 any period shall be reduced by--
 ``(I) the applicable share of 
 natural gas held by the utility on the 
 date of issuance of the issue, and
 ``(II) the natural gas (not taken 
 into account under subclause (I)) which 
 the utility has a right to acquire 
 during such period (determined as of 
 the date of issuance of the issue).
 ``(ii) Applicable share.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the term `applicable share' means, 
 with respect to any period, the natural gas 
 allocable to such period if the gas were 
 allocated ratably over the period to which the 
 prepayment relates.
 ``(G) Intentional acts.--Subparagraph (A) shall 
 cease to apply to any issue if the utility owned by the 
 governmental unit engages in any intentional act to 
 render the volume of natural gas acquired by such 
 prepayment to be in excess of the sum of--
 ``(i) the amount of natural gas needed 
 (other than for resale) by customers of such 
 utility who are located within the service area 
 of such utility, and
 ``(ii) the amount of natural gas used to 
 transport such natural gas to the utility.
 ``(H) Testing period.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `testing period' means, with 
 respect to an issue, the most recent 5 calendar years 
 ending before the date of issuance of the issue.
 ``(I) Service area.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the service area of a utility owned by a 
 governmental unit shall be comprised of--
 ``(i) any area throughout which such 
 utility provided at all times during the 
 testing period--
 ``(I) in the case of a natural gas 
 utility, natural gas transmission or 
 distribution services, and
 ``(II) in the case of an electric 
 utility, electricity distribution 
 services,
 ``(ii) any area within a county contiguous 
 to the area described in clause (i) in which 
 retail customers of such utility are located if 
 such area is not also served by another utility 
 providing natural gas or electricity services, 
 as the case may be, and
 ``(iii) any area recognized as the service 
 area of such utility under State or Federal 
 law.''.
 (b) Private Loan Financing Test Not To Apply to Prepayments for 
Natural Gas.--Section 141(c)(2) (providing exceptions to the private 
loan financing test) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of 
subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) 
and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(C) is a qualified natural gas supply contract 
 (as defined in section 148(b)(4)).''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 141(d) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Exception for qualified electric and natural gas 
 supply contracts.--The term `nongovernmental output property' 
 shall not include any contract for the prepayment of 
 electricity or natural gas which is not investment property 
 under section 148(b)(2).''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to obligations issued after December 31, 2004.

 Subtitle F--Electric Utility Restructuring Provisions

SEC. 855. MODIFICATIONS TO SPECIAL RULES FOR NUCLEAR DECOMMISSIONING 
 COSTS.

 (a) Repeal of Limitation on Deposits Into Fund Based on Cost of 
Service; Contributions After Funding Period.--Subsection (b) of section 
468A (relating to special rules for nuclear decommissioning costs) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Limitation on Amounts Paid Into Fund.--The amount which a 
taxpayer may pay into the Fund for any taxable year shall not exceed 
the ruling amount applicable to such taxable year.''.
 (b) Clarification of Treatment of Fund Transfers.--Section 468A(e) 
(relating to Nuclear Decommissioning Reserve Fund) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) Treatment of fund transfers.--If, in connection with 
 the transfer of the taxpayer's interest in a nuclear power 
 plant, the taxpayer transfers the Fund with respect to such 
 power plant to the transferee of such interest and the 
 transferee elects to continue the application of this section 
 to such Fund--
 ``(A) the transfer of such Fund shall not cause 
 such Fund to be disqualified from the application of 
 this section, and
 ``(B) no amount shall be treated as distributed 
 from such Fund, or be includable in gross income, by 
 reason of such transfer.''.
 (c) Treatment of Certain Decommissioning Costs.--
 (1) In general.--Section 468A is amended by redesignating 
 subsections (f) and (g) as subsections (g) and (h), 
 respectively, and by inserting after subsection (e) the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(f) Transfers Into Qualified Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), any 
 taxpayer maintaining a Fund to which this section applies with 
 respect to a nuclear power plant may transfer into such Fund 
 not more than an amount equal to the present value of the 
 excess of the total nuclear decommissioning costs with respect 
 to such nuclear power plant over the portion of such costs 
 taken into account in determining the ruling amount in effect 
 immediately before the transfer.
 ``(2) Deduction for amounts transferred.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (C), the deduction allowed by subsection 
 (a) for any transfer permitted by this subsection shall 
 be allowed ratably over the remaining estimated useful 
 life (within the meaning of subsection (d)(2)(A)) of 
 the nuclear power plant beginning with the taxable year 
 during which the transfer is made.
 ``(B) Denial of deduction for previously deducted 
 amounts.--No deduction shall be allowed for any 
 transfer under this subsection of an amount for which a 
 deduction was previously allowed or a corresponding 
 amount was not included in gross income. For purposes 
 of the preceding sentence, a ratable portion of each 
 transfer shall be treated as being from previously 
 deducted or excluded amounts to the extent thereof.
 ``(C) Transfers of qualified funds.--If--
 ``(i) any transfer permitted by this 
 subsection is made to any Fund to which this 
 section applies, and
 ``(ii) such Fund is transferred thereafter,
 any deduction under this subsection for taxable years 
 ending after the date that such Fund is transferred 
 shall be allowed to the transferee and not the 
 transferor. The preceding sentence shall not apply if 
 the transferor is an entity exempt from tax under this 
 chapter.
 ``(D) Special rules.--
 ``(i) Gain or loss not recognized.--No gain 
 or loss shall be recognized on any transfer 
 permitted by this subsection.
 ``(ii) Transfers of appreciated property.--
 If appreciated property is transferred in a 
 transfer permitted by this subsection, the 
 amount of the deduction shall not exceed the 
 adjusted basis of such property.
 ``(3) New ruling amount required.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to any transfer unless the taxpayer requests from the 
 Secretary a new schedule of ruling amounts in connection with 
 such transfer.
 ``(4) No basis in qualified funds.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, the taxpayer's basis in any Fund to 
 which this section applies shall not be increased by reason of 
 any transfer permitted by this subsection.''.
 (2) New ruling amount to take into account total costs.--
 Subparagraph (A) of section 468A(d)(2) (defining ruling amount) 
 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) fund the total nuclear decommissioning costs 
 with respect to such power plant over the estimated 
 useful life of such power plant, and''.
 (d) Technical Amendment.--Section 468A(e)(2) (relating to taxation 
of Fund) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``rate set forth in subparagraph (B)'' in 
 subparagraph (A) and inserting ``rate of 20 percent'',
 (2) by striking subparagraph (B), and
 (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), respectively.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 856. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN INCOME OF COOPERATIVES.

 (a) Income From Open Access and Nuclear Decommissioning 
Transactions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 501(c)(12)(C) (relating to list of 
 exempt organizations) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end 
 of clause (i), by striking clause (ii), and by adding at the 
 end the following new clauses:
 ``(ii) from any open access transaction 
 (other than income received or accrued directly 
 or indirectly from a member),
 ``(iii) from any nuclear decommissioning 
 transaction,
 ``(iv) from any asset exchange or 
 conversion transaction, or
 ``(v) from the prepayment of any loan, 
 debt, or obligation made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under the Rural Electrification Act 
 of 1936.''.
 (2) Definitions and special rules.--Section 501(c)(12) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(E) For purposes of subparagraph (C)(ii)--
 ``(i) The term `open access transaction' 
 means any transaction meeting the open access 
 requirements of any of the following subclauses 
 with respect to a mutual or cooperative 
 electric company:
 ``(I) The provision or sale of 
 electric transmission service or 
 ancillary services meets the open 
 access requirements of this subclause 
 only if such services are provided on a 
 nondiscriminatory open access basis 
 pursuant to an open access transmission 
 tariff filed with and approved by FERC, 
 including an acceptable reciprocity 
 tariff, or under a regional 
 transmission organization agreement 
 approved by FERC.
 ``(II) The provision or sale of 
 electric energy distribution services 
 or ancillary services meets the open 
 access requirements of this subclause 
 only if such services are provided on a 
 nondiscriminatory open access basis to 
 end-users served by distribution 
 facilities owned by the mutual or 
 cooperative electric company (or its 
 members).
 ``(III) The delivery or sale of 
 electric energy generated by a 
 generation facility meets the open 
 access requirements of this subclause 
 only if such facility is directly 
 connected to distribution facilities 
 owned by the mutual or cooperative 
 electric company (or its members) which 
 owns the generation facility, and such 
 distribution facilities meet the open 
 access requirements of subclause (II).
 ``(ii) Clause (i)(I) shall apply in the 
 case of a voluntarily filed tariff only if the 
 mutual or cooperative electric company files a 
 report with FERC within 90 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this subparagraph relating 
 to whether or not such company will join a 
 regional transmission organization.
 ``(iii) A mutual or cooperative electric 
 company shall be treated as meeting the open 
 access requirements of clause (i)(I) if a 
 regional transmission organization controls the 
 transmission facilities.
 ``(iv) References to FERC in this 
 subparagraph shall be treated as including 
 references to the Public Utility Commission of 
 Texas with respect to any ERCOT utility (as 
 defined in section 212(k)(2)(B) of the Federal 
 Power Act (16 U.S.C. 824k(k)(2)(B))) or 
 references to the Rural Utilities Service with 
 respect to any other facility not subject to 
 FERC jurisdiction.
 ``(v) For purposes of this subparagraph--
 ``(I) The term `transmission 
 facility' means an electric output 
 facility (other than a generation 
 facility) which operates at an electric 
 voltage of 69 kilovolts or greater. To 
 the extent provided in regulations, 
 such term includes any output facility 
 which FERC determines is a transmission 
 facility under standards applied by 
 FERC under the Federal Power Act (as in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of 
 the Energy Tax Incentives Act).
 ``(II) The term `regional 
 transmission organization' includes an 
 independent system operator.
 ``(III) The term `FERC' means the 
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
 ``(F) The term `nuclear decommissioning 
 transaction' means--
 ``(i) any transfer into a trust, fund, or 
 instrument established to pay any nuclear 
 decommissioning costs if the transfer is in 
 connection with the transfer of the mutual or 
 cooperative electric company's interest in a 
 nuclear power plant or nuclear power plant 
 unit,
 ``(ii) any distribution from any trust, 
 fund, or instrument established to pay any 
 nuclear decommissioning costs, or
 ``(iii) any earnings from any trust, fund, 
 or instrument established to pay any nuclear 
 decommissioning costs.
 ``(G) The term `asset exchange or conversion 
 transaction' means any voluntary exchange or 
 involuntary conversion of any property related to 
 generating, transmitting, distributing, or selling 
 electric energy by a mutual or cooperative electric 
 company, the gain from which qualifies for deferred 
 recognition under section 1031 or 1033, but only if the 
 replacement property acquired by such company pursuant 
 to such section constitutes property which is used, or 
 to be used, for--
 ``(i) generating, transmitting, 
 distributing, or selling electric energy, or
 ``(ii) producing, transmitting, 
 distributing, or selling natural gas.''.
 (b) Treatment of Income From Load Loss Transactions.--Section 
501(c)(12), as amended by subsection (a)(2), is amended by adding after 
subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraph:
 ``(H)(i) In the case of a mutual or cooperative 
 electric company described in this paragraph or an 
 organization described in section 1381(a)(2)(C), income 
 received or accrued from a load loss transaction shall 
 be treated as an amount collected from members for the 
 sole purpose of meeting losses and expenses.
 ``(ii) For purposes of clause (i), the term `load 
 loss transaction' means any wholesale or retail sale of 
 electric energy (other than to members) to the extent 
 that the aggregate sales during the recovery period do 
 not exceed the load loss mitigation sales limit for 
 such period.
 ``(iii) For purposes of clause (ii), the load loss 
 mitigation sales limit for the recovery period is the 
 sum of the annual load losses for each year of such 
 period.
 ``(iv) For purposes of clause (iii), a mutual or 
 cooperative electric company's annual load loss for 
 each year of the recovery period is the amount (if any) 
 by which--
 ``(I) the megawatt hours of electric energy 
 sold during such year to members of such 
 electric company are less than
 ``(II) the megawatt hours of electric 
 energy sold during the base year to such 
 members.
 ``(v) For purposes of clause (iv)(II), the term 
 `base year' means--
 ``(I) the calendar year preceding the 
 start-up year, or
 ``(II) at the election of the electric 
 company, the second or third calendar years 
 preceding the start-up year.
 ``(vi) For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
 recovery period is the 7-year period beginning with the 
 start-up year.
 ``(vii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
 start-up year is the calendar year which includes 
 January 1, 2005, or, if later, at the election of the 
 mutual or cooperative electric company--
 ``(I) the first year that such electric 
 company offers nondiscriminatory open access, 
 or
 ``(II) the first year in which at least 10 
 percent of such electric company's sales are 
 not to members of such electric company.
 ``(viii) A company shall not fail to be treated as 
 a mutual or cooperative company for purposes of this 
 paragraph or as a corporation operating on a 
 cooperative basis for purposes of section 1381(a)(2)(C) 
 by reason of the treatment under clause (i).
 ``(ix) In the case of a mutual or cooperative 
 electric company, income from any open access 
 transaction received, or accrued, indirectly from a 
 member shall be treated as an amount collected from 
 members for the sole purpose of meeting losses and 
 expenses.''.
 (c) Exception From Unrelated Business Taxable Income.--Section 
512(b) (relating to modifications), as amended by this Act, is amended 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(20) Treatment of mutual or cooperative electric 
 companies.--In the case of a mutual or cooperative electric 
 company described in section 501(c)(12), there shall be 
 excluded income which is treated as member income under 
 subparagraph (H) thereof.''.
 (d) Cross Reference.--Section 1381 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Cross Reference.--

 ``For treatment of income from load 
loss transactions of organizations described in subsection (a)(2)(C), 
see section 501(c)(12)(H).''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2004.

SEC. 857. SALES OR DISPOSITIONS TO IMPLEMENT FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY 
 COMMISSION OR STATE ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING POLICY.

 (a) In General.--Section 451 (relating to general rule for taxable 
year of inclusion) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(i) Special Rule for Sales or Dispositions To Implement Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission or State Electric Restructuring Policy.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
 taxpayer elects the application of this subsection to a 
 qualifying electric transmission transaction in any taxable 
 year--
 ``(A) any ordinary income derived from such 
 transaction which would be required to be recognized 
 under section 1245 or 1250 for such taxable year 
 (determined without regard to this subsection), and
 ``(B) any income derived from such transaction in 
 excess of such ordinary income which is required to be 
 included in gross income for such taxable year 
 (determined without regard to this subsection),
 shall be so recognized and included ratably over the 8-taxable 
 year period beginning with such taxable year.
 ``(2) Qualifying electric transmission transaction.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term `qualifying electric 
 transmission transaction' means any sale or other disposition 
 before January 1, 2008, of--
 ``(A) property used by the taxpayer in the trade or 
 business of providing electric transmission services, 
 or
 ``(B) any stock or partnership interest in a 
 corporation or partnership, as the case may be, whose 
 principal trade or business consists of providing 
 electric transmission services,
 but only if such sale or disposition is to an independent 
 transmission company.
 ``(3) Independent transmission company.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the term `independent transmission company' 
 means--
 ``(A) a regional transmission organization approved 
 by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
 ``(B) a person--
 ``(i) who the Federal Energy Regulatory 
 Commission determines in its authorization of 
 the transaction under section 203 of the 
 Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 824b) is not a 
 market participant within the meaning of such 
 Commission's rules applicable to regional 
 transmission organizations, and
 ``(ii) whose transmission facilities to 
 which the election under this subsection 
 applies are under the operational control of a 
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved 
 regional transmission organization before the 
 close of the period specified in such 
 authorization, but not later than January 1, 
 2008, or
 ``(C) in the case of facilities subject to the 
 exclusive jurisdiction of the Public Utility Commission 
 of Texas, a person which is approved by that Commission 
 as consistent with Texas State law regarding an 
 independent transmission organization.
 ``(4) Election.--An election under paragraph (1), once 
 made, shall be irrevocable.
 ``(5) Nonapplication of installment sales treatment.--
 Section 453 shall not apply to any qualifying electric 
 transmission transaction with respect to which an election to 
 apply this subsection is made.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to transactions occurring after December 31, 2004.

 Subtitle G--Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit

SEC. 860. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax 
Credit (VEETC) Act of 2004''.

SEC. 861. ALCOHOL AND BIODIESEL EXCISE TAX CREDIT AND EXTENSION OF 
 ALCOHOL FUELS INCOME TAX CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 65 (relating to rules of 
special application) is amended by inserting after section 6425 the 
following new section:

``SEC. 6426. CREDIT FOR ALCOHOL FUEL AND BIODIESEL MIXTURES.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credits.--There shall be allowed as a credit 
against the tax imposed by section 4081 an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) the alcohol fuel mixture credit, plus
 ``(2) the biodiesel mixture credit.
 ``(b) Alcohol Fuel Mixture Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the 
 alcohol fuel mixture credit is the product of the applicable 
 amount and the number of gallons of alcohol used by the 
 taxpayer in producing any alcohol fuel mixture for sale or use 
 in a trade or business of the taxpayer.
 ``(2) Applicable amount.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the applicable amount is 52 cents (51 
 cents in the case of any sale or use after 2004).
 ``(B) Mixtures not containing ethanol.--In the case 
 of an alcohol fuel mixture in which none of the alcohol 
 consists of ethanol, the applicable amount is 60 cents.
 ``(3) Alcohol fuel mixture.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `alcohol fuel mixture' means a mixture of 
 alcohol and a taxable fuel which--
 ``(A) is sold by the taxpayer producing such 
 mixture to any person for use as a fuel,
 ``(B) is used as a fuel by the taxpayer producing 
 such mixture, or
 ``(C) is removed from the refinery by a person 
 producing such mixture.
 ``(4) Other definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Alcohol.--The term `alcohol' includes 
 methanol and ethanol but does not include--
 ``(i) alcohol produced from petroleum, 
 natural gas, or coal (including peat), or
 ``(ii) alcohol with a proof of less than 
 190 (determined without regard to any added 
 denaturants).
 Such term also includes an alcohol gallon equivalent of 
 ethyl tertiary butyl ether or other ethers produced 
 from such alcohol.
 ``(B) Taxable fuel.--The term `taxable fuel' has 
 the meaning given such term by section 4083(a)(1).
 ``(5) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply to any 
 sale, use, or removal for any period after December 31, 2010.
 ``(c) Biodiesel Mixture Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the 
 biodiesel mixture credit is the product of the applicable 
 amount and the number of gallons of biodiesel used by the 
 taxpayer in producing any biodiesel mixture for sale or use in 
 a trade or business of the taxpayer.
 ``(2) Applicable amount.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the applicable amount is 50 cents.
 ``(B) Amount for agri-biodiesel.--In the case of 
 any biodiesel which is agri-biodiesel, the applicable 
 amount is $1.00.
 ``(3) Biodiesel mixture.--For purposes of this section, the 
 term `biodiesel mixture' means a mixture of biodiesel and 
 diesel fuel (as defined in section 4083(a)(3)), determined 
 without regard to any use of kerosene, which--
 ``(A) is sold by the taxpayer producing such 
 mixture to any person for use as a fuel,
 ``(B) is used as a fuel by the taxpayer producing 
 such mixture, or
 ``(C) is removed from the refinery by a person 
 producing such mixture.
 ``(4) Certification for biodiesel.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under this section unless the taxpayer obtains a 
 certification (in such form and manner as prescribed by the 
 Secretary) from the producer of the biodiesel which identifies 
 the product produced and the percentage of biodiesel and agri-
 biodiesel in the product.
 ``(5) Other definitions.--Any term used in this subsection 
 which is also used in section 40A shall have the meaning given 
 such term by section 40A.
 ``(6) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply to any 
 sale, use, or removal for any period after December 31, 2006.
 ``(d) Mixture not used as a fuel, etc.--
 ``(1) Imposition of tax.--If--
 ``(A) any credit was determined under this section 
 with respect to alcohol or biodiesel used in the 
 production of any alcohol fuel mixture or biodiesel 
 mixture, respectively, and
 ``(B) any person--
 ``(i) separates the alcohol or biodiesel 
 from the mixture, or
 ``(ii) without separation, uses the mixture 
 other than as a fuel,
 then there is hereby imposed on such person a tax equal 
 to the product of the applicable amount and the number 
 of gallons of such alcohol or biodiesel.
 ``(2) Applicable laws.--All provisions of law, including 
 penalties, shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent 
 with this section, apply in respect of any tax imposed under 
 paragraph (1) as if such tax were imposed by section 4081 and 
 not by this section.
 ``(e) Coordination With Exemption From Excise Tax.--Rules similar 
to the rules under section 40(c) shall apply for purposes of this 
section.''.
 (b) Registration Requirement.--Section 4101(a)(1) (relating to 
registration), as amended by sections 871 and 880 of this Act, is 
amended by inserting ``and every person producing or importing 
biodiesel (as defined in section 40A(d)(1)) or alcohol (as defined in 
section 6426(b)(4)(A))'' after ``4081''.
 (c) Additional Amendments.--
 (1) Section 40(c) is amended by striking ``subsection 
 (b)(2), (k), or (m) of section 4041, section 4081(c), or 
 section 4091(c)'' and inserting ``section 4041(b)(2), section 
 6426, or section 6427(e)''.
 (2) Paragraph (4) of section 40(d) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(4) Volume of alcohol.--For purposes of determining under 
 subsection (a) the number of gallons of alcohol with respect to 
 which a credit is allowable under subsection (a), the volume of 
 alcohol shall include the volume of any denaturant (including 
 gasoline) which is added under any formulas approved by the 
 Secretary to the extent that such denaturants do not exceed 5 
 percent of the volume of such alcohol (including 
 denaturants).''.
 (3) Section 40(e)(1) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``2007'' in subparagraph (A) and 
 inserting ``2010'', and
 (B) by striking ``2008'' in subparagraph (B) and 
 inserting ``2011''.
 (4) Section 40(h) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``2007'' in paragraph (1) and 
 inserting ``2010'', and
 (B) by striking ``, 2006, or 2007'' in the table 
 contained in paragraph (2) and inserting ``through 
 2010''.
 (5) Section 4041(b)(2)(B) is amended by striking ``a 
 substance other than petroleum or natural gas'' and inserting 
 ``coal (including peat)''.
 (6) Section 4041 is amended by striking subsection (k).
 (7) Section 4081 is amended by striking subsection (c).
 (8) Paragraph (2) of section 4083(a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Gasoline.--The term `gasoline'--
 ``(A) includes any gasoline blend, other than 
 qualified methanol or ethanol fuel (as defined in 
 section 4041(b)(2)(B)), partially exempt methanol or 
 ethanol fuel (as defined in section 4041(m)(2)), or a 
 denatured alcohol, and
 ``(B) includes, to the extent prescribed in 
 regulations--
 ``(i) any gasoline blend stock, and
 ``(ii) any product commonly used as an 
 additive in gasoline (other than alcohol).
 For purposes of subparagraph (B)(i), the term `gasoline blend 
 stock' means any petroleum product component of gasoline.''.
 (9) Section 6427 is amended by inserting after subsection 
 (d) the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Alcohol or Biodiesel Used To Produce Alcohol Fuel and 
Biodiesel Mixtures or Used as Fuels.--Except as provided in subsection 
(k)--
 ``(1) Used to produce a mixture.--If any person produces a 
 mixture described in section 6426 in such person's trade or 
 business, the Secretary shall pay (without interest) to such 
 person an amount equal to the alcohol fuel mixture credit or 
 the biodiesel mixture credit with respect to such mixture.
 ``(2) Used as fuel.--If alcohol (as defined in section 
 40(d)(1)) or biodiesel (as defined in section 40A(d)(1)) or 
 agri-biodiesel (as defined in section 40A(d)(2)) which is not 
 in a mixture described in section 6426--
 ``(A) is used by any person as a fuel in a trade or 
 business, or
 ``(B) is sold by any person at retail to another 
 person and placed in the fuel tank of such person's 
 vehicle,
 the Secretary shall pay (without interest) to such person an 
 amount equal to the alcohol credit (as determined under section 
 40(b)(2)) or the biodiesel credit (as determined under section 
 40A(b)(2)) with respect to such fuel.
 ``(3) Coordination with other repayment provisions.--No 
 amount shall be payable under paragraph (1) with respect to any 
 mixture with respect to which an amount is allowed as a credit 
 under section 6426.
 ``(4) Termination.--This subsection shall not apply with 
 respect to--
 ``(A) any alcohol fuel mixture (as defined in 
 section 6426(b)(3)) or alcohol (as so defined) sold or 
 used after December 31, 2010, and
 ``(B) any biodiesel mixture (as defined in section 
 6426(c)(3)) or biodiesel (as so defined) or agri-
 biodiesel (as so defined) sold or used after December 
 31, 2006.''.
 (10) Section 6427(i)(3) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``subsection (f)'' both places it 
 appears in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``subsection 
 (e)(1)'',
 (B) by striking ``gasoline, diesel fuel, or 
 kerosene used to produce a qualified alcohol mixture 
 (as defined in section 4081(c)(3))'' in subparagraph 
 (A) and inserting ``a mixture described in section 
 6426'',
 (C) by adding at the end of subparagraph (A) the 
 following new flush sentence:
 ``In the case of an electronic claim, this subparagraph 
 shall be applied without regard to clause (i).'',
 (D) by striking ``subsection (f)(1)'' in 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``subsection (e)(1)'',
 (E) by striking ``20 days of the date of the filing 
 of such claim'' in subparagraph (B) and inserting ``45 
 days of the date of the filing of such claim (20 days 
 in the case of an electronic claim)'', and
 (F) by striking ``alcohol mixture'' in the heading 
 and inserting ``alcohol fuel and biodiesel mixture''.
 (11) Section 9503(b)(1) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new flush sentence:
 ``For purposes of this paragraph, taxes received under sections 
 4041 and 4081 shall be determined without reduction for credits 
 under section 6426.''.
 (12) Section 9503(b)(4) is amended--
 (A) by adding ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (C),
 (B) by striking the comma at the end of 
 subparagraph (D)(iii) and inserting a period, and
 (C) by striking subparagraphs (E) and (F).
 (13) The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 65 
 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6425 
 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6426. Credit for alcohol fuel and biodiesel mixtures.''.
 (14) Tariff schedule.--Headings 9901.00.50 and 9901.00.52 
 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (19 
 U.S.C. 3007) are each amended in the effective period column by 
 striking ``10/1/2007'' each place it appears and inserting ``1/
 1/2011''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to 
 fuel sold or used after September 30, 2004.
 (2) Registration requirement.--The amendment made by 
 subsection (b) shall take effect on April 1, 2005.
 (3) Extension of alcohol fuels credit.--The amendments made 
 by paragraphs (3), (4), and (14) of subsection (c) shall take 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (4) Repeal of general fund retention of certain alcohol 
 fuels taxes.--The amendments made by subsection (c)(12) shall 
 apply to fuel sold or used after September 30, 2003.
 (e) Format for Filing.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
describe the electronic format for filing claims described in section 
6427(i)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by 
subsection (c)(10)(C)) not later than September 30, 2004.

SEC. 862. BIODIESEL INCOME TAX CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to business related credits), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by inserting after section 40A the following new section:

``SEC. 40B. BIODIESEL USED AS FUEL.

 ``(a) General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the biodiesel 
fuels credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an 
amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) the biodiesel mixture credit, plus
 ``(2) the biodiesel credit.
 ``(b) Definition of Biodiesel Mixture Credit and Biodiesel 
Credit.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Biodiesel mixture credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--The biodiesel mixture credit of 
 any taxpayer for any taxable year is 50 cents for each 
 gallon of biodiesel used by the taxpayer in the 
 production of a qualified biodiesel mixture.
 ``(B) Qualified biodiesel mixture.--The term 
 `qualified biodiesel mixture' means a mixture of 
 biodiesel and diesel fuel (as defined in section 
 4083(a)(3)), determined without regard to any use of 
 kerosene, which--
 ``(i) is sold by the taxpayer producing 
 such mixture to any person for use as a fuel, 
 or
 ``(ii) is used as a fuel by the taxpayer 
 producing such mixture.
 ``(C) Sale or use must be in trade or business, 
 etc.--Biodiesel used in the production of a qualified 
 biodiesel mixture shall be taken into account--
 ``(i) only if the sale or use described in 
 subparagraph (B) is in a trade or business of 
 the taxpayer, and
 ``(ii) for the taxable year in which such 
 sale or use occurs.
 ``(D) Casual off-farm production not eligible.--No 
 credit shall be allowed under this section with respect 
 to any casual off-farm production of a qualified 
 biodiesel mixture.
 ``(2) Biodiesel credit.--
 ``(A) In general.--The biodiesel credit of any 
 taxpayer for any taxable year is 50 cents for each 
 gallon of biodiesel which is not in a mixture with 
 diesel fuel and which during the taxable year--
 ``(i) is used by the taxpayer as a fuel in 
 a trade or business, or
 ``(ii) is sold by the taxpayer at retail to 
 a person and placed in the fuel tank of such 
 person's vehicle.
 ``(B) User credit not to apply to biodiesel sold at 
 retail.--No credit shall be allowed under subparagraph 
 (A)(i) with respect to any biodiesel which was sold in 
 a retail sale described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
 ``(3) Credit for agri-biodiesel.--In the case of any 
 biodiesel which is agri-biodiesel, paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A) 
 shall be applied by substituting `$1.00' for `50 cents'.
 ``(4) Certification for biodiesel.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under this section unless the taxpayer obtains a 
 certification (in such form and manner as prescribed by the 
 Secretary) from the producer or importer of the biodiesel which 
 identifies the product produced and the percentage of biodiesel 
 and agri-biodiesel in the product.
 ``(c) Coordination With Credit Against Excise Tax.--The amount of 
the credit determined under this section with respect to any biodiesel 
shall be properly reduced to take into account any benefit provided 
with respect to such biodiesel solely by reason of the application of 
section 6426 or 6427(e).
 ``(d) Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Biodiesel.--The term `biodiesel' means the monoalkyl 
 esters of long chain fatty acids derived from plant or animal 
 matter which meet--
 ``(A) the registration requirements for fuels and 
 fuel additives established by the Environmental 
 Protection Agency under section 211 of the Clean Air 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 7545), and
 ``(B) the requirements of the American Society of 
 Testing and Materials D6751.
 ``(2) Agri-biodiesel.--The term `agri-biodiesel' means 
 biodiesel derived solely from virgin oils, including esters 
 derived from virgin vegetable oils from corn, soybeans, 
 sunflower seeds, cottonseeds, canola, crambe, rapeseeds, 
 safflowers, flaxseeds, rice bran, and mustard seeds, and from 
 animal fats.
 ``(3) Mixture or biodiesel not used as a fuel, etc.--
 ``(A) Mixtures.--If--
 ``(i) any credit was determined under this 
 section with respect to biodiesel used in the 
 production of any qualified biodiesel mixture, 
 and
 ``(ii) any person--
 ``(I) separates the biodiesel from 
 the mixture, or
 ``(II) without separation, uses the 
 mixture other than as a fuel,
 then there is hereby imposed on such person a tax equal 
 to the product of the rate applicable under subsection 
 (b)(1)(A) and the number of gallons of such biodiesel 
 in such mixture.
 ``(B) Biodiesel.--If--
 ``(i) any credit was determined under this 
 section with respect to the retail sale of any 
 biodiesel, and
 ``(ii) any person mixes such biodiesel or 
 uses such biodiesel other than as a fuel,
 then there is hereby imposed on such person a tax equal 
 to the product of the rate applicable under subsection 
 (b)(2)(A) and the number of gallons of such biodiesel.
 ``(C) Applicable laws.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, shall, insofar as applicable and 
 not inconsistent with this section, apply in respect of 
 any tax imposed under subparagraph (A) or (B) as if 
 such tax were imposed by section 4081 and not by this 
 chapter.
 ``(4) Pass-thru in the case of estates and trusts.--Under 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the 
 rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
 ``(e) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any sale or use 
after December 31, 2006.''.
 (b) Credit Treated as Part of General Business Credit.--Section 
38(b) (relating to current year business credit), as amended by this 
Act, is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (28), by 
striking the period at the end of paragraph (29) and inserting ``, 
plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(30) the biodiesel fuels credit determined under section 
 40B(a).''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1)(A) Section 87, as amended by this Act, is amended--
 (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (1),
 (ii) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (2) and inserting ``, and'',
 (iii) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) the biodiesel fuels credit determined with respect to 
 the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 40B(a).'', and
 (iv) by striking ``fuel credit'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``and biodiesel fuels credits''.
 (B) The item relating to section 87 in the table of 
 sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by 
 striking ``fuel credit'' and inserting ``and biodiesel fuels 
 credits''.
 (2) Section 196(c), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the 
 period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, and'', 
 and by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(13) the biodiesel fuels credit determined under section 
 40B(a).''.
 (3) The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding after the item 
 relating to section 40 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 40B. Biodiesel used as fuel.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to fuel produced, and sold or used, after September 30, 2004, in 
taxable years ending after such date.

 Subtitle H--Fuel Fraud Prevention

SEC. 870. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Fuel Fraud Prevention Act of 
2004''.

 PART I--AVIATION JET FUEL

SEC. 871. TAXATION OF AVIATION-GRADE KEROSENE.

 (a) Rate of Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 4081(a)(2) is 
 amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by 
 striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting 
 ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) in the case of aviation-grade 
 kerosene, 21.8 cents per gallon.''.
 (2) Commercial aviation.--Paragraph (2) of section 4081(a) 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Taxes imposed on fuel used in commercial 
 aviation.--In the case of aviation-grade kerosene which 
 is removed from any refinery or terminal directly into 
 the fuel tank of an aircraft for use in commercial 
 aviation, the rate of tax under subparagraph (A)(iv) 
 shall be 4.3 cents per gallon.''.
 (3) Nontaxable uses.--
 (A) In general.--Section 4082 is amended by 
 redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections 
 (f) and (g), respectively, and by inserting after 
 subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Aviation-Grade Kerosene.--In the case of aviation-grade 
kerosene which is exempt from the tax imposed by section 4041(c) (other 
than by reason of a prior imposition of tax) and which is removed from 
any refinery or terminal directly into the fuel tank of an aircraft, 
the rate of tax under section 4081(a)(2)(A)(iv) shall be zero.''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Subsection (b) of section 4082 is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new 
 flush sentence: ``The term `nontaxable use' 
 does not include the use of aviation-grade 
 kerosene in an aircraft.''.
 (ii) Section 4082(d) is amended by striking 
 paragraph (1) and by redesignating paragraphs 
 (2) and (3) as paragraphs (1) and (2), 
 respectively.
 (4) Nonaircraft use of aviation-grade kerosene.--
 (A) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 
 4041(a)(1) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new sentence: ``This subparagraph shall not 
 apply to aviation-grade kerosene.''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--The heading for 
 paragraph (1) of section 4041(a) is amended by 
 inserting ``and kerosene'' after ``diesel fuel''.
 (b) Commercial Aviation.--Section 4083 is amended redesignating 
subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively, and 
by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Commercial Aviation.--For purposes of this subpart, the term 
`commercial aviation' means any use of an aircraft in a business of 
transporting persons or property for compensation or hire by air, 
unless properly allocable to any transportation exempt from the taxes 
imposed by section 4261 and 4271 by reason of section 4281 or 4282 or 
by reason of section 4261(h).''.
 (c) Refunds.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (4) of section 6427(l) is 
 amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Refunds for aviation-grade kerosene.--
 ``(A) No refund of certain taxes on fuel used in 
 commercial aviation.--In the case of aviation-grade 
 kerosene used in commercial aviation (as defined in 
 section 4083(b)) (other than supplies for vessels or 
 aircraft within the meaning of section 4221(d)(3)), 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply to so much of the tax 
 imposed by section 4081 as is attributable to--
 ``(i) the Leaking Underground Storage Tank 
 Trust Fund financing rate imposed by such 
 section, and
 ``(ii) so much of the rate of tax specified 
 in section 4081(a)(2)(A)(iv) as does not exceed 
 4.3 cents per gallon.
 ``(B) Payment to ultimate, registered vendor.--With 
 respect to aviation-grade kerosene, if the ultimate 
 purchaser of such kerosene waives (at such time and in 
 such form and manner as the Secretary shall prescribe) 
 the right to payment under paragraph (1) and assigns 
 such right to the ultimate vendor, then the Secretary 
 shall pay the amount which would be paid under 
 paragraph (1) to such ultimate vendor, but only if such 
 ultimate vendor--
 ``(i) is registered under section 4101, and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A), (B), or (D) of section 
 6416(a)(1).''.
 (2) Time for filing claims.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
 6427(i)(4) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``subsection (l)(5)'' both places 
 it appears and inserting ``paragraph (4)(B) or (5) of 
 subsection (l)'', and
 (B) by striking ``the preceding sentence'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (l)(5)''.
 (3) Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (B) of section 
 6427(l)(2) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(B) in the case of aviation-grade kerosene--
 ``(i) any use which is exempt from the tax 
 imposed by section 4041(c) other than by reason 
 of a prior imposition of tax, or
 ``(ii) any use in commercial aviation 
 (within the meaning of section 4083(b)).''.
 (d) Repeal of Prior Taxation of Aviation Fuel.--
 (1) In general.--Part III of subchapter A of chapter 32 is 
 amended by striking subpart B and by redesignating subpart C as 
 subpart B.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 4041(c) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Aviation-Grade Kerosene.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is hereby imposed a tax upon 
 aviation-grade kerosene--
 ``(A) sold by any person to an owner, lessee, or 
 other operator of an aircraft for use in such aircraft, 
 or
 ``(B) used by any person in an aircraft unless 
 there was a taxable sale of such fuel under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Exemption for previously taxed fuel.--No tax shall be 
 imposed by this subsection on the sale or use of any aviation-
 grade kerosene if tax was imposed on such liquid under section 
 4081 and the tax thereon was not credited or refunded.
 ``(3) Rate of tax.--The rate of tax imposed by this 
 subsection shall be the rate of tax specified in section 
 4081(a)(2)(A)(iv) which is in effect at the time of such sale 
 or use.''.
 (B) Section 4041(d)(2) is amended by striking 
 ``section 4091'' and inserting ``section 4081''.
 (C) Section 4041 is amended by striking subsection 
 (e).
 (D) Section 4041 is amended by striking subsection 
 (i).
 (E) Section 4041(m)(1) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of the sale or use of any 
 partially exempt methanol or ethanol fuel, the rate of the tax 
 imposed by subsection (a)(2) shall be--
 ``(A) after September 30, 1997, and before 
 September 30, 2009--
 ``(i) in the case of fuel none of the 
 alcohol in which consists of ethanol, 9.15 
 cents per gallon, and
 ``(ii) in any other case, 11.3 cents per 
 gallon, and
 ``(B) after September 30, 2009--
 ``(i) in the case of fuel none of the 
 alcohol in which consists of ethanol, 2.15 
 cents per gallon, and
 ``(ii) in any other case, 4.3 cents per 
 gallon.''.
 (F) Sections 4101(a), 4103, 4221(a), and 6206 are 
 each amended by striking ``, 4081, or 4091'' and 
 inserting ``or 4081''.
 (G) Section 6416(b)(2) is amended by striking 
 ``4091 or''.
 (H) Section 6416(b)(3) is amended by striking ``or 
 4091'' each place it appears.
 (I) Section 6416(d) is amended by striking ``or to 
 the tax imposed by section 4091 in the case of refunds 
 described in section 4091(d)''.
 (J) Section 6427 is amended by striking subsection 
 (f).
 (K) Section 6427(j)(1) is amended by striking ``, 
 4081, and 4091'' and inserting ``and 4081''.
 (L)(i) Section 6427(l)(1) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection and in subsection (k), if any diesel fuel or 
 kerosene on which tax has been imposed by section 4041 or 4081 
 is used by any person in a nontaxable use, the Secretary shall 
 pay (without interest) to the ultimate purchaser of such fuel 
 an amount equal to the aggregate amount of tax imposed on such 
 fuel under section 4041 or 4081, as the case may be, reduced by 
 any refund paid to the ultimate vendor under paragraph 
 (4)(B).''.
 (ii) Paragraph (5)(B) of section 6427(l) is amended 
 by striking ``Paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply to 
 kerosene'' and inserting ``Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to kerosene (other than aviation-grade 
 kerosene)''.
 (M) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1), as 
 amended by this Act, is amended by striking clause 
 (xvi) and by redesignating clauses (xvii), (xviii), and 
 (xix) as clauses (xvi), (xvii), and (xviii), 
 respectively.
 (N) Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d), as amended by 
 this Act, is amended by striking subparagraph (X) and 
 by redesignating subparagraphs (Y), (Z), (AA), (BB), 
 and (CC) as subparagraphs (X), (Y), (Z), (AA), and 
 (BB), respectively.
 (O) Paragraph (1) of section 9502(b) is amended by 
 adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B) and by 
 striking subparagraphs (C) and (D) and inserting the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) section 4081 with respect to aviation 
 gasoline and aviation-grade kerosene, and''.
 (P) The last sentence of section 9502(b) is amended 
 to read as follows:
``There shall not be taken into account under paragraph (1) so much of 
the taxes imposed by section 4081 as are determined at the rate 
specified in section 4081(a)(2)(B).''.
 (Q) Subsection (b) of section 9508 is amended by 
 striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs 
 (4) and (5) as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively.
 (R) Section 9508(c)(2)(A) is amended by striking 
 ``sections 4081 and 4091'' and inserting ``section 
 4081''.
 (S) The table of subparts for part III of 
 subchapter A of chapter 32 is amended to read as 
 follows:

 ``Subpart A. Motor and aviation fuels.
 ``Subpart B. Special provisions 
 applicable to fuels tax.''.
 (T) The heading for subpart A of part III of 
 subchapter A of chapter 32 is amended to read as 
 follows:

 ``Subpart A--Motor and Aviation Fuels''.

 (U) The heading for subpart B of part III of 
 subchapter A of chapter 32 is amended to read as 
 follows:

 ``Subpart B--Special Provisions Applicable to Fuels Tax''.

 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to aviation-grade kerosene removed, entered, or sold after 
September 30, 2004.
 (f) Floor Stocks Tax.--
 (1) In general.--There is hereby imposed on aviation-grade 
 kerosene held on October 1, 2004, by any person a tax equal 
 to--
 (A) the tax which would have been imposed before 
 such date on such kerosene had the amendments made by 
 this section been in effect at all times before such 
 date, reduced by
 (B) the tax imposed before such date under section 
 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as in effect 
 on the day before the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (A) Liability for tax.--The person holding the 
 kerosene on October 1, 2004, to which the tax imposed 
 by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (B) Method and time for payment.--The tax imposed 
 by paragraph (1) shall be paid at such time and in such 
 manner as the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 prescribe, including the nonapplication of such tax on 
 de minimis amounts of kerosene.
 (3) Transfer of floor stock tax revenues to trust funds.--
 For purposes of determining the amount transferred to any trust 
 fund, the tax imposed by this subsection shall be treated as 
 imposed by section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986--
 (A) at the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust 
 Fund financing rate under such section to the extent of 
 0.1 cents per gallon, and
 (B) at the rate under section 4081(a)(2)(A)(iv) to 
 the extent of the remainder.
 (4) Held by a person.--For purposes of this section, 
 kerosene shall be considered as held by a person if title 
 thereto has passed to such person (whether or not delivery to 
 the person has been made).
 (5) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, applicable with respect to the tax imposed 
 by section 4081 of such Code shall, insofar as applicable and 
 not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, apply 
 with respect to the floor stock tax imposed by paragraph (1) to 
 the same extent as if such tax were imposed by such section.

SEC. 872. TRANSFER OF CERTAIN AMOUNTS FROM THE AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST 
 FUND TO THE HIGHWAY TRUST FUND TO REFLECT HIGHWAY USE OF 
 JET FUEL.

 (a) In General.--Section 9502(d) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Transfers from the trust fund to the highway trust 
 fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall pay annually 
 from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund into the Highway 
 Trust Fund an amount (as determined by him) equivalent 
 to amounts received in the Airport and Airway Trust 
 Fund which are attributable to fuel that is used 
 primarily for highway transportation purposes.
 ``(B) Amounts transferred to mass transit 
 account.--The Secretary shall transfer 11 percent of 
 the amounts paid into the Highway Trust Fund under 
 subparagraph (A) to the Mass Transit Account 
 established under section 9503(e).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subsection (a) of section 9503 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``appropriated or credited'' and 
 inserting ``paid, appropriated, or credited'', and
 (B) by striking ``or section 9602(b)'' and 
 inserting ``, section 9502(d)(7), or section 9602(b)''.
 (2) Subsection (e)(1) of section 9503 is amended by 
 striking ``or section 9602(b)'' and inserting ``, section 
 9502(d)(7), or section 9602(b)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

 PART II--DYED FUEL

SEC. 873. DYE INJECTION EQUIPMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 4082(a)(2) (relating to exemptions for 
diesel fuel and kerosene) is amended by inserting ``by mechanical 
injection'' after ``indelibly dyed''.
 (b) Dye Injector Security.--Not later than June 30, 2004, the 
Secretary of the Treasury shall issue regulations regarding mechanical 
dye injection systems described in the amendment made by subsection 
(a), and such regulations shall include standards for making such 
systems tamper resistant.
 (c) Penalty for Tampering With or Failing To Maintain Security 
Requirements for Mechanical Dye Injection Systems.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalties) is amended by adding after 
 section 6715 the following new section:

``SEC. 6715A. TAMPERING WITH OR FAILING TO MAINTAIN SECURITY 
 REQUIREMENTS FOR MECHANICAL DYE INJECTION SYSTEMS.

 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--
 ``(1) Tampering.--If any person tampers with a mechanical 
 dye injection system used to indelibly dye fuel for purposes of 
 section 4082, then such person shall pay a penalty in addition 
 to the tax (if any).
 ``(2) Failure to maintain security requirements.--If any 
 operator of a mechanical dye injection system used to indelibly 
 dye fuel for purposes of section 4082 fails to maintain the 
 security standards for such system as established by the 
 Secretary, then such operator shall pay a penalty.
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--The amount of the penalty under 
subsection (a) shall be--
 ``(1) for each violation described in paragraph (1), the 
 greater of--
 ``(A) $25,000, or
 ``(B) $10 for each gallon of fuel involved, and
 ``(2) for each--
 ``(A) failure to maintain security standards 
 described in paragraph (2), $1,000, and
 ``(B) failure to correct a violation described in 
 paragraph (2), $1,000 per day for each day after which 
 such violation was discovered or such person should 
 have reasonably known of such violation.
 ``(c) Joint and Several Liability.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a penalty is imposed under this 
 section on any business entity, each officer, employee, or 
 agent of such entity or other contracting party who willfully 
 participated in any act giving rise to such penalty shall be 
 jointly and severally liable with such entity for such penalty.
 ``(2) Affiliated groups.--If a business entity described in 
 paragraph (1) is part of an affiliated group (as defined in 
 section 1504(a)), the parent corporation of such entity shall 
 be jointly and severally liable with such entity for the 
 penalty imposed under this section.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by adding after the 
 item related to section 6715 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6715A. Tampering with or failing 
 to maintain security 
 requirements for mechanical dye 
 injection systems.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (c) 
shall take effect 180 days after the date on which the Secretary issues 
the regulations described in subsection (b).

SEC. 874. ELIMINATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW FOR TAXABLE USE OF DYED 
 FUEL.

 (a) In General.--Section 6715 is amended by inserting at the end 
the following new subsection:
 ``(e) No Administrative Appeal for Third and Subsequent 
Violations.--In the case of any person who is found to be subject to 
the penalty under this section after a chemical analysis of such fuel 
and who has been penalized under this section at least twice after the 
date of the enactment of this subsection, no administrative appeal or 
review shall be allowed with respect to such finding except in the case 
of a claim regarding--
 ``(1) fraud or mistake in the chemical analysis, or
 ``(2) mathematical calculation of the amount of the 
 penalty.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to penalties assessed after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 875. PENALTY ON UNTAXED CHEMICALLY ALTERED DYED FUEL MIXTURES.

 (a) In General.--Section 6715(a) (relating to dyed fuel sold for 
use or used in taxable use, etc.) is amended by striking ``or'' in 
paragraph (2), by inserting ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3), and by 
inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) any person who has knowledge that a dyed fuel which 
 has been altered as described in paragraph (3) sells or holds 
 for sale such fuel for any use which the person knows or has 
 reason to know is not a nontaxable use of such fuel,''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 6715(a)(3) is amended by 
striking ``alters, or attempts to alter,'' and inserting ``alters, 
chemically or otherwise, or attempts to so alter,''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 876. TERMINATION OF DYED DIESEL USE BY INTERCITY BUSES.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (3) of section 4082(b) (relating to 
nontaxable use) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3) any use described in section 
 4041(a)(1)(C)(iii)(II).''.
 (b) Ultimate Vendor Refund.--Subsection (b) of section 6427 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Refunds for use of diesel fuel in certain intercity 
 buses.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to any fuel to 
 which paragraph (2)(A) applies, if the ultimate 
 purchaser of such fuel waives (at such time and in such 
 form and manner as the Secretary shall prescribe) the 
 right to payment under paragraph (1) and assigns such 
 right to the ultimate vendor, then the Secretary shall 
 pay the amount which would be paid under paragraph (1) 
 to such ultimate vendor, but only if such ultimate 
 vendor--
 ``(i) is registered under section 4101, and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A), (B), or (D) of section 
 6416(a)(1).
 ``(B) Credit cards.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, if the sale of such fuel is made by means of 
 a credit card, the person extending credit to the 
 ultimate purchaser shall be deemed to be the ultimate 
 vendor.''.
 (c) Payment of Refunds.--Subparagraph (A) of section 6427(i)(4), as 
amended by this Act, is amended by inserting ``subsections (b)(4) and'' 
after ``filed under''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to fuel sold after September 30, 2004.

 PART III--MODIFICATION OF INSPECTION OF RECORDS PROVISIONS

SEC. 877. AUTHORITY TO INSPECT ON-SITE RECORDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 4083(d)(1)(A) (relating to administrative 
authority), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at 
the end of clause (i) and by inserting after clause (ii) the following 
new clause:
 ``(iii) inspecting any books and records 
 and any shipping papers pertaining to such 
 fuel, and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 878. ASSESSABLE PENALTY FOR REFUSAL OF ENTRY.

 (a) In General.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 (relating to 
assessable penalties), as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at 
the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6717. REFUSAL OF ENTRY.

 ``(a) In General.--In addition to any other penalty provided by 
law, any person who refuses to admit entry or refuses to permit any 
other action by the Secretary authorized by section 4083(d)(1) shall 
pay a penalty of $1,000 for such refusal.
 ``(b) Joint and Several Liability.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a penalty is imposed under this 
 section on any business entity, each officer, employee, or 
 agent of such entity or other contracting party who willfully 
 participated in any act giving rise to such penalty shall be 
 jointly and severally liable with such entity for such penalty.
 ``(2) Affiliated groups.--If a business entity described in 
 paragraph (1) is part of an affiliated group (as defined in 
 section 1504(a)), the parent corporation of such entity shall 
 be jointly and severally liable with such entity for the 
 penalty imposed under this section.
 ``(c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 4083(d)(3), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``entry.--The penalty'' and 
 inserting: ``entry.--
 ``(A) Forfeiture.--The penalty'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) Assessable penalty.--For additional 
 assessable penalty for the refusal to admit entry or 
 other refusal to permit an action by the Secretary 
 authorized by paragraph (1), see section 6717.''.
 (2) The table of sections for part I of subchapter B of 
 chapter 68, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6717. Refusal of entry.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

 PART IV--REGISTRATION AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 879. REGISTRATION OF PIPELINE OR VESSEL OPERATORS REQUIRED FOR 
 EXEMPTION OF BULK TRANSFERS TO REGISTERED TERMINALS OR 
 REFINERIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4081(a)(1)(B) (relating to exemption for 
bulk transfers to registered terminals or refineries) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``by pipeline or vessel'' after 
 ``transferred in bulk'', and
 (2) by inserting ``, the operator of such pipeline or 
 vessel,'' after ``the taxable fuel''.
 (b) Civil Penalty for Carrying Taxable Fuels by Nonregistered 
Pipelines or Vessels.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalties), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6718. CARRYING TAXABLE FUELS BY NONREGISTERED PIPELINES OR 
 VESSELS.

 ``(a) Imposition of Penalty.--If any person knowingly transfers any 
taxable fuel (as defined in section 4083(a)(1)) in bulk pursuant to 
section 4081(a)(1)(B) to an unregistered, such person shall pay a 
penalty in addition to the tax (if any).
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amount of the penalty under subsection (a) on each act shall be 
 an amount equal to the greater of--
 ``(A) $10,000, or
 ``(B) $1 per gallon.
 ``(2) Multiple violations.--In determining the penalty 
 under subsection (a) on any person, paragraph (1) shall be 
 applied by increasing the amount in paragraph (1) by the 
 product of such amount and the number of prior penalties (if 
 any) imposed by this section on such person (or a related 
 person or any predecessor of such person or related person).
 ``(c) Joint and Several Liability.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a penalty is imposed under this 
 section on any business entity, each officer, employee, or 
 agent of such entity or other contracting party who willfully 
 participated in any act giving rise to such penalty shall be 
 jointly and severally liable with such entity for such penalty.
 ``(2) Affiliated groups.--If a business entity described in 
 paragraph (1) is part of an affiliated group (as defined in 
 section 1504(a)), the parent corporation of such entity shall 
 be jointly and severally liable with such entity for the 
 penalty imposed under this section.
 ``(d) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68, as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6718. Carrying taxable fuels by 
 nonregistered pipelines or 
 vessels.''.
 (c) Publication of Registered Persons.--Not later than June 30, 
2004, the Secretary of the Treasury shall publish a list of persons 
required to be registered under section 4101 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall take effect on October 1, 2004.

SEC. 880. DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 4101 (relating to 
registration) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Every'' and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--Every'', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Display of registration.--Every operator of a vessel 
 required by the Secretary to register under this section shall 
 display proof of registration through an electronic 
 identification device prescribed by the Secretary on each 
 vessel used by such operator to transport any taxable fuel.''.
 (b) Civil Penalty for Failure to Display Registration.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalties), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6719. FAILURE TO DISPLAY REGISTRATION OF VESSEL.

 ``(a) Failure to Display Registration.--Every operator of a vessel 
who fails to display proof of registration pursuant to section 
4101(a)(2) shall pay a penalty of $500 for each such failure. With 
respect to any vessel, only one penalty shall be imposed by this 
section during any calendar month.
 ``(b) Multiple Violations.--In determining the penalty under 
subsection (a) on any person, subsection (a) shall be applied by 
increasing the amount in subsection (a) by the product of such amount 
and the number of prior penalties (if any) imposed by this section on 
such person (or a related person or any predecessor of such person or 
related person).
 ``(c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68, as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6719. Failure to display 
 registration of vessel.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

SEC. 881. REGISTRATION OF PERSONS WITHIN FOREIGN TRADE ZONES, ETC.

 (a) In General.--Section 4101(a), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and by 
inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Registration of persons within foreign trade zones, 
 etc.--The Secretary shall require registration by any person 
 which--
 ``(A) operates a terminal or refinery within a 
 foreign trade zone or within a customs bonded storage 
 facility, or
 ``(B) holds an inventory position with respect to a 
 taxable fuel in such a terminal.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

SEC. 882. PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO REGISTER AND FAILURE TO REPORT.

 (a) Increased Penalty.--Subsection (a) of section 7272 (relating to 
penalty for failure to register) is amended by inserting ``($10,000 in 
the case of a failure to register under section 4101)'' after ``$50''.
 (b) Increased Criminal Penalty.--Section 7232 (relating to failure 
to register under section 4101, false representations of registration 
status, etc.) is amended by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting 
``$10,000''.
 (c) Assessable Penalty for Failure to Register.--
 (1) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalties), as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6720. FAILURE TO REGISTER.

 ``(a) Failure to Register.--Every person who is required to 
register under section 4101 and fails to do so shall pay a penalty in 
addition to the tax (if any).
 ``(b) Amount of Penalty.--The amount of the penalty under 
subsection (a) shall be--
 ``(1) $10,000 for each initial failure to register, and
 ``(2) $1,000 for each day thereafter such person fails to 
 register.
 ``(c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part I 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68, as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6720. Failure to register.''.
 (d) Assessable Penalty for Failure to Report.--
 (1) In general.--Part II of subchapter B of chapter 68 
 (relating to assessable penalties) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new section:

``SEC. 6725. FAILURE TO REPORT INFORMATION UNDER SECTION 4101.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of each failure described in 
subsection (b) by any person with respect to a vessel or facility, such 
person shall pay a penalty of $10,000 in addition to the tax (if any).
 ``(b) Failures Subject to Penalty.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
the failures described in this subsection are--
 ``(1) any failure to make a report under section 4101(d) on 
 or before the date prescribed therefor, and
 ``(2) any failure to include all of the information 
 required to be shown on such report or the inclusion of 
 incorrect information.
 ``(c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for part II 
 of subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 6725. Failure to report 
 information under section 
 4101.''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to failures pending or occurring after September 30, 2004.

SEC. 883. INFORMATION REPORTING FOR PERSONS CLAIMING CERTAIN TAX 
 BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart C of part III of subchapter A of chapter 
32 is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 4104. INFORMATION REPORTING FOR PERSONS CLAIMING CERTAIN TAX 
 BENEFITS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall require any person claiming 
tax benefits--
 ``(1) under the provisions of section 34, 40, and 40B to 
 file a return at the time such person claims such benefits (in 
 such manner as the Secretary may prescribe), and
 ``(2) under the provisions of section 4041(b)(2), 6426, or 
 6427(e) to file a monthly return (in such manner as the 
 Secretary may prescribe).
 ``(b) Contents of Return.--Any return filed under this section 
shall provide such information relating to such benefits and the 
coordination of such benefits as the Secretary may require to ensure 
the proper administration and use of such benefits.
 ``(c) Enforcement.--With respect to any person described in 
subsection (a) and subject to registration requirements under this 
title, rules similar to rules of section 4222(c) shall apply with 
respect to any requirement under this section.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of 
part III of subchapter A of chapter 32 is amended by adding at the end 
the following new item:

 ``Sec. 4104. Information reporting for persons claiming certain 
 tax benefits.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

 PART V--IMPORTS

SEC. 884. TAX AT POINT OF ENTRY WHERE IMPORTER NOT REGISTERED.

 (a) Tax at Point of Entry Where Importer Not Registered.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart C of part III of subchapter A of 
 chapter 31, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new section:

``SEC. 4105. TAX AT ENTRY WHERE IMPORTER NOT REGISTERED.

 ``(a) In General.--Any tax imposed under this part on any person 
not registered under section 4101 for the entry of a fuel into the 
United States shall be imposed at the time and point of entry.
 ``(b) Enforcement of Assessment.--If any person liable for any tax 
described under subsection (a) has not paid the tax or posted a bond, 
the Secretary may--
 ``(1) seize the fuel on which the tax is due, or
 ``(2) detain any vehicle transporting such fuel,
until such tax is paid or such bond is filed.
 ``(c) Levy of Fuel.--If no tax has been paid or no bond has been 
filed within 5 days from the date the Secretary seized fuel pursuant to 
subsection (b), the Secretary may sell such fuel as provided under 
section 6336.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for 
 subpart C of part III of subchapter A of chapter 31 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by section 5245 of 
 this Act, is amended by adding after the last item the 
 following new item:

 ``Sec. 4105. Tax at entry where importer 
 not registered.''.
 (b) Denial of Entry Where Tax Not Paid.--The Secretary of Homeland 
Security is authorized to deny entry into the United States of any 
shipment of a fuel which is taxable under section 4081 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 if the person entering such shipment fails to pay 
the tax imposed under such section or post a bond in accordance with 
the provisions of section 4105 of such Code.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 885. RECONCILIATION OF ON-LOADED CARGO TO ENTERED CARGO.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 343 of the Trade Act of 
2002 is amended by inserting at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) In General.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), not 
 later than 1 year after the enactment of this paragraph, the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security, together with the Secretary of 
 the Treasury, shall promulgate regulations providing for the 
 transmission to the Internal Revenue Service, through an 
 electronic data interchange system, of information pertaining 
 to cargo of taxable fuels (as defined in section 4083 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986) destined for importation into 
 the United States prior to such importation.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

 PART VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 886. TAX ON SALE OF DIESEL FUEL WHETHER SUITABLE FOR USE OR NOT IN 
 A DIESEL-POWERED VEHICLE OR TRAIN.

 (a) In General.--Section 4083(a)(3) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The term'' and inserting the following:
 ``(A) In general.--The term'', and
 (2) by inserting at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Liquid sold as diesel fuel.--The term `diesel 
 fuel' includes any liquid which is sold as or offered 
 for sale as a fuel in a diesel-powered highway vehicle 
 or a diesel-powered train.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 40B(b)(1)(B), as added by this Act, is amended 
 by striking ``4083(a)(3)'' and inserting ``4083(a)(3)(A)''.
 (2) Section 6426(c)(3), as added by this Act, is amended by 
 striking ``4083(a)(3)'' and inserting ``4083(a)(3)(A)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 887. MODIFICATION OF ULTIMATE VENDOR REFUND CLAIMS WITH RESPECT TO 
 FARMING.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Refunds.--Section 6427(l) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Registered vendors permitted to administer certain 
 claims for refund of diesel fuel and kerosene sold to 
 farmers.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of diesel fuel or 
 kerosene used on a farm for farming purposes (within 
 the meaning of section 6420(c)), paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply to the aggregate amount of such diesel fuel 
 or kerosene if such amount does not exceed 500 gallons 
 (as determined under subsection (i)(5)(A)(iii)).
 ``(B) Payment to ultimate vendor.--The amount which 
 would (but for subparagraph (A)) have been paid under 
 paragraph (1) with respect to any fuel shall be paid to 
 the ultimate vendor of such fuel, if such vendor--
 ``(i) is registered under section 4101, and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A), (B), or (D) of section 
 6416(a)(1).''.
 (2) Filing of claims.--Section 6427(i) is amended by 
 inserting at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Special rule for vendor refunds with respect to 
 farmers.--
 ``(A) In general.--A claim may be filed under 
 subsection (l)(6) by any person with respect to fuel 
 sold by such person for any period--
 ``(i) for which $200 or more ($100 or more 
 in the case of kerosene) is payable under 
 subsection (l)(6),
 ``(ii) which is not less than 1 week, and
 ``(iii) which is for not more than 500 
 gallons for each farmer for which there is a 
 claim.
 Notwithstanding subsection (l)(1), paragraph (3)(B) 
 shall apply to claims filed under the preceding 
 sentence.
 ``(B) Time for filing claim.--No claim filed under 
 this paragraph shall be allowed unless filed on or 
 before the last day of the first quarter following the 
 earliest quarter included in the claim.''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 6427(l)(5)(A) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 diesel fuel or kerosene used by a State or local 
 government.''.
 (B) The heading for section 6427(l)(5) is amended 
 by striking ``farmers and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to fuels sold for nontaxable use after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 888. TAXABLE FUEL REFUNDS FOR CERTAIN ULTIMATE VENDORS.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (4) of section 6416(a) (relating to 
abatements, credits, and refunds) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Registered ultimate vendor to administer credits and 
 refunds of gasoline tax.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 if an ultimate vendor purchases any gasoline on which 
 tax imposed by section 4081 has been paid and sells 
 such gasoline to an ultimate purchaser described in 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (b)(2) (and such 
 gasoline is for a use described in such subparagraph), 
 such ultimate vendor shall be treated as the person 
 (and the only person) who paid such tax, but only if 
 such ultimate vendor is registered under section 4101. 
 For purposes of this subparagraph, if the sale of 
 gasoline is made by means of a credit card, the person 
 extending the credit to the ultimate purchaser shall be 
 deemed to be the ultimate vendor.
 ``(B) Timing of claims.--The procedure and timing 
 of any claim under subparagraph (A) shall be the same 
 as for claims under section 6427(i)(4), except that the 
 rules of section 6427(i)(3)(B) regarding electronic 
 claims shall not apply unless the ultimate vendor has 
 certified to the Secretary for the most recent quarter 
 of the taxable year that all ultimate purchasers of the 
 vendor are certified and entitled to a refund under 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (b)(2).''.
 (b) Credit Card Purchases of Diesel Fuel or Kerosene by State and 
Local Governments.--Section 6427(l)(5)(C) (relating to nontaxable uses 
of diesel fuel, kerosene, and aviation fuel), as amended by this Act, 
is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For 
purposes of this subparagraph, if the sale of diesel fuel or kerosene 
is made by means of a credit card, the person extending the credit to 
the ultimate purchaser shall be deemed to be the ultimate vendor.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

SEC. 889. TWO-PARTY EXCHANGES.

 (a) In General.--Subpart C of part III of subchapter A of chapter 
32, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 4106. TWO-PARTY EXCHANGES.

 ``(a) In General.--In a two-party exchange, the delivering person 
shall not be liable for the tax imposed under of section 
4081(a)(1)(A)(ii).
 ``(b) Two-Party Exchange.--The term `two-party exchange' means a 
transaction, other than a sale, in which taxable fuel is transferred 
from a delivering person registered under section 4101 as a taxable 
fuel registrant to a receiving person who is so registered where all of 
the following occur:
 ``(1) The transaction includes a transfer from the 
 delivering person, who holds the inventory position for taxable 
 fuel in the terminal as reflected in the records of the 
 terminal operator.
 ``(2) The exchange transaction occurs before or 
 contemporaneous with completion of removal across the rack from 
 the terminal by the receiving person.
 ``(3) The terminal operator in its books and records treats 
 the receiving person as the person that removes the product 
 across the terminal rack for purposes of reporting the 
 transaction to the Secretary.
 ``(4) The transaction is the subject of a written 
 contract.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of 
part III of subchapter A of chapter 32, as amended by of this Act, is 
amended by adding after the last item the following new item:

 ``Sec. 4106. Two-party exchanges.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 890. MODIFICATIONS OF TAX ON USE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.

 (a) No Proration of Tax Unless Vehicle Is Destroyed or Stolen.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4481(c) (relating to proration of 
 tax) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Proration of Tax Where Vehicle Sold, Destroyed, or Stolen.--
 ``(1) In general.--If in any taxable period a highway motor 
 vehicle is sold, destroyed, or stolen before the first day of 
 the last month in such period and not subsequently used during 
 such taxable period, the tax shall be reckoned proportionately 
 from the first day of the month in such period in which the 
 first use of such highway motor vehicle occurs to and including 
 the last day of the month in which such highway motor vehicle 
 was sold, destroyed, or stolen.
 ``(2) Destroyed.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a highway 
 motor vehicle is destroyed if such vehicle is damaged by reason 
 of an accident or other casualty to such an extent that it is 
 not economic to rebuild.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 6156 (relating to installment payment 
 of tax on use of highway motor vehicles) is repealed.
 (B) The table of sections for subchapter A of 
 chapter 62 is amended by striking the item relating to 
 section 6156.
 (b) Display of Tax Certificate.--Paragraph (2) of section 4481(d) 
(relating to one tax liability for period) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(2) Display of tax certificate.--Under regulations by the 
 Secretary, every taxpayer which pays the tax imposed under this 
 section with respect to a highway motor vehicle shall, not 
 later than 1 month after the due date of the return of tax with 
 respect to each taxable period, receive and display on such 
 vehicle an electronic identification device prescribed by the 
 Secretary.''.
 (c) Electronic filing.--Section 4481, is amended by redesignating 
subsection (e) as subsection (f) and by inserting after subsection (d) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Electronic filing.--Any taxpayer who files a return under 
this section with respect to 25 or more vehicles for any taxable period 
shall file such return electronically.''.
 (d) Repeal of reduction in tax for certain trucks.--Section 4483 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking subsection 
(f).
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable periods 
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Regulations regarding display of tax certificate.--The 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall issue regulations required 
 under section 4481(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 (as added by subsection (b)) not later than October 1, 2005.

SEC. 891. DEDICATION OF REVENUES FROM CERTAIN PENALTIES TO THE HIGHWAY 
 TRUST FUND.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (b) of section 9503 (relating to 
transfer to Highway Trust Fund of amounts equivalent to certain taxes), 
is amended by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6) and 
inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Certain penalties.--There are hereby appropriated to 
 the Highway Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the penalties 
 assessed under sections 6715, 6715A, 6717, 6718, 6719, 6720, 
 6725, 7232, and 7272 (but only with regard to penalties under 
 such section related to failure to register under section 
 4101).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The heading of subsection (b) of section 9503 is 
 amended by inserting ``and Penalties'' after ``Taxes''.
 (2) The heading of paragraph (1) of section 9503(b) is 
 amended by striking ``In general'' and inserting ``Certain 
 taxes''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to penalties assessed after October 1, 2004.

SEC. 892. NONAPPLICATION OF EXPORT EXEMPTION TO DELIVERY OF FUEL TO 
 MOTOR VEHICLES REMOVED FROM UNITED STATES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4221(d)(2) (defining export) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term does not 
include the delivery of a taxable fuel (as defined in section 
4083(a)(1)) into a fuel tank of a motor vehicle which is shipped or 
driven out of the United States.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 4041(g) (relating to other exemptions) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
 ``Paragraph (3) shall not apply to the sale for delivery of a 
 liquid into a fuel tank of a motor vehicle which is shipped or 
 driven out of the United States.''.
 (2) Clause (iv) of section 4081(a)(1)(A) (relating to tax 
 on removal, entry, or sale) is amended by inserting ``or at a 
 duty-free sales enterprise (as defined in section 555(b)(8) of 
 the Tariff Act of 1930)'' after ``section 4101''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to sales or deliveries made after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 PART VII--TOTAL ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 893. TOTAL ACCOUNTABILITY.

 (a) Taxation of Reportable Liquids.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4081(a), as amended by this Act, 
 is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``or reportable liquid'' after 
 ``taxable fuel'' each place it appears, and
 (B) by inserting ``such liquid'' after ``such 
 fuel'' in paragraph (1)(A)(iv).
 (2) Rate of tax.--Subparagraph (A) of section 4081(a)(2), 
 as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
 end of clause (iii), by striking the period at the end of 
 clause (iv) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end 
 the following new clause:
 ``(v) in the case of reportable liquids, 
 the rate determined under section 
 4083(c)(2).''.
 (3) Exemption.--Section 4081(a)(1) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Exemption for registered transfers of 
 reportable liquids.--The tax imposed by this paragraph 
 shall not apply to any removal, entry, or sale of a 
 reportable liquid if--
 ``(i) such removal, entry, or sale is to a 
 registered person who certifies that such 
 liquid will not be used as a fuel or in the 
 production of a fuel, or
 ``(ii) the sale is to the ultimate 
 purchaser of such liquid.''.
 (4) Reportable liquids.--Section 4083, as amended by this 
 Act, is amended by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) (as 
 redesignated by this Act) as subsections (d) and (e), 
 respectively, and by inserting after subsection (b) the 
 following new section:
 ``(c) Reportable liquid.--For purposes of this subpart--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `reportable liquid' means any 
 petroleum-based liquid other than a taxable fuel.
 ``(2) Taxation.--
 ``(A) Gasoline blend stocks and additives.--
 Gasoline blend stocks and additives which are 
 reportable liquids (as defined in paragraph (1)) shall 
 be subject to the rate of tax under clause (i) of 
 section 4081(a)(2)(A).
 ``(B) Other reportable liquids.--Any reportable 
 liquid (as defined in paragraph (1)) not described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the rate of tax 
 under clause (iii) of section 4081(a)(2)(A).''.
 (5) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 4081(e) is amended by inserting ``or 
 reportable liquid'' after ``taxable fuel''.
 (B) Section 4083(d) (relating to certain use 
 defined as removal), as redesignated by paragraph (4), 
 is amended by inserting ``or reportable liquid'' after 
 ``taxable fuel''.
 (C) Section 4083(e)(1) (relating to administrative 
 authority), as redesignated by paragraph (4), is 
 amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting ``or reportable 
 liquid'' after ``taxable fuel'', and
 (II) by inserting ``or such 
 liquid'' after ``such fuel'' each place 
 it appears, and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``or 
 any reportable liquid'' after ``any taxable 
 fuel''.
 (D) Section 4101(a)(2), as added by this Act, is 
 amended by inserting ``or a reportable liquid'' after 
 ``taxable fuel''.
 (E) Section 4101(a)(3), as added and redesignated 
 by this Act, is amended by inserting ``or any 
 reportable liquid'' before the period at the end.
 (F) Section 4102 is amended by inserting ``or any 
 reportable liquid'' before the period at the end.
 (G)(i) Section 6718, as added by this Act, is 
 amended--
 (I) in subsection (a), by inserting ``or 
 any reportable liquid (as defined in section 
 4083(c)(1))'' after ``section 4083(a)(1))'', 
 and
 (II) in the heading, by inserting ``or 
 reportable liquids'' after ``taxable fuel''.
 (ii) The item relating to section 6718 in table of 
 sections for part I of subchapter B of chapter 68, as 
 added by this Act, is amended by inserting ``or 
 reportable liquids'' after ``taxable fuels''.
 (H) Section 6427(h) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(h) Gasoline Blend Stocks or Additives and Reportable Liquids.--
Except as provided in subsection (k)--
 ``(1) if any gasoline blend stock or additive (within the 
 meaning of section 4083(a)(2)) is not used by any person to 
 produce gasoline and such person establishes that the ultimate 
 use of such gasoline blend stock or additive is not to produce 
 gasoline, or
 ``(2) if any reportable liquid (within the meaning of 
 section 4083(c)(1)) is not used by any person to produce a 
 taxable fuel and such person establishes that the ultimate use 
 of such reportable liquid is not to produce a taxable fuel,
then the Secretary shall pay (without interest) to such person an 
amount equal to the aggregate amount of the tax imposed on such person 
with respect to such gasoline blend stock or additive or such 
reportable liquid.''.
 (I) Section 7232, as amended by this Act, is 
 amended by inserting ``or reportable liquid (within the 
 meaning of section 4083(c)(1))'' after ``section 
 4083)''.
 (J) Section 343 of the Trade Act of 2002, as 
 amended by this Act, is amended by inserting ``and 
 reportable liquids (as defined in section 4083(c)(1) of 
 such Code)'' after ``Internal Revenue Code of 1986)''.
 (b) Dyed Diesel.--Section 4082(a) is amended by striking ``and'' at 
the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of 
paragraph (3) and inserting ``and'', and by inserting after paragraph 
(3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) which is removed, entered, or sold by a person 
 registered under section 4101.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to reportable liquids (as defined in section 4083(c) of the 
Internal Revenue Code) and fuel sold or used after September 30, 2004.

SEC. 894. EXCISE TAX REPORTING.

 (a) In General.--Part II of subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subpart:

 ``subpart e--excise tax reporting

``SEC. 6025. RETURNS RELATING TO FUEL TAXES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall require any person liable 
for the tax imposed under Part III of subchapter A of chapter 32 to 
file a return of such tax on a monthly basis. Not earlier than January 
1, 2005, such filings shall be in electronic form as prescribed by the 
Secretary.
 ``(b) Information Included with Return.--The Secretary shall 
require any person filing a return under subsection (a) to provide 
information regarding any refined product (whether or not such product 
is taxable under this title) removed from a terminal during the period 
for which such return applies.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of 
chapter 61 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Subpart E--Excise Tax Reporting''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to fuel sold or used after September 30, 2004.

SEC. 895. INFORMATION REPORTING.

 (a) In General.--Section 4101(d) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new flush sentence:
``The Secretary shall require reporting under the previous sentence 
with respect to taxable fuels removed, entered, or transferred from any 
refinery, pipeline, or vessel which is registered under this section. 
Any person who is required to report under this subsection and who has 
25 or more reportable transactions in a month shall file such report in 
electronic format.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
on October 1, 2004.

 Subtitle I--Mobile Machinery

SEC. 896. TREATMENT OF MOBILE MACHINERY.

 (a) Treatment of Mobile Machinery as Highway Vehicle.--
 (1) In general.--Section 7701(a) (relating to definitions) 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(48) Treatment of mobile machinery as highway vehicle.--
 ``(A) In general.--A vehicle described in 
 subparagraph (B) shall be treated as a highway vehicle.
 ``(B) Mobile machinery.--A vehicle is described in 
 this subparagraph if such vehicle consists of a 
 chassis--
 ``(i) to which there has been permanently 
 mounted (by welding, bolting, riveting, or 
 other means) machinery or equipment to perform 
 a construction, manufacturing, processing, 
 farming, mining, drilling, timbering, or 
 similar operation if the operation of the 
 machinery or equipment is unrelated to 
 transportation on or off the public highways,
 ``(ii) which has been specially designed to 
 serve only as a mobile carriage and mount (and 
 a power source, where applicable) for the 
 particular machinery or equipment involved, 
 whether or not such machinery or equipment is 
 in operation, and
 ``(iii) which, by reason of such special 
 design, could not, without substantial 
 structural modification, be used as a component 
 of a vehicle designed to perform a function of 
 transporting any load other than that 
 particular machinery or equipment or similar 
 machinery or equipment requiring such a 
 specially designed chassis.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the day after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (b) Eligibility for Refund in Case of Limited Use of Vehicle on 
Highways.--
 (1) Retail sales and tire taxes.--
 (A) In general.--Section 6416(b) (relating to 
 special cases in which tax payments considered 
 overpayments) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Mobile machinery.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the tax imposed by section 
 4051 or 4071 has been paid with respect to any vehicle 
 described in section 7701(a)(48)(B) which meets the 
 use-based test for each of the first 2 12-month periods 
 after such payment, 50 percent of such tax shall be 
 considered an overpayment for each such period.
 ``(B) Use-based test.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the use-based test is met if the use of the 
 vehicle on public highways was less than 5,000 miles 
 during any 12-month period.
 ``(C) Special rule for use by certain tax-exempt 
 organizations.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the 
 use-based test shall be determined without regard to 
 any use in a vehicle by an organization which is 
 described in section 501(c) and exempt from tax under 
 section 501(a).''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by this 
 paragraph shall take effect on the day after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Fuel Taxes.--
 (A) In general.--Section 6421(e)(2) (defining off-
 highway business use) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Uses in mobile machinery.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `off-highway 
 business use' shall include any use in a 
 vehicle described in section 7701(a)(48)(B) 
 which meets the use-based test.
 ``(ii) Use-based test.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the use-based test is met if the 
 use of the vehicle on public highways was less 
 than 5,000 miles during the taxpayer's taxable 
 year.
 ``(iii) Special rule for use by certain 
 tax-exempt organizations.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the use-based test shall be 
 determined without regard to any use in a 
 vehicle by an organization which is described 
 in section 501(c) and exempt from tax under 
 section 501(a).''.
 (B) Annual refund of tax paid.--Section 6427(i)(2) 
 (relating to exceptions) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Nonapplication of paragraph.--This paragraph 
 shall not apply to any fuel used in any off-highway 
 business use described in section 6421(e)(2)(C).''.
 (C) Effective date.--The amendments made by this 
 paragraph shall apply to taxable years beginning after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) Conforming amendment for tax-exempt users with respect 
 to use tax.--
 (A) In general.--Section 4483(d)(1) (relating to 
 suspension of tax) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Special rule for use by certain tax-exempt 
 organizations.--Subparagraph (A) shall be determined 
 without regard to any use in a vehicle by an 
 organization which is described in section 501(c) and 
 exempt from tax under section 501(a).''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by this 
 paragraph shall take effect on the day after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle J--Additional Provisions

SEC. 897. STUDY OF EFFECTIVENESS OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS BY GAO.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
undertake an ongoing analysis of--
 (1) the effectiveness of the alternative motor vehicles and 
 fuel incentives provisions under subtitle B and the 
 conservation and energy efficiency provisions under subtitle C, 
 and
 (2) the recipients of the tax benefits contained in such 
 provisions, including an identification of such recipients by 
 income and other appropriate measurements.
Such analysis shall quantify the effectiveness of such provisions by 
examining and comparing the Federal Government's forgone revenue to the 
aggregate amount of energy actually conserved and tangible 
environmental benefits gained as a result of such provisions.
 (b) Reports.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
report the analysis required under subsection (a) to Congress not later 
than December 31, 2004, and annually thereafter.

SEC. 898. REPEAL OF 4.3-CENT MOTOR FUEL EXCISE TAXES ON RAILROADS AND 
 INLAND WATERWAY TRANSPORTATION WHICH REMAIN IN GENERAL 
 FUND.

 (a) Taxes on Trains.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 4041(a)(1) is 
 amended by striking ``or a diesel-powered train'' each place it 
 appears and by striking ``or train''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Subparagraph (C) of section 4041(a)(1) is 
 amended by striking clause (ii) and by redesignating 
 clause (iii) as clause (ii).
 (B) Subparagraph (C) of section 4041(b)(1) is 
 amended by striking all that follows ``section 
 6421(e)(2)'' and inserting a period.
 (C) Subsection (d) of section 4041 is amended by 
 redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by 
 inserting after paragraph (2) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Diesel fuel used in trains.--There is hereby imposed 
 a tax of 0.1 cent per gallon on any liquid other than gasoline 
 (as defined in section 4083)--
 ``(A) sold by any person to an owner, lessee, or 
 other operator of a diesel-powered train for use as a 
 fuel in such train, or
 ``(B) used by any person as a fuel in a diesel-
 powered train unless there was a taxable sale of such 
 fuel under subparagraph (A).
 No tax shall be imposed by this paragraph on the sale or use of 
 any liquid if tax was imposed on such liquid under section 
 4081.''
 (D) Subsection (f) of section 4082 is amended by 
 striking ``section 4041(a)(1)'' and inserting 
 ``subsections (d)(3) and (a)(1) of section 4041, 
 respectively''.
 (E) Paragraph (3) of section 4083(a) is amended by 
 striking ``or a diesel-powered train''.
 (F) Paragraph (3) of section 6421(f) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(3) Gasoline used in trains.--In the case of gasoline 
 used as a fuel in a train, this section shall not apply with 
 respect to the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund 
 financing rate under section 4081.''
 (G) Paragraph (3) of section 6427(l) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(3) Refund of certain taxes on fuel used in diesel-
 powered trains.--For purposes of this subsection, the term 
 `nontaxable use' includes fuel used in a diesel-powered train. 
 The preceding sentence shall not apply to the tax imposed by 
 section 4041(d) and the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust 
 Fund financing rate under section 4081 except with respect to 
 fuel sold for exclusive use by a State or any political 
 subdivision thereof.''
 (b) Fuel Used on Inland Waterways.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 4042(b) is 
 amended by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``, and'' at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting 
 a period, and by striking subparagraph (C).
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (2) of section 4042(b) 
 is amended by striking subparagraph (C).
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on October 1, 2004.

SEC. 899. DISTRIBUTIONS FROM PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIPS TREATED AS 
 QUALIFYING INCOME OF REGULATED INVESTMENT COMPANIES.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 851(b) (defining 
regulated investment company) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) at least 90 percent of its gross income is derived 
 from--
 ``(A) dividends, interest, payments with respect to 
 securities loans (as defined in section 512(a)(5)), and 
 gains from the sale or other disposition of stock or 
 securities (as defined in section 2(a)(36) of the 
 Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended) or foreign 
 currencies, or other income (including but not limited 
 to gains from options, futures or forward contracts) 
 derived with respect to its business of investing in 
 such stock, securities, or currencies, and
 ``(B) distributions or other income derived from an 
 interest in a qualified publicly traded partnership (as 
 defined in subsection (h)); and''
 (b) Source Flow-Through Rule Not To Apply.--The last sentence of 
section 851(b) is amended by inserting ``(other than a qualified 
publicly traded partnership as defined in subsection (h))'' after 
``derived from a partnership''.
 (c) Limitation on Ownership.--Subsection (c) of section 851 is 
amended by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6) and inserting 
after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) The term `outstanding voting securities of such 
 issuer' shall include the equity securities of a qualified 
 publicly traded partnership (as defined in subsection (h)).''.
 (d) Definition of Qualified Publicly Traded Partnership.--Section 
851 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Qualified Publicly Traded Partnership.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `qualified publicly traded partnership' means a 
publicly traded partnership described in section 7704(b) other than a 
partnership which would satisfy the gross income requirements of 
section 7704(c)(2) if qualifying income included only income described 
in subsection (b)(2)(A).''.
 (e) Definition of Qualifying Income.--Section 7704(d)(4) is amended 
by striking ``section 851(b)(2)'' and inserting ``section 
851(b)(2)(A)''.
 (f) Limitation on Composition of Assets.--Subparagraph (B) of 
section 851(b)(3) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(B) not more than 25 percent of the value of its 
 total assets is invested in--
 ``(i) the securities (other than Government 
 securities or the securities of other regulated 
 investment companies) of any one issuer,
 ``(ii) the securities (other than the 
 securities of other regulated investment 
 companies) of two or more issuers which the 
 taxpayer controls and which are determined, 
 under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, 
 to be engaged in the same or similar trades or 
 businesses or related trades or businesses, or
 ``(iii) the securities of one or more 
 qualified publicly traded partnerships (as 
 defined in subsection (h)).''.
 (g) Application of Special Passive Activity Rule to Regulated 
Investment Companies.--Subsection (k) of section 469 (relating to 
separate application of section in case of publicly traded 
partnerships) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(4) Application to regulated investment companies.--For 
 purposes of this section, a regulated investment company (as 
 defined in section 851) holding an interest in a qualified 
 publicly traded partnership (as defined in section 851(h)) 
 shall be treated as a taxpayer described in subsection (a)(2) 
 with respect to items attributable to such interest.''.
 (h) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 899A. CERTAIN BUSINESS RELATED CREDITS ALLOWED AGAINST REGULAR AND 
 MINIMUM TAX.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (c) of section 38 (relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating 
paragraph (4) as paragraph (5) and by inserting after paragraph (3) the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Special rules for specified credits.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of specified 
 credits--
 ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be 
 applied separately with respect to such 
 credits, and
 ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to such 
 credits--
 ``(I) the tentative minimum tax 
 shall be treated as being zero, and
 ``(II) the limitation under 
 paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause 
 (I)) shall be reduced by the credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) for the 
 taxable year (other than the specified 
 credits).
 ``(B) Specified credits.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `specified credits' includes--
 ``(i) for taxable years beginning after 
 December 31, 2004, the credit determined under 
 section 40, and
 ``(ii) the credit determined under section 
 45 to the extent that such credit is 
 attributable to electricity produced--
 ``(I) at a facility which is 
 originally placed in service after the 
 date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph, and
 ``(II) during the 4-year period 
 beginning on the date that such 
 facility was originally placed in 
 service.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Paragraph (2)(A)(ii)(II) and 
(3)(A)(ii)(II) of section 38(c) are each amended by inserting ``or the 
specified credits'' after ``employee credit''.
 (c) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided, the amendments 
made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 899B. CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT.

 (a) Allowance of Qualifying Pollution Control Equipment Credit.--
Section 46 (relating to amount of credit), as amended by this Act, is 
amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking 
the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) the qualifying pollution control equipment credit.''.
 (b) Amount of Qualifying Pollution Control Equipment Credit.--
Subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to rules 
for computing investment credit), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
inserting after section 48A the following new section:

``SEC. 48B. QUALIFYING POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 46, the qualifying 
pollution control equipment credit for any taxable year is an amount 
equal to 15 percent of the basis of the qualifying pollution control 
equipment placed in service at a qualifying facility during such 
taxable year.
 ``(b) Qualifying Pollution Control Equipment.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `qualifying pollution control equipment' means any 
technology installed in or on a qualifying facility to reduce air 
emissions of any pollutant regulated by the Environmental Protection 
Agency under the Clean Air Act, including thermal oxidizers, 
regenerative thermal oxidizers, scrubber systems, evaporative control 
systems, vapor recovery systems, flair systems, bag houses, cyclones, 
continuous emissions monitoring systems, and low nitric oxide burners.
 ``(c) Qualifying Facility.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`qualifying facility' means any facility which produces not less than 
1,000,000 gallons of ethanol during the taxable year.
 ``(d) Special Rule for Certain Subsidized Property.--Rules similar 
to section 48(a)(4) shall apply for purposes of this section.
 ``(e) Certain Qualified Progress Expenditures Rules Made 
Applicable.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (c)(4) and (d) 
of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the enactment of the 
Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this 
subsection.''.
 (c) Recapture of Credit Where Emissions Reduction Offset is Sold.--
Paragraph (1) of section 50(a) is amended by redesignating subparagraph 
(B) as subparagraph (C) and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Special rule for qualifying pollution control 
 equipment.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), any 
 investment property which is qualifying pollution 
 control equipment (as defined in section 48B(b)) shall 
 cease to be investment credit property with respect to 
 a taxpayer if such taxpayer receives a payment in 
 exchange for a credit for emission reductions 
 attributable to such qualifying pollution control 
 equipment for purposes of an offset requirement under 
 part D of title I of the Clean Air Act.''.
 (d) Special Rule for Basis Reduction; Recapture of Credit.--
Paragraph (3) of section 50(c) (relating to basis adjustment to 
investment credit property), as amended by this Act, is amended by 
inserting ``or qualifying pollution control equipment credit'' after 
``energy credit''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2003, in taxable 
years ending after such date, under rules similar to the rules of 
section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the 
day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act 
of 1990).

SEC. 899C. ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION PROPERTY TREATED AS 15-YEAR PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (E) of section 168(e)(3) (relating to 
classification of certain property), as amended by this Act, is amended 
by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (iii), by striking the period 
at the end of clause (iv) and by inserting ``, and'', and by adding at 
the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) any section 1245 property (as defined 
 in section 1245(a)(3)) used in the transmission 
 at 69 or more kilovolts of electricity for sale 
 the original use of which commences with the 
 taxpayer after the date of the enactment of 
 this clause.''.
 (b) Alternative System.--The table contained in section 
168(g)(3)(B) is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
subparagraph (E)(iv) the following:

``(E)(v)....................................................... 30''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of 
this Act, and prior to July 1, 2006.

 TITLE IX--HOMESTEAD PRESERVATION ACT

SEC. 901. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Homestead Preservation Act''.

SEC. 902. MORTGAGE PAYMENT ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Establishment of Program.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall 
establish a program under which the Secretary shall award low-interest 
loans to eligible individuals to enable such individuals to continue to 
make mortgage payments with respect to the primary residences of such 
individuals.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a loan under the 
program established under subsection (a), an individual shall be--
 (1) an individual that is a worker adversely affected by 
 international economic activity, as determined by the 
 Secretary;
 (2) a borrower under a loan which requires the individual 
 to make monthly mortgage payments with respect to the primary 
 place of residence of the individual; and
 (3) enrolled in a training or assistance program.
 (c) Loan Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--A loan provided to an eligible individual 
 under this section shall--
 (A) be for a period of not to exceed 12 months;
 (B) be for an amount that does not exceed the sum 
 of--
 (i) the amount of the monthly mortgage 
 payment owed by the individual; and
 (ii) the number of months for which the 
 loan is provided;
 (C) have an applicable rate of interest that equals 
 4 percent;
 (D) require repayment as provided for in subsection 
 (d); and
 (E) be subject to such other terms and conditions 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (2) Account.--A loan awarded to an individual under this 
 section shall be deposited into an account from which a monthly 
 mortgage payment will be made in accordance with the terms and 
 conditions of such loan.
 (d) Repayment.--
 (1) In general.--An individual to which a loan has been 
 awarded under this section shall be required to begin making 
 repayments on the loan on the earlier of--
 (A) the date on which the individual has been 
 employed on a full-time basis for 6 consecutive months; 
 or
 (B) the date that is 1 year after the date on which 
 the loan has been approved under this section.
 (2) Repayment period and amount.--
 (A) Repayment period.--A loan awarded under this 
 section shall be repaid on a monthly basis over the 5-
 year period beginning on the date determined under 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Amount.--The amount of the monthly payment 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be determined by 
 dividing the total amount provided under the loan (plus 
 interest) by 60.
 (C) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall be construed to prohibit an individual 
 from--
 (i) paying off a loan awarded under this 
 section in less than 5 years; or
 (ii) from paying a monthly amount under 
 such loan in excess of the monthly amount 
 determined under subparagraph (B) with respect 
 to the loan.
 (e) Regulations.--Not later than 6 weeks after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
necessary to carry out this section, including regulations that permit 
an individual to certify that the individual is an eligible individual 
under subsection (b).
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2005 through 2009.

 TITLE X--OFFICE OF FEDERAL PROCUREMENT POLICY ACT IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 1001. REPORT ON ACQUISITIONS OF GOODS FROM FOREIGN SOURCES.

 (a) Report.--The Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 
U.S.C. 403 et seq.), as amended by this Act, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 43. REPORT ON ACQUISITIONS OF GOODS FROM FOREIGN SOURCES.

 ``(a) Not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, the 
head of each executive agency shall submit to Congress a report on the 
acquisitions that were made of articles, materials, or supplies by such 
executive agency in that fiscal year from entities that manufacture the 
articles, materials, or supplies outside the United States.
 ``(b) The report for a fiscal year under subsection (a) shall 
separately indicate the following information:
 ``(1) The dollar value of any articles, materials, or 
 supplies that were manufactured outside the United States.
 ``(2) An itemized list of all waivers granted with respect 
 to such articles, materials, or supplies under the Buy American 
 Act (41 U.S.C. 10a et seq.).
 ``(3) A summary of--
 ``(A) the total procurement funds expended on 
 articles, materials, and supplies manufactured inside 
 the United States; and
 ``(B) the total procurement funds expended on 
 articles, materials, and supplies manufactured outside 
 the United States.
 ``(c) The head of each executive agency submitting a report under 
subsection (a) shall make the report publicly available by posting on 
an Internet website.
 ``(d) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any procurement for 
national security purposes entered into by--
 ``(1) the Department of Defense or any agency or entity 
 thereof;
 ``(2) the Department of the Army, the Department of the 
 Navy, the Department of the Air Force, or any agency or entity 
 of any of the military departments;
 ``(3) the Department of Homeland Security;
 ``(4) the Department of Energy or any agency or entity 
 thereof, with respect to the national security programs of that 
 Department; or
 ``(5) any element of the intelligence community.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act is amended by adding at 
the end the following new item:

 ``Sec. 43. Report on acquisitions of goods from foreign 
 sources.''.
 (c) Commerce Department Report.--Not later than 60 days after the 
end of each fiscal year ending after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to Congress and make 
publicly available by posting on an Internet website a report on the 
acquisitions by foreign governments of articles, materials, or supplies 
that were manufactured or extracted in the United States in that fiscal 
year. Such report shall indicate the dollar value of such articles, 
materials, or supplies.

 Passed the Senate May 11, 2004.

 Attest:

 Secretary.
108th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 S. 1637

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to comply with the World 
 Trade Organization rulings on the FSC/ETI benefit in a manner that 
 preserves jobs and production activities in the United States, to 
 reform and simplify the international taxation rules of the United 
 States, and for other purposes.