HR 5612 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5612
To safeguard individual privacy of genetic information from the misuse of
records maintained by agencies or their contractors or grantees for the
purpose of research, diagnosis, treatment, or identification of genetic
disorders, and to provide to individuals access to records concerning their
genome which are maintained by agencies for any purpose.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 13, 1990
Mr. CONYERS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Government Operations and the Judiciary
A BILL
To safeguard individual privacy of genetic information from the misuse of
records maintained by agencies or their contractors or grantees for the
purpose of research, diagnosis, treatment, or identification of genetic
disorders, and to provide to individuals access to records concerning their
genome which are maintained by agencies for any purpose.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Human Genome Privacy Act'.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSES
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) the right to privacy is a personal and basic right protected by the
 Constitution of the United States;
 (2) the collection, maintenance, use, and dissemination of genetic
 information can threaten an individual's right to privacy;
 (3) the increasing use of biotechnology and sophisticated genetic
 screening techniques in the advancement of the Human Genome Project and the
 expanded understanding of the genetic links to a variety of physical and
 psychological diseases and disorders have greatly magnified the potential
 harm to individual privacy that can occur from any collection, maintenance,
 use, or dissemination of personal genetic information;
 (4) the opportunities for an individual to secure education, employment,
 health care, insurance, and credit, and his or her right to due process
 and other legal protections are endangered by the misuse of genetic
 information systems;
 (5) in order to protect the genetic privacy of individuals in informational
 systems maintained by agencies, it is necessary and proper for the
 Congress to regulate the collection, maintenance, use, and dissemination
 of information by such agencies;
 (6) the Congress has appropriated $28,230,000 to the National Institute
 of Health in 1989, $59,530,000 in 1990, and a proposed $108,029,000 in
 1991 for the Human Genome Project (`Project'); and
 (7) the Congress has appropriated $17,500,000 to the Department of Energy
 in 1989, $26,000,000 in 1990, and a proposed $45,000,000 in 1991 for
 the Project.
 (b) The purpose of this Act is to provide an individual with certain
 safeguards against the invasion of personal genetic privacy by requiring
 agencies, except as otherwise provided by law, to--
 (1) permit an individual to determine what records pertaining to him or
 her are collected, maintained, used, or disseminated by such agencies;
 (2) permit an individual to prevent records pertaining to him or her obtained
 by such agencies for a particular purpose from being used or made available
 for another purpose without his or her consent;
 (3) permit an individual to gain access to records, to have a copy made
 of any or all portion thereof, and to correct or amend such records;
 (4) collect, maintain, use, or disseminate any record of identifiable
 personal genetic information in a manner that assures that the information
 is current and accurate for its intended use, and that adequate safeguards
 are provided to prevent any misuse of such information;
 (5) permit exemptions from the requirements with respect to personal
 genetic records maintained anonymously for research purposes only; and
 (6) be subject to civil suit and criminal penalties for any damages which
 occur as a result of negligent, willful, or intentional action which
 violates any individual's rights under this Act.
PART A--DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 101. For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `agency' means any executive department, military department,
 Government corporation, Government controlled corporation, Government
 contractors, or Government grantees maintaining genetic information pursuant
 to Federal contracts and/or grants or other establishment in the executive
 branch of the Government (including the Executive Office of the President),
 or any independent regulatory agency.
 (2) The term `genetic information' means any information that describes,
 analyses, or identifies all or any part of a genome identifiable to a
 specific individual.
 (3) The term `individual' means a living individual.
PART B--RIGHTS OF INSPECTION, CORRECTION, NOTICE, AND AUTHORIZED DISCLOSURE
INSPECTION OF GENETIC INFORMATION
 SEC. 111. (a)(1) Except as provided under subsection (b), a government agency
 shall permit an individual to inspect any genetic information that the agency
 maintains about the individual, and shall permit the individual to have a
 copy of the information. The individual may designate in writing another
 individual to inspect, or to have a copy of, the information on behalf of
 the individual or to accompany the individual during the inspection. When
 an individual inspects or obtains a copy of genetic information under this
 subsection, the agency will offer to explain or interpret the information.
 (2) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, a government agency
 may require a written request for the inspection and copying of genetic
 information under this section.
 (3) An agency shall comply with or deny a request for inspection of genetic
 information under this section within the period of ten days beginning on
 the date it receives the request.
 (4) An agency shall not charge a fee for access to or copy of genetic
 information.
 (b)(1) An agency is not required by this section to permit inspection or
 copying of information by an individual if--
 (A)(i) the information consists of psychiatric, psychological, or mental
 health treatment notes, and (ii) the agency does not permit disclosure of
 the notes to any person not engaged in treatment of the individual except
 (I) with the individual's authorization or (II) under compulsion of law;
 (B)(i) the information relates to an individual other than the subject
 individual, or
 (ii) disclosure of the information would constitute a danger to the physical
 safety of any individual; or
 (C) the information duplicates information available for inspection under
 subsection (a).
 (2) If information is withheld under paragraph (1)(A), the agency shall
 permit the information to be inspected and copied by a person, selected
 by the individual, who is (A) a licensed or certified health professional,
 (B) an attorney, (C) a family member, or (D) other person permitted to be
 designated under State law. If inspection or copying of genetic information
 by the family member selected by the individual would cause sufficient harm
 to the individual or to a family member so as to outweigh the desirability
 of permitting access, the agency is not required to permit access by the
 family member, but the agency shall permit the individual to select another
 person in accordance with this paragraph.
 (3) If an agency denies a request for inspection or copying under this
 section, the agency shall provide the individual (or individual's designated
 representative) with a written statement of the reasons for the denial.
AMENDMENT OF GENETIC INFORMATION
 SEC. 112. (a) In the case of an agency that maintains genetic information
 about an individual, if the individual requests in writing that the
 agency correct or supplement the genetic information, the agency shall,
 within the period of forty-five days beginning on the date it receives
 the request, either--
 (1)(A) make the amendment requested;
 (B) inform the individual of the amendment that has been made; and
 (C) inform any person who is identified by the individual, who is not an
 employee of the agency, and to whom the unamended portion of the genetic
 information was previously disclosed of the amendment that has been made; or
 (2) inform the individual of--
 (A) the reasons for its refusal to make the amendment;
 (B) any procedures for further review of the refusal; and
 (C) the individual's right to file with the agency a concise statement
 setting forth the requested amendment and the individual's reasons for
 disagreeing with the refusal of the agency.
After an individual has filed a statement of disagreement, the agency, in
any subsequent disclosure of the disputed portion of the genetic information,
shall include a copy of the individual's statement and may include a concise
statement of the agency's reasons for not making the requested amendment.
 (b) For purposes of this section, the term `amendment' includes correction
 and supplementation.
NOTICE OF INFORMATION PRACTICES
 SEC. 113. (a) Each agency shall prepare a written notice of genetic
 information practices describing--
 (1) the rights and procedures under this title, including the right to
 inspect and copy genetic information, the right to seek amendments to
 genetic information, and the procedures for authorizing disclosures of
 genetic information and for revoking such authorizations; and
 (2) the procedures established by the agencies for the exercise of these
 rights.
 (b) An agency shall, upon request, provide any individual with a copy of
 the agency's notice of information practices.
DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION
 SEC. 114. An agency--
 (1) may not disclose genetic information about an individual other than to
 the individual or the individual's designated representative unless either
 (A) the individual has authorized the disclosure under section 115, or
 (B) the disclosure is permitted under part C without such an authorization;
 (2) may not disclose genetic information to any person unless the person
 is properly identified; and
 (3) shall, in the case of disclosure of genetic information--
 (A) limit the disclosure to the information authorized to be disclosed, and
 (B) limit the disclosure of information to the identified purpose specified
 within the authorization and for no other purpose.
AUTHORIZATION FOR DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION
 SEC. 115. (a) For purposes of this title, an individual has authorized
 disclosure to a person of genetic information maintained by an agency
 only if--
 (1) the authorization is (A) in writing, (B) dated, and (C) signed by
 the individual;
 (2) the agency is specifically named or generically described in the
 authorization as authorized to disclose such information;
 (3) the person to whom the information is to be disclosed is specifically
 or generically described in the authorization as a person to whom such
 information may be disclosed;
 (4) the information to be disclosed is described in the authorization;
 (5) the purpose of the disclosure is specified in the authorization; and
 (6) the disclosure occurs before the date or event (if any), specified in
 the authorization, upon which the authorization expires.
 (b) An individual in writing may revoke or amend an authorization, in whole
 or in part, at any time, except when action has been taken in reliance on
 the authorization.
 (c) An agency that discloses genetic information about an individual
 pursuant to this section shall maintain a copy of the authorization.
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS AND GRANTEES
 SEC. 116. When an agency provides by a contract or a grant for the
 maintenance development, analysis or identification of genetic information
 by or on behalf of the agency to accomplish an agency function, the agency
 shall, consistent with its authority, cause the requirements of this section
 to be applied to such information. For purposes of section 143, any such
 contractor or grantee and any employee of such contractor or grantee,
 if such contract or grant is agreed to on or after the effective date of
 this section, shall be considered to be an employee of an agency.
RIGHTS OF INCOMPETENTS
 SEC. 117. (a) A person who is permitted under State law to exercise the
 rights of another individual (other than because of the individual's
 minority) may, to the extent authorized under State law, exercise and
 discharge the rights of the individual under this title.
 (b) For any period for which the agency determines that an individual--
 (1) does not have another person who can exercise the individual's rights
 in accordance with subsection (a) or section (b), and
 (2) suffers from a medical condition that prevents the individual from acting
 knowingly or effectively on the individual's own behalf, the agency or,
 at the election of the agency, the individual's next of kin may exercise
 the right of the individual to authorize disclosure for the purpose of
 obtaining care or treatment provided by the agency.
RIGHTS OF MINORS
 SEC. 118. (a) Except as provided in section 116, in the case of an
 individual--
 (1) who is eighteen years of age or older, all rights of the individual
 shall be exercised by the individual; or
 (2) who, acting alone has the legal capacity to apply for and obtain
 genetic information and who has sought such information, the individual
 shall exercise all rights of an individual under this title with respect
 to genetic information.
 (b) Except as provided in subsection (a)(2), with respect to a individual
 who is--
 (1) under fourteen years of age, all the individual's rights under this title
 shall be exercised through the parent or legal guardian of the individual; or
 (2) fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen years of age, the right of
 inspection, the right of amendment, and the right to authorize disclosure
 of genetic information of the individual may be exercised either by the
 individual or by the parent or legal guardian of the individual.
PART C--DISCLOSURE OF GENETIC INFORMATION WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION
RIGHT OF AGENCIES TO REFUSE DISCLOSURES
 SEC. 121. (a) Except as provided in section 111, nothing in this Act
 shall be construed to require an agency to disclose genetic information
 not otherwise required to be disclosed by law.
 (b) Except as otherwise required by law, an agency may impose additional
 requirements for disclosures that are made without the authorization
 described in section (a).
EMPLOYEE USE
 SEC. 122. (a) An agency may disclose genetic information it maintains
 about an individual, without the authorization described in section 115(a),
 if the disclosure is to an employee of the agency who has a need for the
 genetic information in the performance of his duties.
 (b) Genetic information disclosed under this section shall not be further
 disclosed except in accordance with this title.
CONSULTATION
 SEC. 123. (a) An agency may disclose genetic information it maintains
 about an individual, without the authorization described in section 115,
 if the disclosure is to a medical professional who will use the information
 in connection with the care or treatment of a specific individual.
 (b) Genetic information about an individual disclosed by an agency under this
 section that is used in connection with the care or treatment of another
 individual shall not be further disclosed except where required by law or
 necessary to fulfill the purpose of which the information was obtained.
HEALTH AND SAFETY
 SEC. 124. An agency may disclose genetic information it maintains about
 an individual, without the authorization described in section 115, if the
 disclosure is based on reasonable grounds to believe that the information
 is needed--
 (1) to assist in the identification of a dead individual, or as an aid to
 that deceased individual's relatives,
 (2) to alleviate emergency circumstances affecting the health or safety
 of any individual, or
 (3) in clinical care or adoption situations where reasonable efforts
 to locate an individual or individuals to secure voluntary consent to
 disclosure have failed and where disclosure of genetic information to
 identifiable third parties is likely to prevent serious harm to such third
 parties as long as there is no objection by such third parties.
LEGALLY REQUIRED REPORTING
 Sec. 125. An agency may disclose genetic information it maintains about
 an individual, without the authorization described in section 115, if
 the disclosure is directed by a court in connection with a court-ordered
 examination of an individual.
PART D--LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNCTIONS ACCESS PROCEDURES, CHALLENGE RIGHTS,
AND REPORTING
LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNCTIONS
 SEC. 131. (a) An agency may disclose genetic information it maintains
 about a individual to a law enforcement agency, without the authorization
 described in section 115(a), if--
 (1) the information is to assist in the identification or location of a
 suspect or fugitive in a law enforcement inquiry; and
 (2) in the case of disclosure of genetic information pursuant to a
 request by the agency, the agency provides the facility with a written
 certification that--
 (A) is signed by a supervisory official of a rank designated by the head
 of the authority,
 (B) specifies the information requested,
 (C) states the specific purpose for which the information is needed,
 (D) demonstrates probable cause or reasonable suspicion to believe a crime
 has been committed and that the information relates to that crime.
 (b) Genetic information disclosed to an agency under this section shall--
 (1) not be disclosed for, or used in, any administrative, civil, or
 criminal action or investigation against the individual, except in an
 action or investigation for which the information was obtained, and
 (2) not be otherwise used or disclosed by the agency unless the use or
 disclosure is necessary to fulfill the purpose for which the information
 was obtained and is not otherwise prohibited by law.
ACCESS PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SUMMONSES, SUBPOENA, WARRANTS, AND
SEARCH WARRANTS
 SEC. 132. (a) No government authority may obtain genetic information about an
 individual from an agency for use in a law enforcement inquiry pursuant to an
 administrative summons or subpoena or a judicial summons or subpoena unless--
 (1) there are reasonable grounds and probable cause to believe that the
 information will be relevant to the law enforcement inquiry being conducted
 by the government authority;
 (2) except as provided in subsection (c), a copy of the summons or subpoena
 has been served upon the individual or mailed to his last known address
 on or before the date on which the summons or subpoena was served on the
 agency, together with a notice (published by the Secretary under section
 143) of the individual's right to challenge the summons or subpoena,
 in accordance with section; and
 (3)(A)(i) ten days have passed from the date of service or (ii) fourteen
 days have passed from the date of mailing, and within such time period
 the individual has not initiated a challenge in accordance with section, or
 (B) disclosure is ordered by a court under such section.
 (b)(1) No government authority may obtain genetic information about an
 individual from an agency for use in a law enforcement inquiry pursuant
 to an administrative warrant unless there are reasonable grounds and
 probable cause to believe that the information will be relevant to the
 law enforcement inquiry being conducted by the government authority.
 (2) A government authority which obtains genetic information about an
 individual from an agency pursuant to a search warrant or administrative
 warrant shall, not later than thirty days after the date the warrant was
 served on the agency, serve the individual with, or mail to the last known
 address of the individual, a copy of the search warrant.
 (c)(1) A government authority may apply to an appropriate court to delay (for
 an initial period of not longer than ninety days) serving or mailing a copy
 of a summons or subpoena and a notice otherwise required under subsection
 (a)(2) with respect to a law enforcement inquiry. The government authority
 may apply to the court for extensions of the delay.
 (2) An application for a delay, or extension of a delay, under this
 subsection shall state, with reasonable specificity, the reasons why the
 delay or extension is being sought.
 (3) If the court finds that--
 (A) the inquiry being conducted is within the lawful jurisdiction of the
 government authority seeking the genetic information;
 (B) there are reasonable grounds and probable cause to believe that the
 information being sought will be relevant to the inquiry;
 (C) the government authority's need for the information outweighs the
 individual's privacy interest; and
 (D) there are reasonable grounds to believe that receipt of a notice by
 the individual will result in--
 (i) endangering the life or physical safety of any individual,
 (ii) flight from prosecution,
 (iii) destruction of or tampering with evidence,
 (iv) intimidation of potential witnesses, or
 (v) unduly delaying a trial or ongoing judicial proceeding, the court
 shall enter an ex parte order delaying, or extending the delay of, the
 notice and an order prohibiting the agency from revealing the request for,
 or the disclosure of, the information.
 (4) Upon the expiration of a period of delay of notice under this subsection,
 the government authority shall serve upon the individual, with the service
 of the summons, or subpoena and the notice, a copy of any applications
 filed and approved under this subsection.
CHALLENGE PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SUMMONED AND SUBPOENA
 SEC. 133. (a) Within ten days of the date of service or fourteen days of the
 date of mailing of a summons or subpoena of a government authority seeking
 genetic information about an individual from an agency the individual may
 file (without filing fee)
 (1)(A) in the case of a State judicial subpoena, in the court which issued
 the subpoena, or
 (B) in the case of another subpoena or summons issued under the authority
 of a State, in a court of competent jurisdiction; or
 (2)(A) in the case of a subpoena issued under the authority of a Federal
 court, in any Federal court of competent jurisdiction, or
 (B) in the case of any other summons or subpoena issued under the
 authority of the United States, in (i) the United States district court
 for the district in which the individual resides or in which the summons
 or subpoena was issued or (ii) another United States district court of
 competent jurisdiction,
a motion to quash the subpoena or summons. A copy of the motion shall be
served by the individual upon the government authority by delivery or by
registered or certified mail.
 (b) The government authority may file with the court such affidavits
 and other sworn documents as sustain the validity of the summons or
 subpoena. The individual may file with the court, within five days of the
 date of the authority's filing, affidavits and sworn documents in response
 to the authority's filing. The court, upon the request of the individual,
 the government authority, or both, may proceed in camera.
 (c) The court may conduct such proceedings as it deems appropriate to rule on
 the motion. All such proceedings shall be completed, and the motion ruled on,
 within seven calendar days of the date of the government authority's filing.
 (d)(1) A court may deny a individual's timely motion under subsection (a)
 if it finds that there are reasonable grounds and probable cause to be
 believe that--
 (A) the law enforcement inquiry is legitimate, and
 (B) the information sought is relevant to that inquiry, unless the court
 finds that the individual's privacy interest outweighs the government
 authority's need for the information.
 (2) In determining under this section whether an individual's privacy
 interest outweighs the government authority's need for the information,
 the court may consider--
 (A) the particular purpose for which the information was collected by
 the agency,
 (B) the degree to which disclosure of the information will embarrass,
 injure, or invade the privacy of the individual;
 (C) the effect of the disclosure on the individual's future medical
 examination, care, or treatment;
 (D) the importance of the inquiry being conducted by the government
 authority, and the importance of the information to that inquiry; and
 (E) any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
 (3) The court may assess against an agency attorney fees and court costs
 reasonably incurred in the case of any motion brought under subsection
 (a) against the authority and in which the individual has substantially
 prevailed.
PART E--ENFORCEMENT
CRIMINAL PENALTY FOR OBTAINING GENETIC INFORMATION THROUGH FALSE PRETENSES
OR THEFT
 SEC. 141. (a) Any person who, under false or fraudulent pretenses or with a
 false or fraudulent certification required or provided for under this Act,
 requests or obtains genetic information about an individual from an agency
 or an authorization from an individual to disclose such information shall
 be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than six months,
 or both.
 (b) Any person who, under false or fraudulent pretenses or with false of
 fraudulent certification required or provided for under this Act, requests
 or obtains genetic information about an individual from an agency or any
 authorization from an individual to disclose such information and who
 intentionally sells or transfers such information for profit or monetary
 gain, shall be fined not more than $30,000, or imprisoned for not more
 than eighteen months, or both.
 (c) Any person who unlawfully takes genetic information from an agency
 and who intentionally sells or transfers such information for profit or
 monetary gain shall be fined not more than $30,000, or imprisoned for not
 more than eighteen months, or both.
CIVIL SUITS
 SEC. 142. (a) Any individual whose rights under this title have been
 knowingly or negligently violated--
 (1) by an officer or employee of the United States while the officer
 or employee was acting within the scope of the office or employment,
 may maintain a civil action for actual damages and for injunctive and
 equitable relief against the United States;
 (2) by an officer or employee or another agency, while the officer or
 employee was not acting within the scope of the office or employment,
 may maintain a civil action for actual damages and for injunctive and
 equitable relief against the employee or officer; or
 (3) by an agency or any other person (not described in paragraph (1) or
 (2),) may maintain a civil action for actual damages and for injunctive
 and equitable relief against the agency or other such person. Such a civil
 action shall be barred unless the complaint is filed within three years
 after (i) the date the right of action accrues, or (ii) in the case of a
 person under a legal disability at the time the right of action accrues,
 the date the disability ceases. The district courts of the United States
 shall have jurisdiction in actions brought under this section.
 (b)(1) Any individual who is entitled to recover actual damages under
 this section because of a knowing violation of this title and who proves
 such actual damages shall be entitled to recover the amount of the actual
 damages proved, or $1,000, whichever is greater.
 (2) In any suit brought under this section because of a knowing violation
 of this title in which the complainant has been awarded actual damages
 or in which the complainant has substantially prevailed in an action for
 injunctive or equitable relief, the court may assess against the defendant
 reasonable attorney fees and court costs reasonably incurred.
 (c) An agency that makes a disclosure of genetic information about an
 individual that is permitted by this title and not otherwise prohibited
 by law shall not be liable to the individual for such disclosure.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES
 SEC. 143. (a) Any officer or employee of an agency, who by virtue of his
 employment or official position, has possession, of or access to, agency
 records which contain individually identifiable genetic information
 the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section or by rules or
 regulations established thereunder, and who knowing that disclosure of the
 genetic information is so prohibited, willfully discloses the material in
 any manner to any person or agency not entitled to receive it, shall be
 guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $10,000.
 (b) Any officer or employee of any agency who willfully maintains genetic
 information without meeting the notice requirements of section 113 shall
 be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $10,000.
 (c) Any person who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any genetic
 information concerning an individual from an agency under false pretenses
 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $10,000.
RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY
 SEC. 144. (a) The Secretary shall promulgate, by regulation, a brief, clear,
 and easily understood notice in English for use under section 132(a)(2),
 detailing the rights of an individual who wishes to challenge, under
 section 133, the disclosure of genetic information about the individual
 under such section.
 (b) The Secretary shall publish a nonbinding model notice of information
 practices describing the disclosures and rights of individuals required
 to be included in the notices of information practices under paragraphs
 (1) and (2) of section 113(a).