[Congressional Bills 118th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2601 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

118th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 2601

 To provide for the protection of agricultural workers, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 27, 2023

 Mr. Welch (for himself, Mr. Booker, and Mr. Wyden) introduced the 
 following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on 
 Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for the protection of agricultural workers, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Agricultural Worker Justice Act''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--FAIR USDA PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING

Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Food worker pay increase.
Sec. 103. Prohibition on stock buybacks while receiving USDA funds.
Sec. 104. Promotion of economic security and workplace accountability.
Sec. 105. Waiver to purchase foreign commodities or products.
Sec. 106. Authorization of local food purchase assistance cooperative 
 agreement program.
Sec. 107. Report regarding grant recipients.
 TITLE II--PROTECTING AMERICA'S MEATPACKING WORKERS

Sec. 201. Findings.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Reforms to Protect Meat and Poultry Processing Workers

 PART I--Department of Agriculture

Sec. 211. Rule on increased line speeds at meat and poultry 
 establishments.
 PART II--Fair Attendance Policies

Sec. 221. Definitions.
Sec. 222. Requirements for employers relating to no fault attendance 
 policies or attendance systems.
Sec. 223. Remedies and enforcement.
Sec. 224. Rulemaking.
Sec. 225. Relationship to other laws.
 PART III--Occupational Safety and Health Administration Reforms

Sec. 231. Definitions.
Sec. 232. Ensuring compliance with employee rights to use toilet 
 facilities at covered establishments.
Sec. 233. Occupational safety and health standards to protect employees 
 in covered establishments.
Sec. 234. Permanent regional emphasis inspection program; expanding 
 inspections.
Sec. 235. Representatives during physical inspections.
Sec. 236. Enhanced protections from retaliation.
Sec. 237. Regulations to restore a column on required records of work-
 related musculoskeletal disorders.
Sec. 238. Funding for additional OSHA inspectors.
Sec. 239. OSHA reporting.
Sec. 240. Private right of action.
Sec. 241. Injunction proceedings.
 PART IV--Savings Provision

Sec. 251. Savings provision.
 Subtitle B--GAO Reports

Sec. 261. Review and report on racial and ethnic disparities in meat 
 and poultry processing.

 TITLE I--FAIR USDA PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING

SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Meat.--The term ``meat'' means meat (within the meaning 
 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.).
 (2) Meat food product.--The term ``meat food product'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 1 of the Federal Meat 
 Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601).
 (3) Poultry; poultry product.--The terms ``poultry'' and 
 ``poultry product'' have the meanings given those terms in 
 section 4 of the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 
 453).
 (4) Processed food.--The term ``processed food'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 201 of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321).

SEC. 102. FOOD WORKER PAY INCREASE.

 (a) Prevailing Rate.--The Secretary of Agriculture may not purchase 
any meat, meat food product, poultry, poultry product, or processed 
food produced by workers in the United States who are compensated at a 
rate lower than the prevailing rate for wages and fringe benefits for 
such workers in their locality.
 (b) Prevailing Rate Determination.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
determine the prevailing rates described in subsection (a) and, in 
determining such rates, shall take into account any applicable existing 
collective bargaining agreements in the locality.
 (c) Collective Bargaining Agreement Supremacy.--A prevailing rate 
established pursuant to this section shall not supersede the wages and 
benefits of a worker agreed to in a collective bargaining agreement.

SEC. 103. PROHIBITION ON STOCK BUYBACKS WHILE RECEIVING USDA FUNDS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Equity security; exchange; issuer.--The terms ``equity 
 security'', ``exchange'', and ``issuer'' have the meanings 
 given the terms in section 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c).
 (2) National security exchange.--The term ``national 
 securities exchange'' means an exchange registered under 
 section 6 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
 78f).
 (b) Prohibitions.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
during any period that an agricultural issuer has a contract or 
receives funding from the Department of Agriculture, the agricultural 
issuer may not--
 (1) purchase an equity security of the issuer or any parent 
 company of the issuer on a national securities exchange; or
 (2) pay dividends or other capital distributions on an 
 equity security of the issuer.

SEC. 104. PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC SECURITY AND WORKPLACE ACCOUNTABILITY.

 (a) Required Disclosures.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall 
require any entity that enters into a contract with the Department of 
Agriculture on or after the date that is 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act to disclose to the Secretary of Labor, on an 
annual basis and to the best of the knowledge of the entity, whether, 
within the preceding 3-year period, any administrative merits 
determination, arbitral award or decision, or civil judgment, as 
defined in regulations issued by the Secretary of Labor, has been 
issued against the entity, or any subcontractor of the entity, for 
violations of any of the following (including, as applicable, any 
regulations issued under any of the following):
 (1) The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 et 
 seq.).
 (2) The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).
 (3) The National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 151 et 
 seq.).
 (4) Subchapter IV of chapter 31 of title 40, United States 
 Code (commonly known as the ``Davis-Bacon Act'').
 (5) Chapter 67 of title 41, United States Code (commonly 
 known as the ``Service Contract Act'').
 (6) Executive Order 11246 (42 U.S.C. 2000e note; relating 
 to equal employment opportunity).
 (7) Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
 U.S.C. 793).
 (8) Section 4212 of title 38, United States Code.
 (9) The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
 2601 et seq.).
 (10) Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
 2000e et seq.).
 (11) Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
 (42 U.S.C. 12111 et seq.).
 (12) The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 
 U.S.C. 621 et seq.).
 (13) Executive Order 13658 (79 Fed. Reg. 9851; relating to 
 establishing a minimum wage for contractors).
 (14) The Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 151 et seq.).
 (15) The Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (division II of the 
 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117-328)).
 (16) Section 4714 of title 41, United States Code.
 (17) Part 170 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations 
 (regarding the Worker Protection Standard).
 (18) Section 218 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 
 U.S.C. 1188) relating to protections for H-2A workers.
 (19) Section 274B of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1324b).
 (20) Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection 
 Act (29 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
 (21) Any applicable State or local labor or employment law, 
 as defined in regulations issued by the Secretary of Labor.
 (b) Consultation.--The Secretary of Labor shall be available, as 
appropriate and in coordination as described in subsection (e), for 
consultation with an entity described in subsection (a) to assist the 
entity in evaluating the information on labor compliance submitted to 
the entity by a subcontractor pursuant to such subsection.
 (c) Corrective Measures.--On an annual basis, the Secretary of 
Labor--
 (1) shall provide an entity that makes a disclosure 
 pursuant to subsection (a) an opportunity to report any steps 
 taken by the entity, or any subcontractor of the entity, to 
 correct violations of or improve compliance with the laws, 
 including Executive orders, listed in such subsection, 
 including any agreements entered into with an enforcement 
 agency; and
 (2) may negotiate with such entity corrective measures that 
 the entity or any subcontractor of the entity may take in order 
 to avoid having the entity placed on the list under subsection 
 (d).
 (d) List of Ineligible Entities.--
 (1) In general.--For each calendar year beginning with the 
 first calendar year that begins after the date that is 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Labor, in coordination as described in subsection (e), shall 
 prepare, and submit to the Secretary of Agriculture, a list of 
 each entity that shall be ineligible for a contract with the 
 Department of Agriculture for that year based on--
 (A) serious, repeated, or pervasive violations of 
 the laws, including Executive orders, listed under 
 subsection (a) committed by the entity or any 
 subcontractor of the entity; or
 (B) the failure of such entity, or any 
 subcontractor of such entity, to complete any 
 corrective measure negotiated under subsection (c).
 (2) Ineligibility.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall 
 not--
 (A) solicit a contract from any entity on the list 
 under paragraph (1) that is in effect for a year for 
 that year or any of the subsequent 4 years; and
 (B) conduct an inspection pursuant to the Federal 
 Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or the 
 Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 451 et 
 seq.), as applicable, of any facility owned or 
 controlled by an entity on the list under paragraph (1) 
 that is in effect for a year for that year or for any 
 of the subsequent 4 years.
 (e) Coordination.--In providing the consultation described in 
subsection (b) and preparing the list under subsection (d), the 
Secretary of Labor shall coordinate, as appropriate, with the National 
Labor Relations Board, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, and any other relevant Federal agency 
as well as States, and local governments.
 (f) Criminal Penalty for Failure To Report.--
 (1) Offense.--It shall be unlawful for an entity to 
 knowingly fail to make a disclosure required under subsection 
 (a).
 (2) Penalty.--
 (A) In general.--A violation of paragraph (1) shall 
 be treated as a violation of section 1031(a) of title 
 18, United States Code.
 (B) Gross loss to government; gross gain to 
 defendant.--For purposes of applying section 1031 of 
 title 18, United States Code, to a violation of 
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the amount that the 
 Department of Agriculture pays an entity that violates 
 such paragraph (1) under a contract described in 
 subsection (a) of this section shall be treated as the 
 gross loss to the Government or the gross gain to the 
 defendant.
 (g) Annual Reports to Congress.--For each calendar year beginning 
with the first calendar year that begins after the date that is 2 years 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture 
shall submit a report to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and 
Forestry of the Senate and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of 
Representatives that includes--
 (1) the number of entities on the list under subsection (d) 
 for the year of the report;
 (2) the number of entities that agreed to take corrective 
 measures under subsection (c) for such year;
 (3) the amount of the applicable contracts for the entities 
 described in paragraph (1) or (2); and
 (4) performance indicators and measures, as determined by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture, assessing the effectiveness of 
 the implementation by the Secretary of Agriculture of this 
 section for such year.

SEC. 105. WAIVER TO PURCHASE FOREIGN COMMODITIES OR PRODUCTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 12(n)(2) of the Richard B. Russell 
National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1760(n)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' 
 and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)'';
 (2) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking ``for the school 
 lunch program under this Act or the school breakfast program 
 under section 4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 
 1773).'' and inserting the following: ``for--
 ``(I) the school lunch program 
 under this Act, including any snacks 
 served under that program;
 ``(II) the special milk program 
 under section 3 of the Child Nutrition 
 Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1772); or
 ``(III) the school breakfast 
 program under section 4 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 
 1773).''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Waiver.--
 ``(i) Waiver request.--Except as provided 
 in clause (ii), in order to purchase foreign 
 commodities or products, a school food 
 authority shall request from the Secretary a 
 waiver of subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Exception.--A school food authority 
 may purchase foreign commodities or products 
 without a waiver under clause (i) if the 
 commodities or products are not--
 ``(I) produced domestically; or
 ``(II) available domestically.
 ``(iii) Requirements.--The Secretary may 
 not provide a waiver to purchase foreign 
 commodities or products under clause (i) 
 unless--
 ``(I) the commodities or products--
 ``(aa) are not produced 
 domestically in sufficient 
 amounts or of satisfactory 
 quality; and
 ``(bb) if purchased 
 domestically, would be 
 significantly higher in price 
 than such foreign commodities 
 or products; and
 ``(II) the school enters into an 
 agreement under clause (iv).
 ``(iv) Agreement.--The Secretary may not 
 provide a waiver under clause (i) unless the 
 school food authority requesting the waiver 
 agrees--
 ``(I) not later than 30 days after 
 receiving the waiver, to make the 
 waiver publicly available on the 
 website of the school food authority; 
 and
 ``(II) not less than once each 
 school year, to email a notification of 
 all waivers to parents or guardians of 
 students who will be served the foreign 
 commodity or product purchased pursuant 
 to any waivers.''.
 (b) Definition of Foreign Commodity.--Section 12(n) of the Richard 
B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1760(n)) is amended by 
striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following:
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Domestic commodity or product.--The term 
 `domestic commodity or product' means--
 ``(i) an agricultural commodity that is 
 produced in the United States; and
 ``(ii) a food product that is processed in 
 the United States substantially using 
 agricultural commodities that are produced in 
 the United States.
 ``(B) Foreign commodity or product.--The term 
 `foreign commodity or product' means a commodity or 
 product other than a domestic commodity or product.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Section 12(n) of the Richard B. Russell 
National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1760(n)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``Paragraph (2)(A)'' and 
 inserting ``Subparagraphs (A) and (C) of paragraph (2)''; and
 (2) in paragraph (4), by striking ``Paragraph (2)(A)'' and 
 inserting ``Subparagraphs (A) and (C) of paragraph (2)''.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section or the 
amendments made by this section affects the requirements under section 
4207 of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (42 U.S.C. 1760 note; 
Public Law 115-334).

SEC. 106. AUTHORIZATION OF LOCAL FOOD PURCHASE ASSISTANCE COOPERATIVE 
 AGREEMENT PROGRAM.

 There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the local food 
purchase assistance cooperative agreement program established pursuant 
to section 1001 of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (7 U.S.C. 7501 
note; Public Law 117-2) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2024 and each 
fiscal year thereafter.

SEC. 107. REPORT REGARDING GRANT RECIPIENTS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act and 
annually thereafter, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to 
Congress and make publicly available on the website of the Department 
of Agriculture an easily-navigable report that, with respect to the 
preceding year, specifies each organization, farm, individual, or other 
entity that received funding (including through a contract, 
subcontract, subsidy, loan, or grant) from the Secretary of Agriculture 
during that year.

 TITLE II--PROTECTING AMERICA'S MEATPACKING WORKERS

SEC. 201. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) meat and poultry slaughter and processing is a 
 particularly dangerous occupation, with meat and poultry 
 processing workers suffering injuries at measurably higher 
 rates than workers in other private sector industries;
 (2) meat and poultry processing workers face double the 
 rate of amputations as the average worker in private industry, 
 and injuries such as sprains, lacerations, and contusions are 
 common among poultry workers;
 (3) meat and poultry processing workers suffer from 
 musculoskeletal injuries, such as carpal tunnel syndrome, 
 ``trigger finger'', tendinitis, rotator cuff injuries, lower 
 back injuries, and chronic pain and numbness, in numbers that 
 can exceed 50 percent of workers;
 (4) higher line speeds in meat and poultry processing 
 facilities is a recognized risk factor that leads to increased 
 risk of both laceration and musculoskeletal injuries; and
 (5) meat and poultry processing workers are subjected to 
 exploitative conditions and abusive behavior by employers--
 (A) including--
 (i) use of abusive and humiliating shouting 
 by supervisors accusing workers of not working 
 fast enough and harassing them to work 
 ``faster'' and ``harder'';
 (ii) use of sexualized language to harass 
 women workers to work ``harder'' and 
 ``faster'';
 (iii) patterns of direct sexual harassment 
 and incidents of sexual assault; and
 (iv) little or no accountability or redress 
 for emotional, sexualized, or psychological 
 abuse due to--
 (I) weak enforcement of, and 
 noncompliance with, discrimination 
 protections; and
 (II) meat and poultry processing 
 workers not reporting the abuse due to 
 fear of receiving more abuse, having 
 their employment terminated, or being 
 reported to immigration enforcement; 
 and
 (B) that lead to long-term psychological impacts, 
 including increased feelings of anger and stress by 
 workers pressured to work faster and more aggressively 
 to slaughter animals on killing lines.

SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Covered establishment.--The term ``covered 
 establishment'' means--
 (A) an official establishment (as defined in 
 section 301.2 of title 9, Code of Federal Regulations 
 (or successor regulations)) that is subject to 
 inspection under the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 
 U.S.C. 601 et seq.); and
 (B) an official establishment (as defined in 
 section 381.1(b) of title 9, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations)) that is subject 
 to inspection under the Poultry Products Inspection Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 451 et seq.).
 (2) Employee; employer.--Unless otherwise specified, the 
 terms ``employee'' and ``employer'' have the meanings given 
 those terms in section 3 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
 Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 652).

 Subtitle A--Reforms to Protect Meat and Poultry Processing Workers

 PART I--DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

SEC. 211. RULE ON INCREASED LINE SPEEDS AT MEAT AND POULTRY 
 ESTABLISHMENTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Service.
 (2) Assistant secretary.--The term ``Assistant Secretary'' 
 means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety 
 and Health.
 (3) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 (5) Service.--The term ``Service'' means the Food Safety 
 Inspection Service.
 (b) Rule on Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law 
 (including regulations, including sections 303.1(h) and 
 381.3(b) of title 9, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor 
 regulations)), the Secretary, acting through the Administrator, 
 shall not issue a waiver under those regulations relating to 
 line speeds that would result in higher line speeds at a 
 covered establishment or inspection staffing requirements for a 
 covered establishment unless the covered establishment--
 (A) agrees to an inspection conducted by the 
 Assistant Secretary or the Director for the purposes of 
 the waiver; and
 (B) the Assistant Secretary or the Director 
 certifies to the Secretary that any increases in line 
 speed at the covered establishment would not have an 
 adverse impact on worker safety.
 (2) Inspections.--An inspection conducted by the Assistant 
 Secretary or the Director under paragraph (1)(A) shall 
 include--
 (A) an ergonomic analysis of all jobs in the 
 applicable covered establishment that may experience an 
 increased work pace due to increasing the number of 
 animals being slaughtered--
 (i) per minute; and
 (ii) per hour;
 (B) an assessment of the current rates of 
 musculoskeletal disorders in the covered establishment;
 (C) a review of current efforts at the covered 
 establishment to mitigate the disorders referred to in 
 subparagraph (B), including a review of how medical 
 personnel at the covered establishment manage those 
 disorders; and
 (D) a review of the impact of any proposed line 
 speed increases on the pace of work for workers on the 
 slaughter and production lines of the covered 
 establishment (including the workers that package the 
 meat).
 (3) Limitation on authority over line speeds.--None of the 
 funds made available to the Secretary on or after the date of 
 enactment of this Act may be used to develop, propose, 
 finalize, issue, amend, or implement any policy, regulation, 
 directive, constituent update, or any other agency program that 
 would increase line speeds at covered establishments.
 (4) Effect on state law.--
 (A) In general.--This subsection shall not preempt 
 or limit any law or regulation of a State or a 
 political subdivision of a State that--
 (i) imposes requirements that are more 
 protective of worker safety or animal welfare 
 than the requirements of this subsection; or
 (ii) creates penalties for conduct 
 regulated by this subsection.
 (B) Other laws.--The requirements of this 
 subsection are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any 
 other laws protecting worker safety and animal welfare.
 (c) Transparency in Rulemaking.--With respect to each rulemaking 
proceeding initiated by the Administrator on or after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall comply with--
 (1) the data quality guidelines of the Service, which state 
 that the Service and the offices of the Service are held to a 
 standard of transparency to ensure that the information shared 
 by the Service is presented in an accurate, reliable, and 
 unbiased manner; and
 (2) Executive Order 13563 (5 U.S.C. 601 note; relating to 
 improving regulation and regulatory review), which requires 
 Federal agencies to provide timely online access to relevant 
 scientific information in an open format that can easily be 
 searched and downloaded during a proposed rulemaking.
 (d) Evaluation of Rulemaking and Policies.--In evaluating the 
impact of any rulemaking or policy, the Secretary shall request that 
the Director conduct an evaluation of the rulemaking or policy that 
includes a review of--
 (1) current safety conditions and injuries and illnesses at 
 the applicable covered establishments, including medical exams 
 and medical histories;
 (2) whether the policy proposals will increase the pace of 
 work for any employee at the applicable covered establishments; 
 and
 (3) whether, and the extent to which, the policy proposals 
 will impact worker safety.
 (e) Report on Implementation of Rules.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 implementation of any rule relating to line speeds at covered 
 establishments, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
 on the impact of the rule on--
 (A) line speeds at covered establishments;
 (B) worker safety and health at covered 
 establishments;
 (C) ergonomic aspects of jobs at covered 
 establishments; and
 (D) staffing levels that will ensure worker safety 
 at covered establishments.
 (2) Requirement.--A report under paragraph (1) shall 
 include--
 (A) the results of a study carried out by an 
 industrial engineer on every type of job at covered 
 establishments impacted by the applicable rule;
 (B) a determination of the industrial engineer of 
 the number of workers needed--
 (i) to do each job safely; and
 (ii) to operate the covered establishment 
 at different line speeds; and
 (C) a job crewing report prepared by the industrial 
 engineer.

 PART II--FAIR ATTENDANCE POLICIES

SEC. 221. DEFINITIONS.

 In this part:
 (1) Covered entity.--The term ``covered entity''--
 (A) has the meaning given the term ``respondent'' 
 in section 701(n) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000e(n)); and
 (B) includes--
 (i) an employing office, as defined in 
 section 101 of the Congressional Accountability 
 Act of 1995 (2 U.S.C. 1301);
 (ii) an employing office, as defined in 
 section 411(c) of title 3, United States Code;
 (iii) an entity employing a State employee 
 described in section 304(a) of the Government 
 Employee Rights Act of 1991 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-
 16c(a)); and
 (iv) an entity to which section 717(a) of 
 the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-
 16(a)) applies.
 (2) Employee.--The term ``employee'' means--
 (A) an employee (including an applicant), as 
 defined in section 701(f) of the Civil Rights Act of 
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e(f));
 (B) a covered employee (including an applicant), as 
 defined in section 101 of the Congressional 
 Accountability Act of 1995 (2 U.S.C. 1301);
 (C) a covered employee (including an applicant), as 
 defined in section 411(c) of title 3, United States 
 Code;
 (D) a State employee (including an applicant) 
 described in section 304(a) of the Government Employee 
 Rights Act of 1991 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16c(a)); or
 (E) an employee (including an applicant) to which 
 section 717(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000e-16(a)) applies.
 (3) Legally protected leave.--The term ``legally protected 
 leave'', when used with respect to an employee, means leave 
 that is protected under a Federal, State, or local law 
 applicable to the employee.
 (4) No fault attendance policy.--The term ``no fault 
 attendance policy'' means a policy or pattern and practice 
 maintained by a covered entity under which employees face 
 consequences for any absence, tardy, or early departure through 
 the assessment of points (also referred to as ``demerits'' or 
 ``occurrences'') or deductions from an allotted bank of time, 
 and those points or deductions subject the employee to 
 progressive disciplinary action, which may include failure to 
 receive a promotion, loss of pay, or termination.
 (5) Person.--The term ``person'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 701(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000e(a)).
 (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Labor.

SEC. 222. REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYERS RELATING TO NO FAULT ATTENDANCE 
 POLICIES OR ATTENDANCE SYSTEMS.

 (a) Requirements for No Fault Attendance Policy.--It shall be 
considered an unlawful employment practice for a covered entity to 
maintain a no fault attendance policy, unless the covered entity 
complies with the following:
 (1) The no fault attendance policy shall be distributed in 
 writing (and be made available in the primary language of such 
 employee)--
 (A) not later than 90 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, to each employee employed by the 
 covered entity as of that date of distribution; and
 (B) with respect to each employee hired by the 
 covered entity after such date of enactment, upon the 
 commencement of the employee's employment.
 (2) If any changes are made to the no fault attendance 
 policy, the no fault attendance policy shall be distributed in 
 writing to all employees by not later than 30 days after the 
 date of the changes.
 (3) The covered entity shall provide employees with a means 
 of accessing the no fault attendance policy at any physical 
 workplace, and outside of a physical workplace, in an 
 accessible location.
 (4) The no fault attendance policy shall explicitly state 
 that employees will not face disciplinary action or other 
 adverse consequences, which may include the assessment of 
 points or a deduction from an allotted bank of time, for 
 legally protected leave.
 (5) The no fault attendance policy shall specifically 
 reference and provide a reasonable amount of detail about all 
 Federal, State, and local laws applicable to the employees that 
 provide legally protected leave, including the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.), the Family 
 and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.), and 
 chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code.
 (6) The no fault attendance policy shall identify a process 
 for employees to complete each of the following:
 (A) Report that an absence is for legally protected 
 leave.
 (B) Provide medical documentation, if it is 
 required under the no fault attendance policy in order 
 to avoid disciplinary action or other adverse 
 consequences for legally protected leave.
 (C) Seek removal of points that an employee 
 believes were wrongly assessed, or the restoration of 
 time that an employee believes was wrongly deducted for 
 legally protected leave.
 (D) Delay the reporting of an absence in unforeseen 
 or emergency circumstances without incurring additional 
 points or discipline.
 (b) Requirements for Attendance Systems.--It shall be an unlawful 
employment practice for a covered entity to maintain any attendance 
system policy, or pattern and practice, that discourages employees from 
exercising, or attempting to exercise, any right to legally protected 
leave.

SEC. 223. REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Action.--The powers, remedies, and procedures provided in 
section 107 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
2617) shall be the powers, remedies, and procedures this part provides 
to any person alleging an unlawful employment practice described in 
section 222.
 (b) Penalties.--Any covered entity that commits an unlawful 
employment practice described in section 222 shall be subject to a 
civil penalty not to exceed the amounts under section 17(a) of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 666(a)), as 
adjusted annually for inflation. The Secretary may bring any legal 
action necessary, including administrative action, to collect such 
penalties.

SEC. 224. RULEMAKING.

 Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary, in coordination with the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission and the heads of other relevant Federal agencies, shall 
issue regulations in an accessible format in accordance with subchapter 
II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, to carry out this part. 
Such regulations shall provide an example of a model no fault 
attendance policy that conforms to the requirements of this part.

SEC. 225. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.

 Nothing in this part shall be construed to invalidate or limit the 
powers, remedies, and procedures under any Federal law or law of any 
State or political subdivision of any State or jurisdiction that 
provide legally protected leave.

 PART III--OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION REFORMS

SEC. 231. DEFINITIONS.

 In this part, the terms ``Secretary'' and ``State'' have the 
meanings given such terms in section 3 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 652).

SEC. 232. ENSURING COMPLIANCE WITH EMPLOYEE RIGHTS TO USE TOILET 
 FACILITIES AT COVERED ESTABLISHMENTS.

 (a) In General.--During any inspection of a covered establishment 
conducted pursuant to section 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 657), the Secretary shall verify that the 
employer of employees working at such establishment is in compliance 
with the occupational safety and health standard set forth in section 
1910.141 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the 
day before the date of enactment of this Act, for employers to provide 
prompt access for employees to visit and use toilet facilities, 
including such standard as interpreted by the memorandum for regional 
administrators and State designees regarding ``Interpretation of 29 
CFR. 1910.141(c)(1)(i): Toilet Facilities'' issued by the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration on April 6, 1998, and any successor 
regulation.
 (b) Requirements.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall verify that the employer described in such subsection--
 (1) allows employees to leave their work locations to use a 
 toilet facility when needed and without punishment;
 (2) provides an adequate number of toilet facilities for 
 the size of the workforce to prevent long lines;
 (3) avoids imposing unreasonable restrictions including 
 waiting lists on the use of toilet facilities;
 (4) ensures that restrictions, such as locking doors or 
 requiring employees to sign out a key, do not cause extended 
 delays in access to toilet facilities; and
 (5) compensates each employee for breaks for using toilet 
 facilities at the regular rate of pay of the employee in 
 accordance with section 785.18 of title 29, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, as in effect on the day before the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and any other applicable Federal, State, 
 or local law.

SEC. 233. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS TO PROTECT EMPLOYEES 
 IN COVERED ESTABLISHMENTS.

 (a) Standard for Protecting Employees From Occupational Risk 
Factors Causing Musculoskeletal Disorders.--
 (1) Proposed standard.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to 
 section 6 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 655), publish in the Federal Register a proposed 
 standard for ergonomic program management for covered 
 establishments. Such proposed standard shall include 
 requirements for--
 (A) hazard identification and ergonomic job 
 evaluations, including requirements for employee and 
 authorized employee representative participation in 
 such identification;
 (B) hazard control, which such requirements rely on 
 the principles of the hierarchy of controls and which 
 may include measures such as rest breaks, equipment and 
 workstation redesign, work pace reductions, or job 
 rotation to less forceful or repetitive jobs;
 (C) training for employees regarding employer 
 activities, occupational risk factors, and training on 
 controls and recognition of symptoms of musculoskeletal 
 disorders; and
 (D) medical management that includes--
 (i) encouraging early reporting of 
 musculoskeletal disorder symptoms;
 (ii) first aid delivered by those operating 
 under State licensing requirements; and
 (iii) systematic evaluation and early 
 referral for medical attention.
 (2) Final standard.--Not later than 30 months after the 
 date of enactment this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to 
 section 6 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 655), publish in the Federal Register a final standard 
 based on the proposed standard under paragraph (1).
 (b) Standard for Protecting Employees From Delays in Medical 
Treatment Referrals Following Injuries or Illnesses.--
 (1) Proposed standard.--Not later than 3 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to 
 section 6 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 655), publish in the Federal Register a proposed 
 standard requiring that all employers with employees working at 
 a covered establishment who, in accordance with the standard 
 promulgated under section 1910.151 of title 29, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, as in effect on the day before the date of 
 enactment of this Act, are required to have a person readily 
 available at the establishment who is adequately trained to 
 render first aid shall ensure that such person--
 (A) without delay, refers any such employee who 
 reports an injury or illness that requires further 
 medical treatment to an appropriate medical 
 professional of the employee's choice for such 
 treatment;
 (B) provides for occupational medicine consultation 
 services through a physician who is board certified in 
 occupational medicine, which services shall include--
 (i) regular review of any health and safety 
 program, medical management program, or 
 ergonomics program of the employer;
 (ii) review of any work-related injury or 
 illness of an employee;
 (iii) providing onsite health services for 
 treatment of such injury or illness; and
 (iv) consultation referral to a local 
 health care provider for treating such injury 
 or illness; and
 (C) complies with the licensing requirements for 
 licensed practical nurses or registered nurses in the 
 State in which the establishment is located.
 (2) Final standard.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to 
 section 6 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
 U.S.C. 655), publish in the Federal Register a final standard 
 based on the proposed standard under paragraph (1).
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2024 to carry out this section.

SEC. 234. PERMANENT REGIONAL EMPHASIS INSPECTION PROGRAM; EXPANDING 
 INSPECTIONS.

 (a) Regional Emphasis Inspection Program.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to section 
 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 
 657), implement a regional emphasis inspection program for 
 covered establishments in every State in which a covered 
 establishment is located. Such program shall cover--
 (A) amputation hazards;
 (B) ergonomics;
 (C) hazards related to line speeds;
 (D) bathroom breaks;
 (E) use of chemicals such as peracetic acid 
 (antimicrobials); and
 (F) working conditions in high and low 
 temperatures.
 (2) State plans.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, a State with a State plan that has been 
 approved by the Secretary under section 18 of such Act (29 
 U.S.C. 667) shall adopt in each region within the State in 
 which a covered establishment is located a regional emphasis 
 inspection program that is at least as effective as the program 
 under paragraph (1).
 (b) Expanding Inspections When Information Presents Possible 
Additional Dangers.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary conducts a physical 
 inspection of a covered establishment pursuant to section 8 of 
 such Act in response to a referral, complaint, or fatality, and 
 the Secretary, during such inspection makes a determination 
 described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall expand such 
 inspection to all areas of the establishment.
 (2) Determination.--A determination described in this 
 paragraph is either of the following:
 (A) A determination, following a review of records 
 of work-related injuries and illnesses maintained in 
 accordance with such section 8, that a work-related 
 injury or illness may be related to a workplace danger 
 that may threaten physical harm.
 (B) A determination, upon interviews with 
 employees, that a workplace danger may threaten 
 physical harm.

SEC. 235. REPRESENTATIVES DURING PHYSICAL INSPECTIONS.

 (a) Proposed Rule.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, under section 8(e) of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 657(e)), publish 
in the Federal Register a regulation providing that during a physical 
inspection of a covered establishment under such section--
 (1) the representative authorized by employees to be given 
 the opportunity to accompany the Secretary during the 
 inspection as described in such section shall not be required 
 to be an employee of the employer;
 (2) where there is no representative authorized by 
 employees as described in paragraph (1), the employees may 
 designate a person affiliated with a worker-based community 
 organization to serve as such representative; and
 (3) the inspector may arrange for interviews with employees 
 off-site upon the request of the representative or designated 
 person.
 (b) Final Rule.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a 
final rule for the proposed rule under subsection (a).

SEC. 236. ENHANCED PROTECTIONS FROM RETALIATION.

 (a) Employee Actions.--Section 11(c)(1) of the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 660(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``discharge'' and all that follows through 
 ``because such'' and inserting the following: ``discharge or 
 cause to be discharged, or in any other manner retaliate or 
 discriminate against or cause to be retaliated or discriminated 
 against, any employee because--
 ``(A) such'';
 (2) by striking ``this Act or has'' and inserting the 
 following: ``this Act;
 ``(B) such employee has'';
 (3) by striking ``in any such proceeding or because of the 
 exercise'' and inserting the following: ``before Congress or in 
 any Federal or State proceeding related to safety or health;
 ``(C) such employee has refused to violate any 
 provision of this Act; or
 ``(D) of the exercise''; and
 (4) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``, including the reporting of any injury, illness, 
 or unsafe condition to the employer, agent of the employer, 
 safety and health committee involved, or employee safety and 
 health representative involved''.
 (b) Prohibition of Retaliation; Procedure.--Section 11 of such Act 
(29 U.S.C. 660) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``discharged or otherwise 
 discriminated against by any person in 
 violation of this subsection'' and inserting 
 ``aggrieved by a violation of this 
 subsection''; and
 (ii) by striking ``such discrimination'' 
 and inserting ``such violation''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Exception for meat and poultry establishments.--
 Paragraphs (2) and (3) shall not apply with respect to a 
 complaint filed by an employee of an employer that is a covered 
 establishment, as defined in section 202 of the Agricultural 
 Worker Justice Act.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Meat and Poultry Establishments.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Complainant.--The term `complainant' means a 
 complainant who is a covered employee.
 ``(B) Covered employee.--The term `covered 
 employee' means an employee of a covered employer.
 ``(C) Covered employer.--The term `covered 
 employer' means an employer that is a covered 
 establishment, as defined in section 202 of the 
 Agricultural Worker Justice Act.
 ``(D) Respondent.--The term `respondent' means a 
 respondent who is a covered employer.
 ``(2) Reasonable apprehension.--No person shall discharge, 
 or cause to be discharged, or in any other manner retaliate or 
 discriminate against, or cause to be retaliated or 
 discriminated against, a covered employee for refusing to 
 perform the covered employee's duties if--
 ``(A) the covered employee has a reasonable 
 apprehension that performing such duties would result 
 in serious injury to, or serious impairment of the 
 health of, the covered employee or other covered 
 employees; and
 ``(B) when practicable, the covered employee has 
 communicated or attempted to communicate such 
 reasonable apprehension to the covered employer and has 
 not received from the covered employer a response 
 reasonably calculated to allay such apprehension.
 ``(3) Complaint.--Any covered employee who believes that 
 the covered employee has been discharged, disciplined, or 
 otherwise retaliated or discriminated against by any person in 
 violation of subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this 
 subsection may seek relief for such violation by filing a 
 complaint with the Secretary under paragraph (5).
 ``(4) Statute of limitations.--
 ``(A) In general.--A covered employee may take the 
 action permitted by paragraph (3) not later than 180 
 days after the later of--
 ``(i) the date on which an alleged 
 violation of subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) 
 of this subsection occurs; or
 ``(ii) the date on which the covered 
 employee knows or should reasonably have known 
 that such alleged violation occurred.
 ``(B) Repeat violation.--Except in cases when the 
 covered employee has been discharged, a violation of 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection 
 shall be considered to have occurred on the last date 
 an alleged repeat violation occurred.
 ``(5) Investigation.--
 ``(A) In general.--A covered employee may, within 
 the time period required under paragraph (4)(A), file a 
 complaint with the Secretary alleging a violation of 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
 If the complaint alleges a prima facie case, the 
 Secretary shall conduct an investigation of the 
 allegations in the complaint, which--
 ``(i) shall include--
 ``(I) interviewing the complainant;
 ``(II) providing the respondent an 
 opportunity to--
 ``(aa) submit to the 
 Secretary a written response to 
 the complaint; and
 ``(bb) meet with the 
 Secretary to present statements 
 from witnesses or provide 
 evidence; and
 ``(III) providing the complainant 
 an opportunity to--
 ``(aa) receive any 
 statements or evidence provided 
 to the Secretary;
 ``(bb) meet with the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(cc) rebut any statements 
 or evidence; and
 ``(ii) may include issuing subpoenas for 
 the purposes of such investigation.
 ``(B) Decision.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 filing of the complaint under this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) determine whether reasonable cause 
 exists to believe that a violation of 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this 
 subsection has occurred; and
 ``(ii) issue a decision granting or denying 
 relief.
 ``(6) Preliminary order following investigation.--If, after 
 completion of an investigation under paragraph (5)(A), the 
 Secretary finds reasonable cause to believe that a violation of 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection has 
 occurred, the Secretary shall issue a preliminary order 
 providing relief authorized under paragraph (14) at the same 
 time the Secretary issues a decision under paragraph (5)(B). If 
 a de novo hearing is not requested within the time period 
 required under paragraph (7)(A)(i), such preliminary order 
 shall be deemed a final order of the Secretary and is not 
 subject to judicial review.
 ``(7) Hearing.--
 ``(A) Request for hearing.--
 ``(i) In general.--A de novo hearing on the 
 record before an administrative law judge may 
 be requested--
 ``(I) by the complainant or 
 respondent within 30 days after 
 receiving notification of a decision 
 granting or denying relief issued under 
 paragraph (5)(B) or a preliminary order 
 under paragraph (6), respectively;
 ``(II) by the complainant within 30 
 days after the date the complaint is 
 dismissed without investigation by the 
 Secretary under paragraph (5)(A); or
 ``(III) by the complainant within 
 120 days after the date of filing the 
 complaint under paragraph (5), if the 
 Secretary has not issued a decision 
 under paragraph (5)(B).
 ``(ii) Reinstatement order.--The request 
 for a hearing shall not operate to stay any 
 preliminary reinstatement order issued under 
 paragraph (6).
 ``(B) Procedures.--
 ``(i) In general.--A hearing requested 
 under this paragraph shall be conducted 
 expeditiously and in accordance with rules 
 established by the Secretary for hearings 
 conducted by administrative law judges.
 ``(ii) Subpoenas; production of evidence.--
 In conducting any such hearing, the 
 administrative law judge may issue subpoenas. 
 The respondent or complainant may request the 
 issuance of subpoenas that require the 
 deposition of, or the attendance and testimony 
 of, witnesses and the production of any 
 evidence (including any books, papers, 
 documents, or recordings) relating to the 
 matter under consideration.
 ``(iii) Decision.--The administrative law 
 judge shall issue a decision not later than 90 
 days after the date on which a hearing was 
 requested under this paragraph and promptly 
 notify, in writing, the parties and the 
 Secretary of such decision, including the 
 findings of fact and conclusions of law. If the 
 administrative law judge finds that a violation 
 of subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this 
 subsection has occurred, the judge shall issue 
 an order for relief under paragraph (14). If 
 review under paragraph (8) is not timely 
 requested, such order shall be deemed a final 
 order of the Secretary that is not subject to 
 judicial review.
 ``(8) Administrative appeal.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 date of notification of a decision and order issued by 
 an administrative law judge under paragraph (7), the 
 complainant or respondent may file, with objections, an 
 administrative appeal with an administrative review 
 body designated by the Secretary (referred to in this 
 paragraph as the `review board').
 ``(B) Standard of review.--In reviewing the 
 decision and order of the administrative law judge, the 
 review board shall affirm the decision and order if it 
 is determined that the factual findings set forth 
 therein are supported by substantial evidence and the 
 decision and order are made in accordance with 
 applicable law.
 ``(C) Decisions.--If the review board grants an 
 administrative appeal, the review board shall issue a 
 final decision and order affirming or reversing, in 
 whole or in part, the decision under review by not 
 later than 90 days after receipt of the administrative 
 appeal. If it is determined that a violation of 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection 
 has occurred, the review board shall issue a final 
 decision and order providing relief authorized under 
 paragraph (14). Such decision and order shall 
 constitute final agency action with respect to the 
 matter appealed.
 ``(9) Settlement in the administrative process.--
 ``(A) In general.--At any time before issuance of a 
 final order, an investigation or proceeding under this 
 subsection may be terminated on the basis of a 
 settlement agreement entered into by the parties.
 ``(B) Public policy considerations.--Neither the 
 Secretary, an administrative law judge, nor the review 
 board conducting a hearing under this subsection shall 
 accept a settlement that contains conditions 
 conflicting with the rights protected under this Act or 
 that are contrary to public policy, including a 
 restriction on a complainant's right to future 
 employment with employers other than the specific 
 covered employers named in a complaint.
 ``(10) Inaction by the review board or administrative law 
 judge.--
 ``(A) In general.--The complainant may bring a de 
 novo action described in subparagraph (B) if--
 ``(i) an administrative law judge has not 
 issued a decision and order within the 90-day 
 time period required under paragraph 
 (7)(B)(iii); or
 ``(ii) the review board has not issued a 
 decision and order within the 90-day time 
 period required under paragraph (8)(C).
 ``(B) De novo action.--Such de novo action may be 
 brought at law or equity in the United States district 
 court for the district where a violation of subsection 
 (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection allegedly 
 occurred or where the complainant resided on the date 
 of such alleged violation. The court shall have 
 jurisdiction over such action without regard to the 
 amount in controversy and to order appropriate relief 
 under paragraph (14). Such action shall, at the request 
 of either party to such action, be tried by the court 
 with a jury.
 ``(11) Judicial review.--
 ``(A) Timely appeal to the court of appeals.--Any 
 party adversely affected or aggrieved by a final 
 decision and order issued under this subsection may 
 obtain review of such decision and order in the United 
 States Court of Appeals for the circuit where the 
 violation, with respect to which such final decision 
 and order was issued, allegedly occurred or where the 
 complainant resided on the date of such alleged 
 violation. To obtain such review, a party shall file a 
 petition for review not later than 60 days after the 
 final decision and order was issued. Such review shall 
 conform to chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code. 
 The commencement of proceedings under this subparagraph 
 shall not, unless ordered by the court, operate as a 
 stay of the final decision and order.
 ``(B) Limitation on collateral attack.--An order 
 and decision with respect to which review may be 
 obtained under subparagraph (A) shall not be subject to 
 judicial review in any criminal or other civil 
 proceeding.
 ``(12) Enforcement of order.--If a respondent fails to 
 comply with an order issued under this subsection, the 
 Secretary or the complainant on whose behalf the order was 
 issued may file a civil action for enforcement in the United 
 States district court for the district in which the violation 
 was found to occur to enforce such order. If both the Secretary 
 and the complainant file such action, the action of the 
 Secretary shall take precedence. The district court shall have 
 jurisdiction to grant all appropriate relief described in 
 paragraph (14).
 ``(13) Burdens of proof.--
 ``(A) Criteria for determination.--In making a 
 determination or adjudicating a complaint pursuant to 
 this subsection, the Secretary, administrative law 
 judge, review board, or a court may determine that a 
 violation of subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this 
 subsection has occurred only if the complainant 
 demonstrates that any conduct described in subsection 
 (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection with respect 
 to the complainant was a contributing factor in the 
 adverse action alleged in the complaint.
 ``(B) Prohibition.--Notwithstanding subparagraph 
 (A), a decision or order that is favorable to the 
 complainant shall not be issued in any administrative 
 or judicial action pursuant to this subsection if the 
 respondent demonstrates by clear and convincing 
 evidence that the respondent would have taken the same 
 adverse action in the absence of such conduct.
 ``(14) Relief.--
 ``(A) Order for relief.--If the Secretary, 
 administrative law judge, review board, or a court 
 determines that a covered employer has violated 
 subsection (c)(1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection, 
 the Secretary, administrative law judge, review board, 
 or court, respectively, shall have jurisdiction to 
 order all appropriate relief, including injunctive 
 relief, and compensatory and exemplary damages, 
 including--
 ``(i) affirmative action to abate the 
 violation;
 ``(ii) reinstatement without loss of 
 position or seniority, and restoration of the 
 terms, rights, conditions, and privileges 
 associated with the complainant's employment, 
 including opportunities for promotions to 
 positions with equivalent or better 
 compensation for which the complainant is 
 qualified;
 ``(iii) compensatory and consequential 
 damages sufficient to make the complainant 
 whole (including back pay, prejudgment 
 interest, and other damages); and
 ``(iv) expungement of all warnings, 
 reprimands, or derogatory references that have 
 been placed in paper or electronic records or 
 databases of any type relating to the actions 
 by the complainant that gave rise to the 
 unfavorable personnel action, and, at the 
 complainant's direction, transmission of a copy 
 of the decision on the complaint to any person 
 whom the complainant reasonably believes may 
 have received such unfavorable information.
 ``(B) Attorneys' fees and costs.--If the Secretary 
 or an administrative law judge, review board, or court 
 grants an order for relief under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary, administrative law judge, review board, or 
 court, respectively, shall assess, at the request of 
 the covered employee against the covered employer--
 ``(i) reasonable attorneys' fees; and
 ``(ii) costs (including expert witness 
 fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the 
 Secretary, administrative law judge, review 
 board, or court, respectively, in connection 
 with bringing the complaint upon which the 
 order was issued.
 ``(15) Procedural rights.--The rights and remedies provided 
 for in this subsection may not be waived by any agreement, 
 policy, form, or condition of employment, including by any pre-
 dispute arbitration agreement or collective bargaining 
 agreement.
 ``(16) Savings.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed to diminish the rights, privileges, or remedies of 
 any covered employee under any Federal or State law or common 
 law, or under any collective bargaining agreement.
 ``(17) Election of venue.--
 ``(A) In general.--A covered employee of a covered 
 employer who is located in a State that has a State 
 plan approved under section 18 may file a complaint 
 alleging a violation of subsection (c)(1) or paragraph 
 (2) of this subsection by such employer with--
 ``(i) the Secretary under paragraph (5); or
 ``(ii) a State plan administrator in such 
 State.
 ``(B) Referrals.--If--
 ``(i) the Secretary receives a complaint 
 pursuant to subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary 
 shall not refer such complaint to a State plan 
 administrator for resolution; or
 ``(ii) a State plan administrator receives 
 a complaint pursuant to subparagraph (A)(ii), 
 the State plan administrator shall not refer 
 such complaint to the Secretary for resolution.
 ``(18) Presumption of retaliation.--The Secretary shall 
 apply an unrebuttable presumption of retaliation in any 
 complaint initiated under paragraph (5) in which the Secretary 
 finds a covered employee suffers an adverse action within 90 
 days of the date on which the covered employee took any action 
 protected under subsection (c)(1) or raised any reasonable 
 apprehension under paragraph (2) of this subsection.
 ``(19) Supplement and not supplant.--The remedies provided 
 for under this subsection supplement, and do not supplant, the 
 private right of action under section 240 of the Agricultural 
 Worker Justice Act.
 ``(20) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection and 
 subsection (c)--
 ``(A) the term `retaliate or discriminate against' 
 includes reporting, or threatening to report, to a 
 Federal, State, or local authority the suspected 
 citizenship or immigration status of a covered 
 employee, or of a family member of a covered employee, 
 because the covered employee raises a concern about 
 workplace health and safety practices or hazards; and
 ``(B) the term `family member', with respect to the 
 family member of a covered employee, means an 
 individual who--
 ``(i) is related to the covered employee by 
 blood, adoption, marriage, or domestic 
 partnership; and
 ``(ii) is a significant other, parent, 
 sibling, child, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, 
 cousin, grandparent, or grandchild of the 
 covered employee.''.
 (c) Relation to Enforcement.--Section 17(j) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
666(j)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, 
including the history of violations under subsection (c) or (d) of 
section 11''.

SEC. 237. REGULATIONS TO RESTORE A COLUMN ON REQUIRED RECORDS OF WORK-
 RELATED MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary shall issue a final rule regarding matters pertaining to the 
proposed rule issued by the Secretary on January 29, 2010, entitled 
``Occupational Injury and Illness Recording and Reporting 
Requirements'' (75 Fed. Reg. 4728).

SEC. 238. FUNDING FOR ADDITIONAL OSHA INSPECTORS.

 Out of any amounts in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
there is appropriated $60,000,000 to the Secretary for each of fiscal 
years 2024 through 2029, to remain available until expended for--
 (1) the hiring of additional inspectors to carry out 
 inspections under section 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
 Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 657); and
 (2) carrying out sections 6, 8, and 11 of the Occupational 
 Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 655; 657; and 660), as 
 amended by this Act.

SEC. 239. OSHA REPORTING.

 (a) Definition of Pandemic.--In this section, the term ``pandemic'' 
means a public health emergency declared under section 319 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d) with respect to a pandemic.
 (b) Reporting During a Pandemic.--
 (1) Standardized reporting.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 standardized process for covered establishments to 
 report, on a weekly basis during a pandemic, to the 
 Secretary information regarding infections and deaths 
 related to the pandemic. Such information shall 
 include--
 (i) the number of employees on a weekly and 
 cumulative basis that have contracted the 
 disease resulting in the pandemic;
 (ii) racial demographics of such employees; 
 and
 (iii) the employment status of such 
 employees.
 (B) Form and procedures.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, or 7 days 
 following a declaration of a pandemic, whichever is 
 sooner, the Secretary shall issue reporting procedures 
 described in subparagraph (A), including forms for such 
 procedures, for pandemics.
 (2) Public availability.--The Secretary shall make the 
 information reported under paragraph (1) available to the 
 public in a manner that facilitates public participation, 
 including by making such information available on its website 
 in a manner that maximizes public participation.
 (3) Privacy.--A covered establishment, in reporting 
 information to the Secretary under paragraph (1), may not claim 
 confidential business information or patient privacy, except 
 that such an establishment may withhold the names of workers, 
 as a basis to withhold information.
 (c) Disclosures to Employees.--A covered establishment shall 
disclose to each employee or individual providing work for the 
employer, including any individual providing such work through a 
contract or subcontract, all chemicals used at the worksite where the 
employee or individual provides such work. Such disclosure shall be 
provided to the employee or individual in the native language of the 
employee or individual.

SEC. 240. PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.

 (a) In General.--Any person aggrieved by the failure of a covered 
establishment to comply with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.), including any regulation promulgated 
pursuant to such Act, or to comply with this subtitle may file suit in 
any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the 
parties, without respect to the amount in controversy and without 
regard to the citizenship of the parties, or in any other court of 
competent jurisdiction.
 (b) Right of Recovery.--In an action brought by any aggrieved 
person pursuant to this section, the person may recover equitable and 
legal relief (including compensatory and punitive damages), attorney's 
fees (including expert fees), and costs of the action.
 (c) Action by the Secretary.--Any administrative enforcement by the 
Secretary shall not preclude the relief afforded by this section or 
otherwise deprive a court of jurisdiction.

SEC. 241. INJUNCTION PROCEEDINGS.

 Section 13(a) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 
U.S.C. 662(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Any 
employee (or the representative of such employee) at a place of 
employment subject to enforcement under this subsection may 
unconditionally intervene as a matter of right.''.

 PART IV--SAVINGS PROVISION

SEC. 251. SAVINGS PROVISION.

 Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to diminish the rights, 
privileges, or remedies of any employee who exercises rights under any 
Federal or State law or common law, or under any collective bargaining 
agreement.

 Subtitle B--GAO Reports

SEC. 261. REVIEW AND REPORT ON RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISPARITIES IN MEAT 
 AND POULTRY PROCESSING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall carry out, and submit to Congress, a report on racial and ethnic 
disparities in the meat and poultry processing sector.
 (b) Inclusions.--The report under subsection (a) shall contain a 
review of each of the following:
 (1) The impacts of working in covered establishments to 
 individuals working at such establishments who are employees, 
 temporary workers, incarcerated workers, noncitizen workers 
 admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants described in 
 section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b)) or as refugees under 
 section 207 of that Act (8 U.S.C. 1157), or noncitizen workers 
 who are not lawfully present in the United States, including--
 (A) workplace injuries, including repetitive 
 musculoskeletal injuries, of those individuals;
 (B) psychological and mental health conditions of 
 those individuals;
 (C) exposure of those individuals to chemicals or 
 other potential carcinogens and reproductive toxins; 
 and
 (D) any physical or mental abuse, including sexual 
 harassment, of those individuals by coworkers or 
 managers.
 (2) The racial demographics and use of temporary workers to 
 outsource the responsibility of covered establishments to 
 provide a safe workplace.
 (3) The racial demographics and use of incarcerated workers 
 in covered establishments, including--
 (A) the extent to which those workers have a choice 
 in working at covered establishments;
 (B) the use of those workers to outsource the 
 responsibility of covered establishments to provide a 
 safe workplace;
 (C) the use of those workers to outsource the 
 responsibility of covered establishments to provide 
 fair compensation; and
 (D) the use of those workers by covered 
 establishments to externalize employee cost.
 (4) The racial demographics and use of noncitizen workers 
 admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants described in 
 section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b)) or as refugees under 
 section 207 of that Act (8 U.S.C. 1157) at covered 
 establishments, including--
 (A) the extent to which predatory practices, such 
 as limiting the ability of those workers to choose and 
 move between competing organizations, are utilized by 
 covered establishments with respect to those workers;
 (B) the extent to which those workers are unable to 
 speak out for fear of retaliation; and
 (C) the extent to which there is full transparency 
 about the nature of employment of those workers prior 
 to being hired.
 (5) The racial demographics and use of noncitizen workers 
 who are not lawfully present in the United States at covered 
 establishments, including--
 (A) the extent to which those workers are unable to 
 speak out for fear of retaliation; and
 (B) whether any collusion between Federal 
 immigration offices and covered establishments have the 
 effect of intimidating and silencing those workers.
 <all>