HR 3265 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3265
To provide for improved energy efficiency.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 2, 1991
Mr. MURTHA introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Energy and Commerce, Ways and Means, and Science, Space,
and Technology
A BILL
To provide for improved energy efficiency.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Energy Resources Act of 1991'.
TITLE I--ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Subtitle A--Average Fuel Economy Standards
SEC. 101. AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY.
 (a) Section 502(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)) is amended by striking:
`1985 and thereafter
27.5.'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`1985 and through 1995
27.5.
`1996 and thereafter
27.5.
as provided in accordance with section 514 of this Act.'.
 (b) Section 502(a)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(4)) is amended by striking `The Secretary' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `Except in the case of standards established by sections
 514 and 515, the Secretary'.
SEC. 102. LIGHT TRUCKS.
 Section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `and which ends before model year
 1996' immediately after `after the date of enactment of this title'.
SEC. 103. EXEMPTIONS FOR LIMITED PRODUCTION.
 Section 502(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `passenger' each place it appears;
 (2) by inserting `or subsection (b) or section 514 or 515' immediately
 before the period at the end of the first sentence; and
 (3) by inserting `subsection (b) or sections 514 and 515' immediately before
 `is more stringent'.
SEC. 104. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
 Section 502(g)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(g)(1)) is amended by inserting `or section 514 or 515'
 immediately before the period at the end of the first sentence.
SEC. 105. CONSULTATION.
 Section 502(i) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(i)) is amended by inserting `or sections 514 or 515'
 immediately before the period in the first sentence.
SEC. 106. NOTIFICATION.
 Section 502(j) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(j)) is amended by inserting `or sections 514 or 515'
 immediately before `or any modification'.
SEC. 107. NEW STANDARDS.
 (a) Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sections:
`PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `Sec. 514. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the average fuel
 economy for passenger automobiles manufactured by any manufacturer in model
 year 1996 and each model year thereafter shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
1996 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 10 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of
such average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such
standard shall not be less than 27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed
35 miles per gallon.
2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 25 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 40 miles per gallon.
`AUTOMOBILES OTHER THAN PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 515. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, commencing with
 model year 1996 and each model year thereafter, the average fuel economy
 for passenger automobiles other than passenger automobiles manufactured by
 any manufacturer in any such model year shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
1996 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for light trucks in model year 1988, plus an
amount equal to 10 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average
fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard shall not
be less than 20 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 25 miles per gallon.
2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 25 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
20 miles per gallon and shall not exceed 30 miles per gallon.
`MODIFICATIONS OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 516. (a) Any time after the beginning of fiscal year 1996, any person
 may petition the Secretary to modify any average fuel economy standard
 established under this Act for model year 2001 and thereafter. In response
 to such a petition, the Secretary may increase or decrease such standard to
 the level which the Secretary determines is the maximum feasible average
 fuel economy for the relevant model year (taking into consideration the
 factors listed in (sections 514 and 515), except that the Secretary shall
 not reduce any such standard below a standard equal to a 20 percent increase
 over the average fuel economy achieved by the manufacturer involved for
 the applicable type (or class) of vehicles for model year 1988. Any such
 petition shall be filed at least 12 months in advance of the model year to
 which it is applicable. Upon receipt of such a petition, the Secretary shall
 conduct a rulemaking proceeding, which shall be conducted in accordance
 with the following procedure:
 `(1) The Secretary--
 `(A) shall publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking which specifies
 the type (or class) of vehicles to which the rule may apply;
 `(B) shall invite interested persons to submit, within 60 days after the
 date of publication of such advance notice, written presentations of data,
 views, and arguments in response to such notice; and
 `(C) may identify proposed or amended standards that may be prescribed.
 `(2) A proposed rule which prescribes an amended average fuel economy
 standard, or prescribes no amended standard, for a type (or class) of
 vehicles shall be published in the Federal Register. In prescribing any
 such proposed rule with respect to a standard, the Secretary shall consider
 the factors listed in sections 514 and 515 and shall determine the maximum
 improvement in energy efficiency or maximum reduction in energy use that
 is technologically feasible for each type (or class) of vehicles. If such
 standard is not designed to achieve such maximum improvement or maximum
 reduction, the Secretary shall state in the proposed rule the reasons
 therefor.
 `(3) After the publication of the proposed rulemaking, the Secretary shall
 afford interested persons an opportunity, during a period of not less than
 60 days, to comment on matters relating to the proposed rule.
 `(4) A final rule prescribing an amended average fuel economy standard,
 or prescribing no amended standard, for a type (or class) of vehicles
 shall be published as soon as is practicable, but not less than 120 days,
 after publication of the proposed rule in the Federal Register.
 `(b) In determining the maximum feasible average fuel economy during a
 rulemaking proceeding under this section, the Secretary shall evaluate
 the economic practicability of the standard, considering--
 `(1) the economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the
 consumers of the vehicles subject to such standard;
 `(2) the savings in operating costs throughout the estimated average
 life of the vehicle in the type (or class) compared to any increase in
 the price of, or in the initial charges for, or maintenance expenses of,
 the vehicles which are likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(3) the total projected amount of energy savings likely to result directly
 from the imposition of the standard
 `(4) any lessening of the utility or the performance of the vehicles likely
 to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(5) the total projected amount of economic savings due to reduced emissions;
 `(6) the impact of any lessening of competition or any change in foreign
 trade that is likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(7) the value of reducing carbon dioxide emissions to mitigate the global
 greenhouse warming, as well as reducing other environmentally damaging
 energy-related pollutants;
 `(8) the national security implications of reduced oil dependency;
 `(9) the value of national energy conservation; and
 `(10) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.'.
Subtitle B--Federal Energy Management
SEC. 121. FEDERAL ENERGY MANAGEMENT AMENDMENTS.
 Part 3 of title V of the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (41
 U.S.C. 8251 et seq.) is amended as follows:
 (1) In section 543--
 (A) amend subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(1) Not later than January 1, 2000, each Federal agency shall, to the
 maximum extent practicable, install in Federal buildings under the control
 of such agency in the United States, all energy conservation projects
 (single or multiple measures) with payback periods of less than 10
 years as calculated using the methods and procedures developed pursuant
 to section 544. Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 each agency shall submit to the Secretary a list of projects meeting the
 10-year payback criterion, the energy that each project will save and
 total energy and cost savings involved.
 `(2) An agency may exclude from the requirements of paragraph (1) any
 Federal building or collection of Federal buildings, and the associated
 energy consumption and gross square footage, if the head of such agency
 finds that compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1) would
 be impracticable. A finding of impracticability shall be based on the
 energy intensiveness of activities carried out in such Federal buildings or
 collection of Federal buildings, the type and amount of energy consumed, the
 technical feasibility of making the desired changes, or the unique character
 of many facilities operated by the Departments of Defense and Energy. Each
 agency shall identify and list in each report made under section 548, the
 Federal buildings designated by it for such exclusion. The Secretary shall
 review such findings for consistency with the impracticability standards
 set forth herein, and may within 90 days after receipt of the findings,
 reverse a finding of impracticability, in which case the agency shall comply
 with the requirements of paragraph (1). This section shall not apply to
 an agency's facilities that generate or transmit electric energy, nor to
 the uranium enrichment facilities operated by the Department of Energy.';
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) after `subsection (a),' insert the following: `The Secretary of
 Energy shall consult with the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator
 of the General Services Administration in developing guidelines for the
 implementation of this part, and';
 (ii) strike `Federal Energy Management Improvement Act of 1988,' in paragraph
 (1) and insert in lieu thereof `National Energy Resources Act of 1991,
 and submit to the Secretary of Energy';
 (iii) after `high priority projects,' insert the following: `and such plan
 shall include steps to take maximum advantage of contracts authorized under
 title VIII of this Act (42 U.S.C. 8287 et seq.), financial incentives,
 and other services provided by utilities for efficiency investment and
 other forms of financing to reduce the direct costs to the Government;';
 (iv) at the end of paragraph (2), strike the semicolon and insert the
 following: `, and update such surveys periodically, but not less than
 every 3 years;';
 (v) amend paragraph (3) to read as follows:
 `(3) using such surveys, determine the cost and payback period of energy
 conservation measures likely to achieve the goals of this section;'; and
 (vi) redesignate paragraph (4) as paragraph (5) and insert the following
 new paragraph after paragraph (3):
 `(4) install those energy conservation measures that will attain the
 requirements of this section in a cost-effective manner as defined in
 section 544, and'.
 (b) In section 544--
 (1) strike `National Bureau of Standards,' in subsection (a) and insert
 in lieu thereof `National Institute of Standards and Technology,';
 (2) strike all after the word `each', in subsection (b)(2) and insert
 in lieu thereof: `agency shall, after January 1, 1994, fully consider
 the energy efficiency of all potential building space at the time of
 renewing or entering into a new lease. Further, all Government leased
 space constructed after January 1, 1994, shall meet model Federal energy
 conservation performance standards for new commercial buildings promulgated
 pursuant to section 304 of the Energy Conservation and Production Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6833).'; and
 (3) in subsection (b), add the following new paragraph:
 `(3) Each agency shall fully consider the costs of environmental
 externalities.'.
 (c) In section 545, insert after the word `measures' the following:
 `as needed to meet the requirements of section 543.'.
 (d) In section 546, strike subsection (b) and insert in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `(b) IMPLEMENTATION- To facilitate the financing of energy conservation
 measures, each Federal agency shall promote the use of contracts authorized
 by title VIII of this Act (42 U.S.C. 8287 et seq.). The Secretary, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of the
 General Services Administration, within 6 months after the date of the
 enactment of the National Energy Resources Act of 1991, shall develop
 appropriate procedures and methods for use by Federal agencies to select
 energy service contractors that will achieve the intent of this section in
 a cost-effective manner. Notwithstanding any other procurement laws and
 regulations, such procedures and methods shall apply to the selection of
 energy service contractors by each Federal agency.'.
 (e) In section 548--
 (1) strike the word `Each' in subsection (a) and insert in lieu thereof
 the following: `In addition to the plan required to be submitted to the
 Secretary pursuant to section 543(b)(1), each';
 (2) insert `by April 2 of each year,' after the word `annually' in subsection
 (b); and
 (3) insert the words `by each agency', after the words `under this part'
 in subsection (b)(1).
SEC. 122. AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY.
 Section 510(a) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2010(a)) is amended by striking `enactment' and all that follows
 and inserting the following: `achieve a fleet average fuel economy for such
 year not less than the average fuel economy for that particular model type
 for the previous model year.'.
Subtitle C--Tax Treatment of Transportation Benefits Provided by Employer
SEC. 131. TAX TREATMENT OF TRANSPORTATION BENEFITS PROVIDED BY EMPLOYER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 132(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to certain fringe benefits) is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (3),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting `,
 or', and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(5) qualified transportation benefit.'
 (b) QUALIFIED TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT- Section 132 of such Code is amended
 by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (l) and inserting after
 subsection (j) the following new subsection:
 `(k) QUALIFIED TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `qualified
 transportation benefit' means--
 `(A) transportation in a commuter highway vehicle between the employee's
 residence and place of employment, and
 `(B) any transit pass.
 `(2) LIMITATION OF EXCLUSION FOR TRANSIT PASSES- In the case of a qualified
 transportation benefit described in paragraph (1)(B), the amount excluded
 from gross income under subsection (a) shall not exceed $75 per month.
 `(3) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS- Subsection (a) shall not apply to the value
 of any qualified transportation benefit unless--
 `(A) such benefit is provided under a separate written plan of the employer
 which does not discriminate in favor of employees who are officers,
 shareholders, or highly compensated employees, and
 `(B) the plan provides that such benefit is provided in addition to (and
 not in lieu of) any compensation otherwise payable to the employee.
 `(4) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) TRANSIT PASS- The term `transit pass' means any pass, token, farecard,
 voucher, or similar item entitling a person to transportation on mass
 transit facilities (whether or not publicly owned).
 `(B) COMMUTER HIGHWAY VEHICLE- The term `commuter highway vehicle' means
 any highway vehicle--
 `(i) the seating capacity of which is at least 7 adults (not including
 the driver), and
 `(ii) at least 80 percent of the mileage use of which can reasonably be
 expected to be--
 `(I) for purposes of transporting employees between their residences and
 their place of employment, and
 `(II) on trips during which the number of employees transported for such
 purposes is at least 1/2 of the adult seating capacity of such vehicle
 (not including the driver).
 `(C) TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED BY EMPLOYER- Transportation referred to in
 paragraph (1)(A) shall be considered to be provided by an employer if such
 transportation is furnished in a commuter highway vehicle operated by or
 for the employer.
 `(D) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' does not include an individual who is
 an employee (within the meaning of section 401(c)(1).'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 132(h)(1) of such Code is amended by
 striking `and (2)' and inserting `, (2), and (5)'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 132. LIMITATION ON EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME FOR PARKING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (4) of section 132(h) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to special rule for parking) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) WORKING CONDITION FRINGE INCLUDES CERTAIN TRANSPORTATION SUBSIDIES
 AND PARKING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `working condition
 fringe' includes--
 `(i) parking provided to an employee at a parking facility--
 `(I) which is located on the premises of the employer,
 `(II) which is operated by the employer, and
 `(III) substantially all the use of which is by employees of the employer,
 and
 `(ii) qualified transportation provided by the employer between the
 employee's residence and place of employment.
 `(B) LIMITATION- Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall only apply to the extent
 the qualified transportation provided during any calendar month does not
 exceed $75.
 `(C) QUALIFIED TRANSPORTATION- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `qualified transportation' means--
 `(i) transportation furnished in a commuter highway vehicle operated by
 or for the employer, and
 `(ii) transportation provided by the employer (whether by payment or
 reimbursement) on buses, trains, boats, or subways but only if such
 transportation--
 `(I) is available to the general public, and
 `(II) is scheduled and along regular routes.
 `(D) COMMUTER HIGHWAY VEHICLE- For purposes of subparagraph (C), the term
 `commuter highway vehicle' means any highway vehicle--
 `(i) the seating capacity of which is at least 7 adults (not including
 the driver), and
 `(ii) at least 80 percent of the mileage use of which can reasonably be
 expected to be (I) for purposes of transporting the taxpayer's employees
 between their residences and their place of employment, and (II) on trips
 during which the number of employees transported for such purposes is at
 least 1/2 the adult seating capacity of such vehicle (not including the
 the driver).'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 parking and transportation provided after December 31, 1992, in taxable
 years ending after such date.
Subtitle D--Amendments to Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978
SEC. 141. ENCOURAGEMENT OF LEAST COST INVESTMENT.
 The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-617;
 November 9, 1978), as amended, is further amended by inserting the
 following new section after section 113 and renumbering subsequent sections
 accordingly:
`SEC. 114. LEAST COST INVESTMENT.
 `(a) ADOPTION OF STANDARDS- Not later than 2 years after the date of
 enactment of this section, each State regulatory authority (with respect to
 each gas utility and electric utility for which it has ratemaking authority)
 shall provide public notice and conduct a hearing respecting the standard
 established by subsection (b) and, on the basis of such hearing, shall adopt
 and implement the standard established by subsection (b) if, and to the
 extent, such authority determines that such adoption and implementation
 is appropriate and consistent with otherwise applicable State law. For
 purposes of any determination made on the basis of such hearing and any
 review of such determination in any court in accordance with section 125,
 the purposes of this title supplement otherwise applicable State law.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT- The following Federal standard is hereby established:
 `The rates permitted to be charged by a gas utility or electric utility
 shall as to remove the rate disincentives for utility implementation
 of demand side management programs. For purposes of this standard, the
 term `implementation of least cost supply measures' shall mean actions
 (including, but not limited to, conservation and other means of demand
 reduction) taken to provide adequate and reliable service to consumers
 while providing lowest total costs to society, such costs to include costs
 incurred by the utility and its customers, and environmental costs.
 `(c) PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS- Each State regulatory authority (with respect
 to each gas utility and electric utility for which it has ratemaking
 authority) within the 2-year period specified in subsection (a), shall (1)
 adopt and implement, pursuant to subsection (a), the standard established
 by subsection (b) or, (2) if the standard is not adopted and implemented,
 such authority shall state in writing that it has determined not to
 adopt and implement such standard, together with the reasons for such
 determination. Such statement of reasons shall be available to the public.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `gas utility' means any person who is engaged in the local
 distribution and sale of natural gas to any ultimate consumer and over
 whom a State regulatory authority has ratemaking authority; and
 `(2) the term `electric utility' means any person who is engaged in the
 local distribution and sale of electricity to any ultimate consumer and
 over whom a State regulatory authority has ratemaking authority.
Subtitle E--Energy and Water Conservation Subsidies
SEC. 151. ENERGY AND WATER CONSERVATION SUBSIDIES.
 (a) Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to amounts specifically excluded from gross income)
 is amended by redesignating section 136 as section 137 and by inserting
 after section 135 the following new section:
`SEC. 136. ENERGY AND WATER CONSERVATION SUBSIDIES.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Gross income shall not include the value of any subsidy
 provided by a public utility to a customer for the purchase or installation
 of any energy or water conservation measure.
 `(b) DENIAL OF DOUBLE BENEFIT- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 subtitle, no deduction or credit shall be allowed for, or by reason of,
 any expenditure to the extent of any subsidy excluded under subsection (a)
 which was provided with respect to such expenditure. The adjusted basis
 of any property shall be reduced by the amount of any subsidy excluded
 under subsection (a) which was provided with respect to such property.
 `(c) ENERGY OR WATER CONSERVATION MEASURE- For purposes of this section,
 the term `energy or water conservation measure' means--
 `(1) any residential energy conservation measure described in section
 210(11) of the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 8211(11)),
 `(2) any commercial energy conservation measure described in section
 710(b)(5) of the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (as in effect
 on the day before the date of the enactment of the Conservation Service
 Reform Act of 1986),
 `(3) any specially defined energy property (as defined in section 48(l)(5)
 of this title, as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment
 of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990), and
 `(4) any device designed to reduce water consumption.
 `(d) PUBLIC UTILITY- For purposes of this section, the term `public utility'
 means any person, corporation, State agency or local unit of government,
 or Federal agency engaged in the sale of electrical energy, gas, or water.'.
 (b) The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such
 Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 136 and inserting:
`Sec. 136. Energy and water conservation subsidies.
`Sec. 137. Cross reference to other Acts.'.
 (c) The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts received
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subtitle F--Development of Recycling Markets
SEC. 161. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds the following:
 (1) Each year, millions of tons of recovered materials are recycled into
 consumer and other goods which are sold or distributed in interstate
 commerce. Recovered materials already being recycled include recoverable
 paper and paperboard, plastic scrap, various compostable materials,
 discarded tires and other rubber scrap, recoverable glass, aluminum scrap,
 spent automotive batteries and other nonferrous scrap, steel scrap, and
 yard waste. Much greater quantities of these same recovered materials are
 not currently being recycled, and are instead incinerated, landfilled,
 or otherwise made unavailable to industries in the United States for the
 production of consumer and other goods.
 (2) Segregation of recyclable materials from the solid waste stream does
 not, by itself, guarantee successful recycling. Effective recycling is
 critically dependent on the existence of adequate regional, national,
 and international markets for each type of material collected.
 (3) By virtue of its significant Constitutional interest in facilitating
 interstate commerce and its ability to influence the economic climate for
 business investment in the United States, the Federal Government can and
 should play a key role in encouraging the expansion of industrial capacity
 for the manufacture of recycled consumer and other goods, and stimulating
 and strengthening available markets for recycled goods.
 (4) Surveys of the national waste stream indicate that packaging makes up
 a significant portion of the waste that is being landfilled, incinerated,
 and often cast beside our highways as litter. Reduction, recycling, and
 reuse of packaging must be promoted and supported at the national level.
 (5) By virtue of its significant constitutional interest in facilitating
 interstate commerce and its ability to influence the economic climate for
 business investment in the United States, the Federal Government can and
 should play a key role in encouraging the expansion of industrial capacity
 for the manufacture of recycled consumer and other goods, and stimulating
 and strengthening available markets for recycled goods.
 (6) Increased recycling of recovered materials diverted from solid waste
 will necessitate the building of new recycling plants such as secondary
 paper mills, plastics recycling plants, steel minimills, rubber reclamation
 facilities, and secondary aluminum and lead smelters. Construction and
 operation of these industrial facilities will contribute to the expansion
 of the Nation's manufacturing base, create new employment opportunities
 for the United States labor force, and enhance the tax bases of Federal,
 State, and local governments.
 (7) By displacing goods and raw materials presently imported, domestic
 production of recycled goods can reduce the Nation's dependence on foreign
 supplies of these materials and improve the Nation's balance of trade.
SEC. 162. BUREAU OF RECYCLABLE COMMODITIES.
 The Secretary shall establish within the Department of Commerce a separate
 office to be called the Bureau of Recyclable Commodities. The principal
 purpose of the office shall be to promote the use of recovered materials
 diverted from solid waste. Unless otherwise specified, the office, at the
 direction of the Secretary, shall carry out the functions enumerated by
 this subtitle.
SEC. 163. ANNUAL STATISTICS ON SOLID WASTE AND OTHER MATERIALS.
 (a) MATERIALS COVERED- The Secretary shall gather statistics by validated
 methods of sampling in accordance with this section for solid waste and
 the following types of recovered materials:
 (1) Aluminum scrap.
 (2) Lead scrap.
 (3) Other nonferrous scrap.
 (4) Ferrous scrap.
 (5) Plastic scrap.
 (6) Rubber scrap.
 (7) Waste glass.
 (8) Recoverable paper and paperboard.
 (9) Yard waste.
 (10) Food waste.
 (b) STATISTICS. --For solid waste and for those recovered materials listed
 in subsection (a), the Secretary shall collect statistics and information
 on the following:
 (1) Quantities of durable goods, nondurable goods, containers, packaging,
 and other items that are sold or distributed in commerce and that are
 likely to become solid waste.
 (2) Quantities of solid waste annually generated by households, office
 establishments, commercial establishments, and institutional establishments.
 (3) Quantities of solid waste and recovered materials annually generated
 by industrial facilities.
 (4) Quantities of recovered materials annually managed using techniques
 other than recycling, including incineration and landfilling.
 (5) Inventories of recovered materials being stockpiled for possible
 recycling.
 (6) Quantities of recovered materials annually recycled.
 (c) RECYCLING STATISTICS- For materials being recycled (as determined under
 subsection (b)(6)), the Secretary shall collect statistics and information
 on the following:
 (1) Specific recycling techniques employed by industries, and quantities
 of recovered materials annually recycled using these techniques.
 (2) Available markets (including domestic and export markets) for recycled
 goods, and quantities of recycled goods annually sold or distributed
 in commerce.
 (3) Existing industrial capacity for the manufacture of recycled goods.
 (4) Specific techniques employed by households, local governments, and
 industries to source-separate, collect, transport, stockpile, process,
 or upgrade these materials for the purpose of recycling, and quantities
 of materials annually handled using these techniques.
 (d) ANNUAL STATISTICS- The Secretary shall collect and publish the statistics
 and information required under this section not later than 6 months after
 the date of the enactment of this Act. At a minimum, the Secretary shall
 update and publish such statistics and information on an annual basis.
 (e) MULTI-STATE REGIONS- After consultation with the States, the Secretary
 shall designate not fewer than 6, and no more than 10, multi-State regions
 within the United States for the purpose of regional data collection. The
 Secretary shall collect and compile statistics for each of the designated
 regions.
 (f) S.I.C. REVISION- The Secretary shall revise the standard industrial
 classification system as necessary to facilitate the collection of statistics
 and other information on recycling and other related activities, including
 source-separation, collection, transport, stockpiling, processing, upgrading,
 and consumption of materials for the purpose of recycling. To the extent
 practicable and useful, the Secretary shall integrate necessary data
 collection activities required under this section with periodic surveys
 of industry or government conducted by the Department of Commerce.
 (g) PRIVILEGED OR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this section shall
 be construed so as to authorize the Secretary to obtain privileged or
 confidential information that is described in section 552(b)(4) of title 5,
 United States Code.
SEC. 164. IDENTIFICATION OF GRADES, SPECIFICATIONS, AND TEST METHODS FOR
RECOVERED MATERIALS.
 (a) COMMODITY TYPES AND GRADES- Not later than 9 months after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, and after consultation with appropriate recycling
 industries and other potentially affected parties, the Secretary shall
 identify materials covered under section 504(a) and compostable materials
 that qualify as recovered materials and, to the extent practicable,
 standardize the types and grades of those commodities. The Secretary may
 revise such types and grades from time to time as the Secretary considers
 necessary.
 (b) GRADE DETERMINATION- To the extent practicable, identification under
 subsection (a) of suitable grades of recovered materials shall be based on--
 (1) material grades traded on commodity exchanges or markets;
 (2) material grades used as raw materials or feedstocks in the manufacture
 of recycled goods; or
 (3) material grades purchased or accepted for eventual recycling after
 further source-separation, collection, transport, stockpiling, processing,
 upgrading, or other handling.
 (c) MULTIPLE TYPES AND GRADES- In identifying the types and grades of
 materials that qualify as recovered materials, the Secretary shall assign
 solid waste materials to multiple types and grades.
 (d) SPECIFICATIONS- (1) Not later than 9 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall identify and, to the extent
 practicable, standardize the technical specifications applying to the use
 of each individual recyclable commodity as a raw material or feedstock
 for recycling.
 (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), in carrying out the activities
 described in paragraph (1) the Secretary shall consult with--
 (A) appropriate recycling industries;
 (B) appropriate public or private organizations that set specifications
 for recycling; and
 (C) other potentially affected parties that the Secretary determines to
 be appropriate.
 (3) If the Secretary determines that a technical specification in effect at
 the time of the identification described in paragraph (1) does not conflict
 with the requirements of this title, the Secretary may use such technical
 specification without modification and without consulting pursuant to
 paragraph (2).
 (4) The specifications described in paragraph (1) shall be revised
 periodically to ensure continuing conformance to industry standards for
 recycling.
SEC. 165. LABELING OF NONDURABLE GOODS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall, after notice and opportunity for public
 hearing, promulgate regulations regarding the labeling of nondurable goods
 as to their recyclability and composition in accordance with this section.
 (b) ITEMS COVERED; DEADLINES FOR REGULATIONS- (1) Such regulations shall
 be promulgated not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment
 of this Act for containers and packaging used to hold food, beverages,
 soaps, detergents, cleaning preparations, personal care products, and other
 items sold in food stores (SIC code 54), liquor stores (SIC code 5921),
 and drug stores (SIC code 5912). At a minimum, the regulations for such
 items shall be promulgated regarding labels for--
 (A) liquids containers holding in excess of 4 fluid ounces; and
 (B) other containers and packaging holding materials in excess of 8 ounces
 by weight.
 (2) Such regulations shall be promulgated not later than 3 years after
 the date of the enactment of this Act for paper and paperboard products
 sold to office, commercial, and industrial establishments and households
 by paper and paperboard manufacturers (SIC 26), wholesale suppliers (SIC
 51), and retail suppliers (SIC 5943). Such regulations shall require that
 labels describing the recyclability of paper and paperboard products may
 be affixed either to the paper or paperboard product, or to the container
 or packaging in which the product is distributed or sold.
 (3) Such regulations shall be promulgated not later than 4 years after
 the date of the enactment of this Act for other containers, packaging,
 and nondurable goods, or classes of such items, as determined by the
 Secretary. In making such a determination, the Secretary shall consider--
 (A) quantities of the materials in the items that are present in solid waste;
 (B) whether labeling will facilitate additional recycling of the materials;
 and
 (C) the feasibility and cost of labeling to manufacturers.
 (4) Regulations promulgated under this section shall take effect not later
 than 6 months after the date of promulgation.
 (5) Such regulations shall require the identification of the principal type
 of resin from which plastic containers are formed to facilitate separation
 of such plastic containers by resin type. Such regulations shall take into
 account industry practices and existing State laws respecting labeling of
 plastic containers to identify resin types.
 (c) DETERMINATION OF RECYCLABILITY- The Secretary shall determine
 the recyclability of items covered under the regulations, taking into
 consideration the following:
 (1)(A) The demonstrated recyclability of the principal constituent material
 of such an item. For purposes of this section, the term `demonstrated
 recyclability' means that the principal constituent material of the item
 is actually recycled (when measured by validated methods of sampling) at
 the maximum rate practicable, as determined by the Secretary, nationwide
 or across two or more of the regions designated by the Secretary under
 section 604(e). The Secretary shall review and, wherever feasible, ratchet
 upward the required minimum rate of recycling of principal constituent
 materials at least every 2 years.
 (B) In determining the demonstrated recyclability of items covered under the
 regulations, the Secretary shall give priority to making such determinations
 first to items covered by subsection (b)(1), second to items covered by
 subsection (b)(2), and third to items covered by subsection (b)(3). The
 Secretary may determine the recycling rate for any individual item (or
 class of items), but shall not include such item (or class) in more than
 a single recycling rate determination.
 (C) For purposes of identifying the constituent materials used in the
 manufacture of containers, packaging, and nondurable goods, the Secretary
 shall distinguish between types of materials based on their physical
 and chemical properties. For purposes of evaluating the recyclability of
 items composed of plastic, the Secretary shall treat each type, or where
 appropriate, subtype, of plastic resin as a separate constituent material.
 (2) The potential presence of contaminants which may interfere with existing
 recycling techniques. The Secretary may consider contaminants originally
 contained in the item, or contaminants introduced during normal use or
 handling of the item. If the item is composed of multiple materials,
 the Secretary shall evaluate the separability of the materials. If the
 materials are found to be nonseparable, the Secretary shall evaluate the
 recyclability of the item in its entirety. Such evaluation shall consider
 the necessary inclusion on a package of tamper-evident barriers or seals.
 (3) The need for consistency with grades of recovered materials designated
 by the Secretary under section 605.
 (d) VOLUNTARY RECYCLABILITY LABEL REQUIREMENTS- (1) Except as provided
 in subsection (e), for an item (or class of items) determined by the
 Secretary to be recyclable under subsection (c), a label may only be placed
 on the item to so indicate if the following requirements are fulfilled.
 Such label shall read `RECYCLABLE ' with the blank space filled in with the
 principal constituent material used in manufacturing the item. The label
 also shall, to the maximum extent feasible, provide information that will
 assist in the identification of recyclable commodity grades (designated
 under section 605) potentially produced from the item (or class). In the
 case where only the product or the package of the product is recyclable,
 the recyclability label may be affixed only to the item (the product or
 the package of the product) that is recyclable.
 (2) The Secretary may establish an alternative label for an item (or class
 of items), such as a system of codes or symbols, if such alternative conveys
 information on recyclability and composition of the item (or class) that
 is substantially equivalent to the information conveyed by labels otherwise
 required under this section.
 (e) VOLUNTARY RECYCLABILITY SEAL- Not later than 2 years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall design and publish a
 standardized, national recyclability seal or symbol to provide further
 assistance to purchasers in the identification of recyclable packaging,
 containers, and nondurable goods. Such seal or symbol may be used voluntarily
 by any manufacturer of an item or class of items determined by the Secretary
 to be recyclable under subsection (c). The seal or symbol shall be distinct
 from and may only be used in conjunction with the recyclability label set
 forth in subsection (d).
 (f) ENFORCEMENT- (1) Whenever on the basis of any information the Secretary
 determines that any person has used or is using the recyclability label or
 recyclability seal, or both, in violation of any provision of this section,
 or regulations promulgated under this section, the Secretary may--
 (A) issue a recall order requiring the removal of the item from sale or
 distribution in commerce immediately or within a specified time period; or
 (B) commence a civil action in the United States district court in the
 district in which the violation occurred for appropriate relief, including
 a temporary or permanent injunction.
 (2) Any recall order issued under this subsection shall become final
 unless, not later than 30 days after the order is served, a person named
 in the order requests a public hearing. Upon such request, the Secretary
 shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any proceeding
 under this subsection, the Secretary may issue subpoenas for the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books,
 and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 (3) If a violator fails to take corrective action within the time specified
 in a recall order, the Secretary may assess a civil penalty of not more
 than $25,000 for each day of continued noncompliance with the order.
 (4) The Secretary may compromise any civil penalty or remedy under this
 section. In determining the amount of penalty or scope of relief, the
 Secretary shall consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size
 of the business of the person charged and the gravity of the violation.
 (g) RECYCLED LABEL- A label identifying an item as `recycled' may
 only be affixed to the item if the actual recycled content of the
 principal constituent material is printed immediately adjacent to the
 word `recycled'. Such label shall read ` % RECYCLED '. The actual
 percentage of the recycled content of the principal constituent material
 shall be identified before the percent symbol and the principal constituent
 material shall be identified after the word `recycled'.
Subtitle G--State and Local Building Codes
SEC. 171. STATE AND LOCAL BUILDING CODES
 Title II of the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 8211
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 271. UPDATING OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY CODES AND STANDARDS.
 `(a) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- Not later than 12 months after the date of
 the enactment of this part, the Secretary shall establish a program to
 provide technical assistance to States and localities for the purposes of
 updating energy efficiency provisions of residential and commercial building
 codes. In establishing and carrying out such program, the Secretary shall
 provide assistance to code officials in reviewing and analyzing current
 model codes and standards for residential and commercial building energy
 efficiency, in designing appropriate code amendments, and in developing
 code administration, compliance, and enforcement.
 `(b) CERTIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING ENERGY CODE UPDATES- (1)
 Not later than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this part,
 each State shall certify that it has reviewed and updated its residential
 building code provisions affecting energy efficiency. This certification
 shall include a demonstration that the State's building energy efficiency
 code provisions meet or exceed the requirements of the then current version
 of the Council of American Building Officials' Model Energy Code.
 `(2) At the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date on which a State
 makes the certification described in paragraph (1), the State shall certify
 to the Secretary that all the new residential buildings constructed in
 the State during such period meet the requirements of the updated building
 code referred to in such paragraph.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION OF COMMERCIAL BUILDING ENERGY CODE UPDATES- (1) Not later
 than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this part, each State shall
 certify to the Secretary that it has reviewed and updated its commercial
 building code provisions affecting energy efficiency. The certification
 shall include a demonstration that the State's code provisions meet or
 exceed the requirements of the then current version of the Department of
 Energy's Commercial Building Standards.
 `(2) At the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date on which a State
 makes the certification described in paragraph (1), the State shall certify
 to the Secretary that all of the new commercial buildings constructed in
 the State during such period meet the requirements of the updated building
 code referred to in such paragraph.
 `(d) EXTENSIONS- The Secretary shall permit extensions of the deadlines
 for the certification requirements of subsections (b) and (c) if a State
 can demonstrate that it has made a good faith effort to comply with such
 requirements and that it has made significant progress in doing so but
 that it cannot meet the deadlines set forth in such subsections.
 `(e) TASK FORCE- The Secretary shall establish a task force to advise in
 the development of the program described in subsection (a) and to review
 the results of such program.'.
Subtitle H--Lighting Standards and Labeling
SEC. 181. ENERGY CONSERVATION STANDARDS FOR LAMPS, MOTORS, COMMERCIAL AIR
CONDITIONERS.
 (a) DETERMINATION OF TYPES- (1) The Secretary shall, within 18 months
 of the date of the enactment of this Act, determine the types of lamps,
 electric motors, commercial air conditioners, and heating equipment, for
 commercial application for which energy conservation standards would be
 technologically feasible and economically justified.
 (2) For purposes of this section, the term `energy conservation standard'
 means--
 (A) a performance standard that prescribes a minimum level of energy
 efficiency or a maximum quantity of energy use for a product; or
 (B) a design requirement for a product.
 (b) STANDARDS- (1) The Secretary shall, within 18 months after the date
 on which the determination is made under subsection (a), establish test
 procedures, and develop an energy conservation standard for each type of
 lamp, appliance motor, commercial air conditioners, and heating equipment,
 identified in such determination.
 (2) In establishing such standards, the Secretary shall take into
 consideration the criteria contained in section 325(1) of the Energy Policy
 and Conservation Act.
 (c) LABELING- The Federal Trade Commission shall, within 12 months after
 the date on which an energy conservation standard is developed for a
 product under subsection (b), prescribe a labeling rule for such product.
 (d) REQUIREMENT OF MANUFACTURERS- Beginning on the date which occurs 6 months
 after the date on which a labeling rule is prescribed for a product under
 subsection (c), each manufacturer of the product shall provide a label which
 meets, and is displayed in accordance with the requirement of such rule.
 (e) ENFORCEMENT- (1) After the date on which a manufacturer must provide
 a label for a product pursuant to subsection (d)--
 (A) each product shall be considered, for purposes of paragraphs (1) and
 (2) of section 332(a) of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, a new
 covered product to which a rule under section 324 of such Act applies; and
 (B) it shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or private labeler to
 distribute in commerce any new product to which a labeling rule is applicable
 under subsection (c) which is not in conformity with the applicable energy
 conservation standard prescribed for it under subsection (b).
 (2) For purposes of section 333(a) of the Energy Policy and Conservation
 Act, paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be considered to be a part of
 section 332 of such Act.
TITLE II--DOMESTIC RESOURCES
Subtitle A--Coal Technologies
SEC. 201. COAL RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary, in consultation with the National
 Coal Council and other representatives of the public as the Secretary
 deems necessary, shall, in accordance with the Federal Nonnuclear Energy
 Research and Development Policy Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5901-5920), conduct
 a research, development, and demonstration program within the Department
 of Energy for advanced coal-based technologies with the goal and objective
 of achieving the control of sulfur oxides and oxides of nitrogen at levels
 of proficiency greater than currently available commercial technology. The
 coal technology development program shall also be designed to assure the
 timely development of cost-effective technologies or energy production
 processes or systems utilizing coal which achieve greater efficiency in the
 conversion of coal to useful energy when compared to currently available
 commercial technology for the use of coal and the control of emissions
 from the combustion of coal. Such program shall be designed to assure the
 availability for commercial use of such technologies by the year 2010.
 (b) REPORT- Within two hundred and forty days after the date of enactment
 of this Act the Secretary shall transmit to the United States House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 United States Senate a report which shall include--
 (1) a detailed description of ongoing research and development activities
 regarding advanced coal-based technologies undertaken by the Department
 of Energy, other Federal or State government departments or agencies and,
 to the extent such information is publicly available, other public or
 private organizations in the United States and other countries;
 (2) a listing and analysis of current Federal and State government
 regulatory and financial incentives that could further the goals of the
 program established by this section;
 (3) recommendations, if any, regarding additional cost-sharing demonstrations
 conducted pursuant to the Clean Coal Program established by Public Law
 98-473, that could assure that the goals of the program established by
 this section are achieved; and
 (4) a detailed plan for conducting the research, development, and
 demonstration program to achieve the goals and objectives of subsection
 (a) of this section, which plan shall include a description of--
 (A) the program elements and management structure to be utilized; and
 (B) the technical milestones to be achieved with respect to each of the
 advanced coal-based technologies included in the plan.
 (c) ANNUAL REPORT- Within twelve months after submittal of the report
 described in subsection (b) of this section, and every twelve months
 thereafter for a period of five years, the Secretary shall submit to the
 Congress a report that provides a detailed description of the status of
 development of the advanced coal-based technologies and the research,
 development, and demonstration activities undertaken to carry out the
 program required by this section.
 (d) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `advanced coal-based
 technologies' means, but is not limited to, the following--
 (1) advanced integrated gasification combined cycle;
 (2) pressurized fluidized bed combustion technology capable of achieving
 higher thermal conversion efficiency than can be achieved through ongoing
 demonstration projects;
 (3) direct and indirect coal-fired turbines;
 (4) coal refining processes capable of efficiently producing or utilizing
 the energy contained in coal and also utilizing the byproducts thereof;
 (5) magnetohydrodynamics;
 (6) molten carbonate and solid oxide fuel cells;
 (7) coal liquefaction processes; and
 (8) other coal-based technologies or processes or systems that are capable
 of achieving thermal conversion efficiencies equal to or greater than 50
 per centum.
SEC. 202. NON-FUEL USE OF COAL.
 (a) PLAN- Not later than one hundred and twenty days after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a plan
 for research, development, and demonstration with respect to technologies
 for non-fuel use of coal, including--
 (1) production of coke and other carbon products derived from coal;
 (2) production of coal-derived, carbon-based chemical intermediates that
 are precursors of value-added chemicals and polymers;
 (3) production of chemicals from coal-derived synthesis gas;
 (4) coal treatment processes, including methodologies such as
 solvent-extraction techniques that produce low ash, low sulfur, coal-based
 chemical feedstocks; and
 (5) waste utilization, including recovery, processing, and marketing of
 products derived from sulfur, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and ash from coal.
 (b) JOINT VENTURES- As part of the plan under subsection (a), the Secretary
 may propose specific joint ventures to accelerate the development and
 commercialization of technologies for non-fuel uses of coal.
 (c) PLAN CONTENTS- The plan under subsection (a) shall address and evaluate--
 (1) the known and potential products and processes for the use of coal
 for products in the chemical, utility, fuel, and carbon-based materials
 industries;
 (2) the costs, benefits and economic feasibility of using coal products
 in the chemical and materials industries, including value-added chemicals,
 carbon-based products, coke, and waste derived from coal;
 (3) the economics of co-production of products from coal in conjunction
 with production of electric power, thermal energy, and fuel;
 (4) the economics of coal utilization in comparison with other feedstocks
 that might be used for the same purposes;
 (5) the steps that can be taken by the public and private sectors to
 bring about commercialization of research results produced by the research
 program recommended; and
 (6) the past development, current status, and future potential of coal
 products and processes associated with non-fuel use of coal.
 (d) RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT- The Secretary shall conduct a program of
 research and development under the plan under subsection (a).
 (e) FUNDING- The Secretary may provide financial assistance for a research
 project under the plan using funds authorized by section 5007(b) to the
 extent the Secretary finds that such project--
 (1) furthers achievement of the goals and purposes of this Act;
 (2) offers promise for commercial application; and
 (3) has a reasonable prospect of support in at least 50 per centum of its
 direct costs from non-Federal funds.
 (f) CONSULTATION- In preparing the plan and carrying out research under
 this section, including evaluating the technical progress, feasibility, and
 most effective means for utilizing the results of research, the Secretary
 shall consult with the private sector.
Subtitle B--Strategic Petroleum Reserve Amendments
SEC. 221. ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY FOR DRAWDOWN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 161(d) of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6241(d)) is amended by inserting before the period the following:
 `or unless the President has found that such implementation would assist
 in relieving severe economic problems directly related to a significant
 increase in the price of petroleum product[s]'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 159(e) of the Energy Policy and
 Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6239(e)) is amended by striking `severe energy
 supply interruption' and all that follows through the period and inserting
 the following: `drawdown and distribution of the Reserve under section 161.'.
 (2) Section 173(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 6249b(b)) is amended by striking
 `severe energy supply interruption' and all that follows through the
 period and inserting the following: `drawdown and distribution of the
 Reserve under section 161.'.
SEC. 222. FILL OF THE STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part B of title I of the Energy Policy and Conservation
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6231 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new sections:
`FILL OF THE RESERVE AFTER FISCAL YEAR 1991
 `SEC. 168. (a) The Secretary of Energy shall establish and implement during
 fiscal year 1992 a program for the filling of the Reserve at an average rate
 of at least 200,000 barrels per day during such fiscal year, and each fiscal
 year thereafter, in the manner provided in this section until the quantity
 of crude oil in storage within the Reserve is at least 1,500,000,000 barrels.
 `(b)(1) In establishing and implementing such program, the Secretary shall
 provide, through regulations and orders (including regulations and orders
 to minimize administrative and operating costs of the Reserve) issued under
 this section, that each importer (as defined in section 152(2)) shall provide
 for the storage in the Reserve of an amount of petroleum product equal to a
 percentage, described in paragraph (2), of the amount of petroleum product--
 `(A) which is entered into the United States during any fiscal year after
 fiscal year 1992 for consumption, use, or warehousing; and
 `(B) which is owned first by such importer at the first place of storage
 in the United States.
 `(2) The percentage referred to in paragraph (1) is a percentage which the
 Secretary determines periodically to be sufficient, if applied uniformly
 to all importers, to produce the fill rate for the Reserve required under
 subsection (a).
 `(c) Through regulations and orders issued under this section, the Secretary
 shall provide each importer a credit toward the importer's requirement
 under subsection (b) by reducing the amount of petroleum product owned by
 an importer for purposes of subsection (b)(1)(B) by an amount equal to
 the amount of petroleum product which is entered into the United States
 for consumption, use, or warehousing and which is owned first by such
 importer at the first place of storage in the United States and then is
 refined into another petroleum product and exported from the United States.
 `(d) Through regulations and orders issued under this section, the
 Secretary may provide that the petroleum product stored in the Reserve
 under this section be limited to crude oil determined to be appropriate by
 the Secretary, and may make and require arrangements necessary to assure
 that each importer provide for the storage in the Reserve of an amount of
 such crude oil, in lieu of other petroleum product, that is equivalent to
 the amount of petroleum product required to be stored in the Reserve by
 such importer under this section.
 `(e)(1) When the petroleum product stored in the Reserve under this section
 is distributed as a result of a drawdown under section 161, the Secretary
 shall provide for the payment to each importer, or the importer's assignee,
 of the amount received for the sale of the petroleum product stored in
 the Reserve as a result of actions taken by such importer.
 `(2) In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 `(A) in determining which petroleum product in the Reserve has been stored
 there under this section, consider the first amount of petroleum product
 withdrawn from the Reserve (to the extent of the amount of the petroleum
 product stored in the Reserve under this section) to be the petroleum
 product stored in the Reserve under this section; and
 `(B) provide for the payments to importers to be made on the basis of the
 order in which the importers provided for the storage of petroleum product
 in the Reserve.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 159(f) of the Energy and Policy and
 Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6239(f)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `and' at the end of paragraph (4);
 (2) by striking out the comma at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting
 in lieu thereof `; and';
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
 `(6) section 168,'; and
 (4) by striking out `and' at the end of subparagraph (K).
SEC. 223. NORTHEAST PETROLEUM PRODUCT RESERVE.
 The Secretary of Energy shall establish and implement during fiscal year
 1992 a regional refined product reserve to be located in the northeast
 region of the Nation.
Subtitle C--Used Oil Recycling Program
SEC. 231. USED OIL RECYCLING.
 Section 383 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(g) MARKET INCENTIVES FOR THE REUSE OF USED OIL-
 `(1) REQUIREMENTS- (A) Beginning not later than eighteen months after
 the date of the enactment of the National Energy Resources Act of 1991,
 a producer or importer of one hundred thousand gallons or more per year
 of lubricating oil shall each year either refine, re-refine, or reprocess
 into petroleum products, including fuels, using a method described in
 subparagraph (B), an amount of used oil equal to at least that amount of
 oil determined by--
 `(i) multiplying the lubricating oil produced or imported that year by
 such person, by
 `(ii) the percentage established by the Secretary under paragraph (2).
 `(B) A producer or importer of lubricating oil may comply with this
 paragraph by--
 `(i) refining, re-refining, or reprocessing used oil for purposes of
 producing petroleum products, including fuels; or
 `(ii) purchasing credits under the credit system established pursuant to
 paragraph (3).
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF REUSE PERCENTAGE- The Secretary shall establish, on
 an annual basis, a percentage for use under paragraph (1). The percentage
 applicable during the first year that the requirement established by
 paragraph (1) is in effect, shall be a percentage that is equal to the
 reuse rate for lubricating oil that exists on the date of the enactment of
 the National Energy Resources Act of 1991. Such rate shall be determined by
 using data for the most recent year for which data are available. Through
 the year 2000, the percentage shall be an additional 2 percentage points
 higher than the actual percentage for the previous year as determined by
 the Secretary.
 `(3) REGULATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Not later than eighteen months after the date of the
 enactment of the National Energy Resources Act of 1991, the Secretary shall
 promulgate regulations to implement these requirements. These regulations
 shall cover:
 `(i) producers or importers of lubricating oil;
 `(ii) generators or collectors of used oil;
 `(iii) a system, including permits, by which refiners, re-refiners and
 reprocessors of used oil may create credits which may be purchased by
 producers and importers of lubricating oil for the purpose of complying
 with subparagraph (1)(B);
 `(iv) enforcement;
 `(v) record-keeping;
 `(vi) any other requirement which the Secretary considers necessary for
 administering the program set forth by this subsection; and
 `(vii) prohibitions on the mixing of used oil with hazardous wastes or
 other physical or chemical impurities not associated with its use as a
 lubricating oil, and the creation of credits from such mixed used oil.
 `(B) EXEMPTIONS-
 `(i) This subsection shall not apply to a facility:
 `(I) that is classified as an S.I.C. number 2911 facility under the Office
 of Management and Budget Standard Classification Manual and that refines
 used oil into fuel or other petroleum products, the amount of which is equal
 to no more than the amount of used oil that the owner of the facility is
 required to refine or otherwise reuse under paragraph (1)(A).
 `(II) that is classified as an S.I.C. number 2899, or S.I.C. number 2992
 facility under the Office of Management and Budget Standard Classification
 Manual and that compounds or blends lubricating base oil into finished
 lubricant products as its principal activity, provided that such facility
 has a contract to reprocess a customer's used lubricant, and does not
 take title to such lubricant, and such reprocessed lubricant product is
 returned to the customer.
 `(ii) This subsection shall not apply to used oil that is generated
 on-site for on-site energy production activities, including storage, use,
 and transportation, carried out at a facility that is classified as an
 S.I.C. number 4911 facility under the Office of Management and Budget
 Standard Classification Manual.
 `(iii) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations establishing requirements
 for exempt refineries that refine used oil. The regulations shall cover
 recordkeeping, testing, and such other matters as the Secretary determines
 are necessary and appropriate for refining used oil at exempt refineries.
 `(4) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection, the term--
 `(A) `credit' means a legal record of used oil refined, re-refined or
 reprocessed in accordance with this subsection for purposes of complying
 with paragraph (1);
 `(B) `producer' with respect to lubricating oil means any person who
 produces a lubricant base stock from crude oil. Such production does not
 include the re-refining of used oil;
 `(C) `importer' with respect to lubricating oil means any person who
 imports a lubricant base stock or lubricating oil, except for lubricating
 oil contained in transportation vehicles or other machinery;
 `(D) `lubricant base stock' means oil from which lubricating oil is made
 after introduction of additives;
 `(E) `generator' and `collector' mean any person who collects, stores,
 accumulates, or otherwise generates used oil. Such terms do not include an
 individual who generates used oil by removing such oil from the engine of
 a light duty motor vehicle or household appliance owned by that individual;
 `(F) `re-refiner' and `reprocesser' mean any person who produces lubricating
 oils, fuels, or other petroleum products through the processing of used
 oil; and
 `(G) `refiner' means any owner or operator of a facility that is classified
 as an S.I.C. 2911 facility under the Office of Management and Budget
 Standard Classification Manual.
 `(5) AUTHORIZATIONS- (A) There is authorized to be appropriated to the
 Secretary of Energy $2,000,000 to carry out this subsection.
 `(B) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce
 for use by the National Institute of Standards and Technology $3,000,000
 to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
 `(6) REPORT- One year after the date of enactment of this subsection, and
 annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 Senate on the implementation and operation of this subsection.'.
SEC. 232. LISTING OR IDENTIFICATION OF USED OIL.
 Section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(j) USED OIL- Notwithstanding this Act or any other provision of law,
 the Administrator shall not list or identify used oil as a hazardous
 waste under this subtitle, nor shall used oil otherwise be deemed to be
 a hazardous waste under this subtitle.'.
SEC. 233. SUNSET PROVISION.
 The provisions of this subtitle expire five years after the date of
 enactment of this Act.
Subtitle D--TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS
SEC. 241. TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS UNDER THE NGPA.
 Section 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 (15 U.S.C. 3371) is
 amended by--
 (1) striking `authorization of certain sales and transportation' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `authorization of certain sales, transportation
 and construction';
 (2) striking `Commission Approval of Transportation' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `Commission Approval of Transportation and Construction'; and
 (3) striking subsection (a)(1), and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(1) INTERSTATE PIPELINES-
 `(A) TRANSPORTATION- The Commission may, by rule or order, authorize any
 interstate pipeline to transport natural gas on behalf of any other person.
 `(B) CONSTRUCTION- The Commission may, by rule or order, authorize the
 construction of facilities to transport natural gas in interstate commerce
 pursuant to subparagraph (A).
 `(C) JUST AND REASONABLE RATES- The rates and charges of any interstate
 pipeline with respect to any transportation authorized under subparagraph
 (A) shall be just and reasonable (within the meaning of the Natural Gas Act).
 `(D) NON-DISCRIMINATORY TRANSPORTATION- Any transportation authorized under
 subparagraph (A) shall not be unjust, unreasonable, unduly discriminatory
 or preferential (within the meaning of the Natural Gas Act).'.
SEC. 242. NEPA COMPLIANCE.
 (a) LEAD AGENCY- In cases where Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
 authorization of the construction or operation of facilities or projects
 under the Natural Gas Act or the Federal Power Act may be deemed a major
 Federal action under the National Environmental Policy Act or requires the
 preparation of other environmental documents, the Commission shall be the
 lead agency and shall have primary authority for compliance with section 2
 and title I of the National Environmental Policy Act. The Commission may
 set reasonable time limits for consultation with other Federal agencies
 which participate in the review of a proposed facility or project pursuant
 to the National Environmental Policy Act to complete their review of any
 potential environmental impacts of the construction or operation of such
 facility or project, and for such other agencies to consult and submit
 comments to the Commission.
 (b) ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS- Where environmental documents are prepared
 in connection with applications for authority to construct or operate
 facilities or projects under the Natural Gas Act or the Federal Power Act,
 the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission shall permit, at the election
 of the applicant, a contractor, consultant or other person funded by the
 applicant to prepare such environmental document. The contractor shall
 be chosen by the Commission in its sole discretion. The Commission shall
 establish procedures to assure that the contractor, consultant or other
 person has no financial or other potential conflict of interest in the
 outcome of the proceeding. Nothing herein shall affect the Commission's
 responsibility to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act.
TITLE III--ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
Subtitle A--Alternative Fueled Vehicles
SEC. 301. ALTERNATIVE FUELED VEHICLES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- With respect to any fleet of passenger automobiles and
 light-duty trucks owned or leased for more than 60 days by the United
 States, no less than--
 (1) 10 percent of the vehicles of such fleet to be used shall be alternative
 fuel vehicles after September 30, 1996;
 (2) 20 percent of the vehicles of such fleet to be used shall be alternative
 fuel vehicles after September 30, 1997;
 (3) 30 percent of the vehicles of such fleet to be used shall be alternative
 fuel vehicles after September 30, 1998;
 (4) 40 percent of the vehicles of such fleet to be used shall be alternative
 fuel vehicles after September 30, 1999;
 (5) 50 percent of the vehicles of such fleet to be used shall be alternative
 fuel vehicles after September 30, 2000.
 (b) REQUIRED OPERATION- The Administrator of the General Services
 Administration and the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the
 Secretary of Energy, shall, before October 1, 1994, issue regulations to
 ensure that a vehicle acquired pursuant to subsection (a)--
 (1) shall be supplied with alcohol, natural gas, or other gaseous
 hydrocarbons (for example, propane), or electricity, as appropriate,
 in its primary area of operation, using commercially available fueling
 facilities to the maximum extent practicable; and
 (2) shall be operated exclusively on such fuel except when operated so as
 to make it impracticable to obtain such fuel.
 (c) CONSIDERATION- (1) Funds appropriated for carrying out this Act shall
 be applied on a priority basis, for expenditure first in areas of the
 United States which the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency determines have the most severe air pollution problems.
 (2) A Federal officer or agency responsible for deciding which types of
 alternative fuel vehicles to acquire in order to comply with subsection
 (a) shall consider as a factor in such decision which types of vehicles
 yield the greatest reduction in pollutants emitted per dollar spent.
 (d) CONSULTATION- A Federal officer or agent responsible for deciding
 which types of alternative fuel vehicles to acquire in order to comply with
 subsection (a) shall, on an expedited and informal basis, consult with the
 Environmental Protection Agency and with the lead State or local charged with
 air quality planning for the area in which the vehicles will be operated. The
 purpose of such consultation shall be to obtain relevant information--
 (1) with respect to considerations under subsection (c)(2); and
 (2) to facilitate the coordination of this Act with other Federal, State,
 and local programs, such as any plans by a State to install alternative
 fuel pumps near a location where vehicles acquired under subsection (a)
 will be operated.
Subtitle B--Tax Incentives for Production of Electricity From Renewables
SEC. 321. CREDIT FOR ELECTRICITY GENERATED USING SOLAR, WIND, OR GEOTHERMAL
ENERGY.
 (a) ALLOWANCE CREDIT- Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to amount of credit) is amended by striking `and' at the end
 of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3)
 and inserting `, and', and by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(4) the renewable electricity generating credit.'
 (b) RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY GENERATING CREDIT- Section 48 of such Code is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(c) RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY GENERATING CREDIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of section 46, the renewable electricity
 generating credit for any taxable year is the 2.5 cents for each kilowatt
 hour of electricity--
 `(A) which is generated and sold during the taxable year by a qualified
 taxpayer within the United States using solar, wind, or geothermal energy,
 and
 `(B) which is not used by the taxpayer or a related person.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) ELECTRICITY MUST BE GENERATED FROM CAPACITY INSTALLED DURING 6 YEARS
 AFTER ENACTMENT- Credit shall be allowed under this subsection only for
 electricity generated from generating capacity first used during the 6-year
 period beginning on the date of the enactment of this subsection.
 `(B) NO CREDIT AFTER 10 YEARS OF CREDIT- Credit shall be allowed under
 this subsection for electricity generated from any capacity only during
 the 10-year period beginning on the first date electricity generated from
 such capacity was eligible to be taken in account in determining the credit
 under this subsection.
 `(3) QUALIFIED TAXPAYER- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `qualified taxpayer' means any person engaged in the trade or business of
 selling electricity.'
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The section heading for section 48 of such Code is amended by inserting
 before the period `; renewable electricity generating credit'.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of
 chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting before the period in the
 item relating to section 48 `; renewable electricity generating credit'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 electricity generated more than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
Subtitle C--Residential and Efficiency and Renewable Energy Tax Credits
SEC. 331. RESIDENTIAL ENERGY CREDIT.
 Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to credits allowable) is amended by inserting after
 section 22 the following new section:
`SEC. 23. RESIDENTIAL ENERGY CREDIT.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed
 as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year
 an amount equal to the sum of--
 `(1) the qualified energy conservation expenditures, plus
 `(2) the qualified renewable energy source expenditures.
 `(b) QUALIFIED EXPENDITURES- For purposes of subsection (a)--
 `(1) ENERGY CONSERVATION- In the case of any dwelling unit, the qualified
 energy conservation expenditures are 15 percent of so much of the energy
 conservation expenditures made by the taxpayer during the taxable year
 with respect to such unit as does not exceed $3,000.
 `(2) RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE- In the case of any dwelling unit, the qualified
 renewable energy source expenditures are the following percentages of
 the renewable energy source expenditures made by the taxpayer during the
 taxable year with respect to such unit:
 `(A) 30 percent of so much of such expenditures as does not exceed $3,000,
 plus
 `(B) 20 percent of so much of such expenditures as exceeds $3,000 but does
 not exceed $10,000.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) ENERGY CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES- The term `energy conservation
 expenditure' means an expenditure made on or after April 20, 1991, by
 the taxpayer for insulation or any other energy-conserving component
 (or for the original installation of such insulation or other component)
 installed in or on a dwelling unit--
 `(A) which is located in the United States,
 `(B) which is used by the taxpayer as his principal residence, and
 `(C) the construction of which was substantially completed before April
 20, 1991.
 `(2) RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE EXPENDITURE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `renewable energy source expenditure' means an
 expenditure made on or after April 20, 1991, by the taxpayer for renewable
 energy source property installed in connection with a dwelling unit--
 `(i) which is located in the United States, and
 `(ii) which is issued by the taxpayer as his principal residence.
 `(B) CERTAIN LABOR COSTS INCLUDED- The term `renewable energy source
 expenditure' includes expenditures for labor costs properly allocable to
 the onsite preparation, assembly, or original installation of renewable
 energy sources property.'.
TITLE IV--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--Joint Ventures for Renewable Energy Development for Oil
Displacement
SEC. 401. JOINT VENTURES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT FOR OIL DISPLACEMENT.
 Section 6 of the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology
 Competitiveness Act of 1989 (Public Law 101-218) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsections:
 `(f) ADDITIONAL JOINT VENTURES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT FOR OIL
 DISPLACEMENT-
 `(1) OIL DISPLACEMENT BY BIOFUELS ENERGY SYSTEMS-
 `(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for and provide financial
 assistance to at least one joint venture for the commercialization of
 biofuels energy systems technology in accordance with the provisions of
 this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint venture supported under this paragraph shall be
 [to] design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for the
 development of biofuels energy systems for commercial application in uses
 that have substantial prospects for displacing the consumption of oil.
 `(C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph.
 `(2) OIL DISPLACEMENT BY SOLAR WATER HEATING-
 `(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for and provide financial
 assistance to at least one joint venture for the commercialization of solar
 water heating technology in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint ventures supported under this paragraph shall be
 to design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for solar
 water heating for commercial application in institutional water heating
 and process heat uses that have substantial prospects for displacing the
 consumption of oil.
 `(C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph.
 `(3) DIESEL FUEL OIL DISPLACEMENT BY PHOTOVOLTAIC AND WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS-
 `(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for and provide financial
 assistance to at least one joint venture for the commercialization of
 photovoltaic and wind energy systems in accordance with the provisions of
 this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint ventures supported under this paragraph shall
 be to design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for
 photovoltaic and wind energy systems for commercial application in electric
 power generation uses that have substantial prospects for displacing the
 consumption of diesel fuel oil.
 `(C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph.
 `(4) DIESEL FUEL OIL DISPLACEMENT BY DIRECT COMBUSTION OR GASIFICATION
 OF BIOMASS-
 `(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for and provide financial
 assistance to at least one joint venture for the commercialization of
 technologies for the direct combustion or gasification of biomass in
 accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint ventures supported under this paragraph shall be
 to design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for direct
 combustion or gasification of biomass, including waste wood, for industrial
 process heat and electric power generation for commercial application in
 uses that have substantial prospects for displacing the consumption of
 diesel fuel oil.
 `(C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph.
 `(5) OIL DISPLACEMENT BY FUEL CELLS TECHNOLOGY-
 `(A) The Secretary shall solicit proposals for and provide financial
 assistance to at least one joint venture for the demonstration of fuel
 cells technology in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
 `(B) The purpose of joint ventures supported under this paragraph shall
 be to design, test, and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for
 the production of electric energy from fuel cells in order to accelerate
 commercial application of fuel cells.
 `(C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph.'.
Subtitle B--Technology Transfer
SEC. 421. TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the scientific, technical, and engineering capability at the Federal
 laboratories is unmatched throughout the world;
 (2) superb research, development, testing, and evaluation occurs in
 Department laboratories;
 (3) Department laboratories will play an increasing role in assuring that
 America remains competitive in world markets;
 (4) greater effort and funding must be devoted to technology transfer from
 Department laboratories; and
 (5) Department laboratories are in a unique position to take on increased
 responsibilities in the interest of improving our Nation's competitiveness
 and our quality of life.
SEC. 422. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this subtitle--
 (1) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy; and
 (2) the term `Department' means the Department of Energy.
SEC. 423. MISSION.
 Section 91(a) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2121(a)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(6) use the facilities, equipment, personnel, and other resources of the
 Department of Energy to the fullest extent possible to enhance educational
 opportunities in science, mathematics, and engineering for American students
 and educators so as to improve the scientific literacy and competitiveness
 of the Nation.'.
SEC. 424. SCIENCE AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To the extent appropriate, the Secretary shall establish
 programs that will use fully the unique scientific resources of the
 Department to promote transfers of federally owned or originated technology
 to State and local governments, private industry, and universities or
 other nonprofit organizations so that the prospects for commercialization
 of such technology are enhanced.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated
 for programs under this section for fiscal year 1991 an amount equal to
 10 percent of the total fiscal year 1990 appropriation for each Department
 laboratory facility under the relevant appropriations accounts, to remain
 available until expended.
Subtitle C--Research Funding Priorities
SEC. 431. RESEARCH FUNDING PRIORITIES.
 The Secretary shall establish funding priorities for research, development,
 demonstration, and commercialization activities. These priorities shall
 include consideration of the following criteria:
 (1) The potential to increase the Nation's energy independence and thus
 reduce reliance on imported oil.
 (2) The projected cost effectiveness of the energy or energy efficiency
 resource to be produced or saved, including an evaluation of the likelihood
 of the activities contributing to the achievement of commercialization of
 new energy technologies.
 (3) The environmental and public health benefits of the energy to be
 produced or saved by the specific activities.
 (4) The National security impact of the energy produced or saved, including
 its projected contribution to the reduction of oil imports and to the
 diversity of the domestic energy resource mix.
 (5) The contribution to United States competitiveness.
Subtitle D--Math and Science Education Programs
SEC. 441. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this subtitle--
 (1) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy; and
 (2) the term `Department' means the Department of Energy.
SEC. 442. MISSION.
 Section 91(a) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2121(a)) (as
 amended by section 423 of this Act) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new paragraph:
 `(7) use the resources of the Department of Energy, in cooperation with
 the Department of Education, to the fullest extent possible to enhance
 educational opportunities in science and mathematics, for American students
 and educators so as to improve the educational capability of the Nation
 regarding the vital relationship between energy and the environment.'.
SEC. 443. ENHANCED MATH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To the extent appropriate, in cooperation with the Secretary
 of Education, the Secretary shall--
 (1) establish programs that will use fully the unique scientific resources
 of the Department to promote activities enhancing the quality of mathematics
 and science education throughout the Nation, so as to improve understanding
 of the vital relationship between energy and the environment and improve
 the Nation's overall education capability; and
 (2) make grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with,
 appropriate institutions or organizations for the purpose of developing a
 comprehensive curriculum for primary and secondary school level courses
 aimed at providing students enhanced math and science courses that will
 teach them about the interdependency of energy and the environment.
 (b) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary of Education shall provide the
 necessary technical assistance and funds for the widespread dissemination
 of the results of such curriculum development activities throughout the
 Nation's school districts.
 (c) APPLICATION- Each institution or organization desiring financial
 assistance pursuant to this section shall submit an application to the
 Secretary of Education at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by
 such information as the Secretary of Education may request.
TITLE V--LOW INCOME, AFFORDABILITY, AND STATE PROGRAMS
SEC. 501. LOW INCOME, AFFORDABILITY, AND STATE PROGRAMS.
 (a) WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM- Section 422 of the Energy Conservation
 and Production Act (42 U.S.C. 6872) is amended to read as follows:
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 `SEC. 422. There are authorized to be appropriated for purposes of carrying
 out the weatherization program under this part not to exceed $300,000,000
 for fiscal year 1992, $350,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, and $400,000,000
 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996.'.
 (b) ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM FOR SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS- Section 397
 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6371f) is amended to
 read as follows:
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 `SEC. 397. For the purposes of carrying out this part, there are authorized
 to be appropriated not to exceed $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1992 and
 $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996.'.