HR 2699 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2699
To amend the Clean Air Act to require the Environmental Protection Agency to
take certain steps to protect the stratospheric ozone layer from depletion
resulting from chlorofluorocarbons, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 21, 1989
Mr. BATES (for himself, Ms. SCHNEIDER, Mr. WAXMAN, Mr. GEPHARDT, Mrs. MORELLA,
Mr. STARK, Mr. FISH, Mr. EDWARDS of California, Mr. SCHEUER, Mr. DOWNEY,
Mr. PANETTA, Mr. GEJDENSON, Mr. MILLER of California, Mrs. SCHROEDER,
Mr. STOKES, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. LEVIN of Michigan, Mr. LELAND,
Mr. HEFNER, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. MRAZEK, Mr. BUSTAMANTE, Mr. BOSCO, Mr. COOPER,
Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr. KASTEMEIER, Mr. COYNE, Mr. FAZIO, Mr. DORGAN of North
Dakota, Mr. GAYDOS, Mr. KANJORSKI, Mr. KLECZKA, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia,
Mr. KOLTER, Mr. MATSUI, Mr. MCHUGH, Mr. MURPHY, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. ORTIZ,
Mr. TOWNS, Mr. FLAKE, Mr. VENTO, Mr. WYDEN, Mr. WILSON, Mr. SIKORSKI,
Mr. STUDDS, Mrs. ROUKEMA, Mr. ROE, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. OBERSTAR,
Ms. PELOSI, Mr. PEASE, Mr. OWENS of Utah, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. MORRISON of
Connecticut, Mr. MFUME, Mr. ATKINS, Mr. AUCOIN, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. BENNETT,
Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. CLAY, Mr. CONYERS, Mr. BERMAN, Mr. BEILENSON, Mr. BILBRAY,
Mr. CROCKETT, Mr. DELLUMS, Mr. MCCLOSKEY, Mr. WEISS, Mr. TORRES, Mr. TRAFICANT,
Mr. SHAYS, Mr. FAUNTROY, Mr. SAVAGE, Mr. SABO, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. LEVINE of
California, Mr. HOCHBRUECKNER, Mr. LANTOS, Mr. GARCIA, Mr. FRANK, Mr. DIXON,
Mr. DURBIN, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mr. FALEOMAVAEGA, Mr. EVANS, Mr. DYMALLY,
Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. ENGEL, Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey, Mr. KOSTMAYER, Mr. WOLPE,
and Mr. RANGEL) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly
to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to require the Environmental Protection Agency to
take certain steps to protect the stratospheric ozone layer from depletion
resulting from chlorofluorocarbons, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Stratospheric Ozone Protection Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that:
 (1) The best available scientific evidence shows that manufactured
 substances, including chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by
 this Act, are destroying stratospheric ozone, and significantly contributing
 to global climate change, and other atmospheric modifications.
 (2) No level of stratospheric ozone depletion or global climate change
 caused by human activities can be deemed safe.
 (3) Stratospheric ozone depletion will lead to increased incidence of solar
 ultraviolet radiation in the troposphere and at the surface of the Earth
 causing increased rates of disease (including increased rates of skin
 cancer, cataracts, and, potentially, suppression of the immune system),
 and otherwise damage the natural environment.
 (4) The control measures that are set forth in the Montreal Protocol (a
 freeze on the consumption of certain chlorofluorocarbons at 1986 levels
 in 1989 followed by a 20 percent reduction in 1993 and an additional 30
 percent reduction in 1998, coupled with a freeze on the consumption of
 certain halons at 1986 levels in 1992) will allow atmospheric concentrations
 of ozone depleting substances to increase at an unacceptable rate.
 (5) Stratospheric ozone depletion and global climate change from continued
 emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated chlorocarbons with
 ozone depleting potential, and emissions of other gases, imperil human
 health and the environment worldwide.
 (6) In order to stabilize and eventually reduce concentrations of chlorine
 and bromine in the stratosphere, to conserve the stratospheric ozone layer
 (an exhaustible natural resource), and to reduce the extent of global
 climate change--
 (A) emissions ofƒchlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by
 this Act, including halogenated carbons with ozone depleting potential,
 should be terminated rapidly,
 (B) it is necessary to control international trade in substances covered
 by this Act and products containing or made with processes that use such
 substances; and
 (C) trade with countries that are not parties to the Montreal Protocol
 should be controlled.
 (7) The highest priority must be given to developing and deploying safe
 and energy efficient substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances as
 rapidly as possible.
 (8) The United States needs to develop and deploy safe, energy efficient
 substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances in order to demonstrate
 to the world its commitment to protect the stratosphere and to limit
 climate change.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENT OF CLEAN AIR ACT.
 Part B of title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by inserting `subpart 1'
 before section 150 and by adding the following at the end thereof:
`Subpart 2--Table of Contents
`Subpart 2--Table of Contents
`Sec. 159A. Definitions.
`Sec. 159B. Reporting requirements.
`Sec. 159C. Production phaseout for class I substances.
`Sec. 159D. Limits on ozone depletion potential.
`Sec. 159E. Accelerated schedule.
`Sec. 159F. Control of trade.
`Sec. 159G. Review of alternatives.
`Sec. 159H. Safe alternatives.
`Sec. 159I. Reclamation and recycling.
`Sec. 159J. Auto air conditioners.
`Sec. 159K. Labeling.
`Sec. 159L. Federal enforcement.
`SEC. 159A. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subpart:
 `(1) The terms `ozone-depleting substance' and `substance covered by this
 Act' means any substance which is known, or may reasonably be anticipated,
 to cause or contribute to stratospheric ozone depletion. Such term includes,
 at a minimum, class I and class II substances.
 `(2) The term `class I substance' means each of the following:
 `Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11),
 `Dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-12),
 `Trichlorotrifluoroethane (CFC-113),
 `Dichlorotetrafluoroethane (CFC-114),
 `(Mono)chloropentafluoroethane (CFC-115),
 `Bromotrifluoromethane (Halon-1301),
 `Bromochlorodifluoromethane (Halon-1211),
 `Tetrachloromethane (carbon tetrachloride),
 `Methyl chloroform,
 `Dibromotetrafluoroethane (Halon-2402).
Any person may petition the Administrator to add a chemical to the list
of class I substances. Within 90 days after receiving such petition,
the Administrator shall either add the chemical to the list or publish an
explanation of the petition denial. Pursuant to such a petition or on his or
her motion, the Administrator shall add any such substance which he determines
to have an ozone depletion potential of 0.15 or greater. No substance listed
as a class I substance may be removed from the list.
 `(3) The term `class II substance' means each of the following and any
 ozone-depleting substance (other than a class I substance) which the
 Administrator adds to the list under this paragraph:
 `Chlorodifluoromethane (CFC-22),
 `Chlorofluorocarbon-123,
 `Chlorofluorocarbon-124,
 `Chlorofluorocarbon-141(b),
 `Chlorofluorocarbon-142(b).
Not later than 1 year after the enactment of this section the
Administrator shall list as additional class II substances each substance
which he determines to have any potentially significant ozone depletion
potential. The Administrator shall publish such list. Any person may petition
the Administrator to add or remove a substance from the list of class II
substances. Within 90 days after receiving such petition, the Administrator
shall either grant the petition or publish an explanation of the reasons
for denial of the petition.
 `(4) The term `ozone-depletion factor' means a factor established by the
 Administrator to reflect the relative stratospheric chlorine and bromine
 accumulations attributable to an ozone-depleting substance. Such factor shall
 be based upon the substance's atmospheric lifetime, molecular weight of
 bromine and chlorine, and its ability to be photolytically disassociated,
 and upon other factors determined to be a more accurate measure of the
 relative stratospheric chlorine and bromine accumulations attributable to
 the substance. In the case of the substances referred to in table 1, the
 ozone-depletion factor shall be as specified in table 1, except that the
 Administrator may adjust such ozone depletion factors based on criteria
 referred to in this paragraph:
`TABLE 1
------------------------------------------------------------------
 Substance Ozone depletion factor
------------------------------------------------------------------
 Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11) 1.00
 Dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-12) 1.00
 Trichlorotrifluoroethane (CFC-113) .80
 Bromotrifluoromethane (Halon-1301) 10.00
 Bromochlorodifluoromethane (Halon-1211) .00
 Tetrachloromethane (carbon tetrachloride) .06
 Dichlorotetrafluoroethane (CFC-114) .00
 (Mono)chloropentafluoroethane (CFC-115) .60
 Methyl chloroform .15
 Dibromotetrafluoroethane (Halon-2402) .00
 Chlorodifluoromethane (CFC-22) 0.05
 Chlorofluorocarbon-123 0.02
 Chlorofluorocarbon-124 0.02
 Chlorofluorocarbon-141(b) 0.1
 Chlorofluorocarbon-142(b) 0.06
------------------------------------------------------------------
Simultaneously with publication of the list under paragraph (3) and
simultaneously with the publication of any addition to such list, the
Administrator shall assign to each listed substance a numerical value
representing the ozone depletion potential of such substance, on a mass
(per kilogram) basis, as compared with Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11). The
numerical value shall, for the purposes of the Act, constitute the
ozone-depletion factor of each such substance.
 `(5) The term `household and commercial appliances' means appliances
 used for household or commercial purposes, including air conditioners,
 refrigerators, chillers, refrigerators, and freezers.
`SEC. 159B. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 `Unless such information has previously been reported to the Administrator,
 within 180 days after enactment of this section (or 180 days after the date
 on which a substance is added to the list of class I or class II substances
 by the Administrator under this subpart), each person producing or importing
 a class I or class II substance shall file a report with the Administrator
 setting forth the amount of the substance that was produced or imported
 by such person during calendar year 1986. On July 1 of each year beginning
 after the enactment of this Act (or after the date on which a substance is
 added to the list of class I or class II substances by the Administrator)
 each person producing or importing a class I or class II substance shall
 file a report with the Administrator setting forth the production or import
 levels of such substance in the preceding calendar year until such producer
 or importer ceases production or importation of the substance. Each such
 report shall be signed and attested by a responsible corporate officer.
`SEC. 159C. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT FOR CLASS I SUBSTANCES.
 `(a) INITIAL LIMIT- Effective 180 days after the enactment of this Act, it
 shall be unlawful for any person to produce a class I substance in annual
 quantities greater than that produced by such person during calendar year
 1986. In the case of a class I substance added to the list of class I
 substances by the Administrator the preceding sentence shall take effect
 180 days after the date on which the Administrator adds such substance to
 the list.
 `(b) 1993 LIMIT- Effective July 1, 1993, it shall be unlawful for any
 person to produce a class I substance in annual quantities greater than
 50 percent of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 `(c) 1996 LIMIT- Effective July 1, 1996, it shall be unlawful for any
 person to produce a class I substance for use other than medical purposes.
 `(d) EXCHANGES- The Administrator may promulgate rules under this subpart
 pursuant to which any person may produce a substance in annual quantities
 greater than those specified pursuant to this section, section 159D,
 or section 159E if such person obtains the rights to such production,
 directly or indirectly, from another person who will be subject under
 such rules to an enforceable and quantifiable reduction in the annual
 production of such substance which (1) exceeds the reduction otherwise
 required under such provisions, (2) is greater than the annual production
 increase obtained pursuant to such transaction, and (3) would not have
 occurred in the absence of such transaction. Such rules shall insure that
 the transactions under the authority of this subsection will result in
 greater total reductions in the production of substances covered by this
 subpart than would occur in the absence of such transactions.
`SEC. 159D. LIMITS ON OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL.
 `(a) INITIAL PRODUCTION LIMITS- It shall be unlawful for any person to
 produce any substance covered by this subpart in annual quantities that,
 based upon the substance's ozone depletion factor, yield a total ozone
 depletion potential greater than that produced by such person during calendar
 year 1986. The preceding sentence shall take effect 180 days after the
 enactment of this Act except that in the case of a substance added to the
 list of class II substances, such prohibition shall take effect 180 days
 after the date on which the substance is added. Such prohibition shall
 remain in effect until the effective date of regulations promulgated in
 accordance with subsection (b) or July 1, 1997, whichever is earlier.
 `(b) 1997 PRODUCTION LIMITS--Prior to July 1, 1992, the Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations establishing production limitations for
 substances covered by this subpart that, based upon the ozone depletion
 factor assigned to each such substance under section 159A and calendar
 year 1986 production levels, yield not less than a 95 percent reduction
 in total ozone depletion potential by 1997. If the Administrator fails to
 promulgate regulations in accordance with this subsection, effective July
 1, 1997, it shall be unlawful for any person to produce substances covered
 by this subpart in annual quantities that, based upon the ozone depletion
 factor assigned to each such substance under section 159A, yield a total
 ozone depletion potential greater than 5 percent of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
`SEC. 159E. ACCELERATED SCHEDULE.
 `The Administrator shall promulgate regulations, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, which require each producer to reduce its production of a
 class I substance more rapidly than the schedule provided under this subpart
 or a class II substance more rapidly than provided for in this subpart if
 the Administrator determines that such revised or specific schedule--
 `(1) based on new information regarding the harmful effects on the
 stratosphere or climate which may be associated with a listed substance,
 may be necessary to protect human health and the environment, or
 `(2) based on the availability of substitutes for a listed substance,
 is attainable.
Any person may petition the Administrator to promulgate such regulations. The
Administrator shall promulgate such regulations within 180 days after receipt
of any such petition, unless the Administrator publishes an explanation of
why such regulations are not necessary and denies the petition.
`SEC. 159F. CONTROL OF TRADE.
 `(a) FINDING- The Congress finds that it is necessary to impose certain
 measures to control international trade in substances covered by this subpart
 in order to conserve an exhaustible natural resource, the stratospheric
 ozone layer and to protect public health and the environment.
 `(b) IMPORTS- Effective 12 months after the enactment of this subpart, it
 shall be unlawful for any person to import any substance covered by this
 subpart, any product containing such substance, or any product manufactured
 with a process that uses such substance unless the Administrator, in
 consultation with the Secretary of State, has published a decision, after
 notice and opportunity for public comment, certifying that the nations
 in which such substance or product was manufactured and from which such
 substance or product is imported have established and are fully implementing
 programs that require reduced production of such listed substance, and limit
 production of other substances covered by this subpart, on a schedule and
 in a manner that is at least as stringent as the reduction schedule for,
 and limitations on, domestic production which apply under this subpart.
 `(c) CERTIFICATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAM- The Administrator shall not certify
 any national program under subsection (a) unless it is determined that--
 `(1) the Nation has adopted legislation or regulations which give the
 reduction schedule for each listed substance the force of law; and
 `(2) the legislation or regulations include reporting requirements and
 enforcement provisions no less stringent than those specified in this
 subpart, and the information contained in such reports is available to
 the Administrator and the Secretary of State.
 `(d) REVOCATION- At least annually, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Secretary of State, shall review each certification made under this
 section and shall revoke such certification, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, unless it is determined that the conditions of subsections
 (b) and (c) remain satisfied and that the reduction schedule for each listed
 substance is in fact being carried out in such nations. Any such revocation
 shall take effect 180 days after notice of the revocation has been published.
 `(e) ALLOCATION- Any person who imports or who has imported a class I or
 class II substance or a product containing such substance shall, for the
 purposes of section 159C (production phase-out), section 159D (relating
 to limitation on ozone depletion potential), and section 159E (relating
 to accelerated schedule), be deemed to have produced an equivalent amount
 of such substance on the date of such importation.
 `(f) INVESTMENT AND EXPORT- Within 1 year after enactment of this section,
 the President shall prohibit both of the following:
 `(1) The export of technologies used to produce class I substances.
 `(2) Direct or indirect investment by any person in facilities for producing
 class I substances in nations not certified under this subsection.
`SEC. 159G. REVIEW OF ALTERNATIVES.
 `(a) REVIEWS AND REPORT- The Administrator shall initiate, not less than 30
 days after enactment of this section, a review of relevant professional,
 technical, and scientific sources that may contain information concerning
 potential chemicals or product substitutes and alternative manufacturing
 processes that are potential replacements for class I substances. The
 Administrator shall report interim findings to the Congress no later than
 6 months after enactment of this section. A final report shall be issued
 no later than 1 year after enactment of this section.
 `(b) FINDINGS- The report required under this subsection shall include
 the Administrator's findings with regard to each of the following:
 `(1) The identity of potential replacement chemicals, product substitutes,
 or alternative production processes.
 `(2) A chemical profile or an abstract that describes each replacement
 chemical and alternative production process identified in paragraph (1)
 and any health or environmental hazards, including greenhouse and ozone
 depletion potential associated with each.
 `(3) The earliest date upon which each chemical and production process
 identified pursuant to paragraph (1) can be available for commercial use.
 `(c) ADDITIONAL MEASURES- The Administrator shall require producers to
 provide the Environmental Protection Agency with their unpublished health and
 safety studies on chemical substitutes for class I substances and require
 producers to notify the Environmental Protection Agency before existing
 chemicals are put to significant new uses as CFC and halon substitutes.
 `(d) ANNUAL UPDATING- The Administrator shall update the review required
 by subsection (a), on an annual basis. Effective no more than 2 years
 after enactment of this title, class II chemicals shall be included in
 the Administrator's annual review.
`SEC. 159H. SAFE ALTERNATIVES.
 `(a) REPLACEMENT- The Administrator shall promulgate rules under this
 section applicable to the replacement of class I and class II ozone-depleting
 substances. Such rules shall provide that alternative production processes,
 products, and raw materials that reduce overall risks to public health
 and the environment are used, to the maximum extent practicable, for the
 replacement of such substances.
 `(b) REPLACEMENT ALTERNATIVES FOR CLASS I SUBSTANCES- The rules under
 subsection (a) shall provide that not more than 2 years after enactment of
 this section, it shall be unlawful to replace class I substances with any
 substance which the Administrator determines may present adverse effects
 to public health or the environment, where--
 `(1) the Administrator has identified an alternative to such replacement
 that reduces the overall risk to public health and the environment; and
 `(2) the alternative can be reasonably available.
 `(c) LIST OF SAFE ALTERNATIVES- Within 2 years of enactment of this subpart
 the Administrator shall publish a list of prohibited substitutes and the
 safe alternatives determined to meet the requirements of subsection (b).
 `(d) RIGHT TO PETITION- Any person may petition the Administrator to add a
 substance to the list under subsection (c) or to remove a substance from
 such list. The Administrator shall promulgate a regulation granting such
 petition within 180 days after receipt thereof unless the Administrator
 publishes an explanation of why the petition should not be granted.
`SEC. 159I. RECLAMATION AND RECYCLING.
 `(a) PROHIBITIONS- Effective January 1, 1993, it shall be unlawful for
 any manufacturer or importer to manufacture or import any household or
 commercial appliance which contains a substance covered by this subpart
 unless the appliance has an aperture that allows such substances to be
 removed from the product without loss of the substance into the atmosphere.
 `(b) SMALL CONTAINERS- Effective January 1, 1991, class I and class
 II substances shall not be introduced into interstate commerce in any
 pressurized container weighing less than 15 pounds.
 `(c) RECYCLING/EFFICIENCY OF USE-
 `(1) MAXIMUM FEASIBLE REDUCTIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations which require the maximum feasible reductions in the use of
 class I substances. Such regulations shall require as appropriate (A)
 measures to recover and recycle such substances both in manufacturing
 processes and prior to disposal of products containing such substances,
 (B) measures to increase the efficiency of use of such substances, and (C)
 the use of safe alternatives. Such regulations shall be proposed not later
 than 1 year after the enactment of this section, and shall be promulgated
 not later than 2 years after the enactment of this section. At a minimum
 such regulations shall include all requirements that may be necessary to
 achieve within 3 years after the enactment of this section a reduction of
 at least 50 percent in the use of virgin class I substances for--
 `(A) the service, maintenance, or repair of household and commercial
 appliances; and
 `(B) the manufacture of products in which such substances are used as
 solvents or blowing agents.
 `(2) FIRE PREVENTION OR EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT- The regulations issued
 under subsection (a) shall also include all requirements necessary to
 achieve the maximum reductions achievable without reduced fire safety in
 releases associated with training, testing, leakage, or accidental discharge
 of class I substances from fire prevention or extinguishing equipment. Such
 regulations shall require, as appropriate, the use of available substitutes,
 alternative procedures, or other measures.
 `(d) REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate such regulations as
 may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section within 1 year
 after enactment of this section.
`SEC. 159J. AUTO AIR CONDITIONERS.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) The term `refrigerant' means dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-12),
 also known as R-12 or any substitute refrigerant with a comparable ozone
 depletion potential.
 `(2) The term `approved refrigerant recycling equipment' means equipment that
 is certified by Underwriters Laboratories (or another independent standards
 testing organization) to meet the Society of Automotive Engineers standard
 applicable to equipment for the extraction and reclamation of refrigerant
 from motor vehicle air conditioners (SAE standard J-1990 or revisions
 thereof). Equipment purchased before the commencement of certification by
 Underwriters Laboratories shall be considered approved if it is substantially
 identical to a model which is certified before January 1, 1991.
 `(3) The term `properly using' approved refrigerant recycling equipment
 means using such equipment in conformity with the Society of Automotive
 Engineers standard establishing the recommended service procedure for
 containment of R-12 refrigerant (SAE standard J-1989 or revisions thereof).
 `(4) The term `properly trained and certified' means that a person authorized
 to perform any service on a motor vehicle air conditioner involving a
 refrigerant for such air conditioner has been trained and certified in the
 proper use of approved refrigerant recycling equipment, as specified in
 SAE standard J-1989 or revisions thereof, under the certification program
 of National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) or under
 a similar program such as the training and certification program of the
 Mobile Air Conditioning Society (MACS).
 `(b) SERVICING MOTOR VEHICLE AIR CONDITIONERS- On or after the date 2 years
 after the enactment of this section, a business establishment may not perform
 any service on a motor vehicle air conditioner involving refrigerant for
 such air conditioner without properly using approved refrigerant recycling
 equipment and unless each person authorized by such establishment to perform
 such service has been properly trained and certified. The requirements of
 the previous sentence shall not apply until the date 3 years after the
 enactment of this section to a business establishment which performed
 service on fewer than 100 motor vehicle air conditioners during 1990:
 Provided, That such establishment so certifies to the Administrator by the
 date 2 years after the enactment of this section, pursuant to subsection (c).
 `(c) CERTIFICATION- Not later than the date 2 years after the enactment
 of this section, each business establishment which performs service on
 motor vehicle air conditioners shall certify to the Administrator either--
 `(1) that the establishment has acquired and is properly using approved
 refrigerant recycling equipment in any service on a motor vehicle air
 conditioner involving refrigerant for such air conditioner and that each
 person authorized by the establishment to perform such service is properly
 trained and certified; or
 `(2) that the establishment serviced fewer than 100 motor vehicle air
 conditioners in 1990.
Each certification shall contain the name and address of the business
establishment and the serial number of each unit of approved recycling
equipment acquired by the establishment and shall be signed by the owner or
another responsible corporate officer. Certifications under paragraph (1)
may be made by submitting the required information to the Administrator
on a standard form provided by the manufacturer of approved refrigerant
recycling equipment.
`SEC. 159K. LABELING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Effective 1 year after promulgation of regulations
 under this section, no container in which an ozone-depleting substance
 is stored or transported, no product containing such substance, and no
 product manufactured with a process that uses a listed substance shall be
 introduced into interstate commerce unless it bears a label stating either
 of the following, as appropriate:
 `(1) Contains [insert name of listed substance] a substance which harms
 public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper atmosphere
 and by disrupting the climate.
 `(2) Manufactured with [insert name of listed substance], a substance
 which harms public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper
 atmosphere and by disrupting the climate.
 `(b) REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to implement
 the labeling requirements of this section within 12 months after enactment
 of this section, after notice and opportunity for public comment. Such
 regulations shall require all containers and products which are subject
 to this section and introduced or reintroduced into commerce later than
 90 days after promulgation of such regulations to bear the appropriate label.
 `(c) DEFENSES- Neither the labeling requirement nor any other provision of
 this subpart, shall constitute, in whole or part, a defense to liability or
 a cause for reduction in damages in any suit, whether civil or criminal,
 brought under any law, whether Federal or State, other than a suit for
 failure to comply with the labeling requirements of this section.
`SEC. 159L. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 `The provisions of sections 113, 114, and 304 shall apply for purposes of
 this subpart in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions
 apply for purposes of enforcement of any emission standard or limitation
 under section 112 of this Act, and for purposes of such provisions each
 requirement of this subpart (or of any regulation under this subpart)
 shall be treated as a standard or emission limitation under section 112.'.