HR 3122 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3122
To amend chapter 1 of title 9 of the United States Code to permit each party
to a sales and service contract to accept or reject arbitration as a means
of settling disputes under the contract.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 31, 1991
Mr. BRYANT (for himself, Mr. KOPETSKI, Mr. LEVINE of California, Mr. COBLE,
Mr. RAMSTAD, Mr. WASHINGTON, Mr. BOUCHER, Mr. MCCOLLUM, Mr. SCHIFF, and
Mr. FEIGHAN) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend chapter 1 of title 9 of the United States Code to permit each party
to a sales and service contract to accept or reject arbitration as a means
of settling disputes under the contract.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. ELECTION OF ARBITRATION.
 (a) SALES AND SERVICE CONTRACTS- Chapter 1 of title 9 of the United States
 Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`Sec. 17. Sales and service contracts
 `(a) For purposes of this section, the term `sales and service contract'
 means a contract under which any person (including any manufacturer,
 importer, or distributor) sells any product to any other person for resale
 to an ultimate purchaser and authorizes such other person to repair and
 service such product.
 `(b) Whenever a sales and service contract provides for the use of
 arbitration to resolve a controversy arising out of or relating to the
 contract, each party to the contract shall have the option, after the
 controversy arises and before both parties commence an arbitration
 proceeding, to reject arbitration as the means of settling the
 controversy. Any such rejection shall be in writing.
 `(c) In making an award in any controversy arising out of or relating to
 a sales and service contract, the arbitrator shall provide the parties to
 the contract with a written explanation of the reasons for the award and
 any such award may be vacated by a court order as provided in section 10
 or whenever the court referred to in section 10 finds that the arbitrator
 disregarded, misapplied, or misinterpreted State law.'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for chapter 1 of title 9,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`17. Sales and service contracts.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 contracts entered into, amended, altered, modified, renewed, or extended
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.