101st CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 2151
AN ACT
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to establish a schedule for the
installation in certain civil aircraft of the collision avoidance system
known as TCAS-II, and for other purposes.
HR 2151 EH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2151
AN ACT
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to establish a schedule for the
installation in certain civil aircraft of the collision avoidance system
known as TCAS-II, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. INSTALLATION AND EVALUATION OF COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEMS.
 Section 601(f) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1421(f))
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (6); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) OPERATIONAL EVALUATION- The Administrator shall institute, for a
 1-year period beginning not later than December 30, 1990, a program for
 the operational evaluation of the collision avoidance system known as
 TCAS-II, in order to collect and assess safety and operational data from
 the civil aircraft equipped with such system. In conducting the program,
 the Administrator shall encourage the participation of foreign air carriers
 which operate civil aircraft equipped with such system.
 `(4) EXTENSION OF TIME- If the Administrator determines that extending
 the deadline contained in paragraph (2) is necessary--
 `(A) to promote a safe and orderly transition to operation of a fleet
 of civil aircraft described in paragraph (2) which is equipped with the
 collision avoidance system known as TCAS-II, or
 `(B) to promote other safety objectives, the Administrator may extend such
 deadline for a period not to exceed 2 years; except that the Administrator
 may further extend such deadline if the Administrator determines that such
 further extension is necessary to promote aviation safety and notifies, in
 writing, the Committee on Public Works and Transportation of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
 of the Senate of such extension at least 90 days before such extension is
 to take effect.
 `(5) COMPATIBILITY OF WINDSHEAR EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION SCHEDULE- The
 Administrator shall consider the feasibility and desirability of amending
 the schedule for the installation of airborne low-altitude windshear
 equipment in order to make such schedule compatible with the schedule for
 the installation of the collision avoidance system known as TCAS-II.'.
Passed the House of Representatives July 31, 1989.
Attest:
Clerk..