HR 5500 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5500
To provide for health care for every American.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 25, 1992
Mr. CONYERS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Energy and Commerce, Ways and Means, Post Office and Civil
Service, Armed Services, and Veterans' Affairs
A BILL
To provide for health care for every American.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Health Care for Every
 American Act of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM;
UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY; ENROLLMENT
Sec. 101. Establishment of a State-based national health insurance program.
Sec. 102. Universal entitlement and eligibility.
Sec. 103. Enrollment.
Sec. 104. Portability of benefits.
Sec. 105. Effective date of benefits.
Sec. 106. Relationship to existing Federal health programs.
TITLE II--COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS, INCLUDING PREVENTIVE BENEFITS AND BENEFITS
FOR LONG TERM CARE
Sec. 201. Comprehensive benefits; limits on cost-sharing; prohibition of
balanced billing and duplicative insurance.
Sec. 202. Comprehensive acute services.
Sec. 203. Preventive services.
Sec. 204. Mental health services.
Sec. 205. Drug and alcohol abuse treatment services.
Sec. 206. Long-term care services.
Sec. 207. Plan of care required for certain services.
Sec. 208. Medical reasonableness; limitations and exclusions from covered
services.
Sec. 209. Study of effects of cost-sharing requirements.
TITLE III--PROVIDER PARTICIPATION
Sec. 301. Provider participation and standards.
Sec. 302. Qualifications for providers.
Sec. 303. Qualifications for comprehensive health service organizations.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 401. National Health Insurance Standards Board.
Sec. 402. National Health Advisory Council.
Sec. 403. State health insurance programs.
Sec. 404. District health advisory councils.
Sec. 405. Complementary conduct of related health programs.
TITLE V--NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGET; PAYMENTS; COST CONTAINMENT MEASURES
Subtitle A--Budgeting and Payments to States
Sec. 501. National health insurance budget.
Sec. 502. State health insurance budgets.
Sec. 503. Computation of individual and State capitation amounts.
Sec. 504. Federal payments to States.
Sec. 505. Required approval process for capital expenditures.
Sec. 506. Optional State charge for non-enrollment with comprehensive health
service organization.
Subtitle B--Payments by States to Providers
Sec. 511. Payments to hospitals and other facility-based services for
operating expenses on the basis of approved global budgets.
Sec. 512. Payments to health care practitioners based on prospective fee
schedule or capitation.
Sec. 513. Payments to comprehensive health service organizations.
Sec. 514. Payments for community-based primary health services.
Sec. 515. Payments for care managers.
Sec. 516. Payments for prescription drugs.
Sec. 517. Approved devices and equipment.
Sec. 518. Payments for other items and services.
Sec. 519. Payment incentives for medically underserved areas.
Sec. 520. Waiver authority for experiments and demonstrations.
Subtitle C--Malpractice Reform
Sec. 521. Malpractice reform.
Sec. 522. Study of medical malpractice.
Subtitle D--Mandatory Assignment and Administrative Provisions
Sec. 531. Mandatory assignment.
Sec. 532. Procedures for reimbursement; appeals.
TITLE VI--FINANCING
Sec. 601. National Health Insurance Trust Fund.
Sec. 602. Federal sources of revenues; National Health Insurance premiums.
Sec. 603. Tax treatment of National Health Insurance premiums.
Sec. 604. State sources of revenues.
TITLE VII--PROMOTION OF PRIMARY HEALTH CARE; DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE
CAPACITY; PROGRAMS TO ASSIST THE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED
Subtitle A--Promotion and Expansion of Primary Care Practitioners
Sec. 701. Role of Board; establishment of primary care physician output goals.
Sec. 702. Establishment of Advisory Committee on Graduate Medical Education.
Sec. 703. Office of Primary Care and Prevention Research.
Sec. 704. Priorities regarding assistance for undergraduate medical education
for primary care.
Subtitle B--Grants for Expansion of Availability of Primary Care Services
Through Health Centers
Part 1--Primary Care Service Expansion Grants
Sec. 711. Grants for expansion of availability of primary care services
through health centers.
Part 2--Reduction in Medical Malpractice Liability for Community Health Centers
Sec. 721. Liability protections for certain health care professionals.
Sec. 722. Hospital admitting privileges for certain health care providers.
Sec. 723. Payment of judgments.
Sec. 724. Effective date.
Subtitle C--Expansions in the National Health Service Corps
Sec. 731. Placement of personnel at primary care centers.
Sec. 732. Placement levels.
Sec. 733. Midlevel practitioner defined.
TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM;
UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY; ENROLLMENT
SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established in the United States a
 State-Based National Health Insurance Program to be administered by the
 individual States in accordance with Federal standards specified in,
 or established under, this Act.
 (b) STATE PROGRAMS- In order for a State to be eligible to receive payment
 under section 504, a State must establish a State health insurance program
 in accordance with this Act.
 (c) STATE DEFINED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In this Act, subject to paragraph (2), the term `State'
 means each of the fifty States and the District of Columbia.
 (2) ELECTION- If the Governor of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, or the Northern Mariana Islands certifies to the President
 that the legislature of the Commonwealth or territory has enacted legislation
 desiring that the Commonwealth or territory be included as a State under
 the provisions of this Act, such Commonwealth or territory shall be included
 as a `State' under this Act beginning January 1 of the first year beginning
 ninety days after the President receives the notification.
SEC. 102. UNIVERSAL ENTITLEMENT AND ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Every individual who is a resident of the United States and
 is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien (as
 defined in subsection (d) is entitled to benefits for health care services
 under this Act under the appropriate State health insurance program. In
 this section, the term `appropriate State health insurance program' means,
 with respect to an individual, the State health insurance program for the
 State in which the individual maintains a primary residence.
 (b) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN NONIMMIGRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The National Health Insurance Standards Board (in this Act
 referred to as the `Board') may make eligible for benefits for health care
 services under the appropriate State health insurance program under this
 Act such classes of aliens admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants
 as the Board may provide.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1),
 the Board shall consider reciprocity in health care services offered to
 United States citizens who are nonimmigrants in other foreign states,
 and such other factors as the Board determines to be appropriate.
 (c) TREATMENT OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS- The Board also may make eligible for
 benefits for health care services under the appropriate State health
 insurance program under this Act other individuals not described in
 subsection (a) or (b), and regulate the nature of the eligibility of such
 individuals, in order--
 (1) to preserve the public health of communities,
 (2) to compensate States for the additional health care financing burdens
 created by such individuals, and
 (3) to prevent adverse financial and medical consequences of uncompensated
 care,
while inhibiting travel and immigration to the United States for the sole
purpose of obtaining health care services.
 (d) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `lawful resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
 residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United
 States under color of law, including an alien with lawful temporary resident
 status under section 210, 210A, or 234A of the Immigration and Nationality
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).
SEC. 103. ENROLLMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State health insurance program shall provide a mechanism
 for the enrollment of individuals entitled or eligible for benefits under
 this Act. The mechanism shall--
 (1) include a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the time
 of birth in the United States and at the time of immigration into the United
 States or other acquisition of lawful resident status in the United States,
 (2) provide for the enrollment, as of January 1, 1994, of individuals who
 are eligible to be enrolled as of such date, and
 (3) include a process for the enrollment of individuals made eligible for
 health care services under subsections (b) and (c) of section 102.
 (b) AVAILABILITY OF APPLICATIONS- Each State health insurance program
 shall make applications for enrollment under the program available--
 (1) at local offices of the Social Security Administration,
 (2) at social services locations,
 (3) at out-reach sites (such as provider and practitioner locations), and
 (4) at other locations (including post offices) accessible to a broad
 cross-section of individuals eligible to enroll.
 (c) ISSUANCE OF HEALTH INSURANCE CARDS- In conjunction with an individual's
 enrollment for benefits under this Act, the State health insurance program
 shall provide for the issuance of a universal health insurance card which
 may be used for purposes of identification and processing of claims for
 benefits under the program.
SEC. 104. PORTABILITY OF BENEFITS.
 To ensure continuous access to benefits for health care services covered
 under this Act, each State health insurance program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the State, or
 waiting period, in excess of three months before residents of the State
 are entitled to, or eligible for, such benefits under the program;
 (2) shall provide continuation of payment for covered health care services to
 individuals who have terminated their residence in the State and established
 their residence in another State, for the duration of any waiting period
 imposed in the State of new residency for establishing entitlement to,
 or eligibility for, such services; and
 (3) shall provide for the payment for health care services covered under
 this Act provided to individuals while temporarily absent from the State
 based on the following principles:
 (A) Payment for such health care services is at the rate that is approved
 by the State health insurance program in the State in which the services
 are provided, unless the States concerned agree to apportion the cost
 between them in a different manner.
 (B)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), payment for such health care
 services provided outside the United States is made on the basis of the
 amount that would have been paid by the State health insurance program
 for similar services rendered in the State, with due regard, in the case
 of hospital services, to the size of the hospital, standards of service,
 and other relevant factors.
 (ii) Payment for services described under clause (i) which are elective
 services may be subject to prior consent of the agency that administers
 and operates the State health insurance program if such elective services
 are available on a substantially similar basis in the State.
 (iii) For the purposes of this subparagraph, the term `elective services'
 means health care services covered under this Act other than services that
 are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance in which medical
 care is required without delay.
SEC. 105. EFFECTIVE DATE OF BENEFITS.
 Benefits shall first be available under this Act for items and services
 furnished on or after January 1, 1994.
SEC. 106. RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING FEDERAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 (a) MEDICARE AND MEDICAID-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, subject to
 paragraph (2)--
 (A) no benefits shall be available under title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act for any item or service furnished after December 31, 1993,
 (B) no individual is entitled to medical assistance under a State plan
 approved under title XIX of such Act for any item or service furnished
 after such date, and
 (C) no payment shall be made to a State under section 1903(a) of such Act
 with respect to medical assistance for any item or service furnished after
 such date.
 (2) TRANSITION- In the case of inpatient hospital services and extended
 care services during a continuous period of stay which began before January
 1, 1994, and which had not ended as of such date, for which benefits are
 provided under title XVIII, or under a State plan under title XIX, of the
 Social Security Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and each
 State plan, respectively, shall provide for continuation of benefits under
 such title or plan until the end of the period of stay.
 (b) FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM- No benefits shall be made
 available under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for any part
 of a coverage period occurring after December 31, 1993.
 (c) CHAMPUS- No benefits shall be made available under sections 1079 and
 1086 of title 10, United States Code, for items or services furnished
 after December 31, 1993.
 (d) VETERANS' BENEFITS- No benefits shall be available under chapter 17
 of title 38, United States Code, for items or services furnished after
 December 31, 1993, for which payment may be made under a State health
 insurance program; except that nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 to decrease benefits or services, including exclusive use of veterans'
 hospitals, that are available to veterans on the day prior to the date of
 the enactment of this Act.
 (e) TREATMENT OF EXISTING FEDERAL HEALTH CARE FACILITIES- Not later than
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Board shall
 submit to the Congress a report that contains recommendations for the
 treatment of existing Federal health care facilities under this Act.
TITLE II--COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS, INCLUDING PREVENTIVE BENEFITS AND BENEFITS
FOR LONG TERM CARE
SEC. 201. COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS; LIMITS ON COST-SHARING; PROHIBITION OF
BALANCED BILLING AND DUPLICATIVE INSURANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 208 (relating to exclusions), individuals
 enrolled for benefits under this Act are entitled to have payment made
 under this Act for--
 (1) comprehensive acute services (described in section 202);
 (2) preventive services (described in section 203);
 (3) mental health services (described in section 204);
 (4) drug and alcohol abuse treatment services (described in section 205);
 (5) long term care services (described in section 206), and
 (6) plan of care services (described in section 207).
 (b) NO COST-SHARING FOR COMPREHENSIVE ACUTE SERVICES OR PREVENTIVE SERVICES-
 There are no deductibles, coinsurance, or copayments applicable to benefits
 provided under this title for services described in paragraphs (1), (2),
 and (6) of subsection (a).
 (c) PROHIBITION ON BALANCED BILLING- Except as specifically
 provided under this Act, no person may impose a charge for covered services
 for which benefits are provided under this Act.
 (d) NO DUPLICATE HEALTH INSURANCE- Each State health insurance program shall
 prohibit the sale of health insurance in the State if payment under the
 insurance duplicates payment for any items or services for which payment
 may be made under such a program.
 (e) STATE PROGRAM MAY PROVIDE ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this Act
 shall be construed as limiting the benefits that may be made available
 under a State health insurance program to residents of the State.
 (f) EMPLOYERS MAY PROVIDE ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this Act shall be
 construed as limiting the additional benefits that an employer may provide
 to employees or their dependents, or to former employees or their dependents.
SEC. 202. COMPREHENSIVE ACUTE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsections (b) and (c) and section 208, the
 comprehensive acute services for which benefits are available under this
 Act are as follows:
 (1) Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, including 24-hour a day
 emergency services.
 (2) Professional services of health care practitioners authorized to
 provide health care services under State law.
 (3) Diagnostic and screening tests and procedures.
 (4) All care and services relating to pregnancy or to conditions arising
 from pregnancy or that could complicate pregnancy, including at least the
 following pregnancy-related services:
 (A) Prenatal care.
 (B) Inpatient care.
 (C) Post-partum care furnished through the last day of the month in which
 the 60th post partum day occurs.
 (D) Care management services which will assist individuals in gaining
 access to needed medical, social, educational, and other services.
 (E) Home visitation services.
 (F) Any other care and services deemed appropriate by the Board.
 (5) Community-based primary health services, which are ambulatory health
 services furnished--
 (A) by a rural health clinic;
 (B) by a Federally-qualified health center, and which, for purposes of
 this Act, include services furnished by State and local health agencies;
 (C) in a school-based setting;
 (D) by public educational agencies and other providers of services to
 children entitled to assistance under the Individuals with Disabilities
 Education Act for services furnished pursuant to a written Individualized
 Family Services Plan or Individual Education Plan under such Act; and
 (E) public and private non-profit entities receiving Federal assistance
 under the Public Health Service Act.
 (6) Outpatient prescription drugs, biologicals, insulin, and medical foods
 as specified by the Board consistent with section 516.
 (7) Hospice care for individuals certified to be terminally ill, including
 care-management services, provided by a hospice program.
 (8) Post-hospital skilled nursing services and post-hospital home health
 care services, as specified by the Board.
 (9) Other medical and health care services specified by the Board,
 including--
 (A) services and supplies incidental to the provision of health care
 practitioner's services;
 (B) hospital services incidental to health care practitioner's services
 rendered to outpatients;
 (D) outpatient physical therapy services, outpatient speech pathology
 services, and outpatient occupational therapy services in all settings;
 (E) home dialysis supplies and equipment;
 (F) diagnostic x-ray tests, diagnostic laboratory tests, and other
 diagnostic tests;
 (G) radiation (and related) therapy;
 (H) durable medical equipment;
 (I) ambulance service, to the extent provided in regulation;
 (J) prosthetic devices which replace all or part of an internal body organ
 or the function of an internal body organ that cannot adequately function
 (including lens after cataract surgery), including replacements of such
 devices; and
 (K) leg, arm, back, and neck braces, and artificial legs, arms, and eyes,
 including necessary replacements.
 (b) TREATMENT OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AND DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT
 SERVICES- Comprehensive acute services under this section do not include
 mental health services (described in section 204) or drug and alcohol
 abuse treatment services (described in section 205).
 (c) USE OF MEDICARE DEFINITIONS- Except as may be provided by the Board,
 the definitions contained in section 1861 of the Social Security Act shall
 apply in the administration of this Act.
SEC. 203. PREVENTIVE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (b) and section 208, the preventive
 services for which benefits are available under this Act are as follows
 (as defined by the Board):
 (1) Basic immunizations.
 (2) Well-baby care (for infants under one year of age).
 (3) Well-child care (including periodic physical examinations, hearing
 and vision screening, and developmental screening and examinations) for
 individuals under eighteen years of age.
 (4) Periodic screening mammography, Pap smears, and colorectal examinations
 and examinations for prostate cancer.
 (5) Routine dental examinations and prophylaxis.
 (6) Annual adult physical examinations.
 (7) Family planning services.
 (8) Routine eye examinations, eyeglasses, and contact lenses.
 (9) Hearing aids, but only upon a determination of a certified audiologist
 or physician that a hearing problem exists and is caused by a condition
 that can be corrected by use of a hearing aid.
 (10) Health education and wellness promotion services designed to prepare
 individuals to better manage chronic health conditions of themselves or
 family members or to prevent or minimize the effect of illness, disease,
 or medical condition.
 (11) Such other health care services as are found by the Board to be
 effective in preventing or minimizing the effect of illness, disease,
 or medical condition and in promoting wellness.
 (b) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- Preventive services are only included as benefits
 to the extent they are not provided in excess of guidelines adopted by
 the Board based on recommendations by its standing Advisory Committee on
 Benefits and the National Health Advisory Council established in section 402.
 (c) LIMITATIONS ON EYEGLASSES, CONTACT LENSES, AND HEARING AIDS- The Board
 may impose such limits relating to the costs and frequency of replacement of
 eyeglasses, contact lenses, and hearing aids as the Board deems appropriate.
SEC. 204. MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsections (c) and (d) and sections 207 and 208,
 the mental health services for which benefits are available under this Act
 are mental health services (as defined in subsection (b)) provided under
 a treatment program approved by the State and through providers that meet
 State qualification standards.
 (b) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES- In this section, the term `mental health
 services' includes the following (as defined by the Board):
 (1) Crisis intervention, including assessment, diagnosis, and referral.
 (2) Inpatient services, including services provided at hospitals and other
 inpatient facilities, such as residential treatment centers.
 (3) Outpatient services.
 (4) Community-based residential programs, particularly programs that
 prepare individuals for independent living.
 (c) PLAN OF CARE REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), benefits are not
 available for mental health services under this section unless the services
 are provided in accordance with a plan of care approved by a care manager
 under section 207.
 (2) EXCEPTION- The requirement of paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 (A) inpatient mental health services furnished to an individual to the
 extent the services do not exceed 45 inpatient days in a calendar year, or
 (B) outpatient mental health services furnished to an individual to the
 extent the services do not exceed twenty-five outpatient visits in a
 calendar year;
except that days of partial hospitalization or residential care may be
substituted for days of inpatient care according to a ratio established by
the Board.
 (d) COST SHARING REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish an income-related cost-sharing
 schedule that shall apply to mental health services under this section.
 (2) MINIMIZATION OF FINANCIAL BARRIERS TO CARE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board shall ensure that any cost-sharing schedule
 prepared pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not prevent an individual or family
 with income below 185 percent of the poverty line (as defined in subsection
 (e)) from receiving mental health services that are reasonable and necessary.
 (B) COST-SHARING CEILING- The Board shall establish a limitation on the
 amount of cost-sharing that may be incurred for individuals or families
 receiving mental health services that are reasonable and necessary.
 (e) POVERTY LINE DEFINED- In this title, the term `poverty line' means
 the income official poverty line (defined by the Office of Management and
 Budget and reviewed annually in accordance with sections 652 and 673(2)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) for a family unit of
 the size involved.
SEC. 205. DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsections (c) and (d) and sections 207 and
 208, the drug and alcohol abuse treatment services for which benefits are
 available under this Act are drug and alcohol abuse treatment services (as
 defined in subsection (b)) provided under a treatment program approved by
 the State and through provider organizations that meet State qualification
 standards.
 (b) DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In this section, the term `drug and alcohol abuse treatment
 services' includes the following (as defined by the Board):
 (A) Crisis intervention, including assessment, diagnosis, and referral.
 (B) Detoxification services, not to exceed (subject to paragraph (2)) ten
 days of treatment in a hospital or non-hospital detoxification program in
 any calendar year, unless medical complications require additional days.
 (C) Rehabilitation services, not to exceed (subject to paragraph (2))
 thirty days of treatment in a hospital or free-standing residential program
 in any calendar year.
 (D) Outpatient rehabilitation services, not to exceed (subject to paragraph
 (2)) sixty days or visits of treatment in an intensive outpatient, day
 treatment, outpatient, or aftercare program in any calendar year.
 (E) Therapeutic community services, not to exceed (subject to paragraph
 (2)) eighteen months of treatment in a residential program over a five-year
 period.
 (F) Pharmacotherapeutic intervention services.
 (G) Family outpatient services, not to exceed (subject to paragraph (2))
 sixty days of treatment in any calendar year.
 (H) Halfway house care, not to exceed (subject to paragraph (2)) six months
 of treatment in a free-standing residential program in any calendar year.
 (I) Three-quarterway house care, not to exceed (subject to paragraph (2))
 six months of treatment in a free-standing residential program in any
 calendar year.
 (2) EXTENDING SCOPE OF BENEFITS- The Board may extend the duration of
 benefits described in paragraph (1) if provided in accordance with the
 plan of care (required under subsection (c)) and approved in accordance
 with such procedure as the Board shall establish.
 (c) PLAN OF CARE REQUIREMENT- Benefits are not available for drug and
 alcohol abuse treatment services under this section unless the services
 are provided in accordance with a plan of care approved by a care manager
 under section 207.
 (d) COST SHARING REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish an income-related cost-sharing
 schedule that shall apply to drug and alcohol abuse treatment services
 under this section.
 (2) MINIMIZATION OF FINANCIAL BARRIERS TO CARE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board shall ensure that any cost-sharing schedule
 prepared pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not prevent an individual or
 family with income below 185 percent of the poverty line (as defined in
 section 204(e)) from receiving drug and alcohol abuse treatment services
 that are reasonable and necessary.
 (B) COST-SHARING CEILING- The Board shall establish a limitation on the
 amount of cost-sharing that may be incurred for individuals or families
 receiving drug and alcohol abuse treatment services that are reasonable
 and necessary.
SEC. 206. LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section and
 section 207, the long-term care services for which benefits are available
 under this Act are the following services provided for the health, social,
 and personal needs of individuals with limited self-care capabilities in
 order to promote the maximum functional independence of such individuals:
 (1) Institutional services (described in subsection (b)).
 (2) Home and community-based services (described in subsection (c)).
 (3) Respite care services (described in subsection (d)).
 (b) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- For purposes of subsection (a), institutional
 services described in this subsection are the following items and services
 provided to an individual while residing in a participating nursing facility:
 (1) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 (2) Bed and board in connection with the furnishing of supervised residential
 services.
 (3) Physical therapy services, occupational therapy services, audiology or
 speech-language pathology services, and cognitive and behavioral therapies.
 (4) Medical social services.
 (5) Drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment as are ordinarily
 furnished for the care and treatment of inpatients.
 (6) Other services necessary for the health of patients and generally
 provided by nursing facilities.
 (c) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- For purposes of subsection (a),
 home and community-based care services provided to an individual to enable
 the individual to remain in such individual's place of residence within
 the community are the following:
 (1) Homemaker services, including meals.
 (2) Home health aide services.
 (3) Heavy chores.
 (4) Adult day health care, social day care or psychiatric day care.
 (5) Home mobility aids, communication aids, and minor adaptions to the
 home that promote independence (railings, ramps, special toilets).
 (6) Medical social work services.
 (7) Community mental health services, therapy services, and nursing services.
 (8) Physical, occupational or rehabilitative services to preserve and
 restore functional capability or prevent further deterioration.
 (9) Transportation services to and from health and social services.
 (10) Nutrition and dietary counseling provided by or under the supervision
 of a qualified dietitian.
 (11) Other services as determined by the Board and authorized by the
 care manager.
 (d) RESPITE CARE SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subsection (a), subject to paragraph (2),
 respite care services described in this subsection are the following
 institutional or home and community-based services designed to provide
 temporary relief to an individual's primary caregiver who is a relative
 or friend of such individual:
 (A) Companion, day care, and homemaker services.
 (B) Training for informal caregivers.
 (2) HOUR LIMIT- Services described in paragraph (1) are not covered to the
 extent they exceed with respect to an individual seven hundred and twenty
 hours in any calendar year.
 (e) ELIGIBILITY; ASSESSMENTS AND REASSESSMENTS OF NEED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Eligibility for long-term care services shall be determined
 by an assessement (and periodic reassessments) of need.
 (2) ASSESSMENT- Individual needs for long-term care services shall be
 determined by care managers (as defined in section 207(b)) in conjunction
 with the person with long-term support needs and their family members
 through a standardized assessment of the individual's abilities for
 self-care. Each such assessment shall include--
 (A) such a medical and functional examination as may be necessary to
 determine the level of long-term support services (if any) that are
 required, and
 (B) such an environmental and psychosocial evaluation as may be necessary
 to determine the physical and mental abilities of the individual.
Such an assessment shall be conducted pursuant to criteria established by
the Board.
 (3) TYPE OF SERVICES- The assessment described in paragraph (2) shall include
 a determination by the care manager whether institutional services, home
 and community-based services, or respite care services are required. Such
 determination shall be based, with respect to the type of services, on
 the following:
 (A) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- In the case of institutional services described
 in subsection (b), the individual's inability to perform at least two of
 the ADLs described in clauses (iii), (iv), and (v) of paragraph (5)(A)
 or a similar level of disability due to cognitive or mental impairment or
 due to the need for supervision because of behavioral problems.
 (B) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- In the case of noninstitutional
 services described in subsection (c), the individual's inability to perform
 at least two ADLs or two IADLs (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) or similar level of disability due to cognitive or mental
 impairment or due to the need for supervision because of behavioral problems.
 (C) RESPITE CARE SERVICES- In the case of respite care services described
 in subsection (d), the degree to which the individual, on a daily basis,
 is dependent on a primary caregiver who is living with or assisting the
 individual without monetary compensation and is providing assistance to the
 individual in at least two ADLs or IADLs or a similar level of disability
 due to cognitive or mental impairment or due to the need for supervision
 because of behavioral problems.
 (4) REASSESSMENT- Reassessment of the individual's needs shall be conducted
 by a care manager at appropriate intervals, but not less than annually in
 the case of an individual receiving institutional services and semiannually
 in the case of an individual receiving noninstitutional or respite care
 services.
 (5) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) ADL- The term `ADL' means each of the following activities of daily
 living: (i) bathing, (ii) dressing, (iii) toileting, (iv) eating, (v)
 transferring from bed to chair, (vi) exiting outside, and (vii) walking.
 (B) IADL- The term `IADL' means each of the following instrumental
 activities of daily living: (i) cooking, (ii) cleaning, (iii) shopping,
 (iv) taking medications, (v) doing laundry, (vi) making telephone calls,
 and (vii) managing money.
 (f) PLANS OF CARE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For requirement of a plan of care for services under this
 section, see section 207(a).
 (2) LEAST RESTRICTIVE SETTING- In providing long-term care services under
 an approved plan, each State health insurance program shall encourage and
 reimburse home and community-based services, where appropriate, to allow
 individuals needing long-term care to remain safely in their homes to the
 maximum extent possible.
 (g) COST SHARING-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the Board shall establish an
 income-related cost-sharing schedule that shall apply to long-term care
 services under this section.
 (2) ALLOWANCE FOR PERSONAL NEEDS, SPOUSAL PROTECTION, ETC-
 (A) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- The Board shall reduce the cost sharing for
 institutional services described in subsection (b)--
 (i) to provide for at least the income allowances specified in subsection
 (d) of section 1924 of the Social Security Act, and
 (ii) to the extent required to assure protection of the assets and income
 available to a community spouse at least equivalent to the protection
 afforded under such section.
 (B) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES AND RESPITE CARE SERVICES- The Board
 shall not impose any cost sharing for home and community-based services
 described in subsection (c) and respite care services described in subsection
 (d)--
 (i) in the case of a single individual whose family income (as determined
 by the Board) does not exceed 150 percent of the poverty line (as defined
 in section 204(e)) for a family unit of two members (or, if greater,
 the number of individuals in the family unit involved);
 (ii) in the case of a married individual whose spouse is not a resident of
 a nursing facility and whose family income (as determined by the Board)
 does not exceed (I) 200 percent of the poverty line for a family unit of
 two members, or (II) 150 percent of the poverty line for a family unit of
 the size involved, whichever is greater; and
 (iii) in the case of a married individual whose spouse is a resident of
 a nursing facility, whose income (as determined by the Board) does not
 exceed 150 percent of the poverty line for a family unit of two members
 (or, if greater, the number of individuals in the family unit involved).
SEC. 207. PLAN OF CARE REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No benefits are available under this Act for plan of care
 services (as defined in subsection (f)) unless such services are provided
 in accordance with a plan of care which is established (and periodically
 reviewed and revised) by a care manager in accordance with this section.
 (b) PLAN OF CARE- A plan of care under this section with respect to plan
 of care services shall match the services to each individual's needs and
 provide for coordination in the delivery of services, in consultation with
 the individual, family members, or, in the case of long-term care services,
 other informal caregivers.
 (c) CARE MANAGER DEFINED- In this section, the term `care manager' means an
 individual or nonprofit or public agency or organization, or a nonprofit
 or public subdivision of such an agency or organization, which the State
 health insurance program determines--
 (1) is capable of performing directly, efficiently, and effectively the
 duties of a care manager described in subsection (d);
 (2) demonstrates capability--
 (A) in establishing and periodically reviewing and revising plans of
 care, and
 (B) in arranging for and monitoring the provision and quality of the
 services under the plan;
 (3) does not provide mental health services, drug or alcohol abuse treatment
 services, or long-term care services and does not have a direct or indirect
 ownership or control interest in, or have a direct or indirect affiliation
 or relationship with, an entity that provides such service; and
 (4) if the agency, organization, or individual is in a State in which
 State or applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies,
 organizations, or individuals as care managers, (A) is licensed pursuant
 to such law, or (B) is approved, by the agency of the State or locality
 responsible for licensing individual care managers, as meeting the standards
 established for such licensing.
 (d) DUTIES OF CARE MANAGERS- Each care manager shall be responsible--
 (1) for establishing and periodically reviewing and revising plans of care
 for plan of care services under this section, in accordance with criteria
 established by the Board,
 (2) for arranging for and monitoring the provision and quality of such
 services and authorizing payment for such services under State health
 insurance programs, and
 (3) in the case of an individual receiving long-term care services, to
 coordinate the provision of such services with the provision of other
 covered services in order to enable an individual to remain safely in the
 least restrictive setting.
In carrying out paragraph (2), the care manager shall assure that the care
is responsive to the preferences of patients in how the care is provided.
 (e) PAYMENT TO CARE MANAGERS- Each State health insurance program shall
 provide for payment of care managers for establishment of plans of care
 under this section and for periodically reviewing and revising such plans
 of care in accordance with section 515.
 (f) PLAN OF CARE SERVICES DEFINED- In this section, the term `plan of care
 services' means--
 (1) mental health services, other than services to which the exception
 described in section 204(c)(2) applies;
 (2) drug and alcohol abuse treatment services; and
 (3) long-term care services.
SEC. 208. MEDICAL REASONABLENESS; LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS FROM COVERED
SERVICES.
 (a) MEDICALLY REASONABLE AND NECESSARY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Benefits for services are not available under this Act
 unless the services are (as defined by the Board) medically reasonable and
 necessary for the treatment of illness or injury or improvement of a body
 part or to promote a function otherwise limited by impairment or functionally
 necessary to act independently, and, in the case of institutional services,
 the setting of the services is appropriate, consistent with subsection (b).
 (2) RULES FOR PREVENTIVE SERVICES- In applying paragraph (1) in the case of
 preventive services and pregnancy-related services which the Board finds
 to be in the nature of preventive care, the services will be considered
 to be medically reasonable and necessary if they are provided consistent
 with periodicity guidelines established by the Board.
 (3) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES, DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT SERVICES, AND
 LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- In applying paragraph (1) in the case of plan of
 care services (as defined in section 207(f)), the services will be considered
 to be medically reasonable and necessary if they are provided consistent
 with plans of care which are established and reviewed in accordance with
 section 207.
 (4) TREATMENT OF NEW AND EXPERIMENTAL SERVICES- In applying paragraph
 (1), the Board shall make, after consultation with a technical advisory
 committee, national coverage determinations with respect to those services
 that are experimental in nature and that are not yet medically reasonable
 and necessary.
 (5) USE OF NATIONAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES- In the case of services for which
 the Board has recognized national practice guidelines, the services are
 considered to be medically reasonable and necessary only if they have
 been provided in accordance with such guidelines or in accordance with
 such exceptions process as may be established by the Board consistent with
 such guidelines.
 (b) MEDICAL REASONABLENESS, NECESSITY, QUALITY, AND APPROPRIATENESS
 DETERMINATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In applying subsection (a)(1), the medical reasonableness
 and necessity of services and, in the case of institutional services,
 the appropriateness of the setting of such services shall be determined
 in accordance with the quality control mechanism under section 403(e).
 (2) PRE-PROCEDURE AUTHORIZATION- A State health insurance program may,
 to the extent not inconsistent with any regulations of the Board, exclude
 from covered services specified surgical procedures, when not required by
 life-threatening or other acute emergencies, which have not been preceded
 by consultation with such appropriately qualified specialists as may be
 required under the program. The State health insurance program also may
 apply such exclusion to hospital and other services incident to surgery.
 (c) GENERAL EXCLUSIONS FROM COVERED SERVICES- Covered services under this
 Act do not include the following:
 (1) Surgery performed solely for cosmetic purposes (as defined in
 regulations) and hospital or other services incident thereto, unless--
 (A) required to correct a congenital anomaly;
 (B) required to restore or correct a part of the body which has been
 altered as a result of accidental injury, disease, or surgery; or
 (C) otherwise determined to be medically reasonable and necessary under
 subsection (a).
 (2) Personal comfort items or private rooms in inpatient facilities, unless
 determined to be medically reasonable and necessary under subsection (a).
 (3) The services of a professional practitioner if they are furnished in
 a hospital which is not a participating provider.
SEC. 209. STUDY OF EFFECTS OF COST-SHARING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall conduct a study on the effects of the
 cost-sharing requirements under sections 204(d), 205(d), and 206(g) and
 the optional State charge for non-enrollment with comprehensive health
 service organizations required by section 506.
 (b) ANALYSIS- In conducting the study under subsection (a), the Board shall
 analyze the appropriateness of the cost-sharing based on the following
 principles:
 (1) Financial barriers to appropriate medical care should be minimized.
 (2) Economic fairness should be maintained.
 (3) Health behaviors should be encouraged.
 (4) Use of unnecessary services should be deterred.
 (5) Use of clinically effective preventive services should be encouraged.
 (6) Administrative efficiency and simplicity should be assured.
 (7) The fiscal integrity of State health insurance programs should be
 maintained.
 (c) REPORT- Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Board shall submit to Congress a report on the study conducted under
 this section. The Board shall include in the report such recommendations for
 changes in cost-sharing requirements referred to in subsection (a) as may be
 appropriate and consistent with the principles specified in subsection (b).
TITLE III--PROVIDER PARTICIPATION
SEC. 301. PROVIDER PARTICIPATION AND STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An individual or other entity furnishing any covered
 service under a State health insurance program under this Act is not a
 qualified provider unless the individual or entity--
 (1) is a qualified provider of the services under section 302;
 (2) has filed with the State health insurance program a participation
 agreement described in subsection (b); and
 (3) meets such other qualifications and conditions as are established by
 the Board or the State health insurance program under this Act.
 (b) REQUIREMENTS IN PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A participation agreement described in this subsection
 between a State health insurance program and a provider shall provide at
 least for the following:
 (A) Services to eligible persons will be furnished by the provider without
 discrimination on the ground of race, national origin, income, religion,
 age, sex or sexual orientation, disability, handicapping condition, or
 (subject to the professional qualifications of the provider) illness.
 (B) No charge will be made for any covered services other than for payment
 authorized by this Act.
 (C) The provider agrees to furnish such information as may be reasonably
 required by the Board or a State health insurance program, in accordance
 with uniform reporting standards established under section 401(g)(1), for--
 (i) quality assurance and utilization review by professional peers and
 consumers;
 (ii) the making of payments under this Act (including the examination of
 records as may be necessary for the verification of information on which
 payments are based);
 (iii) statistical or other studies required for the implementation of this
 Act; and
 (iv) such other purposes as the Board or State may specify.
 (D) The provider agrees not to expend any amounts on capital expenditures
 (as defined in section 505(c)) relating to the provision of covered services
 unless the purchase of such items has been approved under section 505.
 (E) In the case of a provider that is not an individual, the provider agrees
 not to employ or use for the provision of health services any individual
 or other provider who or which has had a participation agreement under
 this subsection terminated for cause.
 (2) TERMINATION OF PARTICIPATION AGREEMENTS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Participation agreements may be terminated, with appropriate
 notice, by the Board, a State health insurance program, or a provider.
 (B) TERMINATION PROCESS- Providers shall be provided notice and a reasonable
 opportunity to correct deficiencies before the Board or a State health
 insurance program terminates an agreement unless a more immediate termination
 is required for public safety or similar reasons.
SEC. 302. QUALIFICATIONS FOR PROVIDERS.
 (a) PROFESSIONAL PRACTITIONERS- Except as provided by the Board or under a
 State health insurance program, a health care practitioner is considered to
 be qualified to provide covered services if the practitioner is licensed
 and meets all the requirements of State law to provide such services and
 any applicable standards established under subsection (d).
 (b) INSTITUTIONAL AND FACILITY-BASED PROVIDERS- Except as provided by the
 Board or under a State health insurance program, a hospital, comprehensive
 health service organization (as described in section 303), nursing facility,
 home health agency, or other institutional or facility-based provider of
 health services is considered to be qualified to provide covered services
 under this Act as such a provider if the provider is licensed and meets
 the requirements of State law to provide such services and any applicable
 standards established under subsection (d).
 (c) OTHER PROVIDERS- Except as provided by the Board or under a State
 health insurance program--
 (1) a provider of community-based primary health services described in
 section 202(a)(5) is considered to be a qualified provider with respect
 to such services so long as it is described in such section and meets
 all applicable grant and program conditions which may apply to providers
 of community-based primary health services and, in the case of providers
 described in subparagraph (C) or (D) of such section, meets such other
 requirements as the Board specifies;
 (2) an independent pathology laboratory (as defined in regulations) is
 considered to be qualified to provide diagnostic pathology services under
 this Act if it is licensed and meets the requirements of State law to
 provide such services, meets any requirements established by or pursuant
 to the Public Health Service Act with respect to such a laboratory, and
 any applicable standards established under subsection (d);
 (3) an independent radiology service (as defined in regulation) is considered
 to be qualified to provide diagnostic and therapeutic radiology under this
 Act if it is licensed and meets the requirements of State law to provide
 such services and any applicable standards established under subsection (d);
 (4) a provider of outpatient drugs, devices, appliances, or equipment is
 considered to be qualified to provide such drugs and items if it meets all
 applicable requirements established by or pursuant to the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act, all requirements of the law of the State in which
 the provider is situated, and such other applicable standards as the Board
 establishes under subsection (d); and
 (5) a provider of ambulance or other covered transportation services
 is considered to be qualified to provide such services if it meets all
 applicable requirements of the law of the State in which the services are
 furnished and such other applicable standards as the Board establishes
 under subsection (d).
 (d) MINIMUM PROVIDER STANDARDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish, evaluate, and update national
 minimum standards to assure the quality of services provided under this
 Act and to monitor efforts by State health insurance programs to assure
 the quality of such services. A State health insurance program may also
 establish additional minimum standards which providers must meet.
 (2) NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS- The national minimum standards under
 paragraph (1) shall be established for institutional providers of services,
 individual health care practitioners, and comprehensive health service
 organizations. Except as the Board may specify in order to carry out this
 title, a hospital, nursing facility, or other institutional provider of
 services shall meet standards (including having in effect a utilization
 review plan) for such a facility under the medicare program under title
 XVIII of the Social Security Act. Such standards also may include, where
 appropriate, elements relating to--
 (A) adequacy and quality of facilities;
 (B) training and competence of personnel (including continuing education
 requirements);
 (C) comprehensiveness of service;
 (D) continuity of service;
 (E) patient satisfaction (including waiting time and access to services; and
 (F) performance standards (including organization, facilities, and structure
 of services, and outcome in palliation, improvement of health, stabilization,
 cure, or rehabilitation).
 (3) TRANSITION IN APPLICATION- If the Board provides for additional
 requirements for providers under this subsection, any such additional
 requirement shall be implemented in a manner that provides for a reasonable
 period during which a previously qualified provider is permitted to meet
 such an additional requirement.
 (4) EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION- The Board shall provide for an exchange,
 at least annually, among State health insurance programs of information
 with respect to quality assurance and cost containment.
SEC. 303. QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this Act, a comprehensive health service
 organization (in this section referred to as a `CHSO') is a public or
 private nonprofit organization which, in return for a capitated payment
 amount, undertakes to furnish, arrange for the provision of, or provide
 payment with respect to--
 (1) a full range of health services (as identified by the Board), including
 at least hospital services and physicians services, and
 (2) out-of-area coverage in the case of urgently needed services,
to an identified population which is living in or near a specified service
area and which enrolls voluntarily in the organization.
 (b) ENROLLMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All eligible persons living in or near the specified service
 area of a CHSO are eligible to enroll in the organization; except that
 the number of enrollees may be limited to avoid overtaxing the resources
 of the organization.
 (2) MINIMUM ENROLLMENT PERIOD- Subject to paragraph (3), the minimum period
 of enrollment with a CHSO shall be twelve months, unless the enrolled
 individual becomes ineligible to enroll with the organization.
 (3) WITHDRAWAL FOR CAUSE- Each CHSO shall permit an enrolled individual
 to disenroll from the organization for cause at any time.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS FOR CHSOS-
 (1) ACCESSIBLE SERVICES- Each CHSO, to the maximum extent feasible, shall
 make all services readily accessible to enrollees who live in the specified
 service area.
 (2) CONTINUITY OF CARE- Each CHSO shall furnish services in such manner as
 to provide continuity of care and (when services are furnished by different
 providers) shall provide ready referral of patients to such services and
 at such times as may be medically appropriate.
 (3) BOARD OF DIRECTORS-
 (A) CONSUMER REPRESENTATION- At least one-third of the members of each
 CHSO's board of directors must be consumer members with no direct or
 indirect, personal or family financial relationship to the organization.
 (B) PROVIDER REPRESENTATION- Each CHSO's board of directors must include
 at least one member who represents health care providers.
 (4) PATIENT GRIEVANCE PROGRAM- Each CHSO must have in effect a patient
 grievance program and must conduct regularly surveys of the satisfaction
 of members with services provided by or through the organization.
 (5) HEALTH EDUCATION- Each CHSO must encourage health education of its
 enrollees and the development and use of preventive health services,
 health promotion and wellness, self-care, and, if applicable, independent
 living arrangements.
 (6) MEDICAL STANDARDS- Each CHSO must provide that a committee or committees
 of health care practitioners associated with the organization will promulgate
 medical standards, oversee the professional aspects of the delivery of
 care, perform the functions of a pharmacy and drug therapeutics committee,
 and monitor and review the quality of all health services (including drugs,
 education, and preventive services).
 (7) USE OF ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS- Each CHSO must, to the extent
 practicable and consistent with good medical practice, employ allied health
 personnel and paraprofessional persons in the furnishing of services.
 (8) PREMIUMS- Premiums or other charges by a CHSO for any services not
 paid for under this Act must be reasonable.
 (9) UTILIZATION AND BONUS INFORMATION- Each CHSO must--
 (A) comply with the requirements of section 1876(i)(8) of the Social Security
 Act (relating to prohibiting physician incentive plans that provide specific
 inducements to reduce or limit medically necessary services), and
 (B) make available to its membership utilization information and data
 regarding financial performance, including bonus or incentive payment
 arrangements to practitioners that resulted from holding down utilization.
 (10) PROVISION OF SERVICES TO ENROLLEES AT INSTITUTIONS OPERATING UNDER
 GLOBAL BUDGETS- The organization shall arrange to reimburse for hospital
 services and other facility-based services (as identified by the Board)
 for services provided to members of the organization in accordance with
 the global operating budget of the hospital or facility approved under
 section 511.
 (11) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS- Each CHSO must meet such other requirements
 (including requirements relating to financial solvency) as the Board or
 a State health insurance program may specify.
 (d) PROVISION OF SERVICES TO NONENROLLEES- A CHSO may furnish services
 to persons who are not enrolled in the organization if such services
 do not interfere in the prompt and appropriate delivery of care to the
 organization's members. Payment for such services, if they are covered
 services to eligible persons, shall be made to the organization unless
 the organization requests that it be made to the provider which furnished
 the services.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 401. NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established a National Health Insurance
 Standards Board.
 (b) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS- The Board shall be composed of--
 (1) five individuals appointed by the President with the advice and consent
 of the Senate;
 (2) not more than three of whom shall be from the same political party;
 (3) at least one of whom shall represent the interests of consumers; and
 (4) individuals who provide a balanced point of view with respect to the
 various health care interests.
Such individuals shall be chosen on the basis of backgrounds in health policy,
health economics, the healing professions, and the administration of health
care institutions. Such individuals, shall serve for a term of seven years,
except that the terms of individuals initially appointed shall expire,
as designated by the President at the time of their appointment, at the
end of three, four, five, six, and seven years respectively. During a term
of membership on the Board, no member shall engage in any other business,
vocation or employment.
 (c) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The President shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the
 Board in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall not
 affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The President may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Board for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment. A
 member who has served for two consecutive seven-year terms shall not be
 eligible for reappointment until two years after the member has ceased
 to serve.
 (4) REMOVAL FOR CAUSE- Upon confirmation, members of the Board may not be
 removed except by the President for cause.
 (d) CHAIR- The President shall designate one of the members of the Board
 to serve at the will of the President as Chair of the Board.
 (e) COMPENSATION- Members of the Board shall be entitled to compensation
 at a level equivalent to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance
 with section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) GENERAL DUTIES OF THE BOARD-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall develop policies, procedures, guidelines,
 and requirements to carry out this Act, including those related to--
 (A) eligibility;
 (B) enrollment;
 (C) benefits;
 (D) provider participation standards and qualifications, as defined in
 title III;
 (E) national and State funding levels;
 (F) methods for determining amounts of payments to providers of covered
 services, consistent with subtitle B of title V;
 (G) identifying, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the
 revenues needed to fund the services covered by this Act (as specified in
 title VI);
 (H) the determination of medical reasonableness and necessity (including
 the coverage of new technologies and the application of medical practice
 guidelines);
 (I) quality assurance;
 (J) assisting State health insurance programs with planning for capital
 expenditures and service delivery; and
 (K) planning for graduate medical education funding (as specified in
 title VII).
 (2) REGULATIONS- Regulations authorized by this Act shall be issued by
 the Board in accordance with the provisions of section 553 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 (3) WAIVER AUTHORITY- The Board may waive such provisions of this Act in
 order to accommodate legitimate experiments and other demonstration projects.
 (g) Uniform Reporting Standards; Annual Report; Studies-
 (1) Uniform reporting standards-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish uniform reporting requirements and
 standards to ensure an adequate national data base regarding health services
 practitioners, services and finances of State health insurance programs,
 approved plans, providers, and the costs of facilities and practitioners
 providing services. Such standards shall include, to the maximum extent
 feasible, health outcome measures
 (B) REPORTS- The Board shall analyze regularly information reported to
 it, and to State health insurance programs pursuant to such requirements
 and standards.
 (2) ANNUAL REPORT- Beginning January 1, of the second year beginning after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Board shall annually report to
 Congress on the following:
 (A) The status of implementation of the Act.
 (B) Enrollment under this Act.
 (C) Benefits under this Act.
 (D) Expenditures and financing under this Act.
 (E) Cost-containment measures and achievements under this Act.
 (F) Quality assurance.
 (G) The planning and approval process for determining capital expenditures
 under this Act, and the effects of decisions made under this provision.
 (H) Long-range plans and goals for the delivery of health services.
 (I) Differences in the health status of the populations of the different
 States, including income and racial characteristics.
 (J) Necessary changes in the education of health personnel.
 (K) Plans for improving service to medically underserved populations.
 (L) Transition problems as a result of implementation of this Act.
 (M) Opportunities for improvements under this Act.
 (3) STATISTICAL ANALYSES AND OTHER STUDIES- The Board may, either directly
 or by contract--
 (A) make statistical and other studies, on a nationwide, regional, state,
 or local basis, of any aspect of the operation of this Act, including
 studies of the effect of the Act upon the health of the people of the
 United States and the effect of comprehensive health services upon the
 health of persons receiving such services;
 (B) develop and test methods of providing through payment for services or
 otherwise, additional incentives for adherence by providers to standards
 of adequacy, access, and quality; methods of consumer and peer review and
 peer control of the utilization of drugs, of laboratory services, and of
 other services not subject to utilization review; and methods of consumer
 and peer review of the quality of services;
 (C) develop and test, for use by the Board, records and information
 retrieval systems and budget systems for health services administration,
 and develop and test model systems for use by providers of services;
 (D) develop and test, for use by providers of services, records and
 information retrieval systems useful in the furnishing of preventive or
 diagnostic services;
 (E) develop, in collaboration with the pharmaceutical profession, and test,
 improved administrative practices or improved methods for the reimbursement
 of independent pharmacies for the cost of furnishing drugs as a covered
 service; and
 (F) make such other studies as it may consider necessary or promising for
 the evaluation, or for the improvement, of the operation of this Act.
 (4) REPORT ON USE OF EXISTING FEDERAL HEALTH CARE FACILITIES- Not later
 than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Board shall
 recommend to the Congress one or more proposals for the treatment of health
 care facilities of the Federal Government.
 (h) PROFESSIONAL, TECHNICAL, AND TEMPORARY ADVISORY COMMITTEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall appoint the standing advisory committees
 specified in paragraphs (2) through (6), and such other standing professional
 and technical committees in order to advise it in carrying out its duties
 under this Act.
 (2) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON BENEFITS- The Board shall appoint a standing
 Advisory Committee on Benefits to advise it with respect to the several
 classes of covered services under this Act. The membership of the committee
 shall consist of experts (in such number as the Board may determine) drawn
 from the health professions, from medical schools or other health educational
 institutions, from consumers of health services, from providers of health
 services (including non-medical licensed and non-licensed providers),
 or from other sources, whom the Board deems best qualified to advise it
 with respect to the professional and technical aspects of the furnishing
 and utilization of, and the evaluation of, a class of covered services
 designated by the Board, and with respect to the relationship of that
 class of services to other covered services.
 (3) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON COST CONTAINMENT- The Board shall appoint a
 standing Advisory Committee on Cost Containment to advise it with respect
 to the payments and cost containment measures contained in title V of this
 Act. The membership of the committee shall include individuals (in such
 number as the Board may determine) with national recognition for their
 expertise in health economics, health insurance, provider reimbursement,
 and related fields. In appointing individuals the Board shall assure
 significant representation of consumers of health services and providers
 of health services.
 (4) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON QUALITY ASSURANCE AND UTILIZATION REVIEW- The
 Board shall appoint a standing Advisory Committee on Quality Assurance
 and Utilization Review to advise it concerning the quality assurance and
 consumer protection procedures and the appropriateness of utilization of
 services under this Act. The membership of the committee shall include
 individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) from the health
 professions and health services with expertise in the efficacy of services,
 in the application of medical protocols and practice guidelines, and
 in modifying inappropriate provider behavior. In appointing individuals
 the Board shall assure significant representation of consumers of health
 services and providers of health services.
 (5) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PRIMARY CARE AND THE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED- The
 Board shall appoint a standing Advisory Committee on Primary Care and the
 Medically Underserved to advise it with respect to title VII of this Act,
 including with respect to the delivery of services and the education and
 training of health practitioners. The membership of the committee shall
 include individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) from the
 health professions and health services with expertise in--
 (A) primary care services;
 (B) the education and training of primary care practitioners;
 (C) the special health needs of medically underserved populations;
 (D) the training, educational, and financial incentives that would encourage
 health practitioners to serve in medically underserved areas;
 (E) the delivery of health services through community-based facilities; and
 (F) developing alternative models of delivering primary health services
 to medically underserved populations.
In appointing such individuals, the Board shall assure significant
representation of consumers of health services and providers of health
services.
 (6) TEMPORARY COMMITTEES- The Board is authorized to appoint such temporary
 professional and technical committees as it deems necessary to advise
 it on special problems not encompassed in the assignments of standing
 committees appointed under subsection (h), or to supplement the advice of
 standing committees.
 (7) REPORTING- Committees appointed under this subsection shall report from
 time to time to the Board, and copies of their reports shall be transmitted
 by the Board to the National Health Advisory Council and be made readily
 available to the public.
 (8) COMPENSATION- All members of the committees established under this
 subsection shall be reimbursed by the Board for travel and per diem in lieu
 of subsistence expenses during the performance of duties of the Board in
 accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (i) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR-
 (1) There is hereby established the position of Executive Director of the
 Board. The Director shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve as
 secretary to the Board and perform such duties in the administration of
 this title as the Board may assign.
 (2) The Board is authorized to delegate to the Director or to any other
 officer or employee of the Board or, with the approval of the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services (and subject to reimbursement of identifiable
 costs), to any other officer or employee of the Department of Health and
 Human Services, any of its functions or duties under this Act other than--
 (A) the issuance of regulations; or
 (B) the determination of the availability of funds and their allocation
 to implement this Act.
 (j) STAFF- The Board shall employ such staff as the Board may deem necessary.
 (k) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 make available to the Board all information available from sources within
 the Department or from other sources, pertaining to the duties of the Board.
SEC. 402. NATIONAL HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall provide for a National Health Advisory
 Council (in this section referred to as the `Council') to advise the Board
 on its activities.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Council shall be composed of--
 (1) the Chair of the Board, who shall serve as Chair of the Council, and
 (2) twenty members, not otherwise in the employ of the United States,
 appointed by the Board without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
 States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
The appointed members shall include, in accordance with subsection (e),
individuals who are representative of State health insurance programs,
public health professionals, providers of health services, and of individuals
(who shall constitute a majority of the Council) who are representative of
consumers of such services, including a balanced representation of employers,
unions, and consumer organizations.
 (c) TERMS OF MEMBERS- Each appointed member shall hold office for a term
 of four years, except that--
 (1) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring during the term for
 which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the
 remainder of that term; and
 (2) the terms of the members first taking office shall expire, as designated
 by the Board at the time of appointment, five at the end of the first year,
 five at the end of the second year, five at the end of the third year, and
 five at the end of the fourth year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Vacancies-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the
 Council in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall
 not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of
 the Council.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The Board may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Council for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (e) QUALIFICATIONS-
 (1) PUBLIC HEALTH REPRESENTATIVES- Members of the Council who are
 representative of State health insurance programs and public health
 professionals shall be individuals who have extensive experience in the
 financing and delivery of care under public health programs.
 (2) PROVIDERS- Members of the Council who are representative of providers
 of health care shall be individuals who are outstanding in fields related
 to medical, hospital, or other health activities, or who are representative
 of organizations or associations of professional health practitioners.
 (3) CONSUMERS- Members who are representative of consumers of such care
 shall be individuals, not engaged in and having no financial interest in the
 furnishing of health services, who are familiar with the needs of various
 segments of the population for personal health services and are experienced
 in dealing with problems associated with the consumption of such services.
 (f) DUTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- It shall be the duty of the Council--
 (A) to advise the Board on matters of general policy in the administration
 of this Act, in the formulation of regulations, and in the performance of
 the Board's duties under section 401; and
 (B) to study the operation of this Act and the utilization of health services
 under it, with a view to recommending any changes in the administration
 of the Act or in its provisions which may appear desirable.
 (2) REPORT- The Council shall make an annual report to the Board on the
 performance of its functions, including any recommendations it may have
 with respect thereto, and the Board shall promptly transmit the report to
 the Congress, together with a report by the Board on any administrative
 recommendations of the Council that have not been followed.
 (g) STAFF- The Council, its members, and any committees of the Council
 shall be provided with such secretarial, clerical, or other assistance as
 may be authorized by the Board for carrying out their respective functions.
 (h) MEETINGS- The Council shall meet as frequently as the Board deems
 necessary, but not less than four times each year. Upon request by seven
 or more members it shall be the duty of the Chair to call a meeting of
 the Council.
 (i) COMPENSATION- Members of the Council shall be reimbursed by the Board for
 travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses during the performance
 of duties of the Board in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of
 title 5, United States Code.
 (j) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act shall not apply to the Council.
SEC. 403. STATE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS.
 (a) SUBMISSION OF PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State shall submit to the Board a plan for a State
 health insurance program for providing for health care services to the
 residents of the State in accordance with this Act.
 (2) REGIONAL PROGRAMS- A State may join with one or more neighboring
 States to submit to the Board a plan for a regional health insurance
 program instead of separate State health insurance programs.
 (b) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall review plans submitted under subsection (a)
 and determine whether such plans meet the requirements for approval. The
 Board shall not approve such a plan unless it finds that the plan (or State
 law) provides, consistent with the provisions of this Act, for the following:
 (A) Payment for required health services for eligible individuals in the
 State in accordance with this Act.
 (B) Establishment of a State Health Advisory Council, in accordance with
 subsection (d).
 (C) Adequate administration, including the designation of a single
 State agency responsible for the administration (or supervision of the
 administration) of the program.
 (D) The establishment of a State health insurance budget, establishment of
 an approval process for capital expenditures, effective cost containment
 measures, and payment methodologies consistent with title V of this Act.
 (E) Assurances that individuals have the freedom to choose practitioners
 and other health care providers for services covered under this Act.
 (F) A procedure for carrying out long-term regional management and planning
 functions, including establishment of District Health Advisory Councils in
 accordance with section 404, with respect to the delivery and distribution
 of health care services that--
 (i) ensures participation of consumers of health services and providers
 of health services,
 (ii) takes into account the recommendations of District Health Advisory
 Councils under section 404, and
 (iii) gives priority to the most acute shortages and maldistributions of
 health personnel and facilities and the most serious deficiencies in the
 delivery of covered services and to the means for the speedy alleviation
 of these shortcomings.
 (G) The licensure and regulation of all health providers and facilities to
 ensure compliance with Federal and State laws and to promote quality of care.
 (H) Establishment of a quality control mechanism in accordance with
 subsection (e).
 (I) Establishment of an independent ombudsman for consumers to register
 complaints about the organization and administration of the State health
 insurance program.
 (2) CONSEQUENCES OF FAILURE TO COMPLY-
 (A) IN GENERAL- If the Board finds that a State plan submitted under
 paragraph (1) does not meet the requirements for approval under this
 section or that a State health insurance program or specific portion
 of such program, the plan for which was previously approved, no longer
 meets such requirements, the Board shall provide notice to the State of
 such failure and that unless corrective action is taken within a period
 of 90 days the sanctions described in subparagraph (B) may be applied,
 effective ninety days after the end of such ninety day period.
 (B) SANCTIONS- The sanctions described in this subparagraph are:
 (i) Censure.
 (ii) Placing the State health insurance program (or specific portions of
 such program) in receivership under the jurisdiction of the Board.
 (c) BARRIERS TO ACCESS PROHIBITED- No State, either by intention or as
 an unstated consequence of budget allocations, may restrict or cause to
 be restricted timely access to the medically necessary and appropriate
 health care services covered under this Act, or permit queues for services
 to form that have the potential of being life-threatening.
 (d) STATE HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCILS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For each State, the Governor, shall provide for appointment
 of a State Health Advisory Council to advise and make recommendations to
 the Governor and State with respect to the implementation of the State
 health insurance program in the State.
 (2) MEMBERSHIP- Each State Health Advisory Council shall be composed of
 fifteen individuals. The appointed members shall include individuals
 who are representative of State health insurance programs, public health
 professionals, providers of health services, and of individuals (who
 shall constitute a majority) who are representative of consumers of such
 services, including a balanced representation of employers, unions and
 consumer organizations.
 (3) TERM OF APPOINTMENT- Each member shall be appointed for a term of three
 years, except that members first appointed to each such Council shall be
 appointed for such shorter terms as will assure (on a continuing basis)
 that the terms of no more than five members expire in any year.
 (4) DUTIES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Each State Health Advisory Council shall review, and submit
 comments to the Governor concerning the implementation of the State health
 insurance program in the State.
 (B) ASSISTANCE- Each State Health Advisory Council shall provide assistance
 and technical support to community organizations and public and private
 non-profit agencies submitting applications for funding under section
 340D of the Public Health Service Act, with particular emphasis placed on
 assisting those applicants with broad consumer representation.
 (e) QUALITY CONTROL MECHANISM- Each State health insurance program shall
 establish a quality control mechanism that meets standards established by
 the Board. Such standards shall include a requirement that the mechanism--
 (1) provide for a review of the quality of institutional services and
 practitioner services specified in such standards;
 (2) monitor patterns of care to identify excessive utilization of services;
 (3) provide for the review of the medical need, reasonableness, and
 appropriateness of hospital services, practitioner services, nursing home
 services, services of comprehensive health service organizations, clinic
 services, and such other services as the Board may specify or the State
 may elect;
 (4) include significant representation of consumers and of providers;
 (5) solicit views and recommendations of District Health Advisory Councils;
 (6) take into account the quality, as well as the cost, of services being
 provided; and
 (7) provide an annual report on the quality of care in the State, including
 identification of institutions and practitioners with substandard quality
 control reviews.
Such a mechanism may include operation of a utilization and quality control
peer review organization in the manner described in part B of title XI of the
Social Security Act and may provide, in conjunction with the establishment of
fee-for-service payment rates under section 512(b)(2) and the application of
expenditure targets, for the development of individual practitioner practice
profiles in order to monitor and assure appropriate utilization of services.
 (e) STATE USE OF FISCAL AGENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State health insurance program, using competitive
 bidding procedures, may enter into such contracts with qualified entities,
 such as voluntary associations, as the State determines to be appropriate
 to process claims and to perform other related functions of fiscal agents
 under the State health insurance program.
 (2) RESTRICTION- Except as the Board may provide for good cause shown, in
 no case may more than one contract described in paragraph (1) be entered
 into under a State health insurance program with respect to any single
 type or class of services.
SEC. 404. DISTRICT HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCILS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State health insurance program shall establish
 district health advisory councils covering distinct geographic areas for
 the purposes of--
 (1) advising and making recommendations to the State with respect to
 implementation of the program in the geographic area served by a council;
 (2) receiving and investigating complaints by eligible persons and by
 providers of services concerning the administration of the program and of
 taking or recommending appropriate corrective action; and
 (3) carrying out district management and planning functions with the State
 health insurance program, including--
 (A) assessing the health needs of the district;
 (B) assessing the quality, supply, and distribution of health resources,
 including acute care hospitals, specialized inpatient facilities, outpatient
 facilities, trained health care personnel, the availability of specialized
 medical equipment, and home and community-based health programs;
 (C) assessing the need for services to medically underserved areas to
 achieve equitable access to care;
 (D) advising on restructuring the health delivery system, including
 reductions in excess capacity and shifting from institutional to ambulatory
 care;
 (E) advising on funding for new and expanded programs, including capital
 expenditures;
 (F) meeting at least biannually with representatives of the State health
 insurance program (i) to determine the goals and priorities for meeting
 health care needs and (ii) to plan for the efficient and effective use of
 health resources within the district; and
 (G) establishing a strategy to implement such goals and priorities.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- Each district health advisory council shall be composed
 of individuals, appointed by the Governor of the State, who include
 representatives of local public health programs, public health professionals,
 providers of health services, and of persons (who shall constitute a
 majority) who are representative of consumers of such services, including a
 balanced representation of employers, unions, and consumer organizations. The
 Governor shall consult with the State Health Advisory Council and local
 officials in the appointment of district health advisory councils.
 (c) GRANT ASSISTANCE- Each district health advisory council shall provide
 assistance and technical support to community organizations and public
 and private non-profit agencies submitting applications for funding under
 section 340D of the Public Health Service Act, with particular emphasis
 placed on assisting those applicants with broad consumer representation.
SEC. 405. COMPLEMENTARY CONDUCT OF RELATED HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 In performing functions with respect to health personnel education and
 training, health research, environmental health, disability insurance,
 vocational rehabilitation, the regulation of food and drugs, and all other
 matters pertaining to health, the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 shall direct all activities of the Department of Health and Human Services
 toward contributions to the health of the people complementary to this Act.
TITLE V--NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGET; PAYMENTS; COST CONTAINMENT MEASURES
Subtitle A--Budgeting and Payments to States
SEC. 501. NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGET.
 (a) NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGET-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Before the beginning of each year, the Board shall establish
 a national health insurance budget, which specifies the total expenditures
 (including expenditures for administrative costs) to be made by the Federal
 Government and the States for covered health care services under this Act.
 (b) Basis for Total Expenditures-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The total expenditures specified in such budget shall be
 the sum of the capitation amounts computed under section 503(a) and the
 amount of Federal administrative expenditures to carry out this Act.
 (2) NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SPENDING CEILING- For purposes of this
 subtitle, the national health insurance spending ceiling described in this
 paragraph for a year is the sum of--
 (A) zero, or, if greater, the percentage increase in the gross national
 product (in current dollars) from the first quarter of the second previous
 year to the first quarter of the previous year,
 (B) the Board's estimate of the annual percentage increase in health
 care expenditures attributable solely to changes in the age or other risk
 characteristics of the population of the United States, and
 (C) for--
 (i) 1994, 3 percentage points,
 (ii) 1995, 2 percentage points,
 (iii) 1996, 1 percentage point,
 (iv) 1997, and each year thereafter, 0 percentage points or such number
 of percentage points as the Board may specify under paragraph (3)(B).
 (3) PERIODIC ADJUSTMENT- In establishing the national health insurance
 budget before the beginning of each year, the Board--
 (A) shall provide for appropriate adjustments in the State adjustment
 factors and risk group adjustment factors described in subsections (c)
 and (d) of section 503, and
 (B) for years after 1997, may provide for such adjustment in the national
 health insurance spending ceiling (described in paragraph (2)) as it
 determines to be appropriate, after taking into account recommendations of
 the National Health Advisory Council, based on changes in medical technology,
 research evidence concerning the efficacy and safety of health care services,
 needs for health personnel, and other appropriate factors.
SEC. 502. STATE HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State health insurance program shall establish for each
 fiscal year a State health insurance budget, which specifies the following:
 (1) The total expenditures (including expenditures for administrative
 costs) to be made under the program in the State for covered health care
 services under this Act, consistent with subsection (b), broken down by
 the following components:
 (A) Expenditures for operating costs of hospitals, comprehensive health
 service organizations, and other facility-based services in the State.
 (B) Expenditures for payment of services provided by health care
 practitioners.
 (C) Capital expenditures in the State, as determined under section 505.
 (D) Expenditures for the education and training of all health care
 practitioners, including graduate medical education in hospitals and other
 health care institutions to cover excess operating and capital expenditures
 associated with teaching and related research activities, consistent with
 subsection (c).
 (2) The total revenues required to meet the State health insurance
 expenditures.
 (b) EXPENDITURE LIMITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The total expenditures specified in each State health
 insurance budget under subsection (a)(1) shall take into account Federal
 contributions made under section 504.
 (2) LIMIT ON CLAIMS PROCESSING AND BILLING EXPENDITURES- Each State health
 insurance budget shall provide that State administrative expenditures
 for claims processing and billing shall not exceed 3 percent of the total
 expenditures under the State health insurance program, unless the Board
 determines, on a case-by-case basis, that additional expenditures for
 such processing and billing would improve health care quality and cost
 effectiveness.
 (c) GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION EXPENDITURES-
 (1) SEPARATE ACCOUNT- Each State health insurance program shall--
 (A) include a separate account for graduate medical education expenses in
 hospitals and other health care institutions, and
 (B) specify the general manner, consistent with paragraph (2), in which such
 expenditures are to be distributed among different types of institutions
 and the different areas of the State.
 (2) DISTRIBUTION RULES- The distribution of funds to hospitals and other
 health care institutions from the account must conform to the following
 principles:
 (A) The disbursement of funds must be consistent with achievement of the
 national and program goals (specified in section 701) within the State
 health insurance program and the distribution of funds from the account
 must be conditioned upon the receipt of such reports as the Board may
 require in order to monitor compliance with such goals.
 (B) The distribution of funds from the account must take into account the
 potentially higher costs of placing medical students in medical residency
 education programs in health professional shortage areas.
SEC. 503. COMPUTATION OF INDIVIDUAL AND STATE CAPITATION AMOUNTS.
 (a) CAPITATION AMOUNTS-
 (1) INDIVIDUAL CAPITATION AMOUNTS- In establishing the national health
 insurance budget under section 501(a) and in computing the national average
 per capita cost under subsection (b) for each year, the Board shall establish
 a method for computing the capitation amount for each eligible individual
 residing in each State. The capitation amount for an eligible individual
 in a State classified within a risk group (established under subsection
 (d)(2)) is the product of--
 (A) a national average per capita cost for all covered health care services
 (computed under subsection (b)),
 (B) the State adjustment factor (established under subsection (c)) for
 the State, and
 (C) the risk adjustment factor (established under subsection (d)) for the
 risk group.
 (2) STATE CAPITATION AMOUNT-
 (A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this title, the term `State capitation
 amount' means, for a State for a year, the sum of the capitation amounts
 computed under paragraph (1) for all the residents of the State in the year,
 as estimated by the Board before the beginning of the year involved.
 (B) USE OF STATISTICAL MODEL- The Board may provide for the computation of
 State capitation amounts based on statistical models that fairly reflect the
 elements that comprise the State capitation amount described in subparagraph
 (A).
 (C) POPULATION INFORMATION- The Bureau of the Census shall assist the Board
 in determining the number, place of residence, and risk group classification
 of eligible individuals.
 (D) SUBSEQUENT ADJUSTMENT- To the extent that the Board determines that
 the actual population or risk factors for a State for a year are different
 from those used in calculating the State capitation amount for the year,
 the Board shall provide for an increase or decrease in the State capitation
 amount for subsequent years to take into account the amount by which the
 actual payment was less, or greater, respectively, than the payment that
 would have resulted if the actual population and risk factors had been used.
 (b) COMPUTATION OF NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COST-
 (1) FOR 1994- For 1994, the national average per capita cost under this
 paragraph is equal to--
 (A) the average per capita health care expenditures in the United States
 in 1992 (as estimated by the Board),
 (B) increased to 1993 by the Board's estimate of the actual amount of such
 per capita expenditures during 1993, and
 (C) updated to 1994 by the national health insurance spending ceiling
 specified in section 501(b)(2) for 1994.
 (2) FOR SUCCEEDING YEARS- For each succeeding year, the national average
 per capita cost under this subsection is equal to the national average per
 capita cost computed under this subsection for the previous year increased
 by the national health insurance spending ceiling (specified in section
 501(b)(2)) for the year involved.
 (c) STATE ADJUSTMENT FACTORS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Board shall develop
 for each State a factor to adjust the national average per capita costs
 to reflect differences between the State and the United States in--
 (A) average labor and nonlabor costs that are necessary to provide covered
 health services;
 (B) any environmental or geographic condition affecting health status or
 the need for health care services, to the extent such a condition is not
 taken into account in the establishment of risk groups under subsection (d);
 (C) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly the
 proportion of the population residing in medically underserved areas, to
 the extent such a condition is not taken into account in the establishment
 of risk groups under subsection (d); and
 (D) any other factor required to assure equitable distribution of funds
 among the States.
 (2) BUDGET NEUTRALITY- The State adjustment factors shall be applied
 under this subsection in a manner that results in neither an increase
 nor a decrease in the total amount of the Federal contributions to all
 State health insurance programs under subsection (b) as a result of the
 application of such factors.
 (3) PHASE-IN- In applying State adjustment factors under this subsection
 during the five-year period beginning with 1994, the Board shall phase-in,
 over such period, the use of factors described in paragraph (1) in a
 manner so that the adjustment factor for a State is based on a blend of
 such factors and a factor that reflects the relative actual average per
 capita costs of health services of the different States as of the time of
 enactment of this Act.
 (d) ADJUSTMENTS FOR RISK GROUP CLASSIFICATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall develop an adjustment factor to the
 national average per capita costs computed under subsection (b) for
 individuals classified in each risk group (as designated under paragraph
 (2)) to reflect the difference between the average national average per
 capita costs and the national average per capita cost for individuals
 classified in the risk group.
 (2) RISK GROUPS- The Board shall designate a series of risk groups,
 determined by age, sex, and other factors that represent distinct patterns
 of health care services utilization and costs.
SEC. 504. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State with an approved State health insurance program
 is entitled to receive, from amounts in the National Health Insurance Trust
 Fund, on a monthly basis each year, of an amount equal to one-twelfth of
 the product of--
 (1) the State capitation amount (computed under section 503(a)(2)) for
 the State for the year, and
 (2) the Federal contribution percentage (established under subsection (b)).
 (b) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION PERCENTAGE- The Board shall establish a formula
 for the establishment of a Federal contribution percentage for each
 State. Such formula shall take into consideration a State's per capita
 income and revenue capacity and such other relevant economic indicators
 as the Board determines to be appropriate. The weighted-average Federal
 contribution percentage for all States shall equal 87 percent and in no
 event shall such percentage be less than 82 percent nor more than 92 percent.
 (c) USE OF PAYMENTS- All payments made under this section may only be used
 to carry out the State health insurance program.
SEC. 505. REQUIRED APPROVAL PROCESS FOR CAPITAL EXPENDITURES.
 (a) PROCESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Consistent with standards established under subsection (b),
 each State health insurance program shall provide for a process for the
 approval of capital expenditures (as defined in subsection (c)) in order--
 (A) to establish a more efficient balance between the need for services
 and the delivery of services in overserved areas, and
 (B) to expand the delivery of services in medically underserved areas.
 (2) CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL- No expenditures (including operating costs,
 rent, depreciation, and interest) may be approved by a State health insurance
 program to the extent they are attributable to a capital expenditure which
 was subject to, but was not approved under, such process.
 (b) STANDARDS FOR CAPITAL APPROVAL PROCESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall specify standards for the process, to be
 implemented under each State health insurance program, for the approval
 of capital expenditures.
 (2) REQUIREMENTS- Under such standards, such process--
 (A) if there is a limit on capital expenditures, shall assure that such
 expenditures are distributed geographically within a State taking into
 account at least the factors described in paragraph (3);
 (B) shall assure that health care providers and consumers are provided
 reasonable opportunities for involvement in the process;
 (C) may provide for such special consideration as the Board specifies
 in the case of institutions of national repute or other institutions
 disproportionately serving interstate populations;
 (D) may provide for the special consideration of religious and charitable
 organizations that have raised voluntary contributions for such capital
 expenditures;
 (E) may provide for such priorities for comprehensive health service
 organizations as the Board specifies; and
 (F) may provide for limits on the distribution among different types of
 facilities or capital projects as the Board may find necessary in order to
 prevent significant maldistributions while retaining the maximum flexibility
 of States to provide for covered health services in each State.
 (3) FACTORS- The factors to be taken into account under this paragraph in
 the distribution of capital expenditures are as follows:
 (A) The population of the different geographic areas within the State, its
 dispersion, and the risk characteristics (measured by health indicators),
 based on the risk factors described in section 503(d).
 (B) The capital needs of the different geographic areas of the State in
 order to ensure adequate access to general and specialty services and
 technologies and to ensure medical effectiveness.
 (C) The need to correct for historical maldistribution in the allocation
 of health care capital that preceded the enactment of this Act.
 (c) CAPITAL EXPENDITURES DEFINED- In this Act, the term `capital
 expenditures' includes capital purchases or leases for newly constructed
 or renovated facilities and for equipment valued at at least $50,000
 (or such other amount as the Board may specify).
SEC. 506. OPTIONAL STATE CHARGE FOR NON-ENROLLMENT WITH COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
SERVICE ORGANIZATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A State health insurance program may impose a charge
 for individuals who are not enrolled with a comprehensive health service
 organization (as defined in section 303) for the receipt of covered health
 care services under this Act.
 (b) AMOUNT- The amount of such charge shall be assessed relative to
 income and--
 (1) for an individual shall be no less than $25 and no more than $500
 during a calendar year; and
 (2) for a family shall be no less than $50 and no more than $1,000 during
 a calendar year.
 (c) LIMITATION ON OPTIONAL CHARGE- There may be no such optional
 charge assessed if a comprehensive health service organization is not
 in reasonable proximity to the residence of the member or accessible by
 public transportation, as specified by the Board.
Subtitle B--Payments by States to Providers
SEC. 511. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS AND OTHER FACILITY-BASED SERVICES FOR
OPERATING EXPENSES ON THE BASIS OF APPROVED GLOBAL BUDGETS.
 (a) DIRECT PAYMENT UNDER GLOBAL BUDGET- Payment for operating expenses
 for institutional and facility-based care, including hospital services and
 nursing facility services, shall be made directly to each institution or
 facility by each State health insurance program under an annual prospective
 global budget approved under the program. Such a budget shall include
 payment for outpatient care and non-facility-based care that is furnished
 by or through the facility. In the case of a hospital that is wholly owned
 (or controlled) by a comprehensive health service organization that is
 paid under section 514 on the basis of a global budget, the global budget
 of the organization shall include the budget for the hospital.
 (b) ANNUAL NEGOTIATIONS; BUDGET APPROVAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The prospective global budget for an institution or
 facility shall be developed through annual negotiations between the State
 health insurance program and the institution or facility and be based on
 a nationally uniform system of cost accounting established under standards
 of the Board.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing a budget through negotiations, there
 shall be taken into account at least the following:
 (A) With respect to inpatient hospital services, the number, and
 classification by diagnosis-related group, of discharges.
 (B) An institution's or facility's past expenditures.
 (C) Change in the consumer price index and other price indices.
 (D) The cost of reasonable compensation to health care practitioners.
 (E) The wage level of the institution's or facility's workforce.
 (F) The extent to which the institution or facility is providing health care
 services to meet the needs of residents in the area served by the institution
 or facility, including the institution's or facility's occupancy level.
 (G) The institution's or facility's previous financial and clinical
 performance, based on utilization data provided under this Act.
 (H) The type of institution or facility, including whether the institution
 or facility is part of a medical residency education program or serves a
 graduate medical education, research or other training purpose.
 (I) Technological advances or changes.
 (J) Costs of the institution or facility associated with meeting Federal
 and State regulations.
 (K) The costs associated with public outreach activities.
 (L) In the case of a for-profit facility, a reasonable, fixed rate of return
 on equity capital, independent of those operating expenses necessary to
 fulfill the objectives of this Act, reduced (consistent with subparagraph
 (L)) by any operating profit.
 (M) Incentives to facilities that maintain costs below previous reasonable
 budgeted levels without reducing the care provided.
The portion of such a budget that relates to expenditures for graduate
medical education shall be consistent with the State health insurance budget
for such expenditures.
 (3) APPROVAL REQUIRED OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURES- No expenditures may be
 approved as part of a budget of an institution or facility under this
 section to the extent they are attributable to an expenditure for a capital
 expenditure that was subject to, but was not approved under, the process
 described in section 505.
 (4) REVIEW BY ADVISORY COUNCILS- A State shall not approve a budget of an
 institution or facility unless, prior to such approval, the State Health
 Advisory Council and the appropriate District Health Advisory Council have
 had an opportunity to review and submit any comments concerning the budget.
 (5) PROVISION OF REQUIRED INFORMATION; DIAGNOSIS-RELATED GROUP- No budget
 for an institution or facility for a year may be approved unless the
 institution or facility has submitted on a timely basis to the State
 health insurance program such information as the program or the Board
 shall specify, including in the case of hospitals information on discharges
 classified by diagnosis-related group.
 (c) ADJUSTMENTS IN APPROVED BUDGETS-
 (1) ADJUSTMENTS TO GLOBAL BUDGETS THAT CONTRACT WITH COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
 SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS- Each State health insurance program shall develop
 an administrative mechanism for reducing operating funds to institutions or
 facilities in proportion to payments made to such institutions or facilities
 for services contracted for by a comprehensive health service organization.
 (2) AMENDMENTS- In accordance with standards established by the Board,
 an operating and capital budget approved under this section for a year
 may be amended before, during, or after the year if there is a substantial
 change in any of the factors relevant to budget approval.
 (d) DONATIONS PERMISSIBLE- The Board shall promulgate regulations permitting
 institutions and facilities to raise funds from private sources to pay
 for newly constructed facilities, major renovations, and equipment. The
 expenditure of such funds, whether for operating or capital expenditures,
 does not obligate the State health insurance program to provide for
 continued support for such expenditures unless included in an approved
 global budget and, in the case of capital expenditures, unless approved
 under the process described in section 505.
SEC. 512. PAYMENTS TO HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONERS BASED ON PROSPECTIVE FEE
SCHEDULE OR CAPITATION.
 (a) ELECTION OF PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Every independent health care practitioner is entitled
 to be paid for the provision of covered health services under the State
 health insurance program either--
 (A) in accordance with subsection (b), by the fee-for-service method,
 consisting of the payment of a fee for each billable covered service, or
 (B) in accordance with subsection (c), under the capitation method,
at the practitioner's election.
 (2) USE OF SALARY AND OTHER ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT METHODS- A State health
 insurance program may provide, through an agreement with a statewide or local
 professional society or other organization representative of independent
 practitioners or otherwise, for payment to individual practitioners on the
 basis of an annual salary, or hourly payments, or other payment method if
 the State health insurance program is satisfied that the amount of payments
 under such alternative payment method do not exceed, in the aggregate,
 the amount of payments that would otherwise be made and that high quality
 of patient care will be maintained.
 (3) GLOBAL FEE PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES- The Board shall establish models
 and encourage State health insurance programs to implement alternative
 payment methodologies that incorporate global fees for related services
 (such as all outpatient procedures for treatment of a condition) or for
 a basic group of services (such as primary care services) furnished to
 an individual over a period of time, in order to encourage continuity
 and efficiency in the provision of services. Such methodologies shall be
 designed to ensure a high quality of care.
 (b) PAYMENT RATES BASED ON PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SCHEDULES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- With respect to any payment method for a class of
 practitioners, the State health insurance program shall establish, on a
 prospective basis, a payment schedule. The State health insurance program
 shall establish such a schedule only after negotiations with organizations
 representing the class of practitioners involved. Payment amounts shall
 be consistent with the State health insurance budget.
 (2) FEE FOR SERVICE SCHEDULES BASED ON NATIONAL RELATIVE VALUE SCALE- In the
 case of payment based on fee-for-service payments, the payment amount shall--
 (A) be based on a relative value scale, developed by the State taking
 into account the relative value scale developed under section 1848 of
 the Social Security Act, as in effect on the day before the date of the
 enactment of this Act, including such updates and modifications as the
 Board may undertake;
 (B) be based on conversion factors established by each State consistent
 with the State health insurance budget; and
 (C) provide for the application of expenditure targets, in accordance with
 standards established by the Board, based on type of practitioners and
 geographic area (as specified under the State health insurance program),
 and adjustments in present or future payment rates depending on whether
 expenditures are below or above such expenditure targets.
In applying expenditure targets under subparagraph (C), State health insurance
programs may provide for adjustment of rates on a practitioner-specific
basis to reflect utilization patterns of individual practitioners and may
publicly disclose such utilization patterns for individual practitioners
(but only in a manner that does not identify individual patients).
 (c) CAPITATION PAYMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A practitioner may use the capitation payment method only
 if the practitioner has filed with the State health insurance program an
 agreement to--
 (A) furnish all necessary and appropriate medical or dental services,
 as defined by the State health insurance program, to persons on a list of
 persons eligible to receive such services from the practitioner;
 (B) maintain arrangements for referral of patients to specialists,
 institutions, and other providers of covered services and for payment of
 those services, when applicable; and
 (C) maintain such records and make such reports of services furnished
 as may be required by the State health insurance program for purposes of
 medical audit.
 (2) CAPITATION PAYMENT AMOUNTS- In the case of capitation payments,
 the payment amount shall be based on the type of practitioner and shall
 be adjusted to take into account the relative costs of services, the
 population served by a practitioner, and the volume of services required
 by the population served. The amount of such payment shall be computed
 in a manner so that the capitation amount does not exceed a reasonable
 estimate of the total of such payments that would have been made under
 the fee-for-service payment method.
 (3) ENROLLMENT- Each State health insurance program that provides for
 payments in accordance with this subsection shall provide for equitable
 procedures for the enrollment of eligible individuals with practitioners
 under this subsection.
 (4) EXCEPTIONS- A practitioner electing the capitation method is entitled
 to be paid by the fee-for-service method for services furnished to eligible
 individuals who are not on the practitioner's list, but not (except as
 provided in regulations) for specialized services furnished to persons
 who are on the list.
 (d) REDUCTION IN PAYMENT FOR UNAPPROVED CAPITAL EXPENDITURES- In providing
 for payment under this section insofar as the payment amount includes an
 element for a capital expenditure, the payment amount shall be reduced to
 the extent of the value of such expenditure if the expenditure was subject
 to, but was not approved under, the process described in section 505.
SEC. 513. PAYMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Payment to a comprehensive health service organization to
 its enrollees shall be determined by the State--
 (1) based on a global budget described in section 511, or
 (2) based on the basic capitation amount described in subsection (b)
 for each of its enrollees.
 (b) BASIC CAPITATION AMOUNT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The basic capitation amount described in this subsection
 for an enrollee shall be determined by the State health insurance program
 on the basis of the average amount of expenditures that is estimated would
 be made under the State health insurance program for health care services
 for an enrollee with the same actuarial characteristics as the enrollee.
 (2) ADJUSTMENT FOR SPECIAL HEALTH NEEDS- The State health insurance program
 shall adjust such average amounts to take into account the special health
 needs, including a disproportionate number of medically underserved
 individuals, of populations served by the organization.
SEC. 514. PAYMENTS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES.
 In the case of community based primary health services described under
 section 202(a)(5) of this Act, payments shall--
 (1) be based on a global budget described in section 511, which budget
 may include the additional amounts described in subparagraphs (C), (D),
 and (E) of paragraph (2); or
 (2)(A) be made on an individual patient basis,
 (B) to the maximum extent practicable, be based on a provider's reasonable
 cost incurred in serving individual patients,
 (C) include an additional amount, as set by the Board, to cover the costs
 incurred by a provider which serves persons not covered by this Act whose
 health care is essential to overall community health and the control of
 communicable disease, and for whom the cost of such care is otherwise
 uncompensated,
 (D) include an additional amount, as set by the Board, to cover the
 reasonable costs incurred by a provider that furnishes case management
 services (as defined in section 1915(g)(2) of the Social Security Act),
 transportation services, and translation services, and
 (E) include an additional amount, as set by the Board, to cover the costs
 incurred by a provider in conducting graduate medical education training
 programs in connection with the provision of such services.
SEC. 515. PAYMENTS FOR CARE MANAGERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Payment for care managers shall be made directly by each
 State health insurance program pursuant to payment schedules under an
 annual prospective budgeting system established by the program consistent
 with the State health insurance budget established under section 502.
 (b) PAYMENT SCHEDULES- The payment schedules may be based on negotiations
 between the State health insurance program and care management agencies,
 capitation, or other methods.
SEC. 516. PAYMENTS FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF LIST-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish a list of approved prescription
 drugs and biologicals that the Board determines are necessary for the
 maintenance or restoration of health or of employability or self-management
 and eligible for coverage under this Act.
 (2) EXCLUSIONS- The Board may exclude reimbursement under this Act for
 ineffective, unsafe, or over-priced products where better alternatives
 are determined to be available.
 (b) PRICES- For each such listed prescription drug covered under this Act,
 the Board shall from time to time determine a product price or prices
 which shall constitute the maximum to be recognized under this Act as the
 cost of a drug to a provider thereof. The Board may conduct negotiations,
 on behalf of State health insurance programs, with drug manufacturers and
 distributors in determining the applicable product price or prices.
 (c) CHARGES BY INDEPENDENT PHARMACIES- Each State health insurance
 program shall provide for payment for a prescription drug furnished by
 an independent pharmacy based on the drug's cost to the pharmacy (not in
 excess of the applicable product price established under subsection (b))
 plus a dispensing fee. In accordance with standards established by the Board,
 each State health insurance program, after consultation with representatives
 of the pharmaceutical profession, shall establish schedules of dispensing
 fees, designed to afford reasonable compensation to independent pharmacies
 after taking into account variations in their cost of operation resulting
 from regional differences, differences in the volume of prescription drugs
 dispensed, differences in services provided, and other relevant factors.
SEC. 517. APPROVED DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF LIST- The Board shall establish a list of approved
 durable medical equipment and therapeutic devices and equipment (including
 eyeglasses, hearing aids, and prosthetic appliances), that the Board
 determines are necessary for the maintenance or restoration of health or
 of employability or self-management and eligible for coverage under this Act.
 (b) CONSIDERATIONS AND CONDITIONS- In establishing the list under subsection
 (a), the Board shall take into consideration the efficacy, safety, and
 cost of each item contained on such list, and shall attach to any item
 such conditions as the Board determines appropriate with respect to the
 circumstances under which, or the frequency with which, the item may
 be prescribed.
 (c) PRICES- For each such listed item covered under this Act, the Board
 shall from time to time determine a product price or prices which shall
 constitute the maximum to be recognized under this Act as the cost of the
 item to a provider thereof. The Board may conduct negotiations, on behalf
 of State health insurance programs, with equipment and device manufacturers
 and distributors in determining the applicable product price or prices.
 (d) EXCLUSIONS- The Board may exclude from coverage under this Act
 ineffective, unsafe, or overpriced products where better alternatives are
 determined to be available.
SEC. 518. PAYMENTS FOR OTHER ITEMS AND SERVICES.
 In the case of payment for other covered health services, the amount of
 payment shall be established by each State health insurance program--
 (1) in accordance with payment methodologies which are specified by the
 Board after consultation with the National Health Advisory Council and
 the Board's standing Advisory Committee on Cost Containment, and
 (2) consistent with the State health insurance budget.
SEC. 519. PAYMENT INCENTIVES FOR MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.
 (a) MODEL PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES- In addition to the payment amounts
 otherwise provided in this title, the Board shall establish model payment
 methodologies and other incentives that promote the provision of covered
 health care services in medically underserved areas, particularly in rural
 and inner-city underserved areas.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting the
 authority of State health insurance programs to increase payment amounts
 or otherwise provide additional incentives to encourage the provision of
 medically reasonable and necessary services in underserved areas.
SEC. 520. WAIVER AUTHORITY FOR EXPERIMENTS AND DEMONSTRATIONS.
 Upon application of a State health insurance program, the Board may
 waive the required payment methodology under this subtitle as it may be
 necessary to allow alternative payment schemes or conduct experiments and
 demonstration projects.
Subtitle C--Malpractice Reform
SEC. 521. MALPRACTICE REFORM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board may award grants to State health insurance programs
 for the development and implementation of programs for medical malpractice
 reforms. Programs receiving such grants shall include efforts to develop
 alternative methods to resolve liability disputes that fairly protect the
 interests of all parties involved and may include an appropriate role for
 the use of medical practice guidelines. No grant shall be awarded that is
 inconsistent with the goal of--
 (1) ensuring fair and adequate compensation for and review of injuries
 arising from medical negligence;
 (2) reducing unnecessary or ineffective medical care;
 (3) reducing excessive health care costs;
 (4) improving access to quality health care; and
 (5) improving patient protections, disciplinary standards for health care
 professionals, and the effectiveness of State medical boards.
 (b) TYPES OF GRANTS- A grant awarded under subsection (a) shall be either--
 (1) a planning grant, to assist the grantee in the development of a program
 under this section that shall be for a period of not to exceed two years; or
 (2) an operational grant, to assist the grantee in operation and evaluation
 of the new program referred to in paragraph (1), that shall be for a period
 of not to exceed five years.
 (c) REQUIREMENT- An operational grant under subsection (b)(2) shall include
 a requirement that an evaluation, approved by the Board as being adequate,
 is conducted to determine the effectiveness of the program for which the
 grant is utilized. A final report on the results of the evaluation shall
 be prepared and submitted to the Board.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
SEC. 522. STUDY OF MEDICAL MALPRACTICE.
 (a) CONTRACT- The Board shall enter into a contract with the Institute
 of Medicine, or with a similar independent entity, for the collection and
 analysis of data and issues, by a group of representatives of interested
 parties and experts, related to--
 (1) ineffective or unnecessary medical testing and practices;
 (2) the occurrence of malpractice and malpractice awards (including the
 number of claims filed and the number of findings of negligence);
 (3) the adequacy of existing health care provider licensing and disciplining
 procedures in preventing malpractice;
 (4) the reasonableness of malpractice insurance premiums and rate-setting
 practices; and
 (5) any other issues relevant to the adequacy of current medical practices,
 of compensation for injuries resulting from medical malpractice, and the
 impact of legal liability on medical practices.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Institute or entity referred to in subsection (a) shall
 make available to the Board, the appropriate committees of Congress, the
 appropriate State officials, and to the general public, a report containing
 the recommendations of the Institute or entity for any desirable medical
 malpractice reforms.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Subtitle D--Mandatory Assignment and Administrative Provisions
SEC. 531. MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT.
 (a) NO BALANCED BILLING-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Payments for benefits under this Act shall constitute
 payment in full for such benefits and the entity furnishing an item or
 service for which payment is made under this Act shall accept such payment
 as payment in full for the item or service and may not accept any payment
 or impose any charge for any such item or service other than accepting
 payment from the State health insurance program in accordance with this Act.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the imposition of a charge
 or receipt of payment for cost sharing provided under section 204(d),
 205(d), and 206(g).
 (b) ENFORCEMENT- If an entity knowingly and willfully bills for an item or
 service or accepts payment in violation of subsection (a), the Board may
 apply sanctions against the entity in the same manner as sanctions could
 have been imposed under section 1842(j)(2) of the Social Security Act
 for a violation of section 1842(j)(1) of such Act. Such sanctions are in
 addition to any sanctions that a State may impose under its State health
 insurance program.
SEC. 532. PROCEDURES FOR REIMBURSEMENT; APPEALS.
 (a) PROCEDURES FOR REIMBURSEMENT- In accordance with standards issued by
 the Board, a State health insurance program shall establish a timely and
 administratively simple procedure for reimbursement to all providers under
 this Act.
 (b) APPEALS PROCESS- Each State health insurance program shall establish an
 appeals process to handle all grievances pertaining to payment to providers
 under this title.
TITLE VI--FINANCING
SEC. 601. NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE TRUST FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of the
 United States a trust fund to be known as the National Health Insurance Trust
 Fund (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall
 consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made and such amounts as may
 be deposited in, or appropriated to, such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (b) APPROPRIATIONS INTO TRUST FUND-
 (1) TAXES- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund for each fiscal
 year (beginning with fiscal year 1994), out of any moneys in the Treasury not
 otherwise appropriated, amounts equivalent to 100 percent of the aggregate
 increase in tax liabilities under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is
 attributable to the application of the amendments made by this title. The
 amounts appropriated by the preceding sentence shall be transferred from
 time to time (but not less frequently than monthly) from the general fund
 in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such amounts to be determined on the
 basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the taxes paid to
 or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be made in
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in
 excess of or were less than the amounts that should have been so transferred.
 (2) CURRENT PROGRAM RECEIPTS- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, there are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund for each fiscal year
 (beginning with fiscal year 1994) the amounts that would otherwise have been
 appropriated to carry out the following programs (and any other Federal
 program identified by the Board, in consultation with the Secretary of
 the Treasury, as providing for payment for health services the payment of
 which may be made under this Act):
 (A) The medicare program, under parts A and B of title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act.
 (B) The medicaid program, under State plans approved under title XIX of
 such Act.
 (C) The Federal employees health benefit program, under chapter 89 of
 title 5, United States Code.
 (D) The CHAMPUS program, under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code.
 (c) INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (b) through
 (i) of section 1817 of the Social Security Act shall apply to the Trust
 Fund under this Act in the same manner as they applied to the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under part A of title XVIII of such Act,
 except that the National Health Insurance Board shall constitute the Board
 of Trustees of the Trust Fund.
 (d) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- Any amounts remaining in the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
 Fund after the settlement of claims for payments under title XVIII have
 been completed, shall be transferred into the National Health Insurance
 Trust Fund.
SEC. 602. FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUES; NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS.
 (a) FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUES- The sources of Federal funds to make
 payments under this Act are--
 (1) existing Federal funds described in section 601(b), and
 (2) the national health insurance premiums, provided for under this section.
 (b) NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS- The Secretary of the Treasury,
 in consultation with the Board, shall develop a formula for determining
 and collecting amounts from individuals and employers in order to provide
 for the financing of health care services covered under this Act, such
 amounts to be known as the National Health Insurance premiums.
 (c) DETERMINATION OF PREMIUM AMOUNTS- The Secretary of the Treasury shall
 determine the aggregate National Health Insurance premiums for each taxable
 year beginning after December 31, 1993, by estimating the total amount
 necessary to equal the excess of--
 (1) payments to States described in section 504 for the fiscal year
 beginning in such taxable year, over
 (2) amounts appropriated to the National Health Insurance Trust Fund under
 section 601(b)(2) for such fiscal year.
 (d) COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS FROM INDIVIDUALS- The Secretary of the Treasury
 shall collect National Health Insurance premiums from individuals using
 a formula with the following characteristics:
 (1) Income-based (including earned and unearned income).
 (2) Significantly progressive, such that the total premium as a proportion
 of income increases with income.
 (3) For middle and low-income individuals--
 (A) the sum of such premiums and the amount of cost-sharing and other
 out-of-pocket expenditures for health care services covered under this Act
 (expressed as a percentage of individual income), will not exceed
 (B) the percentage of 1993 income of such individuals expended on premiums
 (including the employee share of hospital insurance taxes), cost-sharing,
 and other out-of-pocket expenditures for such services, adjusted to reflect
 the change in ratio of inflation in health care expenditures to increases
 in income for such individuals.
 (4) Payable in increments during the course of the year.
 (5) Payable by individuals or by employers on behalf of employees (at the
 option of the employer), as described in subsection (e)(4).
 (6) Subject to the provisions of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986.
 (e) COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS FROM EMPLOYERS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury shall collect National Health
 Insurance premiums from employers--
 (A) by increasing the highest marginal corporate income tax rate,
 (B) by increasing the employer and self-employment hospital insurance
 tax, and
 (C) by imposing a surtax on regular and minimum taxes.
 (2) INCREASE IN CORPORATE INCOME TAX RATE- In order to carry out paragraph
 (1)(A), the amount of the increase in the highest marginal corporate income
 tax rate shall be specified by the Secretary of the Treasury.
 (3) INCREASE IN EMPLOYER AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX- In
 order to carry out paragraph (1)(B), the amount of the hospital insurance
 taxes imposed by sections 1401(b) and 3111(b) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 shall be increased by an amount or percent specified by the
 Secretary of the Treasury, which amounts or percentages need not be the
 same under both sections.
 (4) SURTAX ON REGULAR AND MINIMUM TAXES- In order to carry out paragraph
 (1)(C)--
 (A) the amount of the tax imposed by section 11 of such Code for any
 taxable year shall be increased by a surtax or percent specified by the
 Secretary of the Treasury, and
 (B) the amount of the tentative minimum tax determined under section 55(b)
 of such Code shall be increased by a surtax or percent specified by the
 Secretary of the Treasury.
 (5) OPTIONAL PAYMENT OF EMPLOYEES PREMIUM- The Secretary of the Treasury
 shall provide for a method for employers to pay for the premium from
 individuals specified under subsection (d)(5) otherwise payable by such
 employer's employees.
 (5) APPLICATION- This subsection shall be subject to the provisions of
 subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall make the National
 Health Insurance premiums effective for remuneration or other income
 received on or after such dates as may be required to provide sufficient
 revenues to carry out this Act.
SEC. 603. TAX TREATMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS.
 (a) TAX EXCLUSIONS FOR AMOUNTS RECEIVED FROM, AND EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
 TO, THE PLAN-
 (1) AMOUNTS RECEIVED- Subsection (e) of section 105 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to amounts received under accident and health plans)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) ACCIDENT OR HEALTH INSURANCE- For purposes of this section, section
 104, and section 106, the term `accident or health insurance' means an
 approved State health insurance program under section 403 of the Health
 Care for Every American Act of 1992.'.
 (2) EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS- Section 106 of such Code (relating to
 contributions by employer to accident and health plans) is amended by
 striking `an accident or health plan' and inserting `accident or health
 insurance'.
 (3) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 105 of such Code is amended by striking
 subsection (h).
 (b) LIMITATION ON BUSINESS EXPENSE DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE- Section
 162 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trade or business
 expenses) is amended by inserting at the end the following new subsection:
 `(n) HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The expenses paid or incurred by an employer for health care
 services (whether directly, through insurance, or otherwise or whether or
 not covered under the Health Care for Every American Act of 1992) shall
 not be allowed as a deduction under this section.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed as disallowing
 the deduction for any National Health Insurance premiums under title VI of
 such Act or other Federal or State taxes used to pay for benefits covered
 under such Act.'.
 (c) RULES RELATING TO DEDUCTIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) SAME TREATMENT FOR SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS AND BUSINESSES- Section
 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules
 for health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended--
 (A) by striking `25 percent of' in paragraph (1), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6).
 (2) SIMILAR TREATMENT FOR OTHER INDIVIDUALS- Subsection (d) of section
 213 of such Code (relating to medical, dental, etc., expenses) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(1) MEDICAL CARE- The term `medical care' means National Health Insurance
 premiums under title VI of the Health Care for Every American Act of 1992
 and cost-sharing amounts and other premiums paid for coverage under a
 State health insurance program under section 403 of such Act.'; and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (6), (7), and (9), and by redesignating paragraph
 (8) as paragraph (6), respectively.
 (d) TERMINATION OF CHILD HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT- Clause (i) of section
 32(b)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by inserting `(0 percent for taxable
 years beginning after December 31, 1998)' after `6 percent'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to any taxable year beginning after such date (or dates) as the
 Secretary of the Treasury specifies as being consistent with the effective
 date specified under section 602(f).
SEC. 604. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for establishing a financing
 program for the implementation of the State health insurance program in
 the State. Such financing program may include--
 (1) funds used to finance the State share of medicaid under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act as in effect on the day before the date described
 in section 105 of this Act,
 (2) State and local funding for public hospitals and other indigent care
 programs, and
 (3) State funding from general revenues, earmarked taxes, payroll taxes,
 sales taxes, and such other measures consistent with this Act as the State
 may provide.
 (b) ONGOING ENTITLEMENT- Each State with a State health insurance program
 approved by the Board is entitled to funding from the Board in the amounts
 provided under section 504.
TITLE VII--PROMOTION OF PRIMARY HEALTH CARE; DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE
CAPACITY; PROGRAMS TO ASSIST THE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED
Subtitle A--Promotion and Expansion of Primary Care Practitioners
SEC. 701. ROLE OF BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN OUTPUT GOALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board is responsible for--
 (1) coordinating graduate medical education policies and goals, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this title
 referred to as the `Secretary'), to achieve the national goal specified
 in subsection (b);
 (2) overseeing the graduate medical education expenditures of the State
 health insurance programs from the account established under section 502(c);
 (3) developing and maintaining, in cooperation with the Secretary, a system
 to monitor the number and specialties of physicians through their graduate
 medical education, medical residency, and practice; and
 (4) developing, coordinating, and promoting such other policies that expand
 the number of primary care physicians.
 (b) NATIONAL GOAL- The national goal specified in this subsection is that,
 by not later than ten years after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 50 percent of the physicians in medical residency education programs (as
 defined in subsection (e)(1)) are being trained as primary care physicians
 (as defined in subsection (e)(2)).
 (c) METHOD FOR ATTAINMENT OF NATIONAL GOAL; PROGRAM GOALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish a method of applying the national
 goal in subsection (b) to program goals for each medical residency education
 program or to medical residency education consortia.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- The program goals under paragraph (1) shall be based
 on the distribution of medical schools and other teaching facilities
 within each State health insurance program, and the number of positions
 for graduate medical education.
 (3) MEDICAL RESIDENCY EDUCATION CONSORTIUM- In this subsection, the term
 `medical residency education consortium' means a consortium of medical
 residency education programs in a contiguous geographic area if the
 consortium--
 (A) includes at least three medical schools with teaching hospitals and
 related teaching settings, and
 (B) has an affiliation with qualified community-based primary health
 service providers described in section 202(a)(5) and with comprehensive
 health service organizations established under section 303.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT-
 (1) THROUGH STATE HEALTH INSURANCE BUDGETS- The Board shall develop a
 formula for reducing payments to State health insurance programs (that
 provide for payments to a medical residency education program) that failed
 to meet the goal for the program established under subsection (c).
 (2) REDUCTION IN INDIRECT PORTION OF EXTRAMURAL BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL
 RESEARCH GRANTS IN CASE OF FAILURE TO MEET GOAL-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, in consultation with the Board, shall
 establish a formula that provides for a reduction of the indirect portion
 of extramural biomedical and behavioral research grants from the National
 Institutes of Health in the case of a medical residency education program
 that fails to comply with the goal for the program established under
 subsection (c).
 (B) PROTECTION OF DIRECT GRANTS- The application of subparagraph (A)
 shall be designed and applied so that the direct portion of extramural
 biomedical and behavioral research grants is not compromised.
 (e) DEFINITIONS- In this title:
 (1) MEDICAL RESIDENCY EDUCATION PROGRAM- The term `medical residency
 education program' means a program which provides education and training to
 graduates of medical schools in order to meet requirements for licensing and
 certification as a physician, and includes the medical school supervising the
 program and the hospital or other facility in which the program is operated.
 (2) PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN- The term `primary care physician' means a
 physician who has no board specialty other than as a family physician,
 general internist, or general pediatrician.
SEC. 702. ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall provide for an Advisory Committee on
 Graduate Medical Education (in this section referred to as the `Committee')
 to advise the Board on its activities under section 701.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Committee shall be composed of--
 (1) the Chair of the Board, who shall serve as Chair of the Committee, and
 (2) 8 members, not otherwise in the employ of the United States, appointed
 by the Board without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States
 Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
The appointed members shall provide a balanced point of view with respect
to medical education, primary care disciplines, and health care policy
and shall include individuals who are representative of medical schools,
teaching hospitals, professional associations, public health organizations,
State health insurance programs, and consumers.
 (c) TERMS OF MEMBERS- Each appointed member shall hold office for a term
 of five years, except that--
 (1) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring during the term for
 which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the
 remainder of that term; and
 (2) the terms of the members first taking office shall expire, as designated
 by the Board at the time of appointment, two at the end of the second year,
 two at the end of the third year, two at the end of the fourth year, and
 three at the end of the fifth year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall fill any vacancy in the membership of
 the Committee in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy
 shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties
 of the Committee.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The Board may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Committee for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (e) DUTIES- It shall be the duty of the Committee to advise the Board
 concerning graduate medical education policies under this title.
 (f) STAFF- The Committee, its members, and any committees of the Committee
 shall be provided with such secretarial, clerical, or other assistance as
 may be authorized by the Board for carrying out their respective functions.
 (g) MEETINGS- The Committee shall meet as frequently as the Board deems
 necessary, but not less than 4 times each year. Upon request by four or more
 members it shall be the duty of the Chair to call a meeting of the Committee.
 (h) COMPENSATION- Members of the Committee shall be reimbursed by the
 Board for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses during the
 performance of duties of the Board in accordance with subchapter I of
 chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (i) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act shall not apply to the Committee.
SEC. 703. OFFICE OF PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTION RESEARCH.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title IV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by
 section 2 of Public Law 101-613, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 486 as section 485A;
 (2) by redesignating parts F through H as parts G through I, respectively;
 and
 (3) by inserting after part E the following new part:
`Part F--Research on Primary Care and Prevention
`SEC. 486. OFFICE OF PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTION RESEARCH.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established within the Office of the Director
 of NIH an office to be known as the Office of Primary Care and Prevention
 Research (in this part referred to as the `Office'). The Office shall be
 headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the Director of NIH.
 `(b) PURPOSE- The Director of the Office shall--
 `(1) identify projects of research on primary care and prevention that
 should be conducted or supported by the national research institutes,
 with particular emphasis on--
 `(A) clinical patient care,
 `(B) diagnostic effectiveness,
 `(C) primary care education,
 `(D) health and family planning services, and
 `(E) medical effectiveness outcomes of primary care procedures and
 interventions;
 `(2) identify multidisciplinary research related to research on primary
 care and prevention that should be so conducted;
 `(3) promote coordination and collaboration among entities conducting
 research identified under any of paragraphs (1) and (2);
 `(4) encourage the conduct of such research by entities receiving funds
 from the national research institutes;
 `(5) recommend an agenda for conducting and supporting such research;
 `(6) promote the sufficient allocation of the resources of the national
 research institutes for conducting and supporting such research; and
 `(7) prepare the report required in section 486B.
 `(c) COORDINATING COMMITTEE-
 `(1) In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall
 establish a committee to be known as the Coordinating Committee on Research
 on Primary Care and Prevention Research (in this subsection referred to
 as the `Coordinating Committee').
 `(2) The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the Directors of the
 national research institutes (or the designees of the Directors).
 `(3) The Director of the Office shall serve as the chair of the Coordinating
 Committee.
 `(4) With respect to research on primary care and prevention, the
 Coordinating Committee shall assist the Director of the Office in--
 `(A) identifying the need for such research, and making an estimate each
 fiscal year of the funds needed to adequately support the research; and
 `(B) identifying needs regarding the coordination of research activities,
 including intramural and extramural multidisciplinary activities.
 `(d) ADVISORY COMMITTEE-
 `(1) In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office shall
 establish an advisory committee to be known as the Advisory Committee
 on Research on Primary Care and Prevention Research (in this subsection
 referred to as the `Advisory Committee').
 `(2) The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 14 individuals who are not
 officers or employees of the Federal Government. The Director of the Office
 shall make appointments to the Advisory Committee from among physicians,
 practitioners, scientists, and other health professionals whose clinical
 practice, research specialization, or professional expertise includes a
 significant focus on research on primary care and prevention.
 `(3) The Director of the Office shall serve as the chair of the Advisory
 Committee.
 `(4) The Advisory Committee shall--
 `(A) advise the Director of the Office on appropriate research activities
 to be undertaken by the national research institutes with respect to--
 `(i) primary care and prevention, and
 `(ii) research on primary care and prevention which requires a
 multidisciplinary approach;
 `(B) report to the Director of the Office on such research; and
 `(C) provide recommendations to such Director regarding activities of the
 Office (including recommendations on priorities in carrying out research
 described in subparagraph (A)).
 `(5)(A) The Advisory Committee shall prepare a biennial report describing
 the activities of the Committee, including findings made by the Committee
 regarding--
 `(i) the extent of expenditures made for research on primary care and
 prevention by the agencies of the National Institutes of Health; and
 `(ii) the level of funding needed for such research.
 `(B) The report required in subparagraph (A) shall be submitted to the
 Director of NIH for inclusion in the report required in section 403.
 `(f) PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTION RESEARCH DEFINED- For purposes of this part,
 the term `primary care and prevention research' means research on improvement
 of the practice of family medicine, general internal medicine, general
 pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, dentistry, or mental health that
 are provided by primary care physicians or other primary care practitioners.
`SEC. 486A. NATIONAL DATA SYSTEM AND CLEARINGHOUSE ON PRIMARY CARE AND
PREVENTION RESEARCH.
 `(a) DATA SYSTEM- The Director of NIH, in consultation with the Director
 of the Office, shall establish a data system for the collection, storage,
 analysis, retrieval, and dissemination of information regarding primary
 care and prevention research that is conducted or supported by the national
 research institutes. Information from the data system shall be available
 through information systems available to health care professionals and
 providers, researchers, and members of the public.
 `(b) CLEARINGHOUSE- The Director of NIH, in consultation with the Director
 of the Office and with the National Library of Medicine, shall establish,
 maintain, and operate a program to provide information on research and
 prevention activities of the national research institutes that relate to
 primary care and prevention research.
`SEC. 486B. BIENNIAL REPORT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- With respect to primary care and prevention research,
 the Director of the Office shall, not later than one year after the date
 of the enactment of this part, and biennially thereafter, prepare a report--
 `(1) describing and evaluating the progress made during the preceding
 two fiscal years in research and treatment conducted or supported by the
 National Institutes of Health;
 `(2) summarizing and analyzing expenditures made by the agencies of such
 Institutes (and by such Office) during the preceding two fiscal years; and
 `(3) making such recommendations for legislative and administrative
 initiatives as the Director of the Office determines to be appropriate.
 `(b) INCLUSION IN BIENNIAL REPORT OF DIRECTOR OF NIH- The Director of
 the Office shall submit each report prepared under subsection (a) to the
 Director of NIH for inclusion in the report submitted to the President
 and the Congress under section 403.'.
 (b) REQUIREMENT OF SUFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES OF INSTITUTES- Section
 402(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 282(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (10), by striking `and' after the semicolon at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (11) the following new paragraph:
 `(12) after consultation with the Director of the Office of Primary Care
 and Prevention Research, shall ensure that resources of the National
 Institutes of Health are sufficiently allocated for projects on primary
 care and prevention research that are identified under section 486(b).'.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- Section 408 of the Public Health
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(3) For the Office of Primary Care and Prevention Research, there
 are authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1994,
 $180,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, and $216,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 485(g) of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 287c-2(g)) is amended by striking `section 486' and inserting
 `section 485A'.
SEC. 704. PRIORITIES REGARDING ASSISTANCE FOR UNDERGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION
FOR PRIMARY CARE.
 Part A of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292a et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`PRIORITIES IN PROVISION OF GRANTS AND CONTRACTS
 `SEC. 711. (a) PRIORITIES REGARDING PRIMARY CARE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of any entity that is an applicant for
 financial assistance under any provision of this title (other than any
 provision specified in paragraph (2)), the Secretary shall in providing
 the assistance give priority to the applicant if, subject to subsection (b)--
 `(A) a substantial percentage of the providers who have completed the
 programs of the applicant for training in the health or allied health
 professions are providing primary care to a substantial number of medically
 underserved individuals; or
 `(B) the applicant has established policies in such programs that may
 reasonably be expected to result in the circumstance that a substantial
 percentage of the participants in the programs will upon completion of the
 programs provide such services to a substantial number of such individuals.
 `(2) EXEMPTED PROGRAMS- The provisions specified in this paragraph are
 sections 708, 788(c), and 794.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT FOR RESIDENCY PROGRAMS- In the case of any entity that
 has a residency program and that is an applicant described in subsection
 (a), the Secretary shall in providing the assistance give priority under
 such subsection to the applicant only if, in addition to the requirement
 established in such subsection, a substantial percentage of the individuals
 completing the residency program have had, through participation in the
 program--
 `(1) significant experience in providing primary care to medically
 underserved individuals; or
 `(2) significant experience in providing such services in ambulatory
 health facilities.
 `(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- In the case of the provision by the Secretary
 of financial assistance described in subsection (a)--
 `(1) the requirement established in subsection (b) regarding receipt of the
 assistance is in addition to the requirements of the program authorizing
 the provision of the assistance; and
 `(2) this section may not be construed as authorizing the Secretary to
 provide such assistance to any entity that would not have been eligible
 for the assistance had this section not been enacted.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `financial assistance' means a grant, cooperative agreement,
 or contract.
 `(2) The term `medically underserved individuals' means individuals who are
 members of a medically underserved population, as defined in section 330(b).
 `(3) The term `primary care' means health services furnished by family
 practitioners, general internists, or general pediatricians.
 `(4) The term `providers' means individuals who are practitioners in the
 health or allied health professions.'.
Subtitle B--Grants for Expansion of Availability of Primary Care Services
Through Health Centers
Part 1--Primary Care Service Expansion Grants
SEC. 711. GRANTS FOR EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF PRIMARY CARE SERVICES
THROUGH HEALTH CENTERS.
 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subpart:
`Subpart V--Emergency Health Care Grant Programs
`SEC. 340D. GRANTS FOR EXPANSION OF AVAILABILITY OF PRIMARY CARE SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities
 to expand the availability of comprehensive primary health services (as
 defined in section 330(b)(1)) in medically underserved areas.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an
 entity shall--
 `(1) be--
 `(A) a migrant or community health center that receives assistance under
 section 329 or 330;
 `(B) be an entity that meets the requirements of section 329(a) of 330(a)
 for being a migrant or community health center, though not a recipient of
 a grant under either of such sections;
 `(C) be an entity that does not meet the requirements of section 329(a)
 or 330(a) for being a migrant or community health center, but that provides
 assurances satisfactory to the Secretary, including subsequent demonstrable
 evidence, that such entity will meet the requirements of either such
 section not later than 2 years after receiving a grant under this section; or
 `(D) be an entity that is eligible for a planning grant under sections
 329(c) or 330(c); and
 `(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time,
 in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 `(c) REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS; PRIORITY-
 `(1) REVIEW- The Secretary shall develop a process and timetable for
 reviewing applications submitted under subsection (b)(2) to assure that,
 to the extent practicable, all amounts appropriated under this section
 are awarded not later than 180 days after the beginning of each fiscal year.
 `(2) PRIORITY- In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall
 give priority to--
 `(A) applicants that will use amounts received under such grant to provide
 services in areas with the greatest need for such services and in which the
 demand for such services can be expected to increase after the implementation
 of the Health Care for Every American Act of 1992;
 `(B) applicants with a demonstrated ability to expand their operations in
 the most efficient manner;
 `(C) applicants that are migrant or community health centers receiving
 assistance under section 329 or 330, that propose to use amounts received
 under such grants to expand their operations, including expansion to
 new sites, to serve high impact areas (as defined in section 329(a)(5))
 or medically underserved populations (as defined in section 330(b)),
 that are not currently being served;
 `(D) applicants that do not receive assistance under section 329 or section
 330, but that meet all requirements to receive funds under either of such
 sections, including, for the purpose of planning the establishment of new
 centers in areas of high need, entities eligible for planning grants under
 sections 329(c) and 330(c).
 `(3) SECONDARY PRIORITY- The Secretary shall give secondary priority in
 awarding grants under this section to applicants that--
 `(A) propose to meet the requirements of section 329 or 330 within 2 years
 after the date on which the application is submitted; and
 `(B) are serving or propose to serve such populations or areas that are
 not currently being served or have a proposal for such service pending.
 `(4) CONSULTATION- In awarding grants to eligible entities in a State
 under this section, the Secretary shall consult with the State Health
 Advisory Council (appointed under section 403(d) of the Health Care for
 Every American Act of 1992) and with the district health advisory council
 (established under section 404 of such Act) in which the entity is located
 or whose population is to be served by the entity. Such consultation shall
 be for the purpose of assuring that the proposed grant award will achieve
 maximum benefit for the patients to be served by the grantee.
 `(d) USE OF AMOUNTS- An entity receiving a grant under this section
 shall use amounts received under such grant to expand the availability of
 comprehensive primary health services (as defined in section 330(b)(1))
 in medically underserved or high impact areas.
 `(e) REIMBURSEMENT FROM OTHER SOURCES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An entity receiving a grant under this section shall
 use any and all reimbursements received from other sources for services
 provided by such entity to--
 `(A) compensate for the unreimbursed costs of providing services to patients;
 `(B) expand the amounts and types of services furnished;
 `(C) serve additional patients or areas; or
 `(D) promote the recruitment, training, or retention of personnel.
 `(2) RETURN OF UNUSED AMOUNTS- Any amounts of the reimbursements referred
 to in paragraph (1) that are not used for the purposes described in
 such paragraph shall be returned to the Secretary, either directly or
 through adjustments in future grants, and shall be used by the Secretary
 to make additional or expanded grants under this section without regard
 to appropriations under subsection (h).
 `(f) FAILURE TO COMPLY-
 `(1) TERMINATION OF PAYMENTS- In the case of an entity that receives a grant
 under this section and fails to comply with the requirements of this section,
 the Secretary shall, after providing such entity with appropriate notice
 and an opportunity for a hearing, terminate the payment of amounts under
 such grant to such entity. The Secretary may terminate grants to entities
 that fail to demonstrate good faith efforts to meet the requirements of
 this section.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE SECRETARY- In addition to terminating payments
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary may--
 `(A) sell any property acquired by the entity with amounts received under
 the grant, or transfer such property to another entity receiving such a
 grant; and
 `(B) recoup (to the extent practicable) assistance previously provided to
 the entity under this section.
 `(3) INELIGIBILITY FOR FUTURE GRANTS- An entity that is not in compliance
 with the requirements of this section may be granted a 2-year extension to
 meet such requirements. If at the end of such 2-year period the entity has
 failed to comply with such requirements, that entity shall be ineligible
 for further grants under this section.
 `(g) ADMINISTRATION- Not more than 10 percent of the amounts made available
 under this section may be used for administrative purposes. The costs of
 administration include--
 `(1) the cost of providing, either directly or by grant or contract to
 nonprofit private entities that represent the recipients of grants under
 this section, for the identification of areas and populations eligible
 for assistance under this section; and
 `(2) the provision of technical assistance to entities for the planning,
 development and operation of the service delivery systems supported under
 this section.
 `(h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated and there are
 appropriated to carry out this section--
 `(A) $58,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;
 `(B) $166,000,000 for fiscal year 1994;
 `(C) $266,000,000 for fiscal year 1995;
 `(D) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; and
 `(E) $426,000,000 for fiscal year 1997.
 `(2) REPORT- Not later than September 30, 1997, the Secretary shall prepare
 and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report concerning the
 need for further migrant and community health center primary care service
 capacity development and recommendations concerning the appropriate level
 of support needed for activities to address such capacity development.
 `(3) ADDITIONAL AMOUNTS- Amounts provided under this section shall be in
 addition to any amounts appropriated under sections 329 and 330.'.
Part 2--Reduction in Medical Malpractice Liability for Community Health Centers
SEC. 721. LIABILITY PROTECTIONS FOR CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 233)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g)(1) For purposes of this section, a public or nonprofit private entity
 receiving Federal funds under section 329, 330, 340, or 340D and any
 officer, employee, or contractor of such an entity who is a physician or
 other licensed health care practitioner shall, while performing functions
 pursuant to any of such sections, be deemed to be an employee of the Public
 Health Service.
 `(2) If, with respect to an entity or person deemed to be an employee for
 purposes of paragraph (1), a cause of action is instituted against the
 United States pursuant to this section, any claim of the entity or person
 for benefits under an insurance policy with respect to medical malpractice
 relating to such cause of action shall be subrogated to the United States.
 `(3) This subsection shall apply with respect to a cause of action only
 if the claim accrues on or after the effective date of this subsection.'.
 (b) REQUIREMENT OF APPROPRIATE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES REGARDING HEALTH
 CARE PROFESSIONALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended
 by subsection (a) of this section, is further amended by adding at the
 end the following new subsection:
 `(h) The Secretary may not make a grant to an entity under section 329,
 330, 340, or 340D unless the entity--
 `(1) has implemented appropriate policies and procedures to assure against
 malpractice in all health or health-related functions performed by the
 entity;
 `(2) has reviewed and verified the professional credentials, references,
 claims history, fitness, professional review organization findings,
 and license status of its physicians and other licensed health care
 practitioners, and, where necessary, has obtained the permission from
 these individuals to gain access to this information; and
 `(3) has no history of claims having been filed against it pursuant to this
 section, or, if such a history exists, has fully cooperated with the Attorney
 General in defending against any such claims and either has taken, or will
 take, such corrective steps to assure against such claims in the future.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, or on the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever
 occurs later.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION FOR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO EXCLUDE CERTAIN HEALTH CARE
 PROFESSIONALS FROM COVERAGE- Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act,
 as amended by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, is further amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (g)(1), the Attorney General,
 in consultation with the Secretary, may determine, after notice and
 opportunity for a hearing, that an individual physician or other licensed
 health care practitioner who is an officer, employee, or contractor of
 an entity described in subsection (g)(1) shall not be deemed to be an
 employee of the Public Health Service for purposes of this section, if
 treating such individual as such an employee would expose the Government
 to an unreasonably high degree of risk of loss because such individual--
 `(A) does not comply with the policies and procedures to assure against
 malpractice that the entity has implemented pursuant to subsection (h)(1);
 `(B) has a history of claims filed against him or her pursuant to this
 section that is outside the norm for a Public Health Service physician or
 other licensed health care practitioner;
 `(C) refused to reasonably cooperate with the Attorney General in defending
 against any such claim;
 `(D) provided false information relevant to the individual's performance of
 his or her duties to the Secretary, the Attorney General, or an applicant
 for or recipient of funds under section 329, 330, 340, or 340D; or
 `(E) was the subject of disciplinary action taken by a State medical
 licensing authority or a State or national professional society.
 `(2) A final determination by the Attorney General under this subsection
 that an individual physician or other licensed health care professional
 shall not be deemed to be an employee of the Public Health Service shall be
 effective upon receipt by the entity employing such individual of notice
 of such determination, and shall apply only to claims accruing after the
 date such notice is received.'.
SEC. 722. HOSPITAL ADMITTING PRIVILEGES FOR CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
 Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 721
 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(j) In the case of a health care provider who is an officer, employee,
 or contractor of an entity described in subsection (g)(1), section 335(e)
 shall apply with respect to the provider to the same extent and in the
 same manner as such section applies to any member of the National Health
 Service Corps.'.
SEC. 723. PAYMENT OF JUDGMENTS.
 Section 224 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by sections 721
 and 722, is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(k)(1)(A) The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary,
 shall estimate, by the beginning of each fiscal year, the amount of all
 claims which are expected to arise under this section from the acts or
 omissions, during that fiscal year, of entities described in subsection
 (g)(1) and of officers, employees, or contractors of such entities.
 `(B) In making an estimate under subparagraph (A), the Attorney General
 shall review--
 `(i) all claims for damage for personal injury, including death, resulting
 from the performance of medical, surgical, dental, or related functions
 by entities described in subsection (g)(1) or by officers, employees, or
 contractors of such entities who are deemed to be employees of the Public
 Health Service under subsection (g)(1) that, during the preceding 5-year
 period, are filed under this section or, with respect to years occurring
 before this subsection takes effect, are filed against persons other than
 the United States, and
 `(ii) the amounts paid during that 5-year period on all claims described
 in clause (i), regardless of when such claims were filed.
 `(2) The Secretary shall withhold, from the total amount appropriated for
 a fiscal year for grants under sections 329, 330, 340, and 340D to the
 entities described in subsection (g)(1), an amount equal to the amount
 estimated under paragraph (1) for that fiscal year.
 `(3) The amount withheld under paragraph (2) shall be transferred to
 the account in the Treasury made available for payments under section
 1304 of title 31, United States Code, and shall be used to pay judgments
 against the United States pursuant to this section arising from the acts
 or omissions of entities described in subsection (g)(1) and of officers,
 employees, or contractors of such entities.'.
SEC. 724. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Except as provided in section 721(b)(2), the amendments made by this part
 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subtitle C--Expansions in the National Health Service Corps
SEC. 731. PLACEMENT OF PERSONNEL AT PRIMARY CARE CENTERS.
 (a) PHYSICIANS- In addition to any other funds authorized to be appropriated
 under section 338H(b) of the Public Health Service Act, there are authorized
 to be appropriated, for the purpose of providing contracts under section
 338B of such Act for loan repayments for physician placements at entities
 receiving funds under section 340D of such Act, $16,300,000 for the
 first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 $31,400,000 for the second such fiscal year, $55,800,000 for the third such
 fiscal year, $81,300,000 for the fourth such fiscal year, and $103,100,000
 for the fifth such fiscal year.
 (b) MIDLEVEL PRACTITIONERS- In addition to any other funds authorized to
 be appropriated under section 338H(b) of the Public Health Service Act,
 there are authorized to be appropriated, for the purpose of providing
 contracts under section 338B of such Act for loan repayments for placements
 of midlevel practitioners at entities receiving funds under section 340D
 of such Act, $2,300,000 for the first fiscal year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, $4,500,000 for the second such fiscal year,
 $7,300,000 for the third such fiscal year, $9,900,000 for the fourth such
 fiscal year, and $11,400,000 for the fifth such fiscal year.
SEC. 732. PLACEMENT LEVELS.
 (a) PHYSICIANS- In addition to any other funds authorized to be appropriated,
 there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary
 to provide a number of contracts for scholarships and loan repayments
 under subpart III of part D of title III of the Public Health Service
 Act that is sufficient to ensure the placement, by the beginning of the
 sixth fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 of 4,500 primary care physicians in health professional shortage areas in
 addition to the number of placements that otherwise is projected to have
 been made by such date. Physicians who are placed pursuant to section 731(a)
 shall be counted toward the increase required under the previous sentence.
 (b) MIDLEVEL PRACTITIONERS- In addition to any other funds authorized to
 be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may
 be necessary to provide a number of contracts for scholarships and loan
 repayments under subpart III of part D of title III of the Public Health
 Service Act that is sufficient to ensure the placement, by the beginning
 of the sixth fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, of a number of midlevel practitioners in health professional shortage
 areas constituting an increase of 20 percent per year above the number of
 placements otherwise projected to have been made by such date. Midlevel
 practitioners who are placed pursuant to section 731(b) shall be counted
 toward the increase required under the previous sentence.
SEC. 733. MIDLEVEL PRACTITIONER DEFINED.
 In this subtitle, the term `midlevel practitioner' includes a certified
 nurse midwife, certified nurse practitioner, physician assistant, and
 similar nonphysician health care practitioner.