[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4317 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 4317

 To lessen the burdens on interstate commerce by discouraging 
 insubstantial lawsuits relating to COVID-19 while preserving the 
ability of individuals and businesses that have suffered real injury to 
 obtain complete relief.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 27, 2020

 Mr. Cornyn (for himself and Mr. McConnell) introduced the following 
 bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the 
 Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To lessen the burdens on interstate commerce by discouraging 
 insubstantial lawsuits relating to COVID-19 while preserving the 
ability of individuals and businesses that have suffered real injury to 
 obtain complete relief.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Safeguarding 
America's Frontline Employees To Offer Work Opportunities Required to 
Kickstart the Economy Act'' or the ``SAFE TO WORK Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
 TITLE I--LIABILITY RELIEF

Subtitle A--Liability Limitations for Individuals and Entities Engaged 
 in Businesses, Services, Activities, or Accommodations

Sec. 121. Application of subtitle.
Sec. 122. Liability; safe harbor.
 Subtitle B--Liability Limitations for Health Care Providers

Sec. 141. Application of subtitle.
Sec. 142. Liability for health care professionals and health care 
 facilities during coronavirus public health 
 emergency.
 Subtitle C--Substantive and Procedural Provisions for Coronavirus-
 related Actions Generally

Sec. 161. Jurisdiction.
Sec. 162. Limitations on suits.
Sec. 163. Procedures for suit in district courts of the United States.
Sec. 164. Demand letters; cause of action.
 Subtitle D--Relation to Labor and Employment Laws

Sec. 181. Limitation on violations under specific laws.
Sec. 182. Liability for conducting testing at workplace.
Sec. 183. Joint employment and independent contracting.
Sec. 184. Exclusion of certain notification requirements as a result of 
 the COVID-19 public health emergency.
 TITLE II--PRODUCTS

Sec. 201. Applicability of the targeted liability protections for 
 pandemic and epidemic products and security 
 countermeasures with respect to COVID-19.
 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. Severability.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The SARS-CoV-2 virus that originated in China and 
 causes the disease COVID-19 has caused untold misery and 
 devastation throughout the world, including in the United 
 States.
 (2) For months, frontline health care workers and health 
 care facilities have fought the virus with courage and resolve. 
 They did so at first with very little information about how to 
 treat the virus and developed strategies to save lives of the 
 people of the United States in real time. They risked their 
 personal health and wellbeing to protect and treat their 
 patients.
 (3) Businesses in the United States kicked into action to 
 produce and procure personal protective equipment, such as 
 masks, gloves, face shields, and hand sanitizer, and other 
 necessary medical supplies, such as ventilators, at 
 unprecedented rates.
 (4) To halt the spread of the disease, State and local 
 governments took drastic measures. They shut down small and 
 large businesses, schools, colleges and universities, 
 religious, philanthropic and other nonprofit institutions, and 
 local government agencies. They ordered people to remain in 
 their homes.
 (5) This standstill was needed to slow the spread of the 
 virus. But it devastated the economy of the United States. The 
 sum of hundreds of local-level and State-level decisions to 
 close nearly every space in which people might gather brought 
 interstate commerce nearly to a halt.
 (6) This halt led to the loss of millions of jobs. These 
 lost jobs were not a natural consequence of the economic 
 environment, but rather the result of a drastic, though 
 temporary, response to the unprecedented nature of this global 
 pandemic.
 (7) Congress passed a series of statutes to address the 
 health care and economic crises--the Coronavirus Preparedness 
 and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020 (Public Law 
 116-123; 134 Stat. 146), the Families First Coronavirus 
 Response Act (Public Law 116-127; 134 Stat. 178), the 
 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act or the CARES 
 Act (Public Law 116-136), and the Paycheck Protection Program 
 and Health Care Enhancement Act (Public Law 116-139; 134 Stat. 
 620). In these laws Congress exercised its power under the 
 Commerce and Spending Clauses of the Constitution of the United 
 States to direct trillions of taxpayer dollars toward efforts 
 to aid workers, businesses, State and local governments, health 
 care workers, and patients.
 (8) This legislation provided short-term insulation from 
 the worst of the economic storm, but these laws alone cannot 
 protect the United States from further devastation. Only 
 reopening the economy so that workers can get back to work and 
 students can get back to school can accomplish that goal.
 (9) The Constitution of the United States specifically 
 enumerates the legislative powers of Congress. One of those 
 powers is the regulation of interstate commerce. The Government 
 is not a substitute for the economy, but it has the authority 
 and the duty to act when interstate commerce is threatened and 
 damaged. As applied to the present crisis, Congress can deploy 
 its power over interstate commerce to promote a prudent 
 reopening of businesses and other organizations that serve as 
 the foundation and backbone of the national economy and of 
 commerce among the States. These include small and large 
 businesses, schools (which are substantial employers in their 
 own right and provide necessary services to enable parents and 
 other caregivers to return to work), colleges and universities 
 (which are substantial employers and supply the interstate 
 market for higher-education services), religious, philanthropic 
 and other nonprofit institutions (which are substantial 
 employers and provide necessary services to their communities), 
 and local government agencies.
 (10) Congress must also ensure that the Nation's health 
 care workers and health care facilities are able to act fully 
 to defeat the virus.
 (11) Congress must also safeguard its investment of 
 taxpayer dollars under the CARES Act and other coronavirus 
 legislation. Congress must ensure that those funds are used to 
 help businesses and workers survive and recover from the 
 economic crisis, and to help health care workers and health 
 care facilities defeat the virus. CARES Act funds cannot be 
 diverted from these important purposes to line the pockets of 
 the trial bar.
 (12) One of the chief impediments to the continued flow of 
 interstate commerce as this public-health crisis has unfolded 
 is the risk of litigation. Small and large businesses, schools, 
 colleges and universities, religious, philanthropic and other 
 nonprofit institutions, and local government agencies confront 
 the risk of a tidal wave of lawsuits accusing them of exposing 
 employees, customers, students, and worshipers to coronavirus. 
 Health care workers face the threat of lawsuits arising from 
 their efforts to fight the virus.
 (13) They confront this litigation risk even as they work 
 tirelessly to comply with the coronavirus guidance, rules, and 
 regulations issued by local governments, State governments, and 
 the Federal Government. They confront this risk notwithstanding 
 equipment and staffing shortages. And they confront this risk 
 while also grappling with constantly changing information on 
 how best to protect employees, customers, students, and 
 worshipers from the virus, and how best to treat it.
 (14) These lawsuits pose a substantial risk to interstate 
 commerce because they threaten to keep small and large 
 businesses, schools, colleges and universities, religious, 
 philanthropic and other nonprofit institutions, and local 
 government agencies from reopening for fear of expensive 
 litigation that might prove to be meritless. These lawsuits 
 further threaten to undermine the Nation's fight against the 
 virus by exposing our health care workers and health care 
 facilities to liability for difficult medical decisions they 
 have made under trying and uncertain circumstances.
 (15) These lawsuits also risk diverting taxpayer money 
 provided under the CARES Act and other coronavirus legislation 
 from its intended purposes to the pockets of opportunistic 
 trial lawyers.
 (16) This risk is not purely local. It is necessarily 
 national in scale. A patchwork of local and State rules 
 governing liability in coronavirus-related lawsuits creates 
 tremendous unpredictability for everyone participating in 
 interstate commerce and acts as a significant drag on national 
 recovery. The aggregation of each individual potential 
 liability risk poses a substantial and unprecedented threat to 
 interstate commerce.
 (17) The accumulated economic risks for these potential 
 defendants directly and substantially affects interstate 
 commerce. Individuals and entities potentially subject to 
 coronavirus-related liability will structure their 
 decisionmaking to avoid that liability. Small and large 
 businesses, schools, colleges and universities, religious, 
 philanthropic and other nonprofit institutions, and local 
 government agencies may decline to reopen because of the risk 
 of litigation. They may limit their output or engagement with 
 customers and communities to avoid the risk of litigation. 
 These individual economic decisions substantially affect 
 interstate commerce because, as a whole, they will prevent the 
 free and fair exchange of goods and services across State 
 lines. Such economic activity that, individually and in the 
 aggregate, substantially affects interstate commerce is 
 precisely the sort of conduct that should be subject to 
 congressional regulation.
 (18) Lawsuits against health care workers and facilities 
 pose a similarly dangerous risk to interstate commerce. 
 Interstate commerce will not truly rebound from this crisis 
 until the virus is defeated, and that will not happen unless 
 health care workers and facilities are free to combat 
 vigorously the virus and treat patients with coronavirus and 
 those otherwise impacted by the response to coronavirus.
 (19) Subjecting health care workers and facilities to 
 onerous litigation even as they have done their level best to 
 combat a virus about which very little was known when it 
 arrived in the United States would divert important health care 
 resources from hospitals and providers to courtrooms.
 (20) Such a diversion would substantially affect interstate 
 commerce by degrading the national capacity for combating the 
 virus and saving patients, thereby substantially elongating the 
 period before interstate commerce could fully re-engage.
 (21) Congress also has the authority to determine the 
 jurisdiction of the courts of the United States, to set the 
 standards for causes of action they can hear, and to establish 
 the rules by which those causes of action should proceed. 
 Congress therefore must act to set rules governing liability in 
 coronavirus-related lawsuits.
 (22) These rules necessarily must be temporary and 
 carefully tailored to the interstate crisis caused by the 
 coronavirus pandemic. They must extend no further than 
 necessary to meet this uniquely national crisis for which a 
 patchwork of State and local tort laws are ill-suited.
 (23) Because of the national scope of the economic and 
 health care dangers posed by the risks of coronavirus-related 
 lawsuits, establishing temporary rules governing liability for 
 certain coronavirus-related tort claims is a necessary and 
 proper means of carrying into execution Congress's power to 
 regulate commerce among the several States.
 (24) Because Congress must safeguard the investment of 
 taxpayer dollars it made in the CARES Act and other coronavirus 
 legislation, and ensure that they are used for their intended 
 purposes and not diverted for other purposes, establishing 
 temporary rules governing liability for certain coronavirus-
 related tort claims is a necessary and proper means of carrying 
 into execution Congress's power to provide for the general 
 welfare of the United States.
 (b) Purposes.--Pursuant to the powers delegated to Congress by 
article I, section 8, clauses 1, 3, 9, and 18, and article III, section 
2, clause 1 of the Constitution of the United States, the purposes of 
this Act are to--
 (1) establish necessary and consistent standards for 
 litigating certain claims specific to the unique coronavirus 
 pandemic;
 (2) prevent the overburdening of the court systems with 
 undue litigation;
 (3) encourage planning, care, and appropriate risk 
 management by small and large businesses, schools, colleges and 
 universities, religious, philanthropic and other nonprofit 
 institutions, local government agencies, and health care 
 providers;
 (4) ensure that the Nation's recovery from the coronavirus 
 economic crisis is not burdened or slowed by the substantial 
 risk of litigation;
 (5) prevent litigation brought to extract settlements and 
 enrich trial lawyers rather than vindicate meritorious claims;
 (6) protect interstate commerce from the burdens of 
 potentially meritless litigation;
 (7) ensure the economic recovery proceeds without 
 artificial and unnecessary delay;
 (8) protect the interests of the taxpayers by ensuring that 
 emergency taxpayer support continues to aid businesses, 
 workers, and health care providers rather than enrich trial 
 lawyers; and
 (9) protect the highest and best ideals of the national 
 economy, so businesses can produce and serve their customers, 
 workers can work, teachers can teach, students can learn, and 
 believers can worship.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Applicable government standards and guidance.--The term 
 ``applicable government standards and guidance'' means--
 (A) any mandatory standards or regulations 
 specifically concerning the prevention or mitigation of 
 the transmission of coronavirus issued by the Federal 
 Government, or a State or local government with 
 jurisdiction over an individual or entity, whether 
 provided by executive, judicial, or legislative order; 
 and
 (B) with respect to an individual or entity that, 
 at the time of the actual, alleged, feared, or 
 potential for exposure to coronavirus is not subject to 
 any mandatory standards or regulations described in 
 subparagraph (A), any guidance, standards, or 
 regulations specifically concerning the prevention or 
 mitigation of the transmission of coronavirus issued by 
 the Federal Government, or a State or local government 
 with jurisdiction over the individual or entity.
 (2) Businesses, services, activities, or accommodations.--
 The term ``businesses, services, activities, or 
 accommodations'' means any act by an individual or entity, 
 irrespective of whether the act is carried on for profit, that 
 is interstate or foreign commerce, that involves persons or 
 things in interstate or foreign commerce, that involves the 
 channels or instrumentalities of interstate or foreign 
 commerce, that substantially affects interstate or foreign 
 commerce, or that is otherwise an act subject to regulation by 
 Congress as necessary and proper to carry into execution 
 Congress's powers to regulate interstate or foreign commerce or 
 to spend funds for the general welfare.
 (3) Coronavirus.--The term ``coronavirus'' means any 
 disease, health condition, or threat of harm caused by the 
 SARS-CoV-2 virus or a virus mutating therefrom.
 (4) Coronavirus exposure action.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``coronavirus exposure 
 action'' means a civil action--
 (i) brought by a person who suffered 
 personal injury or is at risk of suffering 
 personal injury, or a representative of a 
 person who suffered personal injury or is at 
 risk of suffering personal injury;
 (ii) brought against an individual or 
 entity engaged in businesses, services, 
 activities, or accommodations; and
 (iii) alleging that an actual, alleged, 
 feared, or potential for exposure to 
 coronavirus caused the personal injury or risk 
 of personal injury, that--
 (I) occurred in the course of the 
 businesses, services, activities, or 
 accommodations of the individual or 
 entity; and
 (II) occurred--
 (aa) on or after December 
 1, 2019; and
 (bb) before the later of--

 (AA) October 1, 
 2024; or

 (BB) the date on 
 which there is no 
 declaration by the 
 Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services under 
 section 319F-3(b) of 
 the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 247d-6d(b)) (relating 
 to medical 
 countermeasures) that 
 is in effect with 
 respect to coronavirus, 
 including the 
 Declaration Under the 
 Public Readiness and 
 Emergency Preparedness 
 Act for Medical 
 Countermeasures Against 
 COVID-19 (85 Fed. Reg. 
 15198) issued by the 
 Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services on March 
 17, 2020.

 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``coronavirus exposure 
 action'' does not include--
 (i) a criminal, civil, or administrative 
 enforcement action brought by the Federal 
 Government or any State, local, or Tribal 
 government; or
 (ii) a claim alleging intentional 
 discrimination on the basis of race, color, 
 national origin, religion, sex (including 
 pregnancy), disability, genetic information, or 
 age.
 (5) Coronavirus-related action.--The term ``coronavirus-
 related action'' means a coronavirus exposure action or a 
 coronavirus-related medical liability action.
 (6) Coronavirus-related health care services.--The term 
 ``coronavirus-related health care services'' means services 
 provided by a health care provider, regardless of the location 
 where the services are provided, that relate to--
 (A) the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of 
 coronavirus;
 (B) the assessment or care of an individual with a 
 confirmed or suspected case of coronavirus; or
 (C) the care of any individual who is admitted to, 
 presents to, receives services from, or resides at, a 
 health care provider for any purpose during the period 
 of a Federal emergency declaration concerning 
 coronavirus, if such provider's decisions or activities 
 with respect to such individual are impacted as a 
 result of coronavirus.
 (7) Coronavirus-related medical liability action.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``coronavirus-related 
 medical liability action'' means a civil action--
 (i) brought by a person who suffered 
 personal injury, or a representative of a 
 person who suffered personal injury;
 (ii) brought against a health care 
 provider; and
 (iii) alleging any harm, damage, breach, or 
 tort resulting in the personal injury alleged 
 to have been caused by, be arising out of, or 
 be related to a health care provider's act or 
 omission in the course of arranging for or 
 providing coronavirus-related health care 
 services that occurred--
 (I) on or after December 1, 2019; 
 and
 (II) before the later of--
 (aa) October 1, 2024; or
 (bb) the date on which 
 there is no declaration by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services under section 319F-
 3(b) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-
 6d(b)) (relating to covered 
 countermeasures) that is in 
 effect with respect to 
 coronavirus, including the 
 Declaration Under the Public 
 Readiness and Emergency 
 Preparedness Act for Medical 
 Countermeasures Against COVID-
 19 (85 Fed. Reg. 15198) issued 
 by the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services on March 17, 
 2020.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``coronavirus-related 
 medical liability action'' does not include--
 (i) a criminal, civil, or administrative 
 enforcement action brought by the Federal 
 Government or any State, local, or Tribal 
 government; or
 (ii) a claim alleging intentional 
 discrimination on the basis of race, color, 
 national origin, religion, sex (including 
 pregnancy), disability, genetic information, or 
 age.
 (8) Employer.--The term ``employer''--
 (A) means any person serving as an employer or 
 acting directly in the interest of an employer in 
 relation to an employee;
 (B) includes a public agency; and
 (C) does not include any labor organization (other 
 than when acting as an employer) or any person acting 
 in the capacity of officer or agent of such labor 
 organization.
 (9) Government.--The term ``government'' means an agency, 
 instrumentality, or other entity of the Federal Government, a 
 State government (including multijurisdictional agencies, 
 instrumentalities, and entities), a local government, or a 
 Tribal government.
 (10) Gross negligence.--The term ``gross negligence'' means 
 a conscious, voluntary act or omission in reckless disregard 
 of--
 (A) a legal duty;
 (B) the consequences to another party; and
 (C) applicable government standards and guidance.
 (11) Harm.--The term ``harm'' includes--
 (A) physical and nonphysical contact that results 
 in personal injury to an individual; and
 (B) economic and noneconomic losses.
 (12) Health care provider.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``health care provider'' 
 means any person, including an agent, volunteer 
 (subject to subparagraph (C)), contractor, employee, or 
 other entity, who is--
 (i) required by Federal or State law to be 
 licensed, registered, or certified to provide 
 health care and is so licensed, registered, or 
 certified (or is exempt from any such 
 requirement);
 (ii) otherwise authorized by Federal or 
 State law to provide care (including services 
 and supports furnished in a home or community-
 based residential setting under the State 
 Medicaid program or a waiver of that program); 
 or
 (iii) considered under applicable Federal 
 or State law to be a health care provider, 
 health care professional, health care 
 institution, or health care facility.
 (B) Inclusion of administrators, supervisors, 
 etc.--The term ``health care provider'' includes a 
 health care facility administrator, executive, 
 supervisor, board member or trustee, or another 
 individual responsible for directing, supervising, or 
 monitoring the provision of coronavirus-related health 
 care services in a comparable role.
 (C) Inclusion of volunteers.--The term ``health 
 care provider'' includes volunteers that meet the 
 following criteria:
 (i) The volunteer is a health care 
 professional providing coronavirus-related 
 health care services.
 (ii) The act or omission by the volunteer 
 occurs--
 (I) in the course of providing 
 health care services;
 (II) in the health care 
 professional's capacity as a volunteer;
 (III) in the course of providing 
 health care services that--
 (aa) are within the scope 
 of the license, registration, 
 or certification of the 
 volunteer, as defined by the 
 State of licensure, 
 registration, or certification; 
 and
 (bb) do not exceed the 
 scope of license, registration, 
 or certification of a 
 substantially similar health 
 professional in the State in 
 which such act or omission 
 occurs; and
 (IV) in a good-faith belief that 
 the individual being treated is in need 
 of health care services.
 (13) Individual or entity.--The term ``individual or 
 entity'' means--
 (A) any natural person, corporation, company, 
 trade, business, firm, partnership, joint stock 
 company, educational institution, labor organization, 
 or similar organization or group of organizations;
 (B) any nonprofit organization, foundation, 
 society, or association organized for religious, 
 charitable, educational, or other purposes; or
 (C) any State, Tribal, or local government.
 (14) Local government.--The term ``local government'' means 
 any unit of government within a State, including a--
 (A) county;
 (B) borough;
 (C) municipality;
 (D) city;
 (E) town;
 (F) township;
 (G) parish;
 (H) local public authority, including any public 
 housing agency under the United States Housing Act of 
 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.);
 (I) special district;
 (J) school district;
 (K) intrastate district;
 (L) council of governments, whether or not 
 incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under State 
 law; and
 (M) agency or instrumentality of--
 (i) multiple units of local government 
 (including units of local government located in 
 different States); or
 (ii) an intra-State unit of local 
 government.
 (15) Mandatory.--The term ``mandatory'', with respect to 
 standards or regulations, means the standards or regulations 
 are themselves enforceable by the issuing government through 
 criminal, civil, or administrative action.
 (16) Personal injury.--The term ``personal injury''--
 (A) means actual or potential physical injury to an 
 individual or death caused by a physical injury; and
 (B) includes mental suffering, emotional distress, 
 or similar injuries suffered by an individual in 
 connection with a physical injury.
 (17) State.--The term ``State''--
 (A) means any State of the United States, the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and any other territory 
 or possession of the United States, and any political 
 subdivision or instrumentality thereof; and
 (B) includes any agency or instrumentality of 2 or 
 more of the entities described in subparagraph (A).
 (18) Tribal government.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``Tribal government'' 
 means the recognized governing body of any Indian tribe 
 included on the list published by the Secretary of the 
 Interior pursuant to section 104(a) of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 
 5131(a)).
 (B) Inclusion.--The term ``Tribal government'' 
 includes any subdivision (regardless of the laws and 
 regulations of the jurisdiction in which the 
 subdivision is organized or incorporated) of a 
 governing body described in subparagraph (A) that--
 (i) is wholly owned by that governing body; 
 and
 (ii) has been delegated the right to 
 exercise 1 or more substantial governmental 
 functions of the governing body.
 (19) Willful misconduct.--The term ``willful misconduct'' 
 means an act or omission that is taken--
 (A) intentionally to achieve a wrongful purpose;
 (B) knowingly without legal or factual 
 justification; and
 (C) in disregard of a known or obvious risk that is 
 so great as to make it highly probable that the harm 
 will outweigh the benefit.

 TITLE I--LIABILITY RELIEF

Subtitle A--Liability Limitations for Individuals and Entities Engaged 
 in Businesses, Services, Activities, or Accommodations

SEC. 121. APPLICATION OF SUBTITLE.

 (a) Cause of Action; Tribal Sovereign Immunity.--
 (1) Cause of action.--
 (A) In general.--This subtitle creates an exclusive 
 cause of action for coronavirus exposure actions.
 (B) Liability.--A plaintiff may prevail in a 
 coronavirus exposure action only in accordance with the 
 requirements of this title.
 (C) Application.--The provisions of this subtitle 
 shall apply to--
 (i) any cause of action that is a 
 coronavirus exposure action that was filed 
 before the date of enactment of this Act and 
 that is pending on such date of enactment; and
 (ii) any coronavirus exposure action filed 
 on or after such date of enactment.
 (2) Preservation of liability limits and defenses.--Except 
 as otherwise explicitly provided in this subtitle, nothing in 
 this subtitle expands any liability otherwise imposed or limits 
 any defense otherwise available under Federal, State, or Tribal 
 law.
 (3) Immunity.--Nothing in this subtitle abrogates the 
 immunity of any State, or waives the immunity of any Tribal 
 government. The limitations on liability provided under this 
 subtitle shall control in any action properly filed against a 
 State or Tribal government pursuant to a duly executed waiver 
 by the State or Tribe of sovereign immunity and stating claims 
 within the scope of this subtitle.
 (b) Preemption and Supersedure.--
 (1) In general.--Except as described in paragraphs (2) 
 through (6), this subtitle preempts and supersedes any Federal, 
 State, or Tribal law, including statutes, regulations, rules, 
 or standards that are enacted, promulgated, or established 
 under common law, related to recovery for personal injuries 
 caused by actual, alleged, feared, or potential for exposure to 
 coronavirus.
 (2) Stricter laws not preempted or superseded.--Nothing in 
 this subtitle shall be construed to affect the applicability of 
 any provision of any Federal, State, or Tribal law that imposes 
 stricter limits on damages or liabilities for personal injury 
 caused by, arising out of, or related to an actual, alleged, 
 feared, or potential for exposure to coronavirus, or otherwise 
 affords greater protection to defendants in any coronavirus 
 exposure action, than are provided in this subtitle. Any such 
 provision of Federal, State, or Tribal law shall be applied in 
 addition to the requirements of this subtitle and not in lieu 
 thereof.
 (3) Workers' compensation laws not preempted or 
 superseded.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to 
 affect the applicability of any State or Tribal law providing 
 for a workers' compensation scheme or program, or to preempt or 
 supersede an exclusive remedy under such scheme or program.
 (4) Enforcement actions.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
 construed to impair, limit, or affect the authority of the 
 Federal Government, or of any State, local, or Tribal 
 government, to bring any criminal, civil, or administrative 
 enforcement action against any individual or entity.
 (5) Discrimination claims.--Nothing in this subtitle shall 
 be construed to affect the applicability of any provision of 
 any Federal, State, or Tribal law that creates a cause of 
 action for intentional discrimination on the basis of race, 
 color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy), 
 disability, genetic information, or age.
 (6) Maintenance and cure.--Nothing in this subtitle shall 
 be construed to affect a seaman's right to claim maintenance 
 and cure benefits.
 (c) Statute of Limitations.--A coronavirus exposure action may not 
be commenced in any Federal, State, or Tribal government court later 
than 1 year after the date of the actual, alleged, feared, or potential 
for exposure to coronavirus.

SEC. 122. LIABILITY; SAFE HARBOR.

 (a) Requirements for Liability for Exposure to Coronavirus.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as otherwise 
provided in this section, no individual or entity engaged in 
businesses, services, activities, or accommodations shall be liable in 
any coronavirus exposure action unless the plaintiff can prove by clear 
and convincing evidence that--
 (1) in engaging in the businesses, services, activities, or 
 accommodations, the individual or entity was not making 
 reasonable efforts in light of all the circumstances to comply 
 with the applicable government standards and guidance in effect 
 at the time of the actual, alleged, feared, or potential for 
 exposure to coronavirus;
 (2) the individual or entity engaged in gross negligence or 
 willful misconduct that caused an actual exposure to 
 coronavirus; and
 (3) the actual exposure to coronavirus caused the personal 
 injury of the plaintiff.
 (b) Reasonable Efforts To Comply.--
 (1) Conflicting applicable government standards and 
 guidance.--
 (A) In general.--If more than 1 government to whose 
 jurisdiction an individual or entity is subject issues 
 applicable government standards and guidance, and the 
 applicable government standards and guidance issued by 
 1 or more of the governments conflicts with the 
 applicable government standards and guidance issued by 
 1 or more of the other governments, the individual or 
 entity shall be considered to have made reasonable 
 efforts in light of all the circumstances to comply 
 with the applicable government standards and guidance 
 for purposes of subsection (a)(1) unless the plaintiff 
 establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the 
 individual or entity was not making reasonable efforts 
 in light of all the circumstances to comply with any of 
 the conflicting applicable government standards and 
 guidance issued by any government to whose jurisdiction 
 the individual or entity is subject.
 (B) Exception.--If mandatory standards and 
 regulations constituting applicable government 
 standards and guidance issued by any government with 
 jurisdiction over the individual or entity conflict 
 with applicable government standards and guidance that 
 are not mandatory and are issued by any other 
 government with jurisdiction over the individual or 
 entity or by the same government that issued the 
 mandatory standards and regulations, the plaintiff may 
 establish that the individual or entity did not make 
 reasonable efforts in light of all the circumstances to 
 comply with the applicable government standards and 
 guidance for purposes of subsection (a)(1) by 
 establishing by clear and convincing evidence that the 
 individual or entity was not making reasonable efforts 
 in light of all the circumstances to comply with the 
 mandatory standards and regulations to which the 
 individual or entity was subject.
 (2) Written or published policy.--
 (A) In general.--If an individual or entity engaged 
 in businesses, services, activities, or accommodations 
 maintained a written or published policy on the 
 mitigation of transmission of coronavirus at the time 
 of the actual, alleged, feared, or potential for 
 exposure to coronavirus that complied with, or was more 
 protective than, the applicable government standards 
 and guidance to which the individual or entity was 
 subject, the individual or entity shall be presumed to 
 have made reasonable efforts in light of all the 
 circumstances to comply with the applicable government 
 standards and guidance for purposes of subsection 
 (a)(1).
 (B) Rebuttal.--The plaintiff may rebut the 
 presumption under subparagraph (A) by establishing that 
 the individual or entity was not complying with the 
 written or published policy at the time of the actual, 
 alleged, feared, or potential for exposure to 
 coronavirus.
 (C) Absence of a written or published policy.--The 
 absence of a written or published policy shall not give 
 rise to a presumption that the individual or entity did 
 not make reasonable efforts in light of all the 
 circumstances to comply with the applicable government 
 standards and guidance for purposes of subsection 
 (a)(1).
 (3) Timing.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1), a change to 
 a policy or practice by an individual or entity before or after 
 the actual, alleged, feared, or potential for exposure to 
 coronavirus, shall not be evidence of liability for the actual, 
 alleged, feared, or potential for exposure to coronavirus.
 (c) Third Parties.--No individual or entity shall be held liable in 
a coronavirus exposure action for the acts or omissions of a third 
party, unless--
 (1) the individual or entity had an obligation under 
 general common law principles to control the acts or omissions 
 of the third party; or
 (2) the third party was an agent of the individual or 
 entity.
 (d) Mitigation.--Changes to the policies, practices, or procedures 
of an individual or entity for complying with the applicable government 
standards and guidance after the time of the actual, alleged, feared, 
or potential for exposure to coronavirus, shall not be considered 
evidence of liability or culpability.

 Subtitle B--Liability Limitations for Health Care Providers

SEC. 141. APPLICATION OF SUBTITLE.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Cause of action.--
 (A) In general.--This subtitle creates an exclusive 
 cause of action for coronavirus-related medical 
 liability actions.
 (B) Liability.--A plaintiff may prevail in a 
 coronavirus-related medical liability action only in 
 accordance with the requirements of this title.
 (C) Application.--The provisions of this subtitle 
 shall apply to--
 (i) any cause of action that is a 
 coronavirus-related medical liability action 
 that was filed before the date of enactment of 
 this Act and that is pending on such date of 
 enactment; and
 (ii) any coronavirus-related medical 
 liability action filed on or after such date of 
 enactment.
 (2) Preservation of liability limits and defenses.--Except 
 as otherwise explicitly provided in this subtitle, nothing in 
 this subtitle expands any liability otherwise imposed or limits 
 any defense otherwise available under Federal, State, or Tribal 
 law.
 (3) Immunity.--Nothing in this subtitle abrogates the 
 immunity of any State, or waives the immunity of any Tribal 
 government. The limitations on liability provided under this 
 subtitle shall control in any action properly filed against a 
 State or Tribal government pursuant to a duly executed waiver 
 by the State or Tribe of sovereign immunity and stating claims 
 within the scope of this subtitle.
 (b) Preemption and Supersedure.--
 (1) In general.--Except as described in paragraphs (2) 
 through (6), this subtitle preempts and supersedes any Federal, 
 State, or Tribal law, including statutes, regulations, rules, 
 or standards that are enacted, promulgated, or established 
 under common law, related to recovery for personal injuries 
 caused by, arising out of, or related to an act or omission by 
 a health care provider in the course of arranging for or 
 providing coronavirus-related health care services.
 (2) Stricter laws not preempted or superseded.--Nothing in 
 this subtitle shall be construed to affect the applicability of 
 any provision of any Federal, State, or Tribal law that imposes 
 stricter limits on damages or liabilities for personal injury 
 caused by, arising out of, or related to an act or omission by 
 a health care provider in the course of arranging for or 
 providing coronavirus-related health care services, or 
 otherwise affords greater protection to defendants in any 
 coronavirus-related medical liability action than are provided 
 in this subtitle. Any such provision of Federal, State, or 
 Tribal law shall be applied in addition to the requirements of 
 this subtitle and not in lieu thereof.
 (3) Enforcement actions.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
 construed to impair, limit, or affect the authority of the 
 Federal Government, or of any State, local, or Tribal 
 government to bring any criminal, civil, or administrative 
 enforcement action against any health care provider.
 (4) Discrimination claims.--Nothing in this subtitle shall 
 be construed to affect the applicability of any provision of 
 any Federal, State, or Tribal law that creates a cause of 
 action for intentional discrimination on the basis of race, 
 color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy), 
 disability, genetic information, or age.
 (5) Public readiness and emergency preparedness.--Nothing 
 in this subtitle shall be construed to affect the applicability 
 of section 319F-3 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 247d-6d) to any act or omission involving a covered 
 countermeasure, as defined in subsection (i) of such section in 
 arranging for or providing coronavirus-related health care 
 services. Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to affect 
 the applicability of section 319F-4 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-6e).
 (6) Vaccine injury.--To the extent that title XXI of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300aa-1 et seq.) 
 establishes a Federal rule applicable to a civil action brought 
 for a vaccine-related injury or death, this subtitle does not 
 affect the application of that rule to such an action.
 (c) Statute of Limitations.--A coronavirus-related medical 
liability action may not be commenced in any Federal, State, or Tribal 
government court later than 1 year after the date of the alleged harm, 
damage, breach, or tort, unless tolled for--
 (1) proof of fraud;
 (2) intentional concealment; or
 (3) the presence of a foreign body, which has no 
 therapeutic or diagnostic purpose or effect, in the person of 
 the injured person.

SEC. 142. LIABILITY FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS AND HEALTH CARE 
 FACILITIES DURING CORONAVIRUS PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY.

 (a) Requirements for Liability for Coronavirus-related Health Care 
Services.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as 
provided in subsection (b), no health care provider shall be liable in 
a coronavirus-related medical liability action unless the plaintiff can 
prove by clear and convincing evidence--
 (1) gross negligence or willful misconduct by the health 
 care provider; and
 (2) that the alleged harm, damage, breach, or tort 
 resulting in the personal injury was directly caused by the 
 alleged gross negligence or willful misconduct.
 (b) Exceptions.--For purposes of this section, acts, omissions, or 
decisions resulting from a resource or staffing shortage shall not be 
considered willful misconduct or gross negligence.

 Subtitle C--Substantive and Procedural Provisions for Coronavirus-
 related Actions Generally

SEC. 161. JURISDICTION.

 (a) Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States shall 
have concurrent original jurisdiction of any coronavirus-related 
action.
 (b) Removal.--
 (1) In general.--A coronavirus-related action of which the 
 district courts of the United States have original jurisdiction 
 under subsection (a) that is brought in a State or Tribal 
 government court may be removed to a district court of the 
 United States in accordance with section 1446 of title 28, 
 United States Code, except that--
 (A) notwithstanding subsection (b)(2)(A) of such 
 section, such action may be removed by any defendant 
 without the consent of all defendants; and
 (B) notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of such 
 section, for any cause of action that is a coronavirus-
 related action that was filed in a State court before 
 the date of enactment of this Act and that is pending 
 in such court on such date of enactment, and of which 
 the district courts of the United States have original 
 jurisdiction under subsection (a), any defendant may 
 file a notice of removal of a civil action or 
 proceeding within 30 days of the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (2) Procedure after removal.--Section 1447 of title 28, 
 United States Code, shall apply to any removal of a case under 
 paragraph (1), except that, notwithstanding subsection (d) of 
 such section, a court of appeals of the United States shall 
 accept an appeal from an order of a district court granting or 
 denying a motion to remand the case to the State or Tribal 
 government court from which it was removed if application is 
 made to the court of appeals of the United States not later 
 than 10 days after the entry of the order.

SEC. 162. LIMITATIONS ON SUITS.

 (a) Joint and Several Liability Limitations.--
 (1) In general.--An individual or entity against whom a 
 final judgment is entered in any coronavirus-related action 
 shall be liable solely for the portion of the judgment that 
 corresponds to the relative and proportionate responsibility of 
 that individual or entity. In determining the percentage of 
 responsibility of any defendant, the trier of fact shall 
 determine that percentage as a percentage of the total fault of 
 all individuals or entities, including the plaintiff, who 
 caused or contributed to the total loss incurred by the 
 plaintiff.
 (2) Proportionate liability.--
 (A) Determination of responsibility.--In any 
 coronavirus-related action, the court shall instruct 
 the jury to answer special interrogatories, or, if 
 there is no jury, the court shall make findings with 
 respect to each defendant, including defendants who 
 have entered into settlements with the plaintiff or 
 plaintiffs, concerning the percentage of 
 responsibility, if any, of each defendant, measured as 
 a percentage of the total fault of all individuals or 
 entities who caused or contributed to the loss incurred 
 by the plaintiff.
 (B) Factors for consideration.--In determining the 
 percentage of responsibility under this subsection, the 
 trier of fact shall consider--
 (i) the nature of the conduct of each 
 individual or entity found to have caused or 
 contributed to the loss incurred by the 
 plaintiff; and
 (ii) the nature and extent of the causal 
 relationship between the conduct of each such 
 individual or entity and the damages incurred 
 by the plaintiff.
 (3) Joint liability for specific intent or fraud.--
 Notwithstanding paragraph (1), in any coronavirus-related 
 action the liability of a defendant is joint and several if the 
 trier of fact specifically determines that the defendant--
 (A) acted with specific intent to injure the 
 plaintiff; or
 (B) knowingly committed fraud.
 (4) Right to contribution not affected.--Nothing in this 
 subsection affects the right, under any other law, of a 
 defendant to contribution with respect to another defendant 
 determined under paragraph (3) to have acted with specific 
 intent to injure the plaintiff or to have knowingly committed 
 fraud.
 (b) Limitations on Damages.--In any coronavirus-related action--
 (1) the award of compensatory damages shall be limited to 
 economic losses incurred as the result of the personal injury, 
 harm, damage, breach, or tort, except that the court may award 
 damages for noneconomic losses if the trier of fact determines 
 that the personal injury, harm, damage, breach, or tort was 
 caused by the willful misconduct of the individual or entity;
 (2) punitive damages--
 (A) may be awarded only if the trier of fact 
 determines that the personal injury to the plaintiff 
 was caused by the willful misconduct of the individual 
 or entity; and
 (B) may not exceed the amount of compensatory 
 damages awarded; and
 (3) the amount of monetary damages awarded to a plaintiff 
 shall be reduced by the amount of compensation received by the 
 plaintiff from another source in connection with the personal 
 injury, harm, damage, breach, or tort, such as insurance or 
 reimbursement by a government.
 (c) Preemption and Supersedure.--
 (1) In general.--Except as described in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), this section preempts and supersedes any Federal, State, 
 or Tribal law, including statutes, regulations, rules, or 
 standards that are enacted, promulgated, or established under 
 common law, related to joint and several liability, 
 proportionate or contributory liability, contribution, or the 
 award of damages for any coronavirus-related action.
 (2) Stricter laws not preempted or superseded.--Nothing in 
 this section shall be construed to affect the applicability of 
 any provision of any Federal, State, or Tribal law that--
 (A) limits the liability of a defendant in a 
 coronavirus-related action to a lesser degree of 
 liability than the degree of liability determined under 
 this section;
 (B) otherwise affords a greater degree of 
 protection from joint or several liability than is 
 afforded by this section; or
 (C) limits the damages that can be recovered from a 
 defendant in a coronavirus-related action to a lesser 
 amount of damages than the amount determined under this 
 section.
 (3) Public readiness and emergency preparedness.--Nothing 
 in this subtitle shall be construed to affect the applicability 
 of section 319F-3 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 247d-6d) to any act or omission involving a covered 
 countermeasure, as defined in subsection (i) of such section in 
 arranging for or providing coronavirus-related health care 
 services. Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to affect 
 the applicability of section 319F-4 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-6e).

SEC. 163. PROCEDURES FOR SUIT IN DISTRICT COURTS OF THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Pleading With Particularity.--In any coronavirus-related action 
filed in or removed to a district court of the United States--
 (1) the complaint shall plead with particularity--
 (A) each element of the plaintiff's claim; and
 (B) with respect to a coronavirus exposure action, 
 all places and persons visited by the person on whose 
 behalf the complaint was filed and all persons who 
 visited the residence of the person on whose behalf the 
 complaint was filed during the 14-day-period before the 
 onset of the first symptoms allegedly caused by 
 coronavirus, including--
 (i) each individual or entity against which 
 a complaint is filed, along with the factual 
 basis for the belief that such individual or 
 entity was a cause of the personal injury 
 alleged; and
 (ii) every other person or place visited by 
 the person on whose behalf the complaint was 
 filed and every other person who visited the 
 residence of the person on whose behalf the 
 complaint was filed during such period, along 
 with the factual basis for the belief that 
 these persons and places were not the cause of 
 the personal injury alleged; and
 (2) the complaint shall plead with particularity each 
 alleged act or omission constituting gross negligence or 
 willful misconduct that resulted in personal injury, harm, 
 damage, breach, or tort.
 (b) Separate Statements Concerning the Nature and Amount of Damages 
and Required State of Mind.--
 (1) Nature and amount of damages.--In any coronavirus-
 related action filed in or removed to a district court of the 
 United States in which monetary damages are requested, there 
 shall be filed with the complaint a statement of specific 
 information as to the nature and amount of each element of 
 damages and the factual basis for the damages calculation.
 (2) Required state of mind.--In any coronavirus-related 
 action filed in or removed to a district court of the United 
 States in which a claim is asserted on which the plaintiff may 
 prevail only on proof that the defendant acted with a 
 particular state of mind, there shall be filed with the 
 complaint, with respect to each element of that claim, a 
 statement of the facts giving rise to a strong inference that 
 the defendant acted with the required state of mind.
 (c) Verification and Medical Records.--
 (1) Verification requirement.--
 (A) In general.--The complaint in a coronavirus-
 related action filed in or removed to a district court 
 of the United States shall include a verification, made 
 by affidavit of the plaintiff under oath, stating that 
 the pleading is true to the knowledge of the deponent, 
 except as to matters specifically identified as being 
 alleged on information and belief, and that as to those 
 matters the plaintiff believes it to be true.
 (B) Identification of matters alleged upon 
 information and belief.--Any matter that is not 
 specifically identified as being alleged upon the 
 information and belief of the plaintiff, shall be 
 regarded for all purposes, including a criminal 
 prosecution, as having been made upon the knowledge of 
 the plaintiff.
 (2) Materials required.--In any coronavirus-related action 
 filed in or removed to a district court of the United States, 
 the plaintiff shall file with the complaint--
 (A) an affidavit by a physician or other qualified 
 medical expert who did not treat the person on whose 
 behalf the complaint was filed that explains the basis 
 for such physician's or other qualified medical 
 expert's belief that such person suffered the personal 
 injury, harm, damage, breach, or tort alleged in the 
 complaint; and
 (B) certified medical records documenting the 
 alleged personal injury, harm, damage, breach, or tort.
 (d) Application With Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.--This 
section applies exclusively to any coronavirus-related action filed in 
or removed to a district court of the United States and, except to the 
extent that this section requires additional information to be 
contained in or attached to pleadings, nothing in this section is 
intended to amend or otherwise supersede applicable rules of Federal 
civil procedure.
 (e) Civil Discovery for Actions in District Courts of the United 
States.--
 (1) Timing.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in 
 any coronavirus-related action filed in or removed to a 
 district court of the United States, no discovery shall be 
 allowed before--
 (A) the time has expired for the defendant to 
 answer or file a motion to dismiss; and
 (B) if a motion to dismiss is filed, the court has 
 ruled on the motion.
 (2) Standard.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
 the court in any coronavirus-related action that is filed in or 
 removed to a district court of the United States--
 (A) shall permit discovery only with respect to 
 matters directly related to material issues contested 
 in the coronavirus-related action; and
 (B) may compel a response to a discovery request 
 (including a request for admission, an interrogatory, a 
 request for production of documents, or any other form 
 of discovery request) under rule 37 of the Federal 
 Rules of Civil Procedure, only if the court finds 
 that--
 (i) the requesting party needs the 
 information sought to prove or defend as to a 
 material issue contested in such action; and
 (ii) the likely benefits of a response to 
 such request equal or exceed the burden or cost 
 for the responding party of providing such 
 response.
 (f) Interlocutory Appeal and Stay of Discovery.--The courts of 
appeals of the United States shall have jurisdiction of an appeal from 
a motion to dismiss that is denied in any coronavirus-related action in 
a district court of the United States. The district court shall stay 
all discovery in such a coronavirus-related action until the court of 
appeals has disposed of the appeal.
 (g) Class Actions and Multidistrict Litigation Proceedings.--
 (1) Class actions.--In any coronavirus-related action that 
 is filed in or removed to a district court of the United States 
 and is maintained as a class action or multidistrict 
 litigation--
 (A) an individual or entity shall only be a member 
 of the class if the individual or entity affirmatively 
 elects to be a member; and
 (B) the court, in addition to any other notice 
 required by applicable Federal or State law, shall 
 direct notice of the action to each member of the 
 class, which shall include--
 (i) a concise and clear description of the 
 nature of the action;
 (ii) the jurisdiction where the case is 
 pending; and
 (iii) the fee arrangements with class 
 counsel, including--
 (I) the hourly fee being charged; 
 or
 (II) if it is a contingency fee, 
 the percentage of the final award which 
 will be paid, including an estimate of 
 the total amount that would be paid if 
 the requested damages were to be 
 granted; and
 (III) if the cost of the litigation 
 is being financed, a description of the 
 financing arrangement.
 (2) Multidistrict litigations.--
 (A) Trial prohibition.--In any coordinated or 
 consolidated pretrial proceedings conducted pursuant to 
 section 1407(b) of title 28, United States Code, the 
 judge or judges to whom coronavirus-related actions are 
 assigned by the Judicial Panel on Multidistrict 
 Litigation may not conduct a trial in a coronavirus-
 related action transferred to or directly filed in the 
 proceedings unless all parties to that coronavirus-
 related action consent.
 (B) Review of orders.--The court of appeals of the 
 United States having jurisdiction over the transferee 
 district court shall permit an appeal to be taken from 
 any order issued in the conduct of coordinated or 
 consolidated pretrial proceedings conducted pursuant to 
 section 1407(b) of title 28, United States Code, if the 
 order is applicable to 1 or more coronavirus-related 
 actions and an immediate appeal from the order may 
 materially advance the ultimate termination of 1 or 
 more coronavirus-related actions in the proceedings.

SEC. 164. DEMAND LETTERS; CAUSE OF ACTION.

 (a) Cause of Action.--If any person transmits or causes another to 
transmit in any form and by any means a demand for remuneration in 
exchange for settling, releasing, waiving, or otherwise not pursuing a 
claim that is, or could be, brought as part of a coronavirus-related 
action, the party receiving such a demand shall have a cause of action 
for the recovery of damages occasioned by such demand and for 
declaratory judgment in accordance with chapter 151 of title 28, United 
States Code, if the claim for which the letter was transmitted was 
meritless.
 (b) Damages.--Damages available under subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) compensatory damages including costs incurred in 
 responding to the demand; and
 (2) punitive damages, if the court determines that the 
 defendant had knowledge or was reckless with regard to the fact 
 that the claim was meritless.
 (c) Attorney's Fees and Costs.--In an action commenced under 
subsection (a), if the plaintiff is a prevailing party, the court 
shall, in addition to any judgment awarded to a plaintiff, allow a 
reasonable attorney's fee to be paid by the defendant, and costs of the 
action.
 (d) Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States shall 
have concurrent original jurisdiction of all claims arising under 
subsection (a).
 (e) Enforcement by the Attorney General.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever the Attorney General has 
 reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons 
 is engaged in a pattern or practice of transmitting demands for 
 remuneration in exchange for settling, releasing, waiving, or 
 otherwise not pursuing a claim that is, or could be, brought as 
 part of a coronavirus-related action and that is meritless, the 
 Attorney General may commence a civil action in any appropriate 
 district court of the United States.
 (2) Relief.--In a civil action under paragraph (1), the 
 court may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil 
 penalty against the respondent in an amount not exceeding 
 $50,000 per transmitted demand for remuneration in exchange for 
 settling, releasing, waiving or otherwise not pursuing a claim 
 that is meritless.
 (3) Distribution of civil penalties.--If the Attorney 
 General obtains civil penalties in accordance with paragraph 
 (2), the Attorney General shall distribute the proceeds 
 equitably among those persons aggrieved by the respondent's 
 pattern or practice of transmitting demands for remuneration in 
 exchange for settling, releasing, waiving or otherwise not 
 pursuing a claim that is meritless.

 Subtitle D--Relation to Labor and Employment Laws

SEC. 181. LIMITATION ON VIOLATIONS UNDER SPECIFIC LAWS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``covered 
 Federal employment law'' means any of the following:
 (A) The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (including any standard 
 included in a State plan approved under section 18 of 
 such Act (29 U.S.C. 667)).
 (B) The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 201 et seq.).
 (C) The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
 1967 (29 U.S.C. 621 et seq.).
 (D) The Worker Adjustment and Retraining 
 Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 2101 et seq.).
 (E) Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.).
 (F) Title II of the Genetic Information 
 Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. 2000ff et 
 seq.).
 (G) Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act 
 of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12111 et seq.).
 (2) Limitation.--Notwithstanding any provision of a covered 
 Federal employment law, in any action, proceeding, or 
 investigation resulting from or related to an actual, alleged, 
 feared, or potential for exposure to coronavirus, or a change 
 in working conditions caused by a law, rule, declaration, or 
 order related to coronavirus, an employer shall not be subject 
 to any enforcement proceeding or liability under any provision 
 of a covered Federal employment law if the employer--
 (A) was relying on and generally following 
 applicable government standards and guidance;
 (B) knew of the obligation under the relevant 
 provision; and
 (C) attempted to satisfy any such obligation by--
 (i) exploring options to comply with such 
 obligations and with the applicable government 
 standards and guidance (such as through the use 
 of virtual training or remote communication 
 strategies);
 (ii) implementing interim alternative 
 protections or procedures; or
 (iii) following guidance issued by the 
 relevant agency with jurisdiction with respect 
 to any exemptions from such obligation.
 (b) Public Accommodation Laws.--
 (1) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 (A) the term ``auxiliary aids and services'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 4 of the 
 Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 12103);
 (B) the term ``covered public accommodation law'' 
 means--
 (i) title III of the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12181 et 
 seq.); or
 (ii) title II of the Civil Rights Act of 
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000a et seq.);
 (C) the term ``place of public accommodation'' 
 means--
 (i) a place of public accommodation, as 
 defined in section 201 of the Civil Rights Act 
 of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000a); or
 (ii) a public accommodation, as defined in 
 section 301 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12181); and
 (D) the term ``public health emergency period'' 
 means a period designated a public health emergency 
 period by a Federal, State, or local government 
 authority.
 (2) Actions and measures during a public health 
 emergency.--
 (A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law or regulation, during any public 
 health emergency period, no person who owns, leases (or 
 leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation 
 shall be liable under, or found in violation of, any 
 covered public accommodation law for any action or 
 measure taken regarding coronavirus and that place of 
 public accommodation, if such person--
 (i) has determined that the significant 
 risk of substantial harm to public health or 
 the health of employees cannot be reduced or 
 eliminated by reasonably modifying policies, 
 practices, or procedures, or the provision of 
 an auxiliary aid or service; or
 (ii) has offered such a reasonable 
 modification or auxiliary aid or service but 
 such offer has been rejected by the individual 
 protected by the covered law.
 (B) Required waiver prohibited.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, no person who owns, leases (or leases 
 to), or operates a place of public accommodation shall 
 be required to waive any measure, requirement, or 
 recommendation that has been adopted in accordance with 
 a requirement or recommendation issued by the Federal 
 Government or any State or local government with regard 
 to coronavirus, in order to offer such a reasonable 
 modification or auxiliary aids and services.

SEC. 182. LIABILITY FOR CONDUCTING TESTING AT WORKPLACE.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal, State, or local 
law, an employer, or other person who hires or contracts with other 
individuals to provide services, conducting testing for coronavirus at 
the workplace shall not be liable for any action or personal injury 
directly resulting from such testing, except for those personal 
injuries caused by the gross negligence or intentional misconduct of 
the employer or other person.

SEC. 183. JOINT EMPLOYMENT AND INDEPENDENT CONTRACTING.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal or State law, 
including any covered Federal employment law (as defined in section 
181(a)), the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 141 et 
seq.), the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
1001 et seq.), and the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
2601 et seq.), it shall not constitute evidence of a joint employment 
relationship or employment relationship for any employer to provide or 
require, for an employee of another employer or for an independent 
contractor, any of the following:
 (1) Coronavirus-related policies, procedures, or training.
 (2) Personal protective equipment or training for the use 
 of such equipment.
 (3) Cleaning or disinfecting services or the means for such 
 cleaning or disinfecting.
 (4) Workplace testing for coronavirus.
 (5) Temporary assistance due to coronavirus, including 
 financial assistance or other health and safety benefits.

SEC. 184. EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS AS A RESULT OF 
 THE COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 2(a) of the Worker Adjustment and 
Retraining Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 2101(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by adding before the semicolon at the 
 end the following: ``and the shutdown, if occurring during the 
 covered period, is not a result of the COVID-19 national 
 emergency'';
 (2) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by adding ``and'' at the 
 end; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) if occurring during the covered period, is 
 not a result of the COVID-19 national emergency;'';
 (3) in paragraph (7), by striking ``and'';
 (4) in paragraph (8), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) the term `covered period' means the period that--
 ``(A) begins on January 1, 2020; and
 ``(B) ends 90 days after the last date of the 
 COVID-19 national emergency; and
 ``(10) the term `COVID-19 national emergency' means the 
 national emergency declared by the President under the National 
 Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) with respect to the 
 Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).''.
 (b) Exclusion From Definition of Employment Loss.--Section 2(b) of 
the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 
2101(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(6), during the covered 
 period an employee may not be considered to have experienced an 
 employment loss if the termination, layoff exceeding 6 months, 
 or reduction in hours of work of more than 50 percent during 
 each month of any 6-month period involved is a result of the 
 COVID-19 national emergency.''.

 TITLE II--PRODUCTS

SEC. 201. APPLICABILITY OF THE TARGETED LIABILITY PROTECTIONS FOR 
 PANDEMIC AND EPIDEMIC PRODUCTS AND SECURITY 
 COUNTERMEASURES WITH RESPECT TO COVID-19.

 (a) In General.--Section 319F-3(i)(1) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-6d(i)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``; or'' and inserting 
 a semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) a drug (as such term is defined in section 
 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act), 
 biological product (including a vaccine) (as such term 
 is defined in section 351(i)), or device (as such term 
 is defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act) that--
 ``(i) is the subject of a notice of use of 
 enforcement discretion issued by the Secretary 
 if such drug, biological product, or device is 
 used--
 ``(I) when such notice is in 
 effect;
 ``(II) within the scope of such 
 notice; and
 ``(III) in compliance with other 
 applicable requirements of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that are 
 not the subject of such notice;
 ``(ii) in the case of a device, is exempt 
 from the requirement under section 510(k) of 
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; or
 ``(iii) in the case of a drug--
 ``(I) meets the requirements for 
 marketing under a final administrative 
 order under section 505G of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; or
 ``(II) is marketed in accordance 
 with section 505G(a)(3) of such Act.''.
 (b) Clarifying Means of Distribution.--Section 319F-3(a)(5) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-6d(a)(5)) is amended by 
inserting ``by, or in partnership with, Federal, State, or local public 
health officials or the private sector'' after ``distribution'' the 
first place it appears.
 (c) No Change to Administrative Procedure Act Application to 
Enforcement Discretion Exercise.--Section 319F-3 of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d-6d) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(j) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed--
 ``(1) to require use of procedures described in section 553 
 of title 5, United States Code, for a notice of use of 
 enforcement discretion for which such procedures are not 
 otherwise required; or
 ``(2) to affect whether such notice constitutes final 
 agency action within the meaning of section 704 of title 5, 
 United States Code.''.

 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such a provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions 
of and amendments made by this Act, as well as the application of such 
provision or amendment to any person other than the parties to the 
action holding the provision or amendment to be unconstitutional, or to 
any circumstances other than those presented in such action, shall not 
be affected thereby.
 <all>