S 340 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 340
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose a tax on the excess
profits of large oil companies, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 5 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. LIEBERMAN, and Mr. COHEN) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose a tax on the excess
profits of large oil companies, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Excess Oil Profits Tax Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. IMPOSITION OF EXCESS OIL PROFITS TAX.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--TAX ON EXCESS OIL PROFITS
`Sec. 59B. Tax on excess oil profits.
`SEC. 59B. TAX ON EXCESS OIL PROFITS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In the case of a large oil company, there is
 hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle)
 a tax equal to 40 percent of the excess net profits of such corporation
 for the taxable year.
 `(b) EXCESS NET PROFITS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `excess net profits' means the excess (if any) of--
 `(A) the net income of the taxpayer for the taxable year, over
 `(B) the average annual net income of the taxpayer for the base period.
 `(2) NET INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The net income for any taxable year shall be the net
 income or loss of the taxpayer for such taxable year which is shown on
 the applicable financial statement of the taxpayer.
 `(B) STATEMENTS COVERING DIFFERENT PERIODS- Appropriate adjustments shall
 be made in net income or loss in any case in which the applicable financial
 statement covers a period other than the taxable year.
 `(3) BASE PERIOD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `base period' means the 5-taxable year period
 immediately preceding the taxable year (or, if shorter, the period of
 existence of the taxpayer preceding such taxable year).
 `(B) PREDECESSOR CORPORATION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the
 taxable years of any predecessor corporation shall be taken into account
 in computing the base period.
 `(4) SAME STATEMENTS- In computing net income or loss for the taxable
 year and taxable years in the base period, the same type of applicable
 financial statements must be used for all such taxable years unless the
 Secretary provides otherwise.
 `(c) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) LARGE OIL COMPANY- The term `large oil company' means any person--
 `(A) which is identified as a major energy-producing company under section
 205(h) of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7135(h)), and
 `(B) with respect to which for the calendar year in which the taxable year
 begins such person's total for any of the following was at least 1 percent
 of total for the United States:
 `(i) Production of oil or gas.
 `(ii) Reserves of oil or gas.
 `(iii) Oil refining capacity.
 `(iv) Sales of petroleum products.
 `(2) APPLICABLE FINANCIAL STATEMENT- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable financial statement' means, with
 respect to any taxable year, any statement covering such taxable year--
 `(i) which is required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange
 Commission,
 `(ii) which is a certified audited income statement to be used for the
 purposes of a statement or report--
 `(I) for credit purposes,
 `(II) to shareholders, or
 `(III) for any other substantial nontax purpose,
 `(iii) which is an income statement for a substantial nontax purpose
 required to be provided to--
 `(I) the Federal Government or any agency thereof,
 `(II) a State government or any agency thereof, or
 `(III) a political subdivision of a State or any agency thereof, or
 `(iv) which is an income statement to be used for the purposes of a
 statement or report--
 `(I) for credit purposes,
 `(II) to shareholders, or
 `(III) for any other substantial nontax purpose.
 `(B) EARNINGS AND PROFITS USED IN CERTAIN CASES- If--
 `(i) a taxpayer has no applicable financial statement, or
 `(ii) a taxpayer has only a statement described in subparagraph (A)(iv)
 and the taxpayer elects the application of this subparagraph,
the net income or loss set forth on the taxpayer's applicable financial
statement shall, for purposes of this subsection, be treated as being equal to
the taxpayer's earnings and profits for the taxable year (without diminution
by reason of distributions during the tax year). Such election, once made,
shall remain in effect for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is described
in this subparagraph unless revoked with the consent of the Secretary.
 `(C) SPECIAL RULE WHERE MORE THAN 1 STATEMENT- For purposes of subparagraph
 (A), if a taxpayer has a statement described in more than 1 clause or
 subclause, the applicable financial statement shall be the statement
 described in the clause or subclause with the lowest number designation. If
 the taxpayer has 2 or more statements described in the clause (or subclause)
 with the lowest number designation, the applicable financial statement
 shall be the one of such statements specified in regulations.
 `(d) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section and section 899,
 including regulations to prevent the avoidance of such sections through
 related parties and controlled groups of corporations.'
 (b) APPLICATION TO FOREIGN PERSONS- Subpart D of part II of subchapter
 N of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new section:
`SEC. 899. EXCESS OIL PROFITS TAX.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In the case of a taxable foreign person, there
 is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle)
 a tax equal to 40 percent of the excess net profits of such foreign person
 for the taxable year.
 `(b) TAXABLE FOREIGN PERSON- For purposes of this section, the term
 `taxable foreign person' means any foreign person with respect to which
 for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins such person's total
 within the United States for any of the following was at least 1 percent
 of the total for the United States:
 `(1) Production of oil or gas.
 `(2) Reserves of oil or gas.
 `(3) Oil refining capacity.
 `(4) Sales of petroleum products.
 `(c) EXCESS NET PROFITS- For purposes of this section, excess net profits
 shall be determined in the same manner as under section 59B(b), except that
 there shall only be taken into account net income and losses from sources
 within the United States or from the conduct of a trade or business within
 the United States.'
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII--Tax on Excess Oil Profits'.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart D of part II of subchapter N
 of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new item:
`Sec. 899. Excess oil profits tax.'
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989.