101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 819
AN ACT
To strengthen the enforcement of motor carrier safety laws, and for other
purposes.
S 819 ES
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 819
AN ACT
To strengthen the enforcement of motor carrier safety laws, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
That this Act may be cited as the `Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1989'.
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY RATINGS
 SEC. 2. (a) Not later than one year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Interstate Commerce
 Commission, shall issue a final rule amending the Federal motor carrier
 safety regulations contained in subchapter B of chapter III of title 49,
 Code of Federal Regulations, to--
 (1) establish a system to make readily available to the public, and to
 periodically update, the safety ratings of motor carriers which have been
 assigned safety ratings determined by the Secretary to be unsatisfactory; and
 (2) provide that, in any case in which a motor carrier has been assigned
 a safety rating determined by the Secretary to be unsatisfactory and
 has submitted a written request to the Secretary for a reassessment of
 the rating, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, conduct the
 reassessment within nine months after receipt of the request.
 (b) The Secretary shall, not later than one year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, issue a final rule providing that any motor
 carrier that receives a safety rating determined by the Secretary to
 be unsatisfactory shall be prohibited from operating a commercial motor
 vehicle which meets the description set forth in section 204(1) (B) or
 (C) of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (49 App. U.S.C. 2503(1) (B)
 or (C)) until such motor carrier has received a safety rating determined
 by the Secretary to be conditional or satisfactory.
IMMINENT HAZARDS TO SAFETY
 SEC. 3. (a) Not later than January 1, 1990, the Secretary shall develop
 and submit to Congress operational guidelines for taking actions under
 section 521(b)(5) of title 49, United States Code, with respect to any
 violation, or combination of violations, that poses an imminent hazard
 to safety. The guidelines, which shall be effective on January 1, 1990,
 shall specify the criteria for determining when such action shall be taken.
 (b) Not later than January 1 of 1991, 1992, and 1993, the Secretary
 shall submit to Congress a report describing the actions taken under the
 operational guidelines required by subsection (a).
DRUG VIOLATIONS AT TRUCK STOPS AND REST AREAS
 SEC. 4. (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) the illegal use of controlled substances by operators of commercial
 motor vehicles represents an enormous threat to the safety of all motorists
 and their passengers on the Nation's roadways; and
 (2) as indicated by numerous studies, congressional hearings, and
 investigations, individuals often use the areas surrounding roadside
 truckstops and roadside rest areas as sites for the distribution of these
 controlled substances to the operators of commercial motor vehicles.
 (b)(1) In light of the findings in subsection (a), part D of the Controlled
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) is amended by inserting immediately
 after section 408 the following new section:
`TRANSPORTATION SAFETY OFFENSES
 `SEC. 409. (a) Any person who violates section 401(a)(1) or section 416 by
 distributing or possessing with intent to distribute a controlled substance
 in or on, or within 1,000 feet of, a truck stop or safety rest area is
 (except as provided in subsection (b)) punishable--
 `(1) by a term of imprisonment, or fine, or both, up to twice that authorized
 by section 401(b) of this title; and
 `(2) at least twice any term of supervised release authorized by section
 401(b) for a first offense.
Except to the extent a greater minimum sentence is otherwise provided by
section 401(b), a term of imprisonment under this subsection shall be not less
than one year. The mandatory minimum sentencing provisions of this paragraph
shall not apply to offenses involving five grams or less of marihuana.
 `(b) Any person who violates section 401(a)(1) or section 416 by distributing
 or possessing with intent to distribute a controlled substance in or
 on, or within 1,000 feet of, a truck stop or a safety rest area after a
 prior conviction or convictions under subsection (a) have become final
 is punishable--
 `(1) by the greater of (A) a term of imprisonment of not less than three
 years and not more than life imprisonment or (B) a term of imprisonment
 of up to three times that authorized by section 401(b) of this title for
 a first offense, or a fine up to three times that authorized by section
 401(b) of this title for a first offense, or both; and
 `(2) at least three times any term of supervised release authorized by
 section 401(b) of this title for a first offense.
 `(c) In the case of any sentence imposed under subsection (b), imposition or
 execution of such sentence shall not be suspended and probation shall not be
 granted. An individual convicted under subsection (b) shall not be eligible
 for parole under chapter 311 of title 18 of the United States Code until
 the individual has served the minimum sentence required by such subsection.
 `(d) For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `safety rest area' has the meaning given that term in part
 752 of title 23, Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of
 enactment of this section; and
 `(2) the term `truck stop' means any facility (including any parking
 lot appurtenant thereto) with the capacity to provide fuel or service,
 or both, to any commercial motor vehicle as defined under section 12019(6)
 of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986, operating in commerce
 as defined in section 12019(3) of such Act.'.
 (2) Section 401(b) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 841(b)) is amended by striking
 `or 405B' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `405B, or 409'.
 (3) The table of contents of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
 Control Act of 1970 is amended by inserting, immediately after the item
 relating to section 408, the following:
`Sec. 409. Transportation safety offenses.'.
 (c)(1) Pursuant to its authority under section 994 of title 28, United
 States Code, and section 21 of the Sentencing Act of 1987 (28 U.S.C. 994
 note), the United States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate guidelines,
 or shall amend existing guidelines, to provide that a defendant convicted
 of violating section 409 of the Controlled Substances Act, as added by
 this section, shall be assigned an offense level under chapter 2 of the
 sentencing guidelines that is--
 (A) two levels greater than the level that would have been assigned for
 the underlying controlled substance offense; and
 (B) in no event less than level 26.
 (2) If the sentencing guidelines are amended after the effective date of
 this section, the Sentencing Commission shall implement the instruction
 set forth in paragraph (1) so as to achieve a comparable result.
 (3) The guidelines referred to in paragraph (1), as promulgated or amended
 under such paragraph, shall provide that an offense that could be subject
 to multiple enhancements pursuant to such subsection is subject to not
 more than one such enhancement.
IMPROVED BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES
 SEC. 5. (a) Section 9107 of the Truck and Bus Safety and Regulatory Reform
 Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-690, subtitle B of title IX; 102 Stat. 4530)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `report on' in the heading;
 (2) by inserting `(a) REPORT- ' immediately before `Not later than'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- The Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking
 proceeding not later than February 1, 1991. Such proceeding shall concern
 the need to adopt methods for improving braking performance standards for
 commercial motor vehicles and shall include an examination of antilock
 systems, means of improving brake compatibility, and methods of ensuring
 effectiveness of brake timing. Any rule which the Secretary determines to
 issue as a result of such proceeding regarding improved brake performance
 shall take into account the necessity for effective enforcement of such
 a rule. The Secretary shall conclude the proceeding required by this
 subsection not later than October 30, 1991.'.
 (b) The table of contents contained in section 9101(b) of the Truck and
 Bus Safety and Regulatory Reform Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 4527) is amended
 by striking `Report on improved' in the item relating to section 9107 and
 inserting in lieu thereof `Improved'.
SAFETY INSPECTOR GRADE LEVELS
 SEC. 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the position held by a
 fully experienced and qualified senior or journeyman motor carrier safety
 specialist working primarily in the field and employed by the Department
 of Transportation shall be classified in accordance with chapter 51 of
 title 5, United States Code, at grade GS-12 of the General Schedule.
PROCEDURES TO ENSURE TIMELY CORRECTION OF SAFETY VIOLATIONS
 SEC. 7. (a) The Secretary shall, within nine months after the date
 of enactment of this Act, issue a final rule establishing procedures
 to ensure the proper and timely correction of commercial motor vehicle
 safety violations noted during inspections funded with monies authorized
 under section 404 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982 (49
 App. U.S.C. 2304) to carry out the Motor Carrier Safety Assistance Program.
 (b) Such final rule shall establish a verification program, including
 all States participating in the Motor Carrier Safety Assistance Program,
 to ensure that commercial motor vehicles and operators thereof found in
 violation of safety requirements have subsequently been brought into
 compliance with such safety requirements. The final rule shall, among
 other things, institute--
 (1) a nationwide system for random reinspection of the commercial motor
 vehicles and operators thereof that have been declared out-of-service as
 a result of such safety violations, the main purpose of which system shall
 be to verify that the violations have been corrected on a timely basis;
 (2) a program of accountability for correcting all safety violations,
 which shall provide that--
 (A) the operator of a commercial motor vehicle for which a safety violation
 has been noted shall be issued a form prescribed by the Secretary;
 (B) the making of the repairs necessary to correct such violation and the
 date, location, and time of such repairs shall be certified on such form
 by the person making such repairs;
 (C) the motor carrier responsible for such commercial motor vehicle or
 operator shall certify on such form that, based on the knowledge of the
 carrier, the repairs necessary to correct such violations have been made; and
 (D) appropriate State penalties shall be assessed for false statements on
 such forms or for failure to return such forms to the appropriate State
 entity; and
 (3) a system for ensuring that appropriate State penalties are assessed
 for failure to correct any such safety violation.
SERIOUS SAFETY VIOLATIONS
 SEC. 8. (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) the present system for ensuring compliance with Federal motor carrier
 safety laws and regulations needs improvement;
 (2) relying primarily upon voluntary compliance methods has not resulted
 in an acceptable level of commercial motor vehicle safety; and
 (3) improvements in the existing enforcement authorities are required to
 bring about greater safety.
 (b) In light of the findings in subsection (a), section 521(b)(1) of title
 49, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the existing text as subparagraph (A); and
 (2) by adding at the end of the following new subparagraph:
 `(B) The Secretary shall, not later than January 1, 1990, establish
 operational procedures to require a highway safety specialist or other
 appropriate representative of the Secretary to initiate, at the time
 of a safety review, compliance review, or other inspection or audit
 activity, or within a reasonable time thereafter, an enforcement action
 whenever any of the offenses referred to in paragraph (2)(A) and (B)
 can be documented, except recordkeeping violations not specified by the
 Secretary as serious. The procedures shall--
 `(i) specify those serious recordkeeping violations for which an enforcement
 action shall be initiated, including instances in which the falsification
 of records of duty status or drivers' medical certificates is required
 or permitted, and such other recordkeeping violations as the Secretary
 determines to be serious; and
 `(ii) authorize, but not require, initiation of an enforcement action for
 recordkeeping violations not specified by the Secretary as serious.'.
TRUCK VISIBILITY
 SEC. 9. Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding on the need to
 adopt methods for making trucks more visible to motorists so as to reduce
 accidents, particularly at night, taking into consideration such factors
 as truck illumination and truck color. Such proceeding shall be completed
 within two years after the date of enactment of this Act.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 10. As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `commercial driver's license' has the meaning given such term
 in section 12019(4) of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986
 (49 App. U.S.C. 2716(4));
 (2) the term `commercial motor vehicle' has the meaning given such
 term in section 204(1) of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (49
 App. U.S.C. 2503(1));
 (3) the term `conditional' and `unsatisfactory' have the meanings given
 those terms in part 385 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, as in
 effect on the date of enactment of this Act;
 (4) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation; and
 (5) the term `truck' means a commercial motor vehicle that meets the
 description set forth in section 204(1) (A) or (C) of the Motor Carrier
 Safety Act of 1984 (49 App. U.S.C. 2503(1) (A) or (C)).
Passed the Senate August 3 (legislative day, January 3), 1989.
Attest:
Secretary.
S 819 ES----2
S 819 ES----3se serious recordkeeping violations for which an enforcement
action shall be initiated, including instances in which the falsification
of records of duty status or drivers' medical certificates is required or