S 407 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 407
To require the Consumer Product Safety Commission to require the labeling
of certain toys.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
FEBRUARY 9 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. DODD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To require the Consumer Product Safety Commission to require the labeling
of certain toys.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Toy Safety and Child Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. LABELING REQUIREMENT.
 (a) DEFINITION- Section 2 of the Federal Hazardous Substance Act (15
 U.S.C. 1261(p)) is amended in the matter following paragraph (2)--
 (1) by inserting `(A)' after `also includes'; and
 (2) by striking out the period at the end thereof and inserting in lieu
 thereof `; (B) any toy (intended for use by children over the age of 3)
 that contains small parts if such toy is not labeled in accordance with
 the provisions of section 22.'.
 (b) REQUIREMENTS- The Federal Hazardous Substance Act (15 U.S.C. 1261 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 22. CHILDREN'S TOYS.
 `(a) RULE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Consumer Product Safety Commission shall issue a
 consumer product safety standard for any toy for children which--
 `(A) is manufactured for sale, offered for sale, distributed in commerce,
 or imported into the United States, and
 `(B) which includes a small part, as defined by the Commission.
to require that the packaging of such toy and any descriptive materials which
accompany such toy contain the cautionary label described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) LABEL- The cautionary label required under paragraph (1) for a
 toy shall--
 `(A) state the age of children for which such toy is not intended, and
 `(B) contain a description, with respect to children within the age range for
 which such toy is not intended, of any dangerous property of such toy, and
 the hazardous consequences which can result from any such dangerous property.
 `(3) STANDARD- No later than January 1, 1990, the Commission shall
 establish the consumer product safety standard referred to in paragraph
 (1) and rules implementing the requirements of the standard.
 `(b) LABELING REQUIREMENTS- All labeling required under a standard issued
 under subsection (a) for a toy shall--
 `(1) be prominently and conspicuously displayed on the packaging of the
 toy and on any descriptive materials which accompany the toy,
 `(2) be visible, noticeable, and in the English language, and
 `(3) include the word `WARNING' in capital letters.
 `(c) ENFORCEMENT- The Commission may use any remedy available to it under
 this Act to enforce the requirements of the standard issued under subsection
 (a).'.
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Section 2 of this Act shall apply with respect to toys that are manufactured
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.