HR 1711 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1711
To provide for an equitable procedure for establishing congressional districts.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 5, 1989
Mr. SENSENBRENNER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide for an equitable procedure for establishing congressional districts.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Congressional Districting Reform Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS.
 Section 22 of the Act entitled `An Act to provide for the fifteenth
 and subsequent decennial censuses and to provide for apportionment of
 Representatives in Congress', approved June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a),
 is amended by striking out subsection (c) and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `(c)(1) In each State entitled in the 103rd Congress or in any subsequent
 Congress to more than 1 Representative under an apportionment made
 pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, there shall
 be established by the redistricting commission appointed for such State
 pursuant to subsection (d) of this section a number of districts equal
 to the number of Representatives to which such State is so entitled, and
 Representatives shall be elected only from districts so established, no
 district to elect more than 1 Representative. No such district in a State
 shall contain a number of persons (as determined under the then most recent
 decennial census) which differs substantially from the quotient obtained by
 dividing the population of such State (as determined under such decennial
 census) by the number of Representatives to which such State is entitled
 under such apportionment.
 `(2) Subject to the provisions of the second sentence of paragraph (1),
 districts established by a redistricting commission pursuant to such
 paragraph shall, to the extent possible, meet the following requirements:
 `(A) The boundaries of each district may not be drawn for the purpose of
 minimizing the voting strength of any racial, ethnic, or economic group,
 or for the purpose of favoring any political party.
 `(B) Each district shall be composed of contiguous territory, including
 adjoining insular territory, in a compact form.
 `(C) The boundaries of each district shall coincide with the boundaries
 of local political subdivisions.
 `(d)(1) Within 60 days after the executive of a State receives a certificate
 under subsection (b) of this section, there shall be established in
 such State a redistricting commission. Such commission shall consist
 of 5 members, none of whom may be officers of the Federal Government,
 of the government of such State, or of a local government in such State,
 to be appointed as follows:
 `(A) In the case of a partisan bicameral legislature, the following officers
 in such legislature, or equivalent officers therein, shall each appoint
 1 member of the commission:
 `(i) The President of the Senate.
 `(ii) The Speaker of the House.
 `(iii) The minority leader of the Senate.
 `(iv) The minority leader of the House.
 `(B) In the case of a nonpartisan bicameral legislature, the leader of each
 house of such legislature shall each appoint 2 members of the Commission.
 `(C) In the case of a unicameral legislature, the leader of such legislature
 shall appoint 4 members of the commission after consultation with leaders
 of political parties in such State.
 `(D) The 4 members appointed pursuant to subparagraph (A), (B), or (C),
 as the case may be, shall, by an affirmative vote of at least 3 members,
 select a fifth member, who shall be the chairman of the commission.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the determination as to which official
constitutes the minority or majority leader of a house of a State legislature
shall be made by the members of such house.
 `(2) A vacancy in a commission shall, within 15 days after it occurs,
 be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
 `(e) A commission appointed under subsection (d) in a State shall conduct
 public hearings with respect to the preparation of a plan setting forth the
 boundaries of districts to which such State is entitled under this section,
 and such commission shall, not later than 180 days after its appointment,
 prepare such plan. Such plan shall be transmitted forthwith to the Federal
 Election Commission, which, upon receipt of the plan, shall publish such
 plan in the Federal Register. Such plan shall take effect on the 45th day
 after the date of such publication, and shall be effective (except to the
 extent that a court order issued under subsection (f) provides otherwise)
 until the next plan prepared pursuant to this section takes effect in such
 State after the next decennial census.
 `(f) Any person in any State meeting the qualifications for voting in an
 election of a Member of the House of Representatives from that State may,
 not later than 45 days after the publication of a plan pursuant to subsection
 (e), bring an action in the district court of the United States for the
 district of which such person is a resident, without regard to any amount
 in controversy, to enforce the provisions of this section with regard
 to the State in which such person resides. The court may consolidate
 actions brought under this subsection. The court shall have authority
 to issue all orders and decrees necessary to bring a State in compliance
 with this section, except that if the court finds that the redistricting
 plan is not consistent with the requirements of this section, or violates
 any other Federal law or law of that State, the court shall declare the
 plan invalid in whole or in part and shall issue an order requiring the
 commission appointed pursuant to subsection (d) in such State to prepare,
 within 60 days after such order, a new redistricting plan in accordance
 with such order. Such new plan shall be submitted to the court which
 shall review such new plan and, if such plan is still not in compliance
 with this section or other Federal or State law, the court shall issue an
 order establishing single member districts according to law.
 `(g)(1) The district courts of the United States shall have exclusive
 jurisdiction to hear and determine any action brought under subsection
 (f). Such action shall be heard by a district court of 3 judges. It shall
 be the duty of the judges designated to hear the case to assign the case
 for hearing at the earliest practicable date, and the court shall render
 a decision in the case not later than 60 days after the action is brought.
 `(2) An appeal from the final decision under paragraph (1) shall be
 filed within 30 days after the entry of the final order, judgment, or
 decree. Appeals brought to the Supreme Court under this section shall have
 priority over all other cases on the docket of that court.
 `(h) A commission appointed pursuant to subsection (d) may, for the purpose
 of carrying out its duties, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times
 and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as it considers
 necessary.
 `(i) A commission appointed pursuant to subsection (d) shall cease
 to exist 60 days after the publication pursuant to subsection (e) of
 the redistricting plan prepared by such commission, except that such
 commission shall continue to exist during the period in which any action
 under subsection (f) with respect to such plan is pending.'.
SEC. 3. DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS TO THE STATES.
 The Federal Election Commission shall administer and distribute to each
 State, in accordance with the needs of such State, funds appropriated
 for the purpose of enabling each State to carry out the provisions of
 section 22 of the Act entitled `An Act to provide for the apportionment
 of Representatives in Congress', approved June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a),
 as amended by section 2 of this Act.
SEC. 4. REPEAL.
 The second paragraph (relating to congressional redistricting) of the
 Act entitled `An Act for the relief of Doctor Ricardo Vallejo Samala and
 to provide for Congressional redistricting' approved December 14, 1967
 (2 U.S.C. 2c) is repealed, effective January 1, 1993.