HR 3253 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3253
To establish certain requirements with respect to solid waste and hazardous
waste incinerators, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 2, 1991
Mr. KOSTMAYER (for himself, Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr. MAVROULES, Mr. LEVINE
of California, Mr. ATKINS, Mr. OLVER, Mr. BRYANT, Mr. SIKORSKI, Mr. REED,
Mrs. SCHROEDER, Mr. MACHTLEY, Mr. ANDREWS of Maine, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. DELLUMS,
Mr. LIPINSKI, and Mr. TORRES) introduced the following bill; which was
referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
January 21, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. SCHEUER, Mr. YATES, Mr. MCCLOSKEY,
Mr. BERMAN, Mr. BEILENSON, Mrs. BYRON, Mr. MARTINEZ, Mr. LEHMAN of Florida,
Mr. BUSTAMANTE, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. HERTEL, Mr. JONES of Georgia,
Mr. EVANS, Mr. EDWARDS of California, Mr. ANDREWS of New Jersey, Mr. PETERSON
of Minnesota, Ms. PELOSI, Ms. NORTON, Mr. JOHNSTON of Florida, Ms. MOLINARI,
Mr. CAMPBELL of Colorado, Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. MORAN, Mr. VENTO,
Mr. FORD of Tennessee, Mr. GIBBONS, Mr. DONNELLY, Mr. STARK, Mr. RAVENEL,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mrs. COLLINS of Illinois, Mr. ANNUNZIO, Mr. DWYER of New
Jersey, Mr. DEFAZIO, Mr. TORRICELLI, Mr. RUSSO, Mr. SMITH of Florida,
Mr. BROWN, and Mr. OWENS of Utah
A BILL
To establish certain requirements with respect to solid waste and hazardous
waste incinerators, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Pollution Prevention, Community Recycling,
 and Incinerator Control Act'.
SEC. 2. MORATORIUM ON MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE INCINERATORS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO SUBTITLE D- Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 4011. MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE INCINERATORS.
 `(a) MORATORIUM- No municipal solid waste incinerator may be issued a
 permit for construction or expansion until the year 2000.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS- After December 31, 1999, no Federal agency, State or
 local government, or other waste management jurisdiction may issue a permit
 (including a permit under section 129(e) of the Clean Air Act) or other
 prior approval for the construction or expansion of a municipal solid
 waste incinerator, unless the applicant for the permit or other approval
 demonstrates, and the State finds, that the following requirements are met:
 `(1) The applicant shall conduct a waste composition analysis of the solid
 waste generated in a year within the area to be served by the facility and
 shall demonstrate that it will continue to conduct such a waste composition
 analysis annually. Each entity from which the facility plans to accept
 waste also shall conduct a waste composition analysis of the solid waste
 generated in a year by the persons from whom the entity collects waste and
 shall demonstrate that it will continue to conduct such a waste composition
 analysis annually. Any such waste composition analysis shall be conducted
 in compliance with the regulations promulgated under subsection (c).
 `(2) Each entity from which the facility plans to accept waste shall
 demonstrate that it has diverted during at least one year, and will continue
 to divert for each subsequent year, to waste management methods other than
 incineration and landfilling the following percentages of the total amount
 of each of the following materials generated annually by the persons from
 whom the entity collects waste:
 `(A) Glass, 65 percent.
 `(B) Newspapers, 65 percent.
 `(C) Other paper, 65 percent.
 `(D) Metals, 80 percent.
 `(E) Plastics, 50 percent.
 `(F) Yard waste, 90 percent.
 `(G) Food waste, 10 percent.
 `(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that--
 `(A) the facility will not interfere with maintaining the diversion rates
 set forth in paragraph (2) for each entity from which the facility plans
 to accept waste; and
 `(B) in any case in which a diversion rate by an entity from which
 the facility plans to accept waste is higher than the rate set forth in
 paragraph (2), the facility will not interfere with maintaining the higher
 diversion rate.
 `(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not feasible to manage
 the remaining solid waste through source reduction, reuse, or recycling.
 `(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will not adversely
 affect the environment or human health as a consequence of--
 `(A) exposure to air emissions or incinerator ash through inhalation;
 `(B) ingestion of food contaminated by air emissions or incinerator ash as
 a consequence of incorporation of such ash or emissions into the food chain;
 `(C) ingestion of potable water or aquatic organisms contaminated by surface
 water discharges, surface runoff, leaching, or percolation of air emissions
 or incinerator ash into ground water or surface water;
 `(D) ingestion or inhalation of soil particles contaminated with air
 emissions or incinerator ash; or
 `(E) dermal contact with air emissions or incinerator ash.
 `(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility is not situated
 in a nonattainment area (as that term is used in part D of title I of the
 Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.)).
 `(7) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will not harm the
 local economy, including a demonstration that it will not negatively affect
 property values.
 `(8) The applicant shall demonstrate that the full cost of the facility
 over its entire life, including capital costs, debt service, liability
 insurance, remediation, and long-term operation and maintenance expenses,
 will be less costly than reducing, recycling, or composting waste.
 `(9) The Federal agency, State or local government, or other waste management
 jurisdiction shall conduct a full public participation process, including
 public hearings, to address the proposed facility. As part of the process,
 the applicant shall provide to local community groups concerned about the
 project a technical assistance grant of at least $50,000. The applicant
 shall renew the grant every six months after the initial grant is made
 until the date on which final action is completed by each Federal agency,
 State or local government, or other waste management jurisdiction on each
 permit for construction or expansion of the facility.
 `(10) The proposed construction or expansion must be approved by the unit
 of local government in whose boundaries the facility would be sited.
 `(11) The applicant shall demonstrate the following with respect to the
 applicant, any firm engaged to operate the facility, the parent firm of
 the applicant and any firm engaged to operate the facility, and any firms
 controlled by the parent firm or the operating firm or the applicant:
 `(A) Each such entity is in compliance with Federal and State environmental
 and public health statutes and regulations.
 `(B) Each such entity has paid all outstanding fines or penalties for
 violations of such statutes or regulations.
 `(C) Each such entity has made available to the public at the site, and
 at local public libraries in the jurisdiction where the facility would be
 sited, a disclosure statement. The disclosure statement shall include the
 following information with respect to the entity:
 `(i) A list of each conviction of fraud or any criminal offense during
 the previous 10 years in connection with obtaining or attempting to obtain
 a contract.
 `(ii) A list of each conviction of a violation of a State or Federal
 anti-trust law during the previous 10 years, including convictions relating
 to unlawful price-fixing, allocation of customers among competitors,
 and bid-rigging.
 `(iii) A list of each citation for a permit violation under a Federal,
 State, or local environmental statute during the previous 5 years.
 `(iv) A list of each citation for failure to conduct proper cleanup,
 reclamation, or closure of a site or forfeiture of a bond for such a
 failure during the previous 5 years.
 `(12) The applicant shall complete, after public notice and comment,
 an environmental impact statement. Such statement shall be conducted in
 the same manner and in conformance with the same standards required for
 environmental impact statements under the National Environmental Policy Act
 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) and must be approved by the State.
 `(c) WASTE COMPOSITION ANALYSIS REGULATIONS- (1) Not later than January 1,
 1995, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations containing standards
 for the conduct of waste composition analyses under subsection (b)(1). In
 the regulations, the Administrator shall define the term `waste composition
 analysis' to mean--
 `(A) an identification of all materials that fall within standard categories
 and subcategories of materials set forth by the Administrator, including,
 at a minimum, glass, newspapers, other paper, metals, plastics, yard waste,
 and food waste; and
 `(B) a measurement of the quantities of those materials, using a method
 established by the Administrator.
 `(2) The regulations also shall include procedures for--
 `(A) certification of the accuracy of a waste composition analysis by the
 entity carrying out the analysis; and
 `(B) verification by the Administrator of the accuracy of a waste composition
 analysis.
 `(d) AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE HIGHER DIVERSION RATES- The Administrator shall
 assess periodically, but not less often than at least once every 3 years,
 whether the achievement of higher diversion rates under subsection (b)(2)
 is feasible. If the Administrator concludes that a higher rate is feasible
 for one or more materials listed in subsection (b)(2), the Administrator
 may by rule require such higher rate for the material under such subsection.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the following definitions
 apply:
 `(1) The term `municipal solid waste incinerator' means a distinct operating
 unit of any facility which combusts any solid waste material from commercial
 or industrial establishments or the general public (including single and
 multiple residences, hotels, and motels). Such term does not include (i)
 incinerators or other units required to have a permit under section 3005;
 (ii) materials recovery facilities (including primary or secondary smelters)
 which combust waste for the primary purpose of recovering metals; (iii)
 qualifying small power production facilities, as defined in section 3(17)(C)
 of the Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 769(17)(C), which burn homogeneous waste
 (other than refuse-derived fuel) for the production of electric energy;
 (iv) air curtain incinerators provided that such incinerators only burn
 wood wastes, yard wastes, and clean lumber and that such air curtain
 incinerators comply with opacity limitations to be established by the
 Administrator by rule; or (v) incinerators or other units that burn only
 infectious medical waste.
 `(2) The term `waste management jurisdiction' means a governmental entity
 which issues permits for construction or expansion of municipal solid
 waste incinerators within its boundaries.
 `(f) REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to carry
 out this section.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle D of such Act
 (contained in section 1001 of such Act) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new item:
`Sec. 4011. Municipal solid waste incinerators.'.
SEC. 3. MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE INCINERATOR ASH MANAGEMENT.
 Section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6921) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) ASH FROM MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE INCINERATORS- (1) Notwithstanding
 section 306 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (Public Law 101-549;
 104 Stat. 2584), ash from municipal solid waste incinerators shall be
 considered to be a hazardous waste and shall be subject to this subtitle.
 `(2) Ash from municipal solid waste incinerators shall be managed in a
 monofill that contains only ash from such incinerators and that includes,
 at a minimum, the following design components:
 `(A) A double liner system designed, operated, and constructed of materials
 to prevent the migration of any constituent into the liners during the
 period such facility remains in operation (including any postclosure
 monitoring period). The double liner system shall consist of one flexible
 membrane liner and one composite liner, with a leachate collection system
 above and between such liners. For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `flexible membrane liner' means a liner that consists of high density
 polyethylene or equivalent material that is at least 60 mils thick and a
 layer of recompacted clay or other natural materials at least 3 feet thick
 with hydraulic conductivity of no more than 1 x 10-7 centimeter per second.
 `(B) Upon closure, a final composite cover system designed, operated,
 and constructed of materials to prevent the infiltration of precipitation
 into such cover during any closure or post-closure monitoring period. For
 purposes of this section, the term `composite cover' means a cover which
 consists of high density polyethylene or equivalent material that is
 at least 40 mils thick and a layer of recompacted clay or other natural
 materials at least 2 feet thick with hydraulic conductivity of no more
 than 1 x 10-7 centimeter per second.
 `(3) Municipal solid waste incinerators in existence on the date of the
 enactment of the Pollution Prevention, Community Recycling, and Incinerator
 Control Act shall meet the requirements of paragraph (2) not later than
 3 years after such date of enactment.
 `(4) As of the date of the enactment of the Pollution Prevention, Community
 Recycling, and Incinerator Control Act, the utilization of municipal solid
 waste incinerator ash for any purpose is prohibited.
 `(5) For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply:
 `(A) The term `ash from municipal solid waste incinerators' means the
 residues resulting from the combustion of municipal solid waste in a
 municipal solid waste incinerator.
 `(B) The term `municipal solid waste incinerator' means a distinct operating
 unit of any facility which combusts any solid waste material from commercial
 or industrial establishments or the general public (including single and
 multiple residences, hotels, and motels). Such term does not include (i)
 incinerators or other units required to have a permit under section 3005;
 (ii) materials recovery facilities (including primary or secondary smelters)
 which combust waste for the primary purpose of recovering metals; (iii)
 qualifying small power production facilities, as defined in section 3(17)(C)
 of the Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 769(17)(C), which burn homogeneous waste
 (other than refuse-derived fuel) for the production of electric energy;
 (iv) air curtain incinerators provided that such incinerators only burn
 wood wastes, yard wastes and clean lumber and that such air curtain
 incinerators comply with opacity limitations to be established by the
 Administrator by rule; or (v) incinerators or other units that burn only
 infectious medical waste.'.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITION ON INCINERATION OF CERTAIN MATERIALS.
 (a) PROHIBITION- Section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42
 U.S.C. 6921) is further amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(k) PROHIBITION ON INCINERATION OF CERTAIN MATERIALS- The following
 materials and products may not be incinerated in a municipal solid waste
 incinerator:
 `(1) Household hazardous waste.
 `(2) Batteries.
 `(3) Chlorinated plastics.
 `(4) Consumer electronics.
 `(5) Yard waste.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- Subsection (k) of section 3001 of the Solid Waste
 Disposal Act (as added by subsection (a)) shall take effect 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 5. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO HAZARDOUS WASTE INCINERATORS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO SUBTITLE C- Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6921 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 3021. HAZARDOUS WASTE INCINERATORS.
 `(a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS- Effective on the date of the enactment of
 the Pollution Prevention, Community Recycling, and Incinerator Control
 Act, no Federal agency, State or local government, or any other waste
 management jurisdiction may issue a permit or other prior approval for
 the construction or expansion of a hazardous waste incinerator unless the
 following requirements are met:
 `(1) The applicant for the permit or other prior approval, and all generators
 of waste expected to be incinerated at the facility, shall conduct waste
 composition analyses that identify and quantify all the waste expected to
 be incinerated at the facility, including all toxic or hazardous substances
 in the waste.
 `(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the toxics use reduction
 requirements of subsection (b) have been met.
 `(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will not interfere
 with, divert resources from, or otherwise serve as a disincentive to,
 aggressive implementation of the toxics use reduction requirements of
 subsection (b).
 `(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will not adversely
 affect the environment or human health as a consequence of--
 `(A) exposure to air emissions or incinerator ash through inhalation;
 `(B) ingestion of food contaminated by air emissions or incinerator ash as
 a consequence of incorporation of such ash or emissions into the food chain;
 `(C) ingestion of potable water or aquatic organisms contaminated by surface
 water discharges, surface runoff, leaching, or percolation of air emissions
 or incinerator ash into ground water or surface water;
 `(D) ingestion or inhalation of soil particles contaminated with air
 emissions or incinerator ash; or
 `(E) dermal contact with air emissions or incinerator ash.
 `(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will not harm the
 local economy, including a demonstration that it will not negatively affect
 property values.
 `(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that there is no safer disposal or
 treatment technology available for any of the wastes.
 `(7) The Federal agency, State or local government, or other waste management
 jurisdiction shall conduct a full public participation process, including
 public hearings, to address the proposed facility. As part of the process,
 the applicant shall provide to local community groups concerned about the
 project a technical assistance grant of at least $50,000. The applicant
 shall renew the grant every six months after the initial grant is made
 until the date final action is completed by each Federal agency, State or
 local government, or other waste management jurisdiction on each permit
 for construction or expansion of the facility.
 `(8) The proposed construction or expansion must be approved by the unit
 of local government in whose boundaries the facility would be sited.
 `(9) The applicant shall demonstrate the following with respect to the
 applicant, any firm engaged to operate the facility, the parent firm of
 the applicant and any firm engaged to operate the facility, and any firms
 controlled by the parent firm or the operating firm or the applicant:
 `(A) Each such entity is in compliance with Federal and State environmental
 and public health statutes and regulations.
 `(B) Each such entity has paid all outstanding fines or penalties for
 violations of such statutes or regulations.
 `(C) Each such entity has made available to the public at the site, and
 at local public libraries in the jurisdiction where the facility would be
 sited, a disclosure statement. The disclosure statement shall include the
 following information with respect to the entity:
 `(i) A list of each conviction of fraud or any criminal offense during
 the previous 10 years in connection with obtaining or attempting to obtain
 a contract.
 `(ii) A list of each conviction of a violation of a State or Federal
 anti-trust law during the previous 10 years, including convictions relating
 to unlawful price-fixing, allocation of customers among competitors,
 and bid-rigging.
 `(iii) A list of each citation for a permit violation under a Federal,
 State, or local environmental statute during the previous 5 years.
 `(iv) A list of each citation for failure to conduct proper cleanup,
 reclamation, or closure of a site or forfeiture of a bond for such a
 failure during the previous 5 years.
 `(10) The applicant shall complete, after public notice and comment,
 an environmental impact statement. Such statement shall be conducted in
 the same manner and in conformance with the same standards required for
 environmental impact statements under the National Environmental Policy Act
 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) and must be approved by the State.
 `(b) TOXICS USE REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS- (1) For purposes of subsection
 (a)(2), an applicant for a permit, and each generator of waste expected to
 be incinerated at the facility, shall demonstrate that each such generator
 has completed and made available to the public, and intends to complete
 and make available each subsequent year, a report on the use of toxic
 or hazardous substances at the generator's facility and the reduction of
 the use of such substances during the preceding year at the generator's
 facility. The report shall include, at a minimum, the following:
 `(A) A materials accounting for each toxic or hazardous substance used in
 each production unit of the generator's facility and for the facility as
 a whole.
 `(B) An evaluation of options for reducing the use of toxic and hazardous
 substances in each production unit of the generator's facility.
 `(C) Two- and five-year goals, by toxic and hazardous substance,
 for reducing the use of each substance in each production unit of the
 generator's facility and in the facility as a whole.
 `(D) A schedule for implementing the goals referred to in subparagraph (C).
 `(E) A statement signed by an independent expert certifying that, to the
 expert's best knowledge and belief, the report prepared by the generator
 is true, complete, accurate, and prepared under a proper data accounting
 and planning system.
 `(2) For purposes of subsection (a)(2), an applicant for a permit shall
 demonstrate that the State in which the facility is located, and each State
 in which generators of waste expected to be incinerated at the facility
 are located, has established and is implementing a toxics use reduction
 program that includes, at a minimum, the following requirements:
 `(A) The program must be designed to achieve, within 5 years after the date
 the program is established, at least a 50 percent reduction, from the base
 year, in the amount of toxic or hazardous substances entering the hazardous
 waste stream prior to treatment, recycling, handling, disposal, or release.
 `(B) The program must require generators of hazardous waste to develop a
 plan for reducing their toxic or hazardous substance use.
 `(C) The program must require each generator of hazardous waste to publicly
 report on materials accounting for each production unit of the generator's
 facility and the facility as a whole.
 `(c) APPLICABILITY- This section applies to any facility that burns hazardous
 waste, including cement kilns and other industrial furnaces and boilers.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the following definitions
 apply:
 `(1) The term `base year' means any calendar year, not earlier than 1989,
 for which a State has complete and adequate information on the generation
 of toxic or hazardous substances entering the hazardous waste stream,
 prior to treatment, recycling, handling, disposal, or release.
 `(2) The term `toxic or hazardous substance' means--
 `(A) a substance on the list described in section 313(c) of the Emergency
 Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(c));
 `(B) any chemical for which a Federal or State law requires reporting
 similar to section 313 of such Act but which is not otherwise covered
 under subparagraph (A);
 `(C) any hazardous constituent of hazardous wastes identified under
 regulations promulgated under this subtitle and listed in sections 261.33(e),
 261.33(f), and Appendix VIII of part 261 of title 40 of the Code of Federal
 Regulations; and
 `(D) any priority pollutant listed under regulations relating to steam
 electric power point source pollutants under the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1311 et seq.) (as listed in Appendix A of section
 423 of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations).
 `(3)(A) The term `toxics use reduction' means any change in a production
 process or activity, raw material, or product, that reduces or eliminates
 the use of any toxic or hazardous substance, or the amount of any toxic or
 hazardous substance entering any waste stream or otherwise released to the
 environment (including fugitive emissions and hazardous secondary materials),
 prior to recycling, treatment, disposal, handling, or release, without
 creating or increasing risks to the public health, workers, consumers,
 or the environment. The term includes production equipment or technology
 modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw
 materials, changes in production processes or procedures, and improvements
 in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control.
 `(B) The term does not include (i) any waste management or pollution control
 activity, or any other practice which alters the physical, chemical,
 or biological characteristics, or the volume, of a toxic or hazardous
 substance through a process or activity which itself is not integral to and
 necessary for the production of a product or the providing of a service;
 (ii) recycling without the use of in-process, in-line, or closed-loop
 recycling methods according to standard engineering practices and that
 is not integral to and necessary for the production of the product within
 the original production unit; or (iii) the use of a byproduct as hazardous
 secondary material, as a product, or as a constituent of a product.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle C of such Act
 (contained in section 1001 of such Act) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new item:
`Sec. 3021. Hazardous waste incinerators.'.