S 30 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 30
To provide for certain requirements relating to the conversion of oil shale
mining claims located under the General Mining Law of 1872 to leases, and
for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 25 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. WIRTH (for himself, Mr. JOHNSTON, and Mr. BUMPERS) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources
A BILL
To provide for certain requirements relating to the conversion of oil shale
mining claims located under the General Mining Law of 1872 to leases, and
for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act shall be known as
 the `Oil Shale Mining Claims Conversion Act'.
 SEC. 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, with respect to any oil
 shale mining claim located prior to enactment of the Mineral Leasing Act
 of 1920 (30 U.S.C. 181, et seq.; 41 Stat. 437), no patent for such claim
 shall be issued after January 25, 1989, except for those claims for which
 a patent application had been filed and all requirements for a patent had
 been fully complied with by such date.
 SEC. 3. (a) The owner of any valid oil shale mining claim located pursuant
 to the General Mining Law of 1872, as amended (30 U.S.C. 22, et seq.;
 17 Stat. 91) prior to enactment of the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920
 shall make an election under subsection (b) or subsection (c) of this
 section. The election shall be made within one hundred and eighty days
 after the enactment of this Act. Failure to make an election within such
 period shall be deemed conclusively to constitute an abandonment of the
 oil shale claim. Not later than thirty days after the enactment of this
 subsection, the Secretary shall notify the owner of each such claim of
 the election required under this subsection.
 (b) The holder of a claim required to make an election under this section
 may elect to convert such claim to a lease. Such lease shall be issued
 within sixty days after any such election and administered in accordance
 with those provisions of the Mineral Leasing Act, as amended, applicable
 to leases for deposits of oil shale, except as follows:
 (1) The term of the lease shall be for twenty years and for so long
 thereafter as shale oil is produced annually in commercial quantities from
 the lease;
 (2) the acreage limitations contained in section 21(a) (30 U.S.C. 241(a))
 shall not apply;
 (3) the first and second provisos of section 21(a) shall not apply;
 (4) the limitation on the number of leases to be granted to any one person,
 association, or corporation contained in section 21(a) shall not apply; and
 (5) the royalty shall be not less than 12 1/2 per centum in amount or
 value of production removed or sold from the lease.
 (c) The holder of a claim required to make an election under this section
 may elect to maintain the claim by complying with the mining laws of the
 United States and with the provisions of this Act, including the following:
 (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, commencing with the date of
 enactment of this provision, on each claim $1,000 worth of labor shall be
 performed or improvements made during each and every year. The failure to
 fulfill this requirement each and every year shall be deemed conclusively
 to constitute an abandonment of the oil shale mining claim.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in addition to the
 requirements set forth in section 314 of the Federal Land Policy and
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1744; 90 Stat. 2769), the owner of an
 unpatented oil shale mining claim shall file annually in the office of the
 Bureau of Land Management designated by the Secretary of the Interior an
 affidavit of assessment work performed thereon. The failure to file the
 affidavit shall be deemed conclusively to constitute an abandonment of
 the oil shale mining claim.
 SEC. 4. The Mineral Leasing Act, as amended (30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.;
 41 Stat. 437) is amended by inserting after section 44, the following
 new section:
`SEC. 45. PROHIBITION ON LEASE ISSUANCE.
 `The Secretary shall not issue, or approve the assignment of, a lease or
 leases under the terms of this Act to any person, association, corporation,
 or any subsidiary, affiliate, or person controlled by or under common
 control with such person, association, or corporation, where any such
 entity holds an oil shale mining claim located under the General Mining
 Law of 1872 (30 U.S.C. 22, et seq.; 17 Stat. 91).'.
 SEC. 5. In addition to other applicable requirements, any person who holds a
 lease pursuant to subsection 3(b) of this Act or who maintains an oil shale
 mining claim pursuant to subsection 3(c) of this Act shall be required to
 reclaim the site subject to such lease or claim and to post a bond before
 disturbance of the site to guarantee such reclamation. Any person who
 holds a lease issued or readjusted pursuant to section 21 of the Mineral
 Lands Leasing Act of 1920 after the date of enactment of this Act shall
 also be subject to such requirements. The Secretary of the Interior shall
 promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to implement this section.