HR 3919 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3919
To establish the Federal Fuels Stabilization Board.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 30, 1990
Mr. TRAFICANT (for himself and Mr. APPLEGATE) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To establish the Federal Fuels Stabilization Board.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established the Federal Fuels Stabilization Board (hereafter in
 this Act referred to as the `Board').
SEC. 2. DUTIES.
 The Board shall--
 (1) carry out a continuing review of prices of home heating oil, gasoline,
 and diesel fuels on a region-by-region basis and, if necessary to provide
 for equitable prices in cases of significant price increases in such fuels,
 issue an order imposing price limitations on such fuels;
 (2) provide for an equitable uniform surcharge, in the case of increases
 in diesel fuel prices, over and above suggested tariff rates on the price
 of goods shipped by diesel truck, with such surcharge being paid to the
 purchaser of the diesel fuel used in transporting such goods;
 (3) investigate allegations of price-fixing or other collusive practices
 with regard to home heating oil, gasoline, and diesel fuel prices and
 refer any evidence of such practices to the United States Department of
 Justice for prosecution under the antitrust laws of the United States; and
 (4) investigate the impact of price increases for home heating oil,
 gasoline, and diesel fuels on homeowners, travelers, and transporters.
SEC. 3. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) MEMBERS- Subject to the limitations set forth in paragraph (2), the
 Board shall be composed of 7 members appointed by the President.
 (2) LIMITATIONS-
 (A) PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN PETROLEUM INDUSTRY EMPLOYEES- No member appointed
 to the Board shall have been employed by the petroleum industry during
 the 2 year period preceding such appointment.
 (B) INVOLVEMENT OF CONSUMER ADVOCACY GROUPS- At least 3 members of the
 Board shall be individuals who are members of a consumer advocacy group
 dealing with environmental, homeowner, or transportation issues.
 (b) VACANCIES- A vacancy in the Board shall be filled in the manner in
 which the original appointment was made.
 (c) TERM OF APPOINTMENT- Members shall be appointed for terms of 3 years,
 except that 3 of the first 7 individuals shall be appointed to serve a
 term of 2 years.
 (d) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
 of the Board shall be designated by the President at the time of appointment.
 (e) COMPENSATION-
 (1) MEMBERS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Board
 shall each be paid at a rate equal to the rate of pay for level III of the
 Executive Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they
 are engaged in the performance of duties vested in the Board.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Members of the Board who are full-time officers or employees
 of the United States shall receive no additional pay or compensation by
 reason of their service on the Board.
SEC. 4. DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF BOARD; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
 (a) DIRECTOR- The Board shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title
 5, United States Code, have a Director appointed by the Board and paid at
 the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule.
 (b) STAFF-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The Board may appoint personnel as it considers appropriate
 without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing
 appointments to the competitive service.
 (2) PAY- The staff of the Board shall be paid in accordance with the
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United
 States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (c) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Board may procure temporary and intermittent
 services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
 (d) STAFF OF FEDERAL AGENCIES- Upon request of the Board, the head of any
 department or agency of the United States may detail, on a reimbursable
 basis, any of the personnel of that agency to the Board to assist the
 Board in carrying out its duties under this Act.
 (e) LIMITATIONS- The Board shall not appoint any individual to serve as
 Director or a member of the staff of the Board who has been employed by
 the petroleum industry during the 2 years preceding such appointment.
SEC. 5. POWERS OF BOARD.
 (a) HEARINGS- The Board may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act,
 hold hearings, sit and act at the times and places, take testimony,
 and receive evidence, as the Board considers appropriate. The Board may
 administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
 (b) INFORMATION- The Board may secure directly from any department or
 agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry
 out this Act. Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the
 Board, the head of a department or agency shall furnish the information
 to the Board to the extent permitted by law.
 (c) MAILS- The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the
 United States.
 (d) SUPPORT SERVICES- The Administrator of General Services shall provide
 to the Board, on a reimbursable basis, administrative support services as
 the Board may request.
SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.
 Whoever violates any order of the Board issued pursuant to section 2(1) shall
 be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $100,000 for each violation.
SEC. 7. TERMINATION.
 The Board shall continue until terminated by law.