S 2320 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2320
To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide universal health care to
all Americans, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 5 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. WELLSTONE (for himself, Mr. METZENBAUM, and Mr. SIMON) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide universal health care to
all Americans, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as `Universal Health Care Act
 of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. National health insurance program.
Sec. 3. Financing.
Sec. 4. Termination of other programs.
Sec. 5. Effective date for benefits.
SEC. 2. NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- The Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating title XXVII (42 U.S.C. 300cc et seq.) as title
 XXVIII; and
 (2) by inserting after title XXVI the following new title:
`TITLE XXVII--NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM
`Part A--Eligibility and Entitlement
`SEC. 2701. ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Every individual who is a resident of the United States
 and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (c)) is entitled to health insurance benefits
 under this title for each month in which the individual meets such condition.
 `(b) Treatment of Certain Nonimmigrants-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make eligible to enroll for coverage
 for health benefits under this title such classes of aliens admitted to
 the United States as nonimmigrants as the Secretary may provide.
 `(2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1),
 the Secretary shall consider reciprocity in health care benefits offered
 to individuals described in subsection (a) who are nonimmigrants in other
 foreign states, and such other factors as the Secretary deems appropriate.
 `(c) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- In this section, the term `lawful
 resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and
 any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States under
 color of law, including an alien granted asylum or with lawful temporary
 resident status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and
 Nationality Act.
`SEC. 2702. ENROLLMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide a mechanism for the enrollment
 of individuals entitled to benefits under this title and, in conjunction
 with such enrollment, the issuance of a national health insurance card
 which may be used for purposes of identification and processing of claims
 for benefits under this title.
 `(b) ENROLLMENT AT BIRTH OR IMMIGRATION- The mechanism under subsection
 (a) shall include a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals
 at the time of birth in the United States or at the time of immigration
 into the United States or other acquisition of lawful resident status in
 the United States. Such mechanism shall also provide for the enrollment
 of eligible individuals as of January 1, 1994.
`Part B--Benefits
`SEC. 2711. SCOPE OF BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in the succeeding provisions of this
 part, the benefits provided to an individual by the program established
 by this title shall consist of entitlement to have payment made on
 the individual's behalf for benefits necessary or appropriate for the
 maintenance of health or for the diagnosis or treatment or rehabilitation
 following injury, disability or disease, as follows:
 `(1) Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for a
 mental disorder and drug and alcohol abuse treatment services are subject
 to the special limitations described in paragraphs (11) and (12).
 `(2) Services of health care professionals who are authorized to provide
 such services under State law, except that treatment for a mental disorder
 and drug and alcohol abuse treatment services are subject to the special
 limitations described in paragraphs (11) and (12).
 `(3) Diagnostic testing services.
 `(4) Pre-natal, post-natal and well-baby care.
 `(5)(A) Preventive services in accordance with a schedule to be established
 by the Secretary in consultation with experts in preventive medicine and
 public health and taking into consideration those preventive services
 recommended by the Preventive Services Task Force and published as the
 Guide to Clinical Preventive Services. Such schedule shall include the
 periodicity with which the preventive services shall be provided, taking
 into consideration the cost-effectiveness of appropriate preventive care. At
 a minimum such schedule shall include--
 `(i) well-child care;
 `(ii) pap smears;
 `(iii) mammograms;
 `(iv) colorectal examinations; and
 `(v) examinations for prostate cancer.
 `(B) Such schedule shall be revised not less frequently than once every 5
 years, in consultation with experts in preventive medicine and public health.
 `(6) Prescription drugs and biologicals.
 `(7) Dental care.
 `(8) Vision care.
 `(9) Nursing facility services.
 `(10) Hospice care.
 `(11)(A) Inpatient care for a mental disorder, limited to 45 days per year,
 except that days of partial hospitalization or residential care may be
 substituted for days of inpatient care according to a ratio established
 by the Secretary.
 `(B) Outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder,
 limited to 20 visits per year provided by a provider who is acting within
 the scope of State law and who--
 `(i) is a physician; or
 `(ii) meets standards established by the Secretary and is a duly licensed
 or certified clinical psychologist, clinical social worker, or equivalent
 mental health professional, or a clinic or center providing duly licensed
 or certified mental health services.
 `(12) Drug and alcohol abuse or dependency treatment services provided under
 a treatment program approved by the State and meeting State qualification
 standards, subject to an annual limitation of 45 inpatient days and 20
 outpatient visits.
 `(13) Home and community-based services, limited to individuals--
 `(A) over 18 years of age determined (in a manner specified by the
 Secretary)--
 `(i) to be unable to perform, without the assistance of an individual,
 at least 2 of the following 5 activities of daily living (or who has a
 similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment)--
 `(I) bathing;
 `(II) eating;
 `(III) dressing;
 `(IV) toileting; and
 `(V) transferring in and out of a bed or in and out of a chair; or
 `(ii) due to cognitive or mental impairments, requires supervision because
 the individual behaves in a manner that poses health or safety hazards to
 himself or herself or others; or
 `(B) under 19 years of age determined (in a manner specified by the
 Secretary) to meet such alternative standard of disability for children
 as the Secretary develops.
 `(14) Such other medical or health care items or services as the Secretary
 determines to be appropriate.
 `(b) NO DEDUCTIBLES OR COINSURANCE- There shall be no coinsurance,
 deductibles, or copayments applicable to the covered benefits referred to
 in subsection (a).
 `(c) Certifications for Certain Services-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided with respect to eligible organizations
 under section 2772(a)(10), payment for services furnished an individual
 by a provider of services may be made only to providers of services which
 have entered into a participation agreement and only if the conditions
 described in section 1814(a) or 1835(a) of the Social Security Act have
 been met with respect to services to which such sections applied.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES- In applying--
 `(A) section 1814(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act as provided for
 under this subsection, in lieu of the certification described in that
 section with respect to post-hospital extended care services, there must
 be a certification with respect to nursing facility services that the
 services are or were required to be given because the individual needs or
 needed nursing care or skilled rehabilitation services which as a practice
 matter can only be provided in a nursing facility on an inpatient basis; and
 `(B) section 1814(a)(2)(C) of such Act as provided for under this subsection,
 the certifications that the individual is or was confined to the individual's
 home and that the care be on an intermittent basis shall not apply.
 `(3) CERTIFICATION FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- With respect to
 home and community-based services, there shall be required a certification of
 the type described in section 1814(a) of the Social Security Act as to the
 facts that the individual provided the service is within the limitations
 described in subsection (a)(13) and, except for the provision of such
 services, is at risk of institutionalization.
 `(d) STATE FINANCING OF SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES- An individual State, acting
 under section 2731(c), may at the option of such State provide for the
 coverage of additional health benefits or for the expanded eligibility
 of persons entitled to health insurance benefits. The cost of any such
 additional benefits or expanded eligibility shall be absorbed by the
 individual State and not by the Federal Government.
 `(e) MENTAL HEALTH-
 `(1) COMMISSION- The Secretary shall establish a commission to study and
 prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report
 containing recommendations concerning the manner in which the benefits
 for mental disorders and drug and alcohol abuse or dependency treatment
 services should be modified to best meet the objectives of this title.
 `(2) COMPOSITION- The Secretary shall, not later than January 1, 1993,
 appoint individuals to serve on the commission established under paragraph
 (1). Such commission shall be composed of--
 `(A) health care economists,
 `(B) representatives of the multi-disciplinary range of providers of the
 services described in paragraph (1);
 `(C) consumers of such services; and
 `(D) advocacy groups representing consumers of such services.
`SEC. 2712. EXCLUSIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions
 of section 1862 of the Social Security Act shall apply to payments made
 under this title in the same manner as such provisions apply to payments
 made under part A or part B of title XVIII of such Act.
 `(b) EXCEPTIONS- Under this title, the limitations specified in paragraphs
 (7) and (12) of section 1862(a) of the Social Security Act and the provisions
 of section 1862(b) of such Act shall not apply, and the limitations under
 paragraph (1) of such section 1862(b) shall not apply to preventive health
 services that the Secretary determines to be appropriate for the prevention
 of illness or disease.
`SEC. 2713. APPROVED PRESCRIPTION DRUGS, DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF LIST- The Secretary shall establish a list of
 approved prescription drugs and biologicals, durable medical equipment and
 therapeutic devices and equipment (including eyeglasses, hearing aids,
 and prosthetic appliances), that the Secretary determines are important
 for the maintenance or restoration of health or of employability or
 self-management and eligible for coverage under this title.
 `(b) CONSIDERATIONS AND CONDITIONS- In establishing the list under subsection
 (a), the Secretary shall take into consideration the efficacy, safety and
 cost of each item contained on such list, and shall attach to any item
 such conditions as the Secretary determines appropriate with respect to
 the circumstances under which, or the frequency with which, the item may
 be prescribed.
 `(c) EXCLUSIONS- The Secretary may exclude reimbursement under this title
 for ineffective, unsafe or overpriced products where better alternatives
 are determined to be available.
`Part C--Payments
`SEC. 2721. PAYMENTS FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES AND NURSING FACILITY SERVICES.
 `(a) Based on Approved Budget-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of hospital services and nursing facility
 services, payment under this title shall be based on an annual budget for
 the operating expenses of the institution that shall be submitted to, and
 approved by, the Secretary (or the State in accordance with section 2731(c))
 in a form and manner specified by the Secretary. Such approved budgets--
 `(A) shall take into account amounts that are reasonable and necessary
 in the efficient provision of necessary hospital services and nursing
 facility services;
 `(B) shall not include amounts properly allocable to services that are
 not hospital services or nursing facility services, respectively;
 `(C) shall be consistent with the national and State health budgets
 established by the Secretary; and
 `(D) shall not include capital-related items and direct medical education.
Payment under such budget shall only be changed to reflect changes in the
volume or type of services if such changes are significantly different than
the volume or type of such services assumed in the approval of the budget.
 `(2) PERIODIC PAYMENTS- The provisions of section 1815 of the Social
 Security Act (other than subsection (e)) shall apply to payments under
 this title in the same manner as they applied to payments under part A of
 title XVIII of such Act.
 `(3) SUBMITTAL TO STATE ADVISORY BOARDS- Each hospital, nursing facility,
 or other institutional provider shall submit the budget of such institution
 to the State advisory board (appointed under section 2736) for the State
 in which the institution is located prior to the approval of such budget
 by the Secretary (or the State under section 2731(c)).
 `(b) BUDGETING FOR CAPITAL AND MEDICAL EDUCATION EXPENDITURES- Items
 in budgets prepared under subsection (a) for capital-related items and
 for direct medical education shall only be approved if such amounts are
 consistent with the portion of the national and State health budgets
 established under subsections (c) and (d) of section 2732.
 `(c) MODIFICATION OF THE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT ASSESSMENT COMMISSION- The
 Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, instead of conducting activities
 described in section 1886 of the Social Security Act, shall advise the
 Secretary concerning the approval of budgets under this section and shall
 annually prepare and submit to the Congress and the Secretary a report
 containing the recommendations of the Commission concerning--
 `(1) the most appropriate manner in which the budget approval process
 should be modified to best meet the objectives of this title; and
 `(2) global budgets and fee schedules established under section 2723 for
 the payment of facility-based outpatient services.
`SEC. 2722. PAYMENTS FOR OTHER FACILITY-BASED SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Payment under this title for home health services, hospice
 care, home and community-based services, and facility-based outpatient
 services (other than those described in section 2721) shall be based on--
 `(1) a budget (of the type described in section 2721(a)(1)) for the
 facility that is submitted to, and approved by, the Secretary (or State
 under section 2731(c)) in a form and manner specified by the Secretary;
 `(2) a fee schedule established by the Secretary;
 `(3) a capitation payment schedule that is submitted to, and approved by,
 the Secretary (or State under section 2731(c); or
 `(4) an alternative prospective payment method that is submitted to,
 and approved by, the Secretary (or State under section 2731(c)),
as selected by the facility for each reimbursement period and approved by the
Secretary (or State under section 2731(c)). Such payments shall not include
payments for capital-related items, except as provided in subsection (b).
 `(b) CONSIDERATION IN ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE SCHEDULES, ETC- A fee schedule,
 capitation schedule or alternative prospective payment method established
 under subsection (a)(2) for facility-based outpatient services shall--
 `(1) take into account the payment amounts established under section 2723
 for any related professional services; and
 `(2) provide an amount for capital-related costs if the costs are consistent
 with the national and State capital budgets established under section
 2732(c), but only in the case of services either--
 `(A) for which payment of a facility-related component is provided under
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act; or
 `(B) for which the Secretary determines that such a component is appropriate
 to assure access to outpatient services in appropriate facilities.
 `(c) LIMIT ON PAYMENT FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- Payments
 under this title for home and community-based services with respect to any
 individual may not exceed 65 percent of the average amount of payment that
 would have been made for the individual if the individual were a resident
 of a nursing facility in the same area in which the services are provided.
 `(d) LONG-TERM CARE PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION--
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment shall provide for the appointment of a Long-Term Care Payment
 Review Commission (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the
 `Commission') to be composed of individuals with national recognition for
 their expertise in health care economics and related fields for nursing
 facility services, home health services, hospice care, and home and
 community-based services.
 `(B) APPOINTMENTS- Members of the Commission shall first be appointed
 not later than January 1, 1993, for a term of 3 years, except that the
 Director may provide initially for such shorter terms as will insure that
 (on a continuing basis) the terms of no more than one-third of the number
 of members expire in any year. Appointments shall be made without regard
 to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments
 in the competitive service.
 `(C) MEMBERSHIP- Members of the Commission shall include health care
 economists, representatives of providers and manufacturers of such services,
 and consumers of such services.
 `(2) FUNCTIONS- The Commission shall advise the Secretary concerning the
 payment amounts for long-term care established under section 2721 and
 this section and shall annually prepare and submit to Congress and the
 Secretary an annual report containing the recommendations of the Commission
 concerning the manner in which global budgets and fee schedules should be
 modified to best meet the objectives of this title.
 `(e) ENSURING THE PROVISION OF OPERATING FUNDS- In determining the rate
 of reimbursement under this section, and in developing and implementing a
 payment system for providers, the Secretary (or the State in accordance with
 section 2731(c)) shall permit a reasonable, fixed rate of return, independent
 of those operating expenses necessary to fulfill the objectives of this
 title. The Secretary (or the State in accordance with section 2731(c))
 shall ensure that no portion of payments received under this section,
 in excess of that portion attributable to such reasonable rate of return,
 shall be diverted to profits.
`SEC. 2723. PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES OF HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Payment under this title for the services of health care
 professionals shall be based on a fee schedule established by the Secretary.
 `(b) USE OF NATIONAL RELATIVE VALUE SCALE- Such schedule shall--
 `(1) vary the payment amount among different services based on the relative
 value of the input factors to provide the services;
 `(2) vary among different areas, for the portion of the payment relating
 to the goods and services provided, based on reasonable differences in
 the prices for goods and services among the different areas; and
 `(3) be consistent with the national health budget established by the
 Secretary.
In establishing such schedule, the Secretary shall take into account the
fee schedules established under section 1848 of the Social Security Act,
without regard to the update factor provided under that section.
 `(c) MODIFICATION OF THE PHYSICIAN PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION-
 `(1) REDESIGNATION- The Commission established under section 1845 of the
 Social Security Act is renamed the `Professional Payment Review Commission'
 (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Commission') and is
 continued for purposes of carrying out this subsection.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL MEMBERS- The Director of the Congressional Office of
 Technology Assessment shall increase the membership of the Commission to
 such number as may be necessary to include the representation of nurses
 and other health care professionals whose services are paid for on the
 basis of a relative-value fee schedule established under this section,
 and shall consult with the Physician Payment Review Commission, the General
 Health Care Review Commission, and other appropriate provider organizations.
 `(3) ALTERNATIVE FUNCTIONS- The Commission, instead of conducting activities
 of the type described in section 1845 of the Social Security Act, shall
 advise the Secretary concerning the fee schedules established under this
 section and shall annually prepare and submit to Congress and the Secretary
 a report containing recommendations concerning the manner in which fee
 schedules should be modified to best meet the objectives of this title.
`SEC. 2724. PAYMENTS FOR OTHER ITEMS AND SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Payment under this title for items and services not
 described in section 2723 shall be made on the basis of fee schedules
 established by the Secretary consistent with the national health budget
 established by the Secretary. In establishing such schedules, the Secretary
 shall consult with the Commission established under subsection (b).
 `(b) General Health Care Payment Review Commission-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment shall provide for the appointment of a General Health Care
 Payment Review Commission (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the
 `Commission'), to be composed of individuals with national recognition for
 their expertise in health care economics and related fields for items and
 services for which payment is made under a fee schedule established under
 this section, representatives of providers and manufacturers of such items
 and services, and representatives of consumers of these items and services.
 `(B) APPOINTMENTS- Members of the Commission shall first be appointed
 not later than January 1, 1993, for a term of 3 years, except that the
 Director may provide initially for such shorter terms as will insure that
 (on a continuing basis) the terms of no more than one-third of the number
 of members expire in any year. Appointments shall be made without regard
 to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments
 in the competitive service.
 `(C) MEMBERSHIP- Membership on the Commission shall include health care
 economists, representatives of providers and manufacturers of such items
 and services, and representatives of consumers of these items and services.
 `(2) FUNCTIONS- The Commission shall advise the Secretary concerning the
 fee schedules established under this section and shall annually prepare and
 submit to Congress and the Secretary a report containing recommendations
 on the manner in which fee schedules should be modified to best meet the
 objectives of this title.
`SEC. 2725. USE OF FISCAL AGENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary (or the State in accordance with section
 2731(c)), through the use of competitive bidding procedures, may enter
 into such contracts with qualified entities as the Secretary (or the State
 in accordance with section 2731(c)) determines to be appropriate for the
 processing of claims under this title. The Secretary may provide for a
 process for entering into separate contracts under this section for claims
 processing under this title, but in no case may more than one contract be
 entered into for any State.
 `(b) FUNCTIONS- Under contracts entered into under this section, the entity
 with which the contract is entered into may carry out such functions as
 are authorized for fiscal intermediaries and carriers under title XVIII
 of the Social Security Act as the Secretary (or the State in accordance
 with section 2731(c)) determines to be appropriate.
`SEC. 2726. MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Payments for benefits under this title shall constitute
 payment in full for such benefits and the entity furnishing an item or
 service for which payment is made under this title shall accept such
 payment as payment in full for the item or service and may not accept
 any payment or impose any charge for any such item or service other than
 accepting payment in accordance with this title.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT- If an entity knowingly and willfully charges an individual
 for an item or service or accepts payment in violation of subsection (a),
 the Secretary may apply sanctions against the entity in the same manner as
 sanctions could have been imposed under section 1842(j)(2) of the Social
 Security Act for a violation of section 1842(j)(1) of such Act.
`SEC. 2727. NO PAYMENTS TO MOST FEDERAL PROVIDERS OF SERVICES.
 `No payment may be made under this title to any Federal provider of services
 (other than such a provider of the Indian Health Service and other than
 such a provider of the Department of Veterans Affairs) which the Secretary
 determines is providing services to the public generally as a community
 institution or agency, and no such payment may be made to any provider
 of services for any item or service which such provider is obligated by
 a law of, or a contract with, the United States to render at public expense.
`SEC. 2728. REPORTING SYSTEMS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM- Not later than January 1, 1993, the Secretary
 shall establish a system for the reporting, by hospitals and other providers
 of services under this title, of information (including information on
 patient care) sufficient to provide for the review and approval of budgets
 of hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, and other facilities under this
 part and the development of fee schedules for services under this part.
 `(b) BASIS- The system established under subsection (a) shall be based
 on the standardized electronic cost reporting format placed into effect
 under section 1886(f)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act and the uniform
 reporting standards established under section 4007(c) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1987.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT- Notwithstanding any other provision of this title,
 a hospital or other provider of services under this title that fails to
 file reports on a timely basis in accordance with the system established
 under this section shall not be eligible for payments under this title.
`SEC. 2729. RURAL AND MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.
 `In establishing payment procedures for providers under this part the
 Secretary (or State under section 2731(c)) shall construct such schedules
 in a manner that would encourage providers to practice or locate in rural
 and medically underserved areas.
`Part D--Administration
`SEC. 2731. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 `(a) THROUGH HCFA- The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the
 Health Care Financing Administration, shall administer the program under
 this title.
 `(b) USE OF STATE-LEVEL OFFICES- The Secretary shall provide for the
 establishment or designation of an office in each State that shall be
 responsible for the administration of this title in that State.
 `(c) USE OF STATES- If a State submits a request to the Secretary to
 administer this title in that State, the Secretary shall provide for the
 State administration of the provisions of this title within that State as
 the Secretary determines appropriate to meet the objectives of this title,
 unless and until the State fails to comply with such requirements. A State
 with a request approved under this subsection shall have the authority to
 establish operating budgets, capitation rates or alternative prospective
 payment methods for providers in the State. Any State administering this
 title under a request approved under this subsection shall submit its State
 budget (including individual institutional budgets) to the Secretary to
 assure compliance with the national health budget and this title.
`SEC. 2732. NATIONAL AND STATE HEALTH BUDGETS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- For each calendar year the Secretary shall establish a
 national health budget and, for each State, a State health budget that
 specifies--
 `(1) the level and application of expenditures to be made under this title
 in the year in the United States and in the State, respectively; and
 `(2) the amount in and source of revenues of the National Health Trust
 Fund in such year.
Each State health budget established by the Secretary under this subsection
shall be based solely on--
 `(A) the population of the State;
 `(B) reasonable differences in the prices for goods and services;
 `(C) any special social, environmental, or other condition affecting health
 status or the need for health care services; and
 `(D) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly
 the proportion of the population residing in rural or medically underserved
 areas.
 `(b) EXPENDITURE LEVEL- The total level of expenditures to be specified in
 the national health budget under subsection (a) for a year may not exceed
 the level of expenditures for covered benefits under this title made in the
 year preceding the effective date of this title increased in a compounded
 manner for each succeeding year (up to the year involved) by the annual
 percentage increase in the gross national product for the preceding year.
 `(c) INSTITUTIONAL CAPITAL BUDGET-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each national health budget established under subsection
 (a) shall include an amount for total expenditures for capital-related
 items, provide for State capital budgets and specify the general manner
 in which such expenditures for capital-related items are to be distributed
 among the different types of facilities.
 `(2) FACTORS- Each State capital budget under this section shall be
 established based solely on--
 `(A) the population of the State;
 `(B) reasonable differences in the prices for goods and services, as such
 differences affect the prices of the appropriate capital goods;
 `(C) any special social, environmental, or other condition affecting health
 status or the need for health care services; and
 `(D) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly
 the proportion of the population residing in rural or medically underserved
 areas.
 `(d) HEALTH TRAINING BUDGET- Each national health budget established under
 subsection (a) shall include an amount for total expenditures for direct
 medical education expenses for institutions receiving payments under budgets
 approved under section 2721 and for facility-based outpatient services
 for which payments are made under section 2722. Such budgets shall specify
 the general manner in which such expenditures are to be taken into account,
 shall be based on a national plan for training of medical personnel developed
 by the Secretary that shall emphasize training for primary and preventive
 care, and shall provide for State budgets for direct medical education
 expenses. Payments under such budgets for such expenditures shall take
 into account the method for payment for direct medical education expenses
 as described in section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act.
`SEC. 2733. NATIONAL HEALTH TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `National Health
 Trust Fund' (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund')
 that shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made as provided
 in section 201(i)(1) of the Social Security Act and such amounts as may
 be deposited in, or appropriate to, such fund as provided for in this part.
 `(b) Appropriations into Trust Fund-
 `(1) TAXES- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund for each fiscal
 year (beginning with fiscal year 1994), out of any moneys in the Treasury
 not otherwise appropriated, amounts equivalent to 100 percent of--
 `(A) the taxes imposed by sections 3101(b), 3101(c), 3111(b), and 3111(c)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to wages reported to the
 Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate pursuant to subtitle F of such
 Code after January 1, 1994, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury
 by applying the applicable rates of tax under such sections to such wages
 (such wages shall be certified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 on the basis of records of wages established and maintained by the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services in accordance with such reports);
 `(B) the taxes imposed by sections 1401(b) and 1401(c) of such Code
 with respect to self-employment income reported to the Secretary of the
 Treasury on tax returns under subtitle F of such Code, as determined by
 the Secretary of the Treasury by applying the applicable rates of tax
 under such sections to such self-employment income (such self-employment
 income shall be certified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services on
 the basis of records of self-employment established and maintained by the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services in accordance with such returns); and
 `(C) the aggregate increase in tax liabilities under chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is attributable to the application of
 the amendments made by section 3(a) of the Universal Health Care Act of 1992.
The amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall be transferred
from time to time (but not less frequently than monthly) from the general
fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such amounts to be determined on the
basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the taxes, specified
in the preceding sentence, paid to or deposited into the Treasury. Proper
adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent
prior estimates were in excess of or were less than the taxes specified in
such sentence.
 `(2) STATE FUNDS- There are hereby appropriated into the Trust Fund such
 amounts as are paid by States under section 2734.
 `(3) LONG-TERM CARE/HEALTH CARE PREMIUMS- There are also transferred and
 deposited into the Trust Fund long-term care/health care premiums imposed
 under section 3(g) of the Universal Health Care Act of 1992.
 `(c) INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (b) through
 (i) of section 1817 of the Social Security Act shall apply to the Trust
 Fund under this title in the same manner as they applied to the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under part A of title XVIII of such Act.
 `(d) INCORPORATION OF OTHER TRUST FUNDS- Any amounts remaining in the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund after the settlement of claims for payments under title XVIII
 of the Social Security Act have been completed, shall be transferred into
 the National Health Trust Fund.
`SEC. 2734. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 `(a) CONDITION OF COVERAGE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 title, no individual who is a resident of a State is eligible for benefits
 under this title for a month in a calendar year, unless the State provides
 (in a manner and at a time specified by the Secretary) for payment to the
 National Health Trust Fund in the month of the sum of--
 `(1) the product of $7.083 and the number of residents who are residents
 of the State and otherwise eligible for benefits under this title in the
 month; and
 `(2) 85 percent of 1/12 of the amount specified in subsection (b) for
 the year;
or, if less, 1/12 of the limiting amount specified in subsection (c).
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT- The amount of payment specified in
 this subsection for a State for a year is equal to the amount of payment
 (net of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title
 XIX of the Social Security Act for the year preceding the effective date
 of this title, increased for the year involved by the compounded sum of
 the percentage increase in the gross national product of the State for
 each year after that year and up to the year before the year involved.
 `(c) LIMITING AMOUNT- For purposes of subsection (a), the limiting amount
 specified in this subsection--
 `(1) for 1994, is the total amount of payment made by a State (net of any
 Federal payments made to the State) for health care in 1993; or
 `(2) for any subsequent year, is the amount specified in this subsection
 for the State for the previous year increased for the year involved by the
 compounded sum of the percentage increase in the gross national product
 of the State for each year after 1992 and up to the year before the year
 involved.
`SEC. 2735. NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Director' and the
 `Office', respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a National
 Health Advisory Board (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Board')
 to advise the Secretary respecting the implementation of this title. Members
 of the Board shall first be appointed no later than January 1, 1992, for
 a term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide initially for such
 shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing basis) the terms of no
 more than 7 members expire in any year.
 `(b) COMPOSITION- The Board shall be composed of 21 individuals, appointed
 by the Director (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States
 Code, governing appointments in the competitive service). Such individuals
 shall include persons with national recognition for their expertise in health
 and related fields, physicians and other health professionals, administrators
 of health care facilities, providers of nonprofessional items and services,
 health care economists, and representatives of consumers of health care.
`SEC. 2736. STATE ADVISORY BOARDS.
 `(a) Appointment-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For each State, the Secretary (or the Governor, in
 accordance with section 2731(c)) shall provide for appointment of a State
 advisory board (hereafter referred to in this section as the `board')
 to advise the Secretary respecting the implementation of this title in
 the State.
 `(2) BUDGET REVIEW- Each board shall review, and submit comments to
 the Secretary concerning, budgets of hospitals, nursing facilities, and
 other institutional providers in the State submitted for approval by the
 Secretary. Such review shall take into account the State health budgets
 to be established by the Secretary under section 2732.
 `(b) COMPOSITION- Each board shall be composed of 15 individuals, and
 shall include individuals who have expertise in health care as well as
 representatives of consumers, providers, and the State government. Each
 member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, except that members first
 appointed to each such board shall be appointed for such shorter terms
 as will assure (on a continuing basis) that the terms of no more than 5
 members expire in any year.
 `(c) CONSULTATION- Each board shall conduct its activities in consultation
 with the Governor of the State involved.
`Part E--Miscellaneous
`SEC. 2771. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) INCORPORATION OF MEDICARE DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided
 in this section, the definitions contained in section 1861 of the Social
 Security Act (other than subsections (v), (y), and (z)) shall apply for
 purposes of this title in the same manner as such definitions applied for
 purposes of title XVIII of such Act.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS- As used in this title:
 `(1) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- The term `home and community-based
 services' means the services described in paragraphs (1) through (9) of
 section 1929(a) of the Social Security Act provided by an entity certified
 as meeting the applicable standards specified in subsections (f), (g),
 and (h) of section 1929 of such Act pursuant to a plan of care.
 `(2) NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- The term `nursing facility services'
 has the meaning given the term extended care services in section 1861(h)
 of the Social Security Act if the word `skilled' were omitted throughout.
 `(3) NURSING FACILITY- The term `nursing facility' has the meaning given
 such term in section 1819(a) of the Social Security Act if paragraph
 (1) of section 1919(a) of such Act were substituted for paragraph (1)
 of that section.
`SEC. 2772. INCORPORATION OF MISCELLANEOUS MEDICARE-RELATED PROVISIONS.
 `(a) PROVISIONS IN TITLE XVIII- The following provisions of the Social
 Security Act shall apply to this title in the same manner as they applied
 to title XVIII of such Act as of the date of the enactment of this title:
 `(1) Section 1819 (relating to requirements for, and assuring quality of
 care in, skilled nursing facilities), except that--
 `(A) any reference in the section to a `skilled nursing facility' is deemed
 a reference to a `nursing facility'; and
 `(B) the term `nursing facility' has the meaning given such term in
 section 1919(a).
 `(2) Section 1846 (relating to intermediate sanctions for providers of
 clinical diagnostic laboratory tests).
 `(3) Sections 1863 through 1865 (relating to consultation with State agencies
 and other organizations to develop conditions of participation for providers
 of services, use of State agencies to determine compliance by providers
 of services with conditions of participation, and effect of accreditation).
 `(4)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1866 (relating to agreements
 with providers of services).
 `(B)(i) The provisions of section 1866(a)(1)(N) shall not apply.
 `(ii) Under section 1866(a)(2), a provider of services may not impose any
 charge for covered items and services under this title.
 `(iii) In the case of a hospital, the provider agreement under section
 1866 shall prohibit a hospital from denying care to any individual on any
 ground other than the hospital's inability to provide the care required.
 `(5) Section 1867 (relating to examination and treatment for emergency
 medical conditions and women in labor).
 `(6) Section 1869 (relating to determinations and appeals).
 `(7) Section 1870 (relating to overpayment on behalf of individuals and
 settlement of claims for benefits on behalf of deceased individuals).
 `(8) Sections 1871 through 1874 (relating to regulations, application of
 certain provisions of title II of the Social Security Act, designation of
 organization or publication by name, and administration).
 `(9)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1876 (relating to payments
 to health maintenance organizations and competitive medical plans) shall
 apply to individuals entitled to benefits under this title in the same
 manner as it applies to individuals entitled to benefits under part A,
 and enrolled under part B, of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(B) In applying section 1876 under this title--
 `(i) the provisions of such section relating only to individuals enrolled
 under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act shall not apply;
 `(ii) subject to subparagraph (C), any reference to a Trust Fund established
 under title XVIII of such Act and to benefits under such title is deemed a
 reference to the National Health Trust Fund and to benefits under this title;
 `(iii) subject to subparagraph (C), the adjusted average per capita cost
 and adjusted community rate shall be determined on the basis of benefits
 under this title; and
 `(iv) subsection (f) shall not apply.
 `(C) For purposes of subparagraph (B), benefits under this title may, at
 the option of an eligible organization, not include benefits for nursing
 facility services that are not post-hospital extended care services and
 benefits for home and community-based services.
 `(10) Section 1877 (relating to limitation on certain physician referrals).
 `(11) Section 1878 (relating to the provider reimbursement review board),
 except that the hearings pursuant to such section shall be on the approval
 of budgets under section 2721 of this title rather than the determination
 of payment amounts under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(12) Section 1891 (relating to conditions of participation for home health
 agencies; home health quality).
 `(13) Section 1892 (relating to offset of payments to individuals to collect
 past-due obligations arising from breach of scholarship and loan contract).
 `(b) TITLE XI PROVISIONS- The following provisions of the Social Security
 Act shall apply to this title in the same manner as they applied to title
 XVIII of such Act:
 `(1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud
 and abuse).
 `(2) Section 1134 (relating to nonprofit hospital philanthropy).
 `(3) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ procurement
 and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 `(4) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of health care services
 and procedures), except that any reference in such section to a Trust Fund
 is deemed a reference to the National Health Trust Fund.
 `(5) Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act (relating to peer review
 of the utilization and quality of health care services).
 `(c) OTHER PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (g) and (i) of section
 201 of the Social Security Act shall apply to this title and the National
 Health Trust Fund in the same manner as they applied to title XVIII of
 such Act and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
`SEC. 2773. PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE.
 `Private insurance for health care services may be offered or sold to
 cover only those health care benefits not covered under this title.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Sections 2701 through 2714 of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 300cc through 300cc-15) are redesignated as sections 2801 through
 2814, respectively.
 (2) Sections 465(f) and 497 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 286(f) and 289(f)) are
 amended by striking out `2701' each place that such appears and inserting
 in lieu thereof `2801'.
SEC. 3. FINANCING.
 (a) Increase in Top Corporate Income Tax Rate-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subparagraph (C) of section 1(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed on corporations) is amended by striking
 `34 percent' and inserting `38 percent'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
 (b) Increase in Individual Income Taxes-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1 of such Code (relating to tax imposed) as amended
 by striking subsections (a) through (e) and inserting the following:
 `(a) MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING JOINT RETURNS AND SURVIVING SPOUSES-
 There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of--
 `(1) every married individual (as defined in section 7703) who makes a
 single return jointly with his spouse under section 6013, and
 `(2) every surviving spouse (as defined in section 2(a)), a tax determined
 in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $32,450
15% of taxable income.
Over $32,450 but not over $78,400
$4,867.50, plus 30% of the excess over $32,450.
Over $78,400 but not over $200,000
$18,652.50, plus 34% of the excess over $78,400.
Over $200,000
$59,996.50 plus 38% of the excess over $200,000.
 `(b) HEADS OF HOUSEHOLDS- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income
 of every head of a household (as defined in section 2(b)) a tax determined
 in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $26,050
15% of taxable income.
Over $26,050 but not over $67,200
$3,907.50, plus 30% of the excess over $26,500.
Over $67,200 but not over $171,500
$16,252.50, plus 34% of the excess over $67,200.
Over 171,500
$51,714.50, plus 38% of the excess over $171,500.
 `(c) UNMARRIED INDIVIDUALS (OTHER THAN SURVIVING SPOUSES AND HEADS OF
 HOUSEHOLDS)- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of every
 individual (other than a surviving spouse as defined in section 2(a) or
 the head of a household as defined in section 2(b)) who is not a married
 individual (as defined in section 770) a tax determined in accordance with
 the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $19,450
15% of taxable income.
Over $19,450 but not over $47,050
$2,917.50, plus 30% of the excess over $19,450.
Over $47,050 but not over $120,000
$11,197.50, plus 34% of the excess over $47,050.
Over $120,000
$36,000.50, plus 38% of the excess over $120,000.
 `(d) MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING SEPARATE RETURNS- There is hereby imposed
 on the taxable income of every married individual (as defined in section
 7703) who does not make a single return jointly with his spouse under
 section 6013, a tax determined in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $16,225
15% of taxable income.
Over $16,225 but not over $39,200
$2,433.75, plus 30% of the excess over $16,225.
Over $39,200 but not over $100,000
$9,326.25, plus 34% of the excess over $39,200.
Over $100,000
$29,998.25, plus 38% of the excess over $100,000.
 `(e) ESTATES AND TRUSTS- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of--
 `(1) every estate, and
 `(2) every trust,
taxable under this subsection a tax determined in accordance with the
following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $5,450
15% of taxable income.
Over $5,450 but not over $14,150
$817.50, plus 30% of the excess over $5,450.
Over $14,150 but not over $25,000
$3,427.50, plus 34% of the excess over $14,150.
Over $25,000
$7,116.50, plus 38% of the excess over $25,000.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
 (c) INCREASE IN EMPLOYER HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX; REPEAL OF DOLLAR LIMITATION
 ON AMOUNT OF WAGES SUBJECT TO EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYER HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAXES-
 (1) EMPLOYEE TAX- Subsection (b) of section 3101 of such Code is amended
 by striking `equal to' and all that follows and inserting `equal to 1.45
 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a) without regard to
 paragraph (1) thereof) received by him with respect to employment (as
 defined in section 3121(b)).'.
 (2) EMPLOYER TAX- Subsection (b) of section 3111 of such Code is amended
 by striking `equal to' and all that follows and inserting `equal to 7.5
 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a) without regard to
 paragraph (1) thereof) paid by him with respect to employment (as defined
 in section 3121(b)).'.
 (3) SELF-EMPLOYMENT TAX- Subsection (b) of section 1401 of such Code is
 amended by striking `a tax as follows:' and all that follows and inserting
 `a tax equal to 7.5 percent of the amount of the self-employment income
 (as defined in section 1402(b) without regard to paragraph (1) thereof)
 for such taxable year.'.
 (4) RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAXES- Subparagraph (A) of section 3231(e)(2) of
 such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(iii) LIMITATION NOT TO APPLY TO TAXES EQUIVALENT TO HOSPITAL INSURANCE
 TAXES- Clause (i) shall not apply to--
 `(I) so much of the rate applicable under section 3201(a) or 3221(a)
 (as the case may be) as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under
 section 3101(b), and
 `(II) so much of the rate of tax applicable under section 3211(a)(1)
 as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 1401(b).'.
 (5) Technical amendments-
 (A) Subsection (b) of section 1402 of such Code is amended by striking
 `the applicable contribution base (as determined under subsection (k))'
 and inserting `the contribution and benefit base (as determined under
 section 230 of the Social Security Act)'.
 (B) Section 1402 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (k).
 (C) Paragraph (1) of section 3121(a) of such Code is amended--
 (i) by striking `applicable contribution base (as determined under subsection
 (x))' each place it appears and inserting `contribution and benefit base
 (as determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act)', and
 (ii) by striking `such applicable contribution base' and inserting `such
 contribution and benefit base'.
 (D) Section 3121 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (x).
 (E) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(i) TIER 1 TAXES- Except as provided in clause (ii), the term `applicable
 base' means for any calendar year the contribution and benefit base
 determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act for such calendar
 year.'.
 (F) Paragraph (3) of section 6413(c) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(3) SEPARATE APPLICATION FOR HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAXES- Paragraphs (1)
 and (2) shall not apply to--
 `(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(b) (or any amount equivalent to such
 tax), and
 `(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201 as is determined at a rate
 not greater than the rate in effect under section 3101(b).'.
 (G) Sections 3122 and 3125 of such Code are each amended--
 (i) by striking `section 3111' each place it appears and inserting `section
 3111(a)', and
 (ii) by striking `applicable contribution base limitation' and inserting
 `contribution and benefit base limitation'.
 (6) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 1995 and later calendar years.
 (d) Additional State and Local Employees Subject to Hospital Insurance Tax-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) of section 3121(u) of such Code is amended
 by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D).
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
 remuneration paid after December 31, 1994.
 (e) Increase in Income Taxes on Social Security Benefits-
 (1) INCREASE IN AMOUNT OF BENEFITS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT- Subsections (a)
 and (b) of section 86 of such Code is amended by striking `one-half'
 each place it appears and inserting `85 percent'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
 (f) SECTION 15 NOT TO APPLY- No amendment made by this section shall be
 treated as a change in a rate of tax for purposes of section 15 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (g) Long-Term Care/Health Care Premium for the Elderly-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), each individual who
 at any time in a month is 65 years of age or older and is eligible for
 benefits under title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act in the month
 shall pay a long-term care/health care premium for the month of $55.
 (2) EXCEPTION FOR LOW-INCOME ELDERLY- The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall provide a process whereby individuals with an adjusted
 gross income which does not exceed $8,500 (or $10,700 in the case of joint
 adjusted gross income in the case of a married individual) are not liable
 for the premium imposed under paragraph (1).
 (3) COLLECTION OF PREMIUM- The premium imposed under this subsection shall
 be collected in the same manner (including deduction from Social Security
 checks) as the premium imposed under part B of title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act was collected under section 1840 of such Act as of the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (4) DEPOSIT INTO NATIONAL HEALTH TRUST FUND- Premiums collected under this
 subsection shall be transferred to and deposited into the National Health
 Trust Fund in the same manner as premiums collected under section 1840 of
 the Social Security Act were transferred and deposited into the Federal
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.
 (h) SENSE OF THE SENATE- It is the sense of the Senate that the chairman
 of the Committee on Finance of the Senate should recommend to the Senate
 additional provisions with respect to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that
 may be necessary to assist in meeting the funding requirements of this Act.
SEC. 4. TERMINATION OF OTHER PROGRAMS.
 (a) Medicare-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no benefits
 shall be available under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for any
 item or service furnished after December 31, 1994.
 (2) TRANSITION- In the case of inpatient hospital services and extended care
 services during a continuous period of stay which began before January 1,
 1995, and which had not ended as of such date, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services shall provide for continuation of benefits under title
 XVIII of the Social Security Act until the end of the period of stay.
 (b) MEDICAID- No payments shall be made to a State under section 1903(a)
 of the Social Security Act with respect to medical assistance for items
 or services furnished after December 31, 1994.
 (c) FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM- No benefits shall be made
 available under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for any part
 of a coverage period occurring after December 31, 1994.
 (d) CHAMPUS- No benefits shall be made available under sections 1079 and
 1086 of title 10, United States Code, for items or services furnished after
 December 31, 1994, for which any payment may be made under title XXVII of
 the Public Health Service Act.
 (e) VETERANS' BENEFITS- No benefits shall be available under chapter 17
 of title 38, United States Code, for items or services furnished after
 December 31, 1994, for which payment may be made under title XXVII of the
 Public Health Service Act, except that nothing in this subsection may be
 construed to decrease benefits or services, including exclusive use of
 veterans hospitals, that are available to veterans on the day prior to
 the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE FOR BENEFITS.
 Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act shall apply to items and
 services furnished on or after January 1, 1995.