[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1346 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

104th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1346

 To require the periodic review of Federal regulations.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 October 20 (legislative day, October 18), 1995

 Mr. Abraham (for himself, Mr. Heflin, Mr. Lott, Mr. Nickles, Mrs. 
Hutchison, Mr. Craig, and Mr. Kyl) introduced the following bill; which 
 was read twice and referred to the Committee on Governmental Affairs

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To require the periodic review of Federal regulations.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Review Act of 1995''.

SEC. 2. PURPOSE.

 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to require agencies to regularly review their 
 significant rules to determine whether they should be continued 
 without change, modified, consolidated with another rule, or 
 allowed to terminate;
 (2) to require agencies to consider the comments of the 
 public, the regulated community, and the Congress regarding the 
 actual costs and burdens of rules being reviewed under this 
 Act, and whether the rules are obsolete, unnecessary, 
 duplicative, conflicting, or otherwise inconsistent;
 (3) to require that any rules continued in effect meet all 
 the legal requirements that would apply to the issuance of a 
 new rule, including any applicable Federal cost/benefit and 
 risk assessment requirements;
 (4) to provide for the automatic termination of significant 
 rules that are not continued in effect as a result of sunset 
 reviews;
 (5) to provide for a petition process that allows the 
 public and appropriate committees of the Congress to request 
 that other rules that are not significant be reviewed in the 
 same manner as significant rules; and
 (6) to require the Administrator to coordinate and be 
 responsible for sunset reviews conducted by the agencies.

SEC. 3. REVIEW AND TERMINATION OF REGULATIONS.

 The effectiveness of a covered rule shall terminate on the 
applicable termination date specified in section 7(a) or (b), unless 
the rule is reviewed in accordance with the procedures in section 6 
before that termination date and complies with section 5.

SEC. 4. RULES COVERED.

 (a) Covered Rules.--For purposes of this Act, a covered rule is a 
rule that--
 (1) is determined by the Administrator to be a significant 
 rule under subsection (b); or
 (2) is any other rule designated by the Administrator under 
 this Act for sunset review.
 (b) Significant Rules.--For purposes of this Act, a significant 
rule is a rule that the Administrator determines--
 (1) has resulted in or is likely to result in an annual 
 effect on the economy of $100,000,000 or more;
 (2) is a major rule, as that term is defined in Executive 
 Order 12291 (as in effect on the first date that Executive 
 order was in effect); or
 (3) was issued pursuant to a significant regulatory action, 
 as that term is defined in Executive Order 12866 (as in effect 
 on the first date that Executive order was in effect).
 (c) Public Petitions.--
 (1) In general.--Any person adversely affected by a rule 
 that is not a significant rule may submit a petition to the 
 Administrator requesting that the Administrator designate the 
 rule for sunset review. The Administrator shall designate the 
 rule for sunset review unless the Administrator determines that 
 it would be unreasonable to conduct a sunset review of the 
 rule. In making such determination, the Administrator shall 
 take into account the number and nature of other petitions 
 received on the same rule, whether or not they have already 
 been denied.
 (2) Form and content of petition.--A petition under 
 paragraph (1)--
 (A) shall be in writing, but is not otherwise 
 required to be in any particular form;
 (B) shall identify the rule for which sunset review 
 is requested with reasonable specificity and state on 
 its face that the petitioner seeks sunset review or a 
 similar review of the rule; and
 (C) shall be accompanied by a $20 processing fee.
 (3) Response required for noncomplying petitions.--If the 
 Administrator determines that a petition does not meet the 
 requirements of this subsection, the Administrator shall 
 provide a response to the petitioner within 30 days after 
 receiving the petition, notifying the petitioner of the problem 
 and providing information on how to formulate a petition that 
 meets those requirements.
 (4) Decision within 90 days.--Within the 90-day period 
 beginning on the date of receiving a petition that meets the 
 requirements of this subsection, the Administrator shall 
 transmit a response to the petitioner stating whether the 
 petition was granted or denied, except that the Administrator 
 may extend such period by a total of not more than 30 days.
 (5) Petitions deemed granted for substantial inexcusable 
 delay.--A petition for sunset review of a rule is deemed to 
 have been granted by the Administrator, and the Administrator 
 is deemed to have designated the rule for sunset review, if a 
 court finds there is a substantial and inexcusable delay, 
 beyond the period specified in paragraph (4), in notifying the 
 petitioner of the Administrator's determination to grant or 
 deny the petition.
 (6) Public log.--The Administrator shall maintain a public 
 log of petitions submitted under this subsection, that includes 
 the status or disposition of each petition.
 (d) Congressional Requests.--
 (1) In general.--An appropriate committee of the Congress, 
 or a majority of the majority party members or a majority of 
 nonmajority party members of such a committee, may request in 
 writing that the Administrator designate any rule that is not a 
 significant rule for sunset review. The Administrator shall 
 designate such rule for sunset review within 30 days after 
 receipt of such a request unless the Administrator determines 
 that it would be unreasonable to conduct a sunset review of 
 such rule.
 (2) Notice of denial.--If the Administrator denies a 
 congressional request under this subsection, the Administrator 
 shall transmit to the congressional committee making the 
 request a notice stating the reasons for the denial.
 (e) Publication of Notice of Designation for Sunset Review.--After 
designating a rule under this Act for sunset review, the Administrator 
shall promptly publish a notice of that designation in the Federal 
Register.

SEC. 5. CRITERIA FOR SUNSET REVIEW.

 (a) Compliance With Other Laws.--In order to continue without 
change, modify, or consolidate any rule subject to sunset review, the 
continued, modified, or consolidated rule must be authorized by law and 
meet all applicable requirements that would apply under other laws or 
Executive orders if it were issued as a new rule. For purposes of this 
section, applicable requirements include any requirements for cost/
benefit analysis and any requirements for standardized risk analysis 
and risk assessment.
 (b) Governing Law.--If there is an irreconcilable conflict between 
such applicable requirements and an Act under which a rule was issued, 
the conflict shall be resolved in the same manner as such conflict 
would be resolved if the agency were issuing a new rule.

SEC. 6. SUNSET REVIEW PROCEDURES.

 (a) Functions of the Administrator.--
 (1) Notice of rules subject to review.--
 (A) Inventory and first list.--Within 6 months 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Administrator shall conduct an inventory of existing 
 rules and publish a first list of covered rules. The 
 list shall--
 (i) specify the particular group to which 
 each significant rule is assigned under 
 paragraph (2), and state the termination date 
 for all significant rules in each such group; 
 and
 (ii) include other rules subject to sunset 
 review for any other reason, and state the 
 termination date for each such rule.
 (B) Subsequent lists.--After publication of the 
 first list under subparagraph (A), the Administrator 
 shall publish an updated list of covered rules at least 
 annually, specifying the termination date for each rule 
 on the list.
 (2) Grouping of significant rules in first list.--
 (A) Staggered review.--The Administrator shall 
 assign each significant rule in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this Act to one of 4 groups established by 
 the Administrator to permit orderly and prioritized 
 sunset reviews, and specify for each group a 
 termination date in accordance with section 7(a)(1).
 (B) Prioritizations.--In determining which rules 
 shall be given priority in time in that assignment, the 
 Administrator shall consult with appropriate agencies, 
 and shall prioritize rules based on--
 (i) the grouping of related rules in 
 accordance with paragraph (3);
 (ii) the extent of the cost of each rule on 
 the regulated community and the public, with 
 priority in time given to those rules that 
 impose the greatest cost;
 (iii) consideration of the views of 
 regulated persons, including State and local 
 governments;
 (iv) whether a particular rule has recently 
 been subject to cost/benefit analysis and risk 
 assessment, with priority in time given to 
 those rules that have not been subject to such 
 analysis and assessment;
 (v) whether a particular rule was issued 
 under a statutory provision that provides 
 relatively greater discretion to an official in 
 issuing the rule, with priority in time given 
 to those rules that were issued under 
 provisions that provide relatively greater 
 discretion;
 (vi) the burden of reviewing each rule on 
 the reviewing agency; and
 (vii) the need for orderly processing and 
 the timely completion of the sunset reviews of 
 existing rules.
 (3) Grouping of related rules.--The Administrator shall 
 group related rules (and designate other rules) for 
 simultaneous sunset review based upon their subject matter 
 similarity, functional interrelationships, and other relevant 
 factors to ensure comprehensive and coordinated review of 
 redundant, overlapping, and conflicting rules and requirements. 
 The Administrator shall ensure simultaneous sunset reviews of 
 covered rules without regard to whether they were issued by the 
 same agency, and shall designate any other rule for sunset 
 review that is necessary for a comprehensive sunset review 
 whether or not such other rule is otherwise a covered rule 
 under this Act.
 (4) Guidance.--The Administrator shall provide timely 
 guidance to agencies on the conduct of sunset reviews and the 
 preparation of sunset review notices and reports required by 
 this Act to ensure uniform, complete, and timely sunset reviews 
 and to ensure notice and opportunity for public comment.
 (5) Review and evaluation of reports.--The Administrator 
 shall review and evaluate each preliminary and final report 
 submitted by the head of an agency pursuant to this section. 
 Within 90 days after receiving a preliminary report, the 
 Administrator shall transmit comments to the head of the agency 
 regarding--
 (A) the quality of the analysis in the report, 
 including whether the agency has properly applied 
 section 5;
 (B) the consistency of the agency's proposed action 
 with actions of other agencies; and
 (C) whether the rule should be continued without 
 change, modified, consolidated with another rule, or 
 allowed to terminate.
 (b) Agency Sunset Review Procedure.--
 (1) Sunset review notice.--At least 2\1/2\ years before the 
 termination date under section 7(a) for a covered rule issued 
 by an agency, the head of the agency shall--
 (A) publish a sunset review notice in accordance 
 with section 8(a) in the Federal Register and, to the 
 extent reasonable and practicable, in other 
 publications or media that are designed to reach those 
 persons most affected by the covered rule; and
 (B) request the views of the Administrator and the 
 appropriate committees of the Congress on whether to 
 continue without change, modify, consolidate, or 
 terminate the covered rule.
 (2) Preliminary report.--In reviewing a covered rule, the 
 head of an agency shall--
 (A) consider public comments and other 
 recommendations generated by a sunset review notice 
 under paragraph (1); and
 (B) at least 1 year before the termination date 
 under section 7(a) for the covered rule, publish in the 
 Federal Register and transmit to the Administrator and 
 the appropriate committees of the Congress a 
 preliminary report in accordance with section 8(b).
 (3) Final report.--The head of an agency shall consider the 
 public comments and other recommendations generated by the 
 preliminary report under paragraph (2) for a covered rule, and 
 shall consult with the appropriate committees of the Congress 
 before issuing a final report. At least 90 days before the 
 termination date of the covered rule, the head of the agency 
 shall publish in the Federal Register and transmit to the 
 Administrator and the appropriate committees of the Congress a 
 final report in accordance with section 8(c).
 (c) Effectiveness of Agency Recommendation.--If a final report 
under subsection (b)(3) recommends that a covered rule should be 
continued without change, modified, or consolidated with another rule, 
the rule is continued, modified, or consolidated in accordance with the 
recommendation effective 60 days after publication of the final report, 
unless the Administrator or another officer designated by the President 
publishes a notice within that 60-day period stating that the rule 
shall not be so continued without change, modified, or consolidated. 
The Administrator or other officer designated by the President shall 
state in the notice the reasons for such action.
 (d) Reissuance.--If a covered rule terminates for any reason 
pursuant to this Act, it shall not be reissued in substantially the 
same form unless the rule complies with section 5 and the Administrator 
or other officer designated by the President approves the rule.
 (e) Preservation of Independence of Federal Bank Regulatory 
Agencies.--The head of any appropriate Federal banking agency (as that 
term is defined in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), the Federal Housing Finance Board, the National 
Credit Union Administration, and the Office of Federal Housing 
Enterprise Oversight shall have the authority with respect to that 
agency that would otherwise be granted under subsections (c) and (d) of 
this section, section 7(a)(2)(B), and section 7(c) to the Administrator 
or other officer designated by the President.

SEC. 7. TERMINATION DATES FOR COVERED RULES.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of section 3, the termination date of 
a covered rule is as follows:
 (1) Existing significant rules.--For a significant rule in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, the initial 
 termination date is the last day of the 4-year, 5-year, 6-year, 
 or 7-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, as specified by the Administrator under section 
 6(a)(2)(A). For any significant rule that 6 months after the 
 date of enactment is not assigned to such a group specified 
 under section 6(a)(2)(A), the initial termination date is the 
 last day of the 4-year period beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) New significant rules.--For a significant rule that 
 first takes effect after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 the initial termination date is the last day of either--
 (A) the 3-year period beginning on the date the 
 rule takes effect, or
 (B) if the Administrator determines as part of the 
 rulemaking process that the rule is issued pursuant to 
 negotiated rulemaking procedures or that compliance 
 with the rule requires substantial capital investment, 
 the 7-year period beginning on the date the rule takes 
 effect.
 (3) Rules covered pursuant to public petition or 
 congressional request.--For any rule subject to sunset review 
 pursuant to a public petition under section 4(c) or a 
 congressional request under section 4(d), the initial 
 termination date is the last day of the 3-year period beginning 
 on--
 (A) the date the Administrator so designates the 
 rule for review; or
 (B) the date of issuance of a final court order 
 that the Administrator is deemed to have designated the 
 rule for sunset review.
 (4) Related rule designated for review.--For a rule that 
 the Administrator designates under section 6(a)(3) for sunset 
 review because it is related to another covered rule and that 
 is grouped with that other rule for simultaneous review, the 
 initial termination date is the same as the termination date 
 for that other rule.
 (5) Rules extended in effectiveness.--For a rule the 
 effectiveness of which has been extended under section 3, the 
 next termination date is the last day of the 7-year period 
 beginning on the date the rule would have terminated under 
 section 3 if it had not been extended.
 (b) Temporary Extension.--The termination date under subsection (a) 
for a covered rule may be extended by the Administrator for not more 
than 6 months by publishing notice thereof in the Federal Register that 
describes--
 (1) modifications that should be made to the rule and the 
 reasons why the modifications cannot be made by the original 
 termination date; or
 (2) reasons why the temporary extension is necessary to 
 respond to or prevent an emergency situation.
 (c) Limitation on Interim Reviews.--An agency may not undertake a 
comprehensive review and significant revision of a covered rule more 
frequently than required by this section or another law, unless the 
head of the agency determines, and the Administrator concurs, that the 
likely benefits from such review and revision outweigh the reasonable 
expenditures that have been made in reliance on the rule. For purposes 
of this section, a law may be considered to require a comprehensive 
review and significant revision of a rule if it makes significant 
changes in the Act under which the rule was issued.
 (d) Determinations Where Rules Have Been Amended.--For purposes of 
this Act, if various provisions of a covered rule were issued at 
different times, then the rule as a whole shall be treated as if it 
were issued on the later of--
 (1) the date of issuance of the provision of the rule that 
 was issued first; or
 (2) the date the most recent comprehensive review and 
 significant revision of the rule was completed.
 (e) Comprehensive Review and Significant Revision Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``comprehensive review and significant revision'' 
means--
 (1) a sunset review, whether or not the rule is revised; or
 (2) a review and revision of a rule consistent with 
 subsection (c).

SEC. 8. SUNSET REVIEW NOTICES AND AGENCY REPORTS.

 (a) Sunset Review Notices.--The sunset review notice under section 
6(b)(1) for a rule shall--
 (1) request comments regarding whether the rule should be 
 continued without change, modified, consolidated with another 
 rule, or allowed to terminate;
 (2) if applicable, request comments regarding whether the 
 rule meets the applicable Federal cost/benefit and risk 
 assessment criteria; and
 (3) solicit comments about the past implementation and 
 effects of the rule, including--
 (A) the direct and indirect costs incurred because 
 of the rule, including the net reduction in the value 
 of private property (whether real, personal, tangible, 
 or intangible), and whether the incremental benefits of 
 the rule exceeded the incremental costs of the rule, 
 both generally and regarding each of the specific 
 industries and sectors it covers;
 (B) whether the rule as a whole, or any major 
 feature of it, is outdated, obsolete, or unnecessary, 
 whether by change of technology, the marketplace, or 
 otherwise;
 (C) the extent to which the rule or information 
 required to comply with the rule duplicated, 
 conflicted, or overlapped with requirements under rules 
 of other agencies;
 (D) in the case of a rule addressing a risk to 
 health or safety or the environment, what the perceived 
 risk was at the time of issuance and to what extent the 
 risk predictions were accurate;
 (E) whether the rule unnecessarily impeded domestic 
 or international competition or unnecessarily intruded 
 on free market forces, and whether the rule 
 unnecessarily interfered with opportunities or efforts 
 to transfer to the private sector duties carried out by 
 the Government;
 (F) whether, and to what extent, the rule imposed 
 unfunded mandates on, or otherwise affected, State and 
 local governments;
 (G) whether compliance with the rule required 
 substantial capital investment and whether terminating 
 the rule on the next termination date would create an 
 unfair advantage to those who are not in compliance 
 with it;
 (H) whether the rule constituted the least cost 
 method of achieving its objective consistent with the 
 criteria of the Act under which the rule was issued, 
 and to what extent the rule provided flexibility to 
 those who were subject to it;
 (I) whether the rule was worded simply and clearly, 
 including clear identification of those who were 
 subject to the rule;
 (J) whether the rule created negative unintended 
 consequences;
 (K) the extent to which information requirements 
 under the rule can be reduced; and
 (L) the extent to which the rule has contributed 
 positive benefits, particularly health or safety or 
 environmental benefits.
 (b) Preliminary Reports on Sunset Reviews.--The preliminary report 
under section 6(b)(2) on the sunset review of a rule shall request 
public comments and contain--
 (1) specific factual findings and legal conclusions of the 
 head of the agency conducting the review regarding the 
 application of section 5 to the rule, the continued need for 
 the rule, and whether the rule duplicates functions of another 
 rule;
 (2) a preliminary determination on whether the rule should 
 be continued without change, modified, consolidated with 
 another rule, or allowed to terminate; and
 (3) if consolidation or modification of the rule is 
 recommended, the proposed text of the consolidated or modified 
 rule and other relevant information required by law in a notice 
 of proposed rulemaking.
 (c) Final Reports on Sunset Reviews.--The final report under 
section 6(b)(3) on the sunset review of a rule shall contain--
 (1) the final factual findings and legal conclusions of the 
 head of the agency conducting the review regarding the 
 application of section 5 to the rule and whether the rule 
 should be continued without change, modified, consolidated with 
 another rule, or allowed to terminate; and
 (2) in the case of a rule that is continued without change, 
 modified, or consolidated with another rule, the text of the 
 rule.

SEC. 9. DESIGNATION OF AGENCY REGULATORY REVIEW OFFICERS.

 The head of each agency shall designate an officer of the agency as 
the Regulatory Review Officer of the agency. The Regulatory Review 
Officer of an agency shall be responsible for the implementation of 
this Act by the agency and shall report directly to the head of the 
agency and the Administrator with respect to that responsibility.

SEC. 10. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW; SEVERABILITY.

 (a) Relationship to APA.--Except to the extent that there is a 
direct conflict with the provisions of this Act, nothing in this Act is 
intended to supersede the provisions of chapters 5, 6, and 7 of title 
5, United States Code.
 (b) Severability.--If any provision of this Act, or the application 
of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance, is held 
invalid, the application of such provision to other persons or 
circumstances, and the remainder of this Act, shall not be affected 
thereby.

SEC. 11. EFFECT OF TERMINATION OF A COVERED RULE.

 (a) Effect of Termination, Generally.--If the effectiveness of a 
covered rule terminates under section 3--
 (1) this Act shall not be construed to prevent the 
 President or an agency from exercising any authority that 
 otherwise exists to implement the statute under which the rule 
 was issued;
 (2) in an agency proceeding or court action between an 
 agency and a non-agency party, the rule shall be given no legal 
 effect (subject to paragraph (3)) except at the request of the 
 non-agency party; and
 (3) notwithstanding section 3, this Act shall not be 
 construed to prevent the continuation or institution of any 
 enforcement action that is based on a violation of the rule 
that occurred before the effectiveness of the rule terminated.
 (b) Effect on Deadlines.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), any 
 deadline for, relating to, or involving any action dependent 
 upon, any rule terminated under this Act is suspended until the 
 agency that issued the rule issues a new rule on the same 
 matter, unless otherwise provided by a law.
 (2) Deadline defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``deadline'' means any date certain for fulfilling any 
 obligation or exercising any authority established by or under 
 any Federal rule, or by or under any court order implementing 
 any Federal rule.

SEC. 12. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--A denial or substantial inexcusable delay in 
granting or denying a petition under section 4(c) shall be considered 
final agency action. A denial of a congressional request under section 
4(d) shall not be subject to judicial review.
 (b) Time Limitation on Filing a Civil Action.--Notwithstanding any 
other provisions of law, an action seeking judicial review of a final 
agency action under this Act may not be brought--
 (1) in the case of a final agency action denying a public 
 petition under section 4(c) or continuing without change, 
 modifying, or consolidating a covered rule, more than 30 days 
 after the effective date of that agency action; or
 (2) in the case of an action challenging a delay in 
 granting or denying a petition for a rule under section 4(c), 
 more than 1 year after the period applicable to the rule under 
 section 4(c)(4).
 (c) Availability of Judicial Review Unaffected.--Except to the 
extent that there is a direct conflict with the provisions of this Act, 
nothing in this Act is intended to affect the availability or standard 
of judicial review for agency regulatory action.

SEC. 13. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory 
 Affairs in the Office of Management and Budget.
 (2) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) Appropriate committee of the congress.--The term 
 ``appropriate committee of the Congress'' means, with respect 
 to a rule, each standing committee of Congress having authority 
 under the rules of the House of Representatives or the Senate 
 to report a bill to amend the provision of law under which the 
 rule is issued.
 (4) Rule.--
 (A) General rule.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 term ``rule'' means any agency statement of general 
 applicability and future effect, including agency 
 guidance documents, designed to implement, interpret, 
 or prescribe law or policy, or describing the 
 procedures or practices of an agency, or intended to 
 assist in such actions, but does not include--
 (i) regulations or other agency statements 
 issued in accordance with formal rulemaking 
 provisions of sections 556 and 557 of title 5, 
 United States Code;
 (ii) regulations or other agency statements 
 that are limited to agency organization, 
 management, or personnel matters;
 (iii) regulations or other agency 
 statements issued with respect to a military or 
 foreign affairs function of the United States;
 (iv) regulations, statements, or other 
 agency actions that are reviewed and usually 
 modified each year (or more frequently), or are 
 reviewed regularly and usually modified based 
 on changing economic or seasonal conditions;
 (v) regulations or other agency actions 
 that grant an approval, license, permit, 
 registration, or similar authority or that 
 grant or recognize an exemption or relieve a 
 restriction, or any agency action necessary to 
 permit new or improved applications of 
 technology or to allow the manufacture, 
 distribution, sale, or use of a substance or 
 product; and
 (vi) regulations or other agency statements 
 that the Administrator certifies in writing are 
 necessary for the enforcement of the Federal 
 criminal laws.
 (B) Scope of a rule.--For purposes of this Act, 
 each set of rules designated in the Code of Federal 
 Regulations as a part shall be treated as one rule. 
 Each set of rules that do not appear in the Code of 
 Federal Regulations and that are comparable to a part 
 of that Code under guidelines established by the 
 Administrator shall be treated as one rule.
 (5) Sunset review.--The term ``sunset review'' means a 
 review of a rule under this Act.

SEC. 14. SUNSET OF THIS ACT.

 This Act shall have no force or effect after the 10-year period 
beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 <all>
S 1346 IS----2