HR 3120 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3120
To establish permit requirements for overflows from combined storm water and
sanitary sewer systems discharging into the estuarine zone and marine waters
and to require the correction of such systems to minimize discharges into
those waters, to mitigate the effects of pollution discharges into estuaries
and oceans, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 3, 1989
Mr. MANTON (for himself and Mr. LENT) introduced the following bill; which
was referred jointly to the Committees on Public Works and Transportation,
and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To establish permit requirements for overflows from combined storm water and
sanitary sewer systems discharging into the estuarine zone and marine waters
and to require the correction of such systems to minimize discharges into
those waters, to mitigate the effects of pollution discharges into estuaries
and oceans, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
TITLE I--COMBINED SEWER AND STORM WATER SYSTEM OVERFLOW CONTROL
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Estuarine Zone and Marine Waters Combined
 Sewer Overflow Control Act'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the pollutants released by the overflows from combined storm water and
 sanitary sewer systems into the estuarine zone and marine waters result
 in the unacceptable degradation of the quality of these waters;
 (2) combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems are prevalent throughout
 the United States;
 (3) combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems are one of the primary
 sources of degradation of beaches, estuaries, estuarine zones, and coastal
 and ocean waters and are a major reason for the closures of beaches along
 the North Atlantic coast;
 (4) the cost of eliminating overflows from combined storm water and sanitary
 sewer systems into the estuarine zone and marine waters is in the billions
 of dollars;
 (5) coastal State and local governments cannot afford and do not have the
 technological capability to correct the problems associated with overflows
 from combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems;
 (6) the United States must take an active role in providing the technical
 and financial assistance to coastal State and local governments necessary
 to correct overflows from combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems
 into the estuarine zone and marine waters; and
 (7) the national strategy for controlling combined storm water and sanitary
 sewer overflows into the estuarine zone and marine waters should require
 such overflows to comply with all requirements of the Clean Water Act and
 applicable State water quality standards, require the expeditious elimination
 of all dry weather discharges, and seek to minimize wet weather discharges.
SEC. 103. REGULATION OF COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM OVERFLOWS.
 Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342;
 relating to the issuance of permits for the discharge of pollutants into
 waters), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(q) COMBINED SEWER OVERFLOWS-
 `(1) Permit application regulations-
 `(A) ISSUANCE- Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the
 Estuarine Zone and Marine Waters Combined Sewer Overflow Control Act,
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Under Secretary of Commerce
 for Oceans and Atmosphere, shall issue regulations setting forth permit
 requirements for discharges from combined storm water and sanitary sewer
 overflows into the estuarine zone and marine waters.
 `(B) REGULATION CONTENTS- The Administrator, in determining the content
 of the regulations referred to in subparagraph (A), shall take into account--
 `(i) the expected composition of each discharge from the system of the
 permittee, including--
 `(I) the toxicity of the organic and inorganic components of the discharge;
 and
 `(II) the estimated quantity and characteristics of any component of the
 discharge which is likely to create floating debris and debris which may
 wash up on shores;
 `(ii) the anticipated effect on the quality of the receiving waters and
 sediment of each such discharge, including the effect on human health
 and welfare, fish and wildlife resources, the local economy (including
 the commercial fishing industry), and aesthetic and recreational values
 (including sport fishing interests);
 `(iii) the expected frequency, volume, and duration of each such discharge;
 and
 `(iv) the need for a flexible approach to minimizing such discharges.
 `(C) REGULATION PROVISIONS- Regulations issued under subparagraph (A)
 shall allow permits to be issued--
 `(i) which authorize a series of overflows which discharge into a single body
 of water to be considered as a discharge from a single point source if such
 overflows will not result in a violation of water quality standards or the
 deterioration of shorelines or sediment quality of the receiving body; and
 `(ii) on a system- or jurisdiction-wide basis.
 `(2) RESTRICTION ON ISSUANCE- The Administrator may issue permits
 after December 31, 1999, for discharges from combined storm water and
 sanitary sewer overflows into the estuarine zone or marine waters only
 if the Administrator determines that, at the proposed time of issuance,
 the permittee has undertaken reasonable efforts to eliminate dry weather
 discharges and minimize wet weather discharges of overflows from combined
 storm water and sanitary sewer systems.
 `(3) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Administrator shall provide technical
 assistance to States and local governments that are issued permits under
 this subsection in achieving compliance with the permits.
 `(4) EXPENDITURE REQUIREMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- As a condition for the issuance or renewal of a permit
 allowing the discharge from combined storm water and sanitary sewer system
 overflows into the estuarine zone or marine waters, the Administrator
 shall require each permittee to budget and expend an amount of funds,
 determined in accordance with subparagraph (B), for the purposes contained
 in subparagraph (C). This requirement shall be included as a provision of
 each such permit and enforceable under this Act as a permit condition.
 `(B) AMOUNT- The Administrator, in cooperation with the Under Secretary
 of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and the permit applicant, shall
 determine the amount of funds the permit applicant must budget and expend
 as a condition for the issuance of a permit. The Administrator, the Under
 Secretary, and the permit applicant shall base their determination on the
 expected annualized cost the permit applicant will incur in eliminating all
 dry weather discharges of overflows from combined storm water and sanitary
 sewer systems into the estuarine zone or marine waters and in minimizing
 wet weather discharges of such overflows by December 31, 1999.
 `(C) PURPOSES OF EXPENDITURE- The funds required to be expended by the
 permittee under subparagraph (A) shall be expended--
 `(i) to identify and describe all discharges of overflows into the estuarine
 zone and marine waters from the combined storm water and sanitary sewer
 system of the permittee;
 `(ii) to implement technology-based limitations of such discharges,
 derived from the best available professional advice, which provide for--
 `(I) proper operation and regular maintenance of the combined storm water
 and sanitary sewer system of the permittee;
 `(II) maximum use of collection systems for storage of such discharges; and
 `(III) review and, if necessary, modification of pretreatment programs; and
 `(iii) to eliminate discharges of overflows from combined storm water and
 sanitary sewer systems into the estuarine zone and marine waters.
 `(D) WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT- The Administrator, in consultation with the
 Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, shall waive the
 expenditure requirement of subparagraph (A) if the Administrator determines
 that the permittee, or the State in which the combined storm water and
 sanitary sewer system is located, has developed and begun to implement a
 comprehensive plan that will result in the cessation of all dry weather
 overflow discharges, and minimize all wet weather overflow discharges,
 into the estuarine zone and marine waters from the system of the permittee,
 or the systems located in the State, by December 31, 1999.
 `(5) DEFINITIONS- For the purpose of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `estuarine zone' has the same meaning that term has in
 section 320(k); and
 `(B) the term `marine waters' means--
 `(i) the coastal zone, as defined in section 304(1) of the Coastal Zone
 Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1453(1));
 `(ii) the waters of the Great Lakes under the jurisdiction of the United
 States, including their connecting waters, harbors, bays, shallows,
 and marshes;
 `(iii) the waters of the territorial sea;
 `(iv) the United States Exclusive Economic Zone; and
 `(v) the outer Continental Shelf.'.
SEC. 104. DEFINITION OF POLLUTANT.
 (a) DEFINITION OF POLLUTANT- Section 502(6) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1362(6); relating to definitions of terms used in
 the Act), is amended in the first sentence by inserting `combined storm
 water and sewage,' after `sewage sludge,'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall be effective
 6 months after the date the regulations required by section 402(q)(1)(A)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(q)(1)(A)),
 as added by section 103, are issued.
SEC. 105. GRANTS FOR CORRECTION OF OVERFLOWS.
 Paragraph (2) of section 201(n) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1281(n)(2); relating to the issuance of grants to address
 overflows from combined storm water and sanitary sewer overflows)
 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence by inserting a period after `sanitary sewer
 overflows';
 (2) by striking `from adjacent urban complexes,' and all that follows
 through the end of that paragraph; and
 (3) by inserting at the end the following: `These funds shall be available
 to those issued permits under section 402(q) of this Act to address water
 quality problems of the waters defined in that section due to discharges
 from combined storm water and sanitary sewer overflows.'.
SEC. 106. REPORTS.
 (a) TECHNOLOGICAL CLEARINGHOUSE- Not later than 6 months after the date of
 enactment of the Estuarine Zone and Marine Waters Combined Sewer Overflow
 Control Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall submit a report to the Congress concerning the feasibility and cost
 of establishing a technological clearinghouse which would make available to
 States and local governments information on, and assistance in, controlling,
 limiting, and ceasing discharges of overflows into the estuarine zone and
 marine waters from combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.
 (b) COMPOSITION OF FLOATING DEBRIS- Not later than 12 months after the date
 of enactment of Estuarine Zone and Marine Waters Combined Sewer Overflow
 Control Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall submit a report to the Congress concerning the major components
 of discharges of overflows into the estuarine zone and marine waters
 from combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems which significantly
 contribute to floating debris and debris which washes up on shores and
 how to reduce and eventually eliminate the introduction of this debris
 into such systems.
SEC. 107. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry
 out the Estuarine Zone and Marine Waters Combined Sewer Overflow Control Act.
TITLE II--NATIONAL ESTUARY PROGRAM AMENDMENT
SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `National Estuary Program Amendment Act'.
SEC. 202. ESTUARINE IDENTIFICATION.
 Section 320 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1330)
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (l); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (j) the following:
 `(k) COMBINED SEWER DISCHARGES- The Administrator shall--
 `(1) within 6 months after the date of enactment of the National Estuary
 Program Amendment Act--
 `(A) identify estuaries selected under subsection (a)(2)(A) where overflow
 discharges from combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems constitute
 a major source of pollution; and
 `(B) urge that the management conference for each such estuary develop,
 as part of the comprehensive conservation and management plan under
 subsection (b)(4), a priority action plan to address combined sewer
 overflows, including a schedule for eliminating dry weather discharges
 and minimizing wet weather discharges; and
 `(2) within 12 months after the date of enactment of the National Estuary
 Program Amendment Act, report to the Congress on the extent of combined
 sewer overflow discharges into estuaries selected under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 and the anticipated Federal cost of addressing the problem.'.
TITLE III--MARINE POLLUTION DISCHARGE ABATEMENT
SECTION 301. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be referred to as the `Marine Discharge Abatement Act'.
SEC. 302. OCEAN AND ESTUARY POLLUTION CONTROL.
 Section 403 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1343),
 relating to the issuance of permits for discharges of pollutants into
 oceans, is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 403. OCEAN AND ESTUARY DISCHARGE CRITERIA.
 `(a) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISCHARGING INTO ESTUARIES AND OCEANS- No permit
 under section 402 for a discharge into an estuary, an estuarine zone, the
 territorial sea, the waters of the contiguous zone, or the oceans shall be
 issued or renewed except in compliance with the requirements of subsection
 (b) and the guidelines established under subsection (c).
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS OF PERMIT APPLICANT- The requirements referred to in
 subsection (a) are the following:
 `(1) NEED FOR DISCHARGE- The need for the discharge into the waters
 referred to in subsection (a) has been demonstrated by the applicant
 and the Administrator has determined there is no viable, environmentally
 sound alternative.
 `(2) MONITORING PROGRAM- Each permittee must establish an on-going monitoring
 program approved by the Administrator for each such discharge.
 `(3) MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF PERMIT- The applicant agrees to
 include a provision in the permit that allows the Administrator to modify
 or terminate the permit if the Administrator determines such action to be
 in the public interest and necessary to prevent degradation of the waters
 referred to in subsection (a).
 `(c) Permit Guidelines-
 `(1) REVIEW AND PROMULGATION OF GUIDELINES- The Administrator and the Under
 Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere shall review guidelines
 established under this section in effect on the date of enactment of the
 Marine Discharge Abatement Act. The Administrator, in consultation with
 the Under Secretary, shall promulgate guidelines necessary to prevent the
 degradation of the waters and sediment of estuaries, estuarine zones,
 the territorial sea, the waters of the contiguous zone, and the oceans
 which include the factors contained in paragraph (2). The guidelines
 shall be promulgated not later than December 31, 1991, and from time to
 time thereafter.
 `(2) GUIDELINE FACTORS- The factors referred to in paragraph (1) include--
 `(A) the effect of disposal of pollutants on human health and welfare,
 including, but not limited to plankton, fish, shellfish, wildlife,
 shorelines, sediments, and beaches;
 `(B) the effect of disposal of pollutants on marine life, including the
 transfer, concentration, and dispersal of pollutants or their byproducts
 through biological, physical, and chemical processes; changes in marine
 ecosystem diversity, productivity, and stability; and species and community
 population changes;
 `(C) the effect of disposal of pollutants on aesthetic, recreation, and
 economic values;
 `(D) the persistence and permanence of the effects of disposal of pollutants;
 `(E) the effect of the disposal at varying rates, of particular volumes
 and concentrations of pollutants;
 `(F) other possible locations and methods of disposal or recycling of
 pollutants, including land-based alternatives; and
 `(G) the effect on alternate uses of the oceans, especially uses dependent
 on viable, consumable stocks of living resources.
 `(3) INSUFFICIENT INFORMATION- In any event where insufficient information
 exists on any proposed discharge to make a reasonable judgment on whether
 the discharge meets any of the guidelines established pursuant to this
 subsection, no permit shall be issued or renewed under section 402.
 `(d) PROHIBITION OF WAIVERS- The requirements of this section, and of
 section 402(d), may not be waived for the issuance or renewal of a permit
 for the discharge of pollutants into an estuary, an estuarine zone, the
 territorial sea, the waters of the contiguous zone, or the oceans.
 `(e) DEFINITION- For the purposes of this section, the terms `estuary' and
 `estuarine zone' have the same meaning such terms have in section 320(k).'.