[Congressional Bills 108th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1737 Introduced in House (IH)]

108th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1737

 To provide for the fair and efficient judicial consideration of 
 personal injury and wrongful death claims arising out of asbestos 
 exposure, to ensure that individuals who suffer harm, now or in the 
 future, from illnesses caused by exposure to asbestos receive 
 compensation for their injuries, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 April 10, 2003

Mr. Dooley of California (for himself, Mr. Moran of Virginia, Mr. Smith 
 of Washington, Mr. Larson of Connecticut, Mr. Davis of Alabama, Mr. 
Larsen of Washington, and Mr. Stenholm) introduced the following bill; 
 which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for the fair and efficient judicial consideration of 
 personal injury and wrongful death claims arising out of asbestos 
 exposure, to ensure that individuals who suffer harm, now or in the 
 future, from illnesses caused by exposure to asbestos receive 
 compensation for their injuries, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Asbestos Victims' 
Compensation Act of 2003''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. Physical impairment.
Sec. 5. Consolidation.
Sec. 6. Venue.
Sec. 7. Removal.
Sec. 8. Limitations; two-disease rule; general releases.
Sec. 9. Miscellaneous provisions.
Sec. 10. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) asbestos is a mineral that was widely used prior to the 
 1980s for insulation, fire-proofing, and other purposes;
 (2) millions of American workers and others were 
 significantly exposed to asbestos, especially during and after 
 the Second World War and prior to the advent of regulation by 
 the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in the early 
 1970s;
 (3) exposure to asbestos has been associated with various 
 types of cancer, including mesothelioma and lung cancer, as 
 well as such noncancerous conditions as asbestosis, pleural 
 plaques, and diffuse pleural thickening;
 (4) the diseases caused by asbestos have latency periods of 
 up to 40 years or more;
 (5) although the use of asbestos has dramatically declined 
 since 1980 and workplace exposures have been regulated since 
 1971 by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, past 
 exposures will continue to result in significant death and 
 disability from mesothelioma and other cancers well into the 
 21st Century;
 (6) exposure to asbestos has led to the filing of at least 
 600,000 asbestos claims in State and Federal courts, with 
 50,000 to 100,000 new cases filed each year, and, if nothing is 
 done to control the litigation, as many as 2,000,000 additional 
 claims may be filed before the litigation runs its course;
 (7) asbestos personal injury litigation can be unfair and 
 inefficient, imposing a severe burden on courts, litigants and 
 taxpayers alike;
 (8) asbestos personal injury litigation has already 
 contributed to the bankruptcy of more than 60 companies, 
 including nearly all manufacturers of asbestos textile and 
 insulation products, and the rate of asbestos-driven 
 bankruptcies is accelerating;
 (9) the vast majority of asbestos claims are filed by 
 individuals who have been exposed to asbestos and who may have 
 some physical sign of exposure, but who suffer no present 
 asbestos-related impairment;
 (10) the cost of compensating exposed individuals who are 
 not sick--
 (A) jeopardizes the ability of defendants to 
 compensate people with cancer and other serious 
 asbestos-related diseases, now and in the future;
 (B) threatens the savings, retirement benefits, and 
 jobs of these defendants' current and retired 
 employees;
 (C) adversely affects the communities in which 
 these defendants operate; and
 (D) impairs the national economy and interstate 
 commerce;
 (11) the several thousand asbestos-related cancer cases 
 that are filed each year would be manageable by the courts and 
 the litigants but for the volume of noncancer claims brought by 
 those who suffer no present asbestos-related impairment;
 (12) concerns about statutes of limitations can force 
 claimants who have been exposed to asbestos but who have no 
 current injury to bring premature lawsuits in order to protect 
 against losing their rights to future compensation should they 
 become impaired;
 (13) consolidation, joinder, and similar procedures, to 
 which some courts have resorted to deal with the mass of 
 asbestos cases, can undermine the appropriate functioning of 
 the judicial process and encourage the filing of thousands of 
 cases by exposed individuals who are not yet sick and who may 
 never become sick;
 (14) similarly, the availability of sympathetic forums in 
 States with no connection to the plaintiff or to the exposures 
 that form the basis of the lawsuit has encouraged the filing of 
 thousands of cases on behalf of exposed individuals who are not 
 yet sick and may never become sick; and
 (15) the United States Supreme Court has characterized 
 asbestos cases as ``an elephantine mass'' that ``defies 
 customary judicial administration and calls for national 
 legislation'', Ortiz v. Fibreboard Corporation, 119 S. Ct. 
 2295, 2302 (1999), and has reaffirmed its call for national 
 legislation in Norfolk & Western Railway. Co. v. Ayers, No. 01-
 963 (decided March 10, 2003).
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to give priority to those asbestos claimants who can 
 demonstrate actual physical harm or illness caused by asbestos;
 (2) to fully preserve the rights of claimants who were 
 exposed to asbestos to pursue compensation should they become 
 sick in the future;
 (3) to enhance the ability of the State and Federal 
 judicial systems to supervise and control asbestos litigation 
 and asbestos-related bankruptcy proceedings; and
 (4) to conserve the scarce resources of the defendants, and 
 marshal assets in bankruptcy, to allow compensation of cancer 
 victims and others who are physically harmed by exposure to 
 asbestos while securing the right to similar compensation for 
 those who may suffer cancer or other physical harm in the 
 future.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) AMA guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment.--
 The term ``AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
 Impairment'' means the American Medical Association's Guides to 
 the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Fifth Edition 2000).
 (2) Asbestos.--The term ``asbestos'' includes all minerals 
 defined as ``asbestos'' in 29 C.F.R. 1910 as amended from time 
 to time.
 (3) Asbestos claim.--The term ``asbestos claim'' means any 
 claim for damages or other relief presented in a civil action 
 or bankruptcy proceeding, arising out of, based on, or related 
 to the health effects of exposure to asbestos, including loss 
 of consortium, wrongful death, and any derivative claim made by 
 or on behalf of any exposed person or any representative, 
 spouse, parent, child or other relative of any exposed person. 
 The term does not include claims for benefits under a workers' 
 compensation law or veterans' benefits program, or claims 
 brought by any person as a subrogee by virtue of the payment of 
 benefits under a workers' compensation law.
 (4) Asbestosis.--The term ``asbestosis'' means bilateral 
 diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the lungs caused by inhalation 
 of asbestos fibers.
 (5) Cancer claim.--The term ``cancer claim'' means an 
 asbestos claim that is based upon the exposed person's 
 diagnosed cancer.
 (6) Certified b-reader.--The term ``certified B-reader'' 
 means an individual qualified as a ``final'' or ``B-reader'' 
 under 42 C.F.R. 37.51(b) as amended from time to time.
 (7) Civil action.--The term ``civil action'' means all 
 suits of a civil nature in State or Federal court, whether 
 cognizable as cases at law or in equity or in admiralty, but 
 does not include an action relating to any workers' 
 compensation law, or a proceeding for benefits under any 
 veterans' benefits program.
 (8) Exposed person.--The term ``exposed person'' means any 
 person whose exposure to asbestos or to asbestos-containing 
 products is the basis for an asbestos claim.
 (9) FEV1.--The term ``FEV1'' means forced expiratory volume 
 in the first second, which is the maximal volume of air that 
 can be expired from a full inspiration in one second.
 (10) FVC.--The term ``FVC'' means forced vital capacity, 
 which is the maximal volume of air expired with maximum effort 
 from a position of full inspiration.
 (11) ILO scale.--The term ``ILO Scale'' means the system 
 for the classification of chest x-rays set forth in the 
 International Labour Office's Guidelines for the Use of ILO 
 International Classification of Radiographs of Pneumoconioses 
 (1980) as amended from time to time by the International Labour 
 Office.
 (12) Nonmalignant claim.--The term ``nonmalignant claim'' 
 means an asbestos claim that is based upon a condition of the 
 exposed person that is caused or may be caused by asbestos 
 other than a diagnosed cancer.
 (13) Predicted lower limit of normal.--The term ``predicted 
 lower limit of normal'' for any test means the fifth percentile 
 of healthy populations based on age, height, and gender, based 
 on an appropriate reference population.
 (14) Pulmonary function testing.--The term ``pulmonary 
 function testing'' means spirometry, lung volume tests, 
 diffusing capacity tests, and arterial gas tests.
 (15) State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the 
 United States, the District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
 American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the 
 United States or any political subdivision of any of the 
 foregoing.
 (16) TLC.--The term ``TLC'' means total lung capacity, 
 which is the volume of air in the lungs after maximal 
 inspiration as measured by plethysmography or timed gas 
 dilution.
 (17) Veterans' benefits program.--The term ``veterans' 
 benefits program'' means any program for benefits in connection 
 with military service administered by the Veterans' 
 Administration under title 38, United States Code.
 (18) Workers' compensation law.--The term ``workers' 
 compensation law'' means a law respecting a program 
 administered by a State or the United States to provide 
 benefits, funded by a responsible employer or its insurance 
 carrier, for occupational diseases or injuries or for 
 disability or death caused by occupational diseases or 
 injuries. The term includes the Longshore and Harbor Workers' 
 Compensation Act (33 U.S.C. 901-944, 948-950), and chapter 81 
 of title 5, United States Code (known as the Federal Employees 
 Compensation Act), but does not include the Act of April 22, 
 1908 (45 U.S.C. 51 et seq.) (popularly referred to as the 
 ``Federal Employers' Liability Act'').

SEC. 4. PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT.

 (a) Impairment Essential Element of Claim.--Physical impairment of 
the exposed person, to which asbestos exposure was a substantial 
contributing factor, shall be an essential element of an asbestos 
claim. For purposes of this section, cancer shall satisfy the 
requirement for physical impairment.
 (b) Medical Report and Diagnosis: Filing.--The plaintiff in any 
civil action involving an asbestos claim shall file, together with the 
complaint or other initial pleading, a narrative medical report and 
diagnosis, signed by a diagnosing doctor, that meets the requirements 
of this section. In any civil action involving an asbestos claim that 
is pending on the effective date of this Act, the plaintiff shall file 
a narrative medical report and diagnosis within 60 days following such 
effective date but in no event later that 30 days prior to trial. The 
plaintiff's claim shall be dismissed without prejudice if a medical 
report and diagnosis fail to substantially meet the requirements of 
this section or are not timely filed.
 (c) Medical Report and Diagnosis: Contents.--The medical report and 
diagnosis filed under this section shall contain each of the following:
 (1) An employment and exposure history, which shall include 
 all of the principal employments and exposures of the exposed 
 person to airborne contaminants and shall state whether each 
 such employment involved exposure to airborne contaminants 
 (including but not limited to asbestos) that can cause 
 pulmonary impairment, and the nature, duration, and level of 
 any such exposure. The employment and exposure history shall be 
 obtained from the exposed person or, if that person is deceased 
 or otherwise unable to provide the required information, from 
 the person or persons most knowledgeable about the exposed 
 person's employment or exposures. The diagnosing doctor shall 
 certify that the employment and exposure history was taken by 
 the diagnosing doctor, or a medical professional employed by 
 and under the direct supervision and control of the diagnosing 
 doctor.
 (2) A detailed medical and smoking history, which shall 
 include a thorough review of the exposed person's past and 
 present medical conditions and their most probable cause and 
 full information regarding the exposed person's history of 
 smoking of tobacco products. The diagnosing doctor shall 
 certify that the medical and smoking history was taken by the 
 diagnosing doctor, or a medical professional employed by and 
 under the direct supervision and control of the diagnosing 
 doctor.
 (3) Certification that, in the opinion of the diagnosing 
 doctor, at least 15 years have elapsed between the exposed 
 person's first exposure to asbestos and the time of diagnosis.
 (4) Certification that--
 (A) in the opinion of a certified B-reader, the 
 exposed person's chest x-ray shows either--
 (i) bilateral small irregular opacities (s, 
 t, or u) graded 1/0 or higher on the ILO scale; 
 or
 (ii) bilateral diffuse pleural thickening 
 graded b2 or higher on the ILO scale and 
 including blunting of at least one costophrenic 
 angle; or
 (B) in the opinion of a board-certified 
 pathologist, the exposed person has pathological 
 evidence of asbestosis graded 1(B) or higher according 
 to criteria published in Asbestos-Associated Diseases, 
 Special Issue of the Archives of Pathology and 
 Laboratory Medicine, Volume 106, Number 11, Appendix 3 
 (October 8, 1982).
 (5)(A) Certification that the exposed person has asbestos-
 related pulmonary impairment as demonstrated by pulmonary 
 function testing that shows--
 (i) FVC below the predicted lower limit of normal 
 and FEV1/FVC (using actual values) at or above the 
 predicted lower limit of normal; or
 (ii) TLC below the predicted lower limit of normal.
 (B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), where pulmonary 
 function test results do not meet the requirement of such 
 subparagraph, a claimant may submit an additional report, by a 
 board-certified pulmonologist, internist, or occupational 
 physician, that states that the doctor providing the report has 
 a doctor/patient relationship with the exposed person, that the 
 exposed person has a chest x-ray meeting the requirements of 
 this Act which in the opinion of a certified B-reader shows 
 bilateral small irregular opacities (s, t, or u) graded 2/1 or 
 higher on the ILO scale, and that the exposed person has 
 restrictive impairment from asbestosis. The additional report 
 shall set forth in detail the specific pulmonary function test 
 findings that the doctor relies upon to establish that the 
 claimant has restrictive impairment and shall include the 
reports and readouts from all pulmonary function or other testing upon 
which the report is based.
 (6) A statement that the diagnosing doctor has concluded 
 the exposed person's respiratory impairment is not more 
 probably the result of causes other than exposure to 
 asbestosis.
 (7) Copies of the B-reader's report and the results of 
 pulmonary function tests (including printouts of flow volume 
 loops and all other elements necessary to demonstrate 
 compliance with the technical standards required by this 
 section).
 (d) Compliance With Technical Standards.--The technical standards 
required by this section are as follows:
 (1) Chest x-rays shall be administered in accordance with 
 all applicable State and Federal regulatory requirements and 
 shall be quality 1 unless the exposed person is deceased and 
 tissue is unavailable for pathological analysis, in which case 
 the chest x-ray may be quality 2.
 (2) Pulmonary function testing shall be performed using 
 equipment, methods of calibration, and technique that meet the 
 criteria incorporated in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
 Permanent Impairment and reported as set forth in 20 C.F.R. 
 404, Subpt. P, App.1, Part (A) section 3.00 (E) and (F), and 
 the interpretative standards set forth in the Official 
 Statement of the American Thoracic Society titled ``Lung 
 Function Testing: Selection of Reference Values and 
 Interpretative Strategies'' as published in the American Review 
 of Respiratory Diseases 1991: 144: 1202-1218. No adjustments 
 with respect to the interpretation of pulmonary function 
 testing shall be made on the basis of race.
 (e) No Presumption at Trial.--Submission of a medical report and 
diagnosis meeting the requirements of this section shall not result in 
any presumption at trial that the exposed person is impaired by an 
asbestos-related condition, and evidence that such a report was 
submitted shall not be admissible at trial.
 (f) Applicability.--This section shall govern the substantive rule 
of decision, regardless of forum.

SEC. 5. CONSOLIDATION.

 Unless all parties otherwise consent, a court may not consolidate 
for trial--
 (1) asbestos claims relating to more than 20 different 
 exposed persons; and
 (2) a nonmalignant claim relating to one exposed person 
 with a cancer claim relating to another exposed person.

SEC. 6. VENUE.

 A civil action asserting a nonmalignant claim may only be brought 
in the State of plaintiff's domicile or a State in which there occurred 
exposure to asbestos that is a substantial contributing factor to the 
physical impairment on which the claim is based. This section does not 
affect venue for civil actions asserting a cancer claim, which shall be 
governed by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.

SEC. 7. REMOVAL.

 (a) In General.--Any party in a civil action involving an asbestos 
claim may remove such action to a district court of the United States 
in accordance with chapter 89 of title 28, United States Code. A civil 
action may be removed to the district court of the United States in 
accordance with this subsection by any defendant without the consent of 
all defendants.
 (b) Remand.--The district court shall remand any civil action 
removed solely under subsection (a) if it finds that the plaintiffs 
substantially met the requirements of section 4.

SEC. 8. LIMITATIONS; TWO-DISEASE RULE; GENERAL RELEASES.

 (a) Statute of Limitations.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, with respect to any nonmalignant asbestos claim not barred as of 
the effective date of this Act, the limitations period on an asbestos 
claim shall not commence as a result of a purported diagnosis or 
finding of a nonmalignant condition related to asbestos that does not 
meet the substantive criteria in section 4.
 (b) Two-Disease Rule.--An asbestos claim arising out of a 
nonmalignant condition shall be a distinct cause of action from an 
asbestos claim relating to the same exposed person arising out of 
asbestos-related cancer. No damages shall be awarded for fear or risk 
of cancer in any civil action asserting only a nonmalignant asbestos 
claim.
 (c) General Releases From Liability Prohibited.--No settlement of a 
nonmalignant asbestos claim concluded after the effective date of this 
Act shall require, as a condition of settlement, release of any future 
claim for asbestos-related cancer.

SEC. 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Construction With Other Laws.--This Act shall not be construed 
to affect the scope or operation of any workers' compensation law or 
veterans' benefit program, to affect the exclusive remedy or 
subrogation provisions of any such law, or to authorize any lawsuit 
which is barred by any such provision of law.
 (b) Constitutional Authority.--The constitutional authority for 
this Act is contained in Article I, section 8, clause 3 of the 
Constitution of the United States and in Article III, section 1 of the 
Constitution of the United States.

SEC. 10. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall be effective on the date of the enactment of this 
Act and shall apply to any civil action asserting an asbestos claim in 
which trial has not commenced as of such date.
 <all>