[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 3486 Introduced in House (IH)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3486

 To establish safe harbors from the application of the antitrust laws 
 for certain activities of providers of health care services, and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 November 10, 1993

 Mr. Archer introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 May 12, 1994

 Additional sponsors: Mr. Callahan, Mr. Barcia of Michigan, Mr. Goss, 
Mr. Parker, Mr. Petri, Mrs. Fowler, Mr. Canady, Mr. Duncan, Mr. Dornan, 
 Mr. Dickey, Mr. Sundquist, Mr. Derrick, Mr. Allard, Mr. Klug, Mr. 
 Gordon, Mr. Bonilla, Mr. Zeliff, Mr. Inhofe, Mr. DeLay, Mr. Goodling, 
 Mrs. Lloyd, Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Crapo, Mr. Manzullo, Mr. Taylor of 
North Carolina, Mrs. Unsoeld, Mr. Brewster, Mr. Franks of Connecticut, 
Mr. Fields of Texas, Mr. Swett, Mr. Nussle, Mr. Thomas of Wyoming, Mr. 
 Upton, Mr. Boehner, Mr. Sensenbrenner, Mr. Ravenel, Mr. Combest, Mr. 
 Cramer, Mr. Clement, Mr. Levy, Mrs. Vucanovich, Mr. Hall of Ohio, Mr. 
 Montgomery, Ms. Pryce of Ohio, Mr. Knollenberg, Mr. Pete Geren of 
 Texas, Mr. Young of Alaska, Mr. Hoekstra, Mr. Smith of Oregon, Mr. 
Ramstad, Mr. Inslee, Mr. Stump, Mr. McDade, Mr. Paxon, Mr. Portman, Mr. 
 Smith of New Jersey, Mr. McHugh, Mr. Bunning, Mr. Bachus of Alabama, 
 Mr. Hobson, Mr. Coble, Mrs. Byrne, Mr. Rogers, Mrs. Johnson of 
Connecticut, Mr. Moorhead, Mr. Ewing, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Inglis of South 
 Carolina, Mr. Sangmeister, Mr. Shays, Mr. McCandless, Mr. Lightfoot, 
 Mr. Jefferson, Mr. Lazio, Mr. Kyl, Mr. Ehlers, Mr. Bliley, Mr. Oxley, 
 Mr. Machtley, Mr. Solomon, Mr. Armey, Mr. Goodlatte, Mr. Packard, Mr. 
Zimmer, Mr. Peterson of Minnesota, Mr. DeFazio, Ms. McKinney, Mr. Roth, 
Mr. Hansen, Mr. Barca of Wisconsin, Mr. Deutsch, Mr. Mica, Mr. Castle, 
 Ms. Dunn, Mr. McInnis, Mr. Johnson of South Dakota, Mr. Hutto, Mr. 
 Rowland, Mr. Stearns, Mr. Payne of Virginia, Mr. Collins of Georgia, 
 and Mr. Tauzin

 A BILL

 To establish safe harbors from the application of the antitrust laws 
 for certain activities of providers of health care services, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Antitrust Improvements 
Act of 1993''.

SEC. 2. EXEMPTION FROM ANTITRUST LAWS FOR CERTAIN COMPETITIVE AND 
 COLLABORATIVE ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Exemption Described.--An activity relating to the provision of 
health care services shall be exempt from the antitrust laws if--
 (1) the activity is within one of the categories of safe 
 harbors described in section 3;
 (2) the activity is within an additional safe harbor 
 designated by the Attorney General under section 4; or
 (3) the activity is specified in and in compliance with the 
 terms of a certificate of review issued by the Attorney General 
 under section 5 and the activity occurs--
 (A) while the certificate is in effect, or
 (B) in the case of a certificate issued during the 
 2-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, at any time on or after the first day of the 
 2-year period that ends on the date the certificate 
 takes effect.
 (b) Award of Attorney's Fees and Costs of Suit.--
 (1) In general.--If any person brings an action alleging a 
 claim under the antitrust laws and the activity on which the 
 claim is based is found by the court to be exempt from such 
 laws under subsection (a), the court shall, at the conclusion 
 of the action--
 (A) award to a substantially prevailing claimant 
 the cost of suit attributable to such claim, including 
 a reasonable attorney's fee, or
 (B) award to a substantially prevailing party 
 defending against such claim the cost of such suit 
 attributable to such claim, including reasonable 
 attorney's fee, if the claim, or the claimant's conduct 
 during litigation of the claim, was frivolous, 
 unreasonable, without foundation, or in bad faith.
 (2) Offset in cases of bad faith.--The court may reduce an 
 award made pursuant to paragraph (1) in whole or in part by an 
 award in favor of another party for any part of the cost of 
 suit (including a reasonable attorney's fee) attributable to 
 conduct during the litigation by any prevailing party that the 
 court finds to be frivolous, unreasonable, without foundation, 
 or in bad faith.

SEC. 3. SAFE HARBORS.

 The following activities are safe harbors for purposes of section 
2(a)(1):
 (1) Combinations with market share below threshold.--
 Activities relating to health care services of any combination 
 of health care providers if the number of each type or 
 specialty of provider in question does not exceed 25 percent of 
 the total number of such type or specialty of provider in the 
 relevant market area.
 (2) Activities of medical self-regulatory entities.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), any 
 activity of a medical self-regulatory entity relating 
 to standard setting or standard enforcement activities 
 that are designed to promote the quality of health care 
 provided to patients.
 (B) Exception.--No activity of a medical self-
 regulatory entity may be deemed to fall under the safe 
 harbor established under this paragraph if the activity 
 is conducted for purposes of financial gain.
 (3) Participation in surveys.--The participation of a 
 provider of health care services in a written survey of the 
 prices of services, reimbursement levels, or the compensation 
 and benefits of employees and personnel, but only if--
 (A) the survey is conducted by a third party, such 
 as a purchaser of health care services, governmental 
 entity, institution of higher education, or trade 
 association;
 (B) the information provided by participants in the 
 survey is based on prices charged, reimbursements 
 received, or compensation and benefits paid prior to 
 the third month preceding the month in which the 
 information is provided; and
 (C) if the results of the survey are disseminated, 
 the results are aggregated in a manner that ensures 
 that no recipient of the results may identify the 
 prices charged, reimbursement received, or compensation 
 and benefits paid by any particular provider.
 (4) Joint ventures for high technology and costly equipment 
 and services.--Any activity of a health care cooperative 
 venture relating to the purchase, operation, or marketing of 
 high technology or other expensive medical equipment, or the 
 provision of high cost or complex services, but only if the 
 number of participants in the venture does not exceed the 
 lowest number needed to support the venture together with any 
 other providers for whom the participation in the venture is 
 the only means of obtaining or operating such equipment or 
 providing such services.
 (5) Hospital mergers.--Activities relating to a merger of 2 
 hospitals if, during the 3-year period preceding the merger, 
 one of the hospitals had an average of 150 or fewer operational 
 beds and an average daily inpatient census of less than 50 
 percent of such beds.
 (6) Joint purchasing arrangements.--Any joint purchasing 
 arrangement among health care providers if--
 (A) the purchases under the arrangement represent 
 less than 35 percent of the total sales of the product 
 purchased in the relevant market area; and
 (B) the amounts paid under the arrangement 
 represent less than 20 percent of the total revenues of 
 the supplier of the product purchased.
 (7) Negotiations.--Activities consisting of good faith 
 negotiations to carry out any activity--
 (A) described in this section,
 (B) within an additional safe harbor designated by 
 the Attorney General under section 4,
 (C) that is the subject of an application for a 
 certificate of review under section 5, or
 (D) that is deemed a submission of a notification 
 under section 6(a)(2)(B),
 without regard to whether such an activity is carried out.

SEC. 4. DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL SAFE HARBORS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Solicitation of proposals.--Not later than 30 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney 
 General shall publish a notice in the Federal Register 
 soliciting proposals for additional safe harbors.
 (2) Review and report on proposed safe harbors.--Not later 
 than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Attorney General (in consultation with the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services and the Chair of the Federal Trade 
 Commission) shall--
 (A) review the proposed safe harbors submitted 
 under paragraph (1); and
 (B) submit a report to Congress describing the 
 proposals to be included in the publication of 
 additional safe harbors described in paragraph (3) and 
 the proposals that are not to be so included, together 
 with explanations therefore.
 (3) Publication of additional safe harbors.--Not later than 
 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Attorney General (in consultation with the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services and the Chair of the Federal Trade 
 Commission) shall publish in the Federal Register proposed 
 additional safe harbors for purposes of section 2(a)(2) for 
 providers of health care services. Not later than 180 days 
 after publishing such proposed safe harbors in the Federal 
 Register, the Attorney General shall issue final rules 
 establishing such safe harbors.
 (b) Criteria for Safe Harbors.--In establishing safe harbors under 
subsection (a), the Attorney General shall take into account the 
following:
 (1) The extent to which a competitive or collaborative 
 activity will accomplish any of the following:
 (A) An increase in access to health care services.
 (B) The enhancement of the quality of health care 
 services.
 (C) The establishment of cost efficiencies that 
 will be passed on to consumers, including economies of 
 scale and reduced transaction and administrative costs.
 (D) An increase in the ability of health care 
 facilities to provide services in medically underserved 
 areas or to medically underserved populations.
 (E) An improvement in the utilization of health 
 care resources or the reduction in the inefficient 
 duplication of the use of such resources.
 (2) Whether the designation of an activity as a safe harbor 
 under subsection (a) will result in the following outcomes:
 (A) Health plans and other health care insurers, 
 consumers of health care services, and health care 
 providers will be better able to negotiate payment and 
 service arrangements which will reduce costs to 
 consumers.
 (B) Taking into consideration the characteristics 
 of the particular purchasers and providers involved, 
 competition will not be unduly restricted.
 (C) Equally efficient and less restrictive 
 alternatives do not exist to meet the criteria 
 described in paragraph (1).
 (D) The activity will not unreasonably foreclose 
 competition by denying competitors a necessary element 
 of competition.

SEC. 5. CERTIFICATES OF REVIEW.

 (a) Establishment of Program.--In consultation with the Secretary 
and the Chair, the Attorney General shall (not later than 180 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act) issue certificates of 
review in accordance with this section for providers of health care 
services and advise and assist any person with respect to applying for 
such a certificate of review.
 (b) Procedures for Application for Certificate.--
 (1) Form; content.--To apply for a certificate of review, a 
 person shall submit to the Attorney General a written 
 application which--
 (A) specifies the activities relating to the 
 provision of health care services which satisfy the 
 criteria described in section 4(b) and which will be 
 included in the certificate; and
 (B) is in a form and contains any information, 
 including information pertaining to the overall market 
 in which the applicant operates, required by rule or 
 regulation promulgated under section 8.
 (2) Publication of notice in federal register.--Within 10 
 days after an application submitted under paragraph (1) is 
 received by the Attorney General, the Attorney General shall 
 publish in the Federal Register a notice that announces that an 
 application for a certificate of review has been submitted, 
 identifies each person submitting the application, and 
 describes the conduct for which the application is submitted.
 (3) Establishment of procedures for issuance of 
 certificate.--In consultation with the Chair and the Secretary, 
 the Attorney General shall establish procedures to be used in 
 applying for and in determining whether to approve an 
 application for a certificate of review under this title. Under 
 such procedures the Attorney General shall approve an 
 application if the Attorney General determines that the 
 activities to be covered under the certificate will satisfy the 
 criteria described in section 4(b) for additional safe harbors 
 designated under such section and that the benefits of the 
 issuance of the certificate will outweigh any disadvantages 
 that may result from reduced competition.
 (4) Timing for decision on application.--
 (A) In general.--Within 90 days after the Attorney 
 General receives an application for a certificate of 
 review, the Attorney General shall determine whether 
 the applicant's health care market activities are in 
 accordance with the procedures described in paragraph 
 (3). If the Attorney General, with the concurrence of 
 the Secretary, determines that such procedures are met, 
 the Attorney General shall issue to the applicant a 
 certificate of review. The certificate of review shall 
 specify--
 (i) the health care market activities to 
 which the certificate applies,
 (ii) the person to whom the certificate of 
 review is issued, and
 (iii) any terms and conditions the Attorney 
 General or the Secretary deems necessary to 
 assure compliance with the applicable 
 procedures described in paragraph (3).
 (B) Applications deemed approved.--If the Attorney 
 General does not reject an application before the 
 expiration of the 90-period beginning on the date the 
 Attorney General receives the application, the Attorney 
 General shall be deemed to have approved the 
 application and to have issued a certificate of review 
 relating to the applicant's health care market 
 activities covered under the application.
 (5) Expedited action.--If the applicant indicates a special 
 need for prompt disposition, the Attorney General and the 
 Secretary may expedite action on the application, except that 
 no certificate of review may be issued within 30 days of 
 publication of notice in the Federal Register under subsection 
 (b)(2).
 (6) Actions upon denial.--
 (A) Notification.--If the Attorney General denies 
 in whole or in part an application for a certificate, 
 the Attorney General shall notify the applicant of the 
 Attorney General's determination and the reasons for 
 it.
 (B) Request for reconsideration.--An applicant may, 
 within 30 days of receipt of notification that the 
 application has been denied in whole or in part, 
 request the Attorney General to reconsider the 
 determination. The Attorney General, with the 
 concurrence of the Secretary, shall notify the 
 applicant of the determination upon reconsideration 
 within 30 days of receipt of the request.
 (C) Return of documents.--If the Attorney General 
 denies an application for the issuance of a certificate 
 of review and thereafter receives from the applicant a 
 request for the return of documents submitted by the 
 applicant in connection with the application for the 
 certificate, the Attorney General and the Secretary 
 shall return to the applicant, not later than 30 days 
 after receipt of the request, the documents and all 
 copies of the documents available to the Attorney 
 General and the Secretary, except to the extent that 
 the information has been made public under an exception 
 to the rule against public disclosure described in 
 subsection (g)(2)(B).
 (7) Fraudulent procurement.--A certificate of review shall 
 be void ab initio with respect to any health care market 
 activities for which the certificate was procured by fraud.
 (c) Amendment and Revocation of Certificates.--
 (1) Notification of changes.--Any applicant who receives a 
 certificate of review--
 (A) shall promptly report to the Attorney General 
 any change relevant to the matters specified in the 
 certificate; and
 (B) may submit to the Attorney General an 
 application to amend the certificate to reflect the 
 effect of the change on the conduct specified in the 
 certificate.
 (2) Amendment to certificate.--An application for an 
 amendment to a certificate of review shall be treated as an 
 application for the issuance of a certificate. The effective 
 date of an amendment shall be the date on which the application 
 for the amendment is submitted to the Attorney General.
 (3) Revocation.--
 (A) Grounds for revocation.--In accordance with 
 this paragraph, the Attorney General may revoke in 
 whole or in part a certificate of review issued under 
 this section. The following shall be considered grounds 
 for the revocation of a certificate:
 (i) After the expiration of the 2-year 
 period beginning on the date a person's 
 certificate is issued, the activities of the 
 person have not substantially accomplished the 
 purposes for the issuance of the certificate.
 (ii) The person has failed to comply with 
 any of the terms or conditions imposed under 
 the certificate by the Attorney General or the 
 Secretary under subsection (b)(4).
 (iii) The activities covered under the 
 certificate no longer satisfy the criteria set 
 forth in section 4(b).
 (B) Request for compliance information.--If the 
 Attorney General or Secretary has reason to believe 
 that any of the grounds for revocation of a certificate 
 of review described in subparagraph (A) may apply to a 
 person holding the certificate, the Attorney General 
 shall request such information from such person as the 
 Attorney General or the Secretary deems necessary to 
 resolve the matter of compliance. Failure to comply 
 with such request shall be grounds for revocation of 
 the certificate under this paragraph.
 (C) Procedures for revocation.--If the Attorney 
 General or the Secretary determines that any of the 
 grounds for revocation of a certificate of review 
 described in subparagraph (A) apply to a person holding 
 the certificate, or that such person has failed to 
 comply with a request made under subparagraph (B), the 
 Attorney General shall give written notice of the 
 determination to such person. The notice shall include 
 a statement of the circumstances underlying, and the 
 reasons in support of, the determination. In the 60-day 
 period beginning 30 days after the notice is given, the 
 Attorney General shall revoke the certificate or modify 
 it as the Attorney General or the Secretary deems 
 necessary to cause the certificate to apply only to 
 activities that meet the procedures for the issuance of 
 certificates described in subsection (b)(2).
 (D) Investigation authority.--For purposes of 
 carrying out this paragraph, the Attorney General may 
 conduct investigations in the same manner as the 
 Attorney General conducts investigations under section 
 3 of the Antitrust Civil Process Act, except that no 
 civil investigative demand may be issued to a person to 
 whom a certificate of review is issued if such person 
 is the target of such investigation.
 (d) Review of Determinations.--
 (1) Availability of review for certain actions.--If the 
 Attorney General denies, in whole or in part, an application 
 for a certificate of review or for an amendment to a 
 certificate, or revokes or modifies a certificate pursuant to 
 paragraph (3), the applicant or certificate holder (as the case 
 may be) may, within 30 days of the denial or revocation, bring 
 an action in any appropriate district court of the United 
 States to set aside the determination on the ground that such 
 determination is erroneous based on the preponderance of the 
 evidence.
 (2) No other review permitted.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (1), no action by the Attorney General or the 
 Secretary pursuant to this title shall be subject to judicial 
 review.
 (3) Effect of rejected application.--If the Attorney 
 General denies, in whole or in part, an application for a 
 certificate of review or for an amendment to a certificate, or 
 revokes or amends a certificate, neither the negative 
 determination nor the statement of reasons therefore shall be 
 admissible in evidence, in any administrative or judicial 
 proceeding, concerning any claim under the antitrust laws.
 (e) Publication of Decisions.--The Attorney General shall publish a 
notice in the Federal Register on a timely basis of each decision made 
with respect to an application for a certificate of review under this 
section or the amendment or revocation of such a certificate, in a 
manner that protects the confidentiality of any proprietary information 
relating to the application.
 (f) Annual Reports.--Every person to whom a certificate of review 
is issued shall submit to the Attorney General an annual report, in 
such form and at such time as the Attorney General may require, that 
contains any necessary updates to the information required under 
subsection (b) and a description of the activities of the holder under 
the certificate during the preceding year.
 (g) Restrictions on Disclosure of Information.--
 (1) Waiver of disclosure requirements under administrative 
 procedure act.--Information submitted by any person in 
 connection with the issuance, amendment, or revocation of a 
 certificate of review shall be exempt from disclosure under 
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Restrictions on disclosure of commercial or financial 
 information.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), no officer or employee of the United States shall 
 disclose commercial or financial information submitted 
 in connection with the issuance, amendment, or 
 revocation of a certificate of review if the 
 information is privileged or confidential and if 
 disclosure of the information would cause harm to the 
 person who submitted the information.
 (B) Exceptions.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply 
 with respect to information disclosed--
 (i) upon a request made by the Congress or 
 any committee of the Congress,
 (ii) in a judicial or administrative 
 proceeding, subject to appropriate protective 
 orders,
 (iii) with the consent of the person who 
 submitted the information,
 (iv) in the course of making a 
 determination with respect to the issuance, 
 amendment, or revocation of a certificate of 
 review, if the Attorney General deems 
 disclosure of the information to be necessary 
 in connection with making the determination,
 (v) in accordance with any requirement 
 imposed by a statute of the United States, or
 (vi) in accordance with any rule or 
 regulation promulgated under subsection (i) 
 permitting the disclosure of the information to 
 an agency of the United States or of a State on 
 the condition that the agency will disclose the 
 information only under the circumstances 
 specified in clauses (i) through (v).
 (3) Prohibition against use of information to support or 
 answer claims under antitrust laws.--Any information disclosed 
 in an application for a certificate of review under this 
 section shall only be admissible into evidence in a judicial or 
 administrative proceeding for the sole purpose of establishing 
 that a person is entitled to the protections provided by such a 
 certificate.

SEC. 6. NOTIFICATIONS PROVIDING REDUCTION IN CERTAIN PENALTIES UNDER 
 ANTITRUST LAW FOR HEALTH CARE COOPERATIVE VENTURES.

 (a) Notifications Described.--
 (1) Submission of notification by venture.--Any party to a 
 health care cooperative venture, acting on such venture's 
 behalf, may, not later than 90 days after entering into a 
 written agreement to form such venture or not later than 90 
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever is 
 later, file with the Attorney General a written notification 
 disclosing--
 (A) the identities of the parties to such venture,
 (B) the nature and objectives of such venture, and
 (C) such additional information as the Attorney 
 General may require by regulation.
 (2) Activities deemed submission of notification.--The 
 following health care cooperative ventures shall be deemed to 
 have filed a written notification with respect to the venture 
 under paragraph (1):
 (A) Submission of application for certificate of 
 review.--Any health care cooperative venture for which 
 an application for a certificate of review is filed 
 with the Attorney General under section 4.
 (B) Engaging in risk-sharing activities under 
 venture.--Any health care cooperative venture whose 
 members engage in risk-sharing arrangements, including 
 (but not limited to)--
 (i) the acceptance of capitation contracts;
 (ii) the acceptance of contracts with fee 
 withholding mechanisms relating to the ability 
 to meet established goals for utilization 
 review and management; and
 (iii) the holding by members of significant 
 ownership or equity interests in the venture, 
 where the capital contributed by the members is 
 used to fund the operational costs of the 
 venture such as administration, marketing, and 
 computer-operated medical information, if the 
 venture develops and operates comprehensive 
 programs for utilization management and quality 
 assurance that include controls over the use of 
 institutional, specialized, and ancillary 
 medical services.
 (C) Ventures below certain size.--Any health care 
 cooperative venture consisting of a network of 
 providers not greater than--
 (i) in the case of a nonexclusive network 
 in which the participating members are 
 permitted to create or join other competing 
 networks, 50 percent of the providers of health 
 care services in the relevant geographic area 
 and 50 percent of the members of the provider 
 specialty group in the relevant market area; or
 (ii) in the case of an exclusive network in 
 which the participating members are not 
 permitted to create or join other competing 
 networks, 35 percent of the providers of health 
 care services in the relevant geographic area 
 and 35 percent of the members of the provider 
 specialty group in the relevant market area.
 (3) Submission of additional information.--
 (A) Request of attorney general.--At any time after 
 receiving a notification filed under paragraph (1), the 
 Attorney General may require the submission of 
 additional information or documentary material relevant 
 to the proposed health care cooperative venture.
 (B) Parties to venture.--Any party to a health care 
 cooperative venture may submit such additional 
 information on the venture's behalf as may be 
 appropriate to ensure that the venture will receive the 
 protections provided under subsection (b).
 (C) Required submission of information on changes 
 to venture.--A health care cooperative venture for 
 which a notification is in effect under this section 
 shall submit information on any change in the 
 membership of the venture not later than 90 days after 
 such change occurs.
 (4) Publication of notification.--
 (A) Information made publicly available.--Not later 
 than 30 days after receiving a notification with 
 respect to a venture under paragraph (1), the Attorney 
 General shall publish in the Federal Register a notice 
 with respect to the venture that identifies the parties 
 to the venture and generally describes the purpose and 
 planned activity of the venture. Prior to its 
 publication, the contents of the notice shall be made 
 available to the parties to the venture.
 (B) Restriction on disclosure of other 
 information.--All information and documentary material 
 submitted pursuant to this section and all information 
 obtained by the Attorney General in the course of any 
 investigation or case with respect to a potential 
 violation of the antitrust laws by the health care 
 cooperative venture (other than information and 
 material described in subparagraph (A)) shall be exempt 
 from disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United 
 States Code, and shall not be made publicly available 
 by any agency of the United States to which such 
 section applies except in a judicial proceeding in 
 which such information and material is subject to any 
 protective order.
 (5) Withdrawal of notification.--Any person who files a 
 notification pursuant to this section may withdraw such 
 notification before a publication by the Attorney General 
 pursuant to paragraph (4). Any person who is deemed to have 
 filed a notification under paragraph (2)(A) shall be deemed to 
 have withdrawn the notification if the certificate of review in 
 question is revoked or withdrawn under section 5.
 (6) No judicial review permitted.--Any action taken or not 
 taken by the Attorney General with respect to notifications 
 filed pursuant to this subsection shall not be subject to 
 judicial review.
 (b) Protections for Ventures Subject to Notification.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Protections described.--The provisions of 
 paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5) shall apply with 
 respect to any action under the antitrust laws 
 challenging conduct within the scope of a notification 
 which is in effect pursuant to subsection (a)(1).
 (B) Timing of protections.--The protections 
 described in this subsection shall apply to the venture 
 that is the subject of a notification under subsection 
 (a)(1) as of the earlier of--
 (i) the date of the publication in the 
 Federal Register of the notice published with 
 respect to the notification; or
 (ii) if such notice is not published during 
 the period required under subsection (a)(4), 
 the expiration of the 30-day period that begins 
 on the date the Attorney General receives any 
 necessary information required to be submitted 
 under subsection (a)(1) or any additional 
 information required by the Attorney General 
 under subsection (a)(3)(A).
 (2) Applicability of rule of reason standard.--In any 
 action under the antitrust laws, the conduct of any person 
 which is within the scope of a notification filed under 
 subsection (a) shall not be deemed illegal per se, but shall be 
 judged on the basis of its reasonableness, taking into account 
 all relevant factors affecting competition, including, but not 
 limited to, effects on competition in relevant markets.
 (3) Limitation on recovery to actual damages and 
 interest.--Notwithstanding section 4 of the Clayton Act, any 
 person who is entitled to recovery under the antitrust laws for 
 conduct that is within the scope of a notification filed under 
 subsection (a) shall recover the actual damages sustained by 
 such person and interest calculated at the rate specified in 
 section 1961 of title 28, United States Code, for the period 
 beginning on the earliest date for which injury can be 
 established and ending on the date of judgment, unless the 
 court finds that the award of all or part of such interest is 
 unjust under the circumstances.
 (4) Award of attorney's fees and costs of suit.--
 (A) In general.--In any action under the antitrust 
 laws brought against a health care cooperative venture 
 for conduct that is within the scope of a notification 
 filed under subsection (a), the court shall, at the 
 conclusion of the action--
 (i) award to a substantially prevailing 
 claimant the cost of suit attributable to such 
 claim, including a reasonable attorney's fee, 
 or
 (ii) award to a substantially prevailing 
 party defending against such claim the cost of 
 such suit attributable to such claim, including 
 reasonable attorney's fee, if the claim, or the 
 claimant's conduct during litigation of the 
 claim, was frivolous, unreasonable, without 
 foundation, or in bad faith.
 (B) Offset in cases of bad faith.--The court may 
 reduce an award made pursuant to subparagraph (A) in 
 whole or in part by an award in favor of another party 
 for any part of the cost of suit (including a 
 reasonable attorney's fee) attributable to conduct 
 during the litigation by any prevailing party that the 
 court finds to be frivolous, unreasonable, without 
 foundation, or in bad faith.
 (5) Restrictions on admissibility of information.--
 (A) In general.--Any information disclosed in a 
 notification submitted under subsection (a)(1) and the 
 fact of the publication of a notification by the 
 Attorney General under subsection (a)(4) shall only be 
 admissible into evidence in a judicial or 
 administrative proceeding for the sole purpose of 
 establishing that a party to a health care cooperative 
 venture is entitled to the protections described in 
 this subsection.
 (B) Actions of attorney general.--No action taken 
 by the Attorney General pursuant to this section shall 
 be admissible into evidence in any judicial or 
 administrative proceeding for the purpose of supporting 
 or answering any claim under the antitrust laws.

SEC. 7. REVIEW AND REPORTS ON SAFE HARBORS AND CERTIFICATES OF REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--The Attorney General (in consultation with the 
Secretary and the Chair) shall periodically review the safe harbors 
described in section 3, the additional safe harbors designated under 
section 4, and the certificates of review issued under section 5, and--
 (1) with respect to the safe harbors described in section 
 3, submit such recommendations to Congress as the Attorney 
 General considers appropriate for modifications of such safe 
 harbors;
 (2) with respect to the additional safe harbors under 
 designated under section 4, issue proposed revisions to such 
 activities and publish the revisions in the Federal Register; 
 and
 (3) with respect to the certificates of review, submit a 
 report to Congress on the issuance of such certificates, and 
 shall include in the report a description of the effect of such 
 certificates on increasing access to high quality health care 
 services at reduced costs.
 (b) Recommendations for Legislation.--The Attorney General shall 
include in the reports submitted under subsection (a)(3) any 
recommendations of the Attorney General for legislation to improve the 
program for the issuance of certificates of review established under 
this title.

SEC. 8. RULES, REGULATIONS, AND GUIDELINES.

 (a) Safe Harbors, Certificates, and Notifications.--The Attorney 
General, with the concurrence of the Secretary, shall promulgate such 
rules, regulations, and guidelines as are necessary to carry out 
sections 3, 4, 5, and 6, including guidelines relating to appropriate 
geographic and product areas for health care services and providers of 
health care services.
 (b) Guidance for Providers.--
 (1) In general.--To promote greater certainty regarding the 
 application of the antitrust laws to activities in the health 
 care market, the Attorney General, in consultation with the 
 Secretary and the Chair, shall (not later than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act), taking into account the 
 criteria used to designate additional safe harbors under 
 section 4 and grant certificates of review under section 5, 
 publish guidelines--
 (A) to assist providers of health care services in 
 analyzing whether the activities of such providers may 
 be subject to a safe harbor under sections 3 or 4; and
 (B) describing specific types of activities which 
 would meet the requirements for a certificate of review 
 under section 5, and summarizing the factual and legal 
 bases on which the activities would meet the 
 requirements.
 (2) Periodic update.--The Attorney General shall 
 periodically update the guidelines published under paragraph 
 (1) as the Attorney General considers appropriate.
 (3) Waiver of administrative procedure act.--Section 553 of 
 title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to the issuance of 
 guidelines under paragraph (1).

SEC. 9. ESTABLISHMENT OF HHS OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE COMPETITION POLICY.

 (a) In General.--There is established within the Department of 
Health and Human Services an Office to be known as the Office of Health 
Care Competition Policy (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
``Office''). The Office shall be headed by a director, who shall be 
appointed by the Secretary.
 (b) Duties.--The Office shall coordinate the responsibilities of 
the Secretary under this Act and otherwise assist the Secretary in 
developing policies relating to the competitive and collaborative 
activities of providers of health care services.

SEC. 10. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act, the following definitions shall apply:
 (1) The term ``antitrust laws''--
 (A) has the meaning given it in subsection (a) of 
 the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12(a)), 
 except that such term includes section 5 of the Federal 
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) to the extent such 
 section applies to unfair methods of competition; and
 (B) includes any State law similar to the laws 
 referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (2) The term ``Chair'' means the Chair of the Federal Trade 
 Commission.
 (3) The term ``health benefit plan'' means any hospital or 
 medical expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or 
 medical service plan contract, or health maintenance subscriber 
 contract, or a multiple employer welfare arrangement or 
 employee benefit plan (as defined under the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974) which provides benefits with 
 respect to health care services.
 (4) The term ``health care cooperative venture'' means any 
 activities, including attempts to enter into or perform a 
 contract or agreement, carried out by 2 or more persons for the 
 purpose of providing health care services.
 (5) The term ``health care services'' means any services 
 for which payment may be made under a health benefit plan, 
 including services related to the delivery or administration of 
 such services.
 (6) The term ``medical self-regulatory entity'' means a 
 medical society or association, a specialty board, a recognized 
 accrediting agency, or a hospital medical staff, and includes 
 the members, officers, employees, consultants, and volunteers 
 or committees of such an entity.
 (7) The term ``person'' includes a State or unit of local 
 government.
 (8) The term ``provider of health care services'' means any 
 individual or entity that is engaged in the delivery of health 
 care services in a State and that is required by State law or 
 regulation to be licensed or certified by the State to engage 
 in the delivery of such services in the State.
 (9) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services.
 (10) The term ``specialty group'' means a medical specialty 
 or subspecialty in which a provider of health care services may 
 be licensed to practice by a State (as determined by the 
 Secretary in consultation with the certification boards for 
 such specialties and subspecialties).
 (11) The term ``standard setting and enforcement 
 activities'' means--
 (A) accreditation of health care practitioners, 
 health care providers, medical education institutions, 
 or medical education programs,
 (B) technology assessment and risk management 
 activities,
 (C) the development and implementation of practice 
 guidelines or practice parameters, or
 (D) official peer review proceedings undertaken by 
 a hospital medical staff (or committee thereof) or a 
 medical society or association for purposes of 
 evaluating the professional conduct or quality of 
 health care provided by a medical professional.

 <all>

HR 3486 SC----2
HR 3486 SC----3