[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 684 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

103d CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 684

 To establish a national health plan, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 March 31 (legislative day, March 3), 1993

 Mr. Inouye (for himself and Mr. Wellstone) introduced the following 
 bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish a national health plan, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Health 
Care Act of 1993''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Purpose.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
 TITLE I--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM

Sec. 101. Establishment.
Sec. 102. Approval of State programs.
Sec. 103. Eligibility for enrollment.
Sec. 104. Enrollment.
Sec. 105. Portability.
 TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVISION OF SERVICES

 Subtitle A--Scope of Services

Sec. 201. Covered services.
Sec. 202. Exclusions.
Sec. 203. Prohibitions on limitations.
Sec. 204. Eligibility.
Sec. 205. Additional and duplicate services.
 Subtitle B--Provision of Services

Sec. 211. Health care providers.
Sec. 212. Delivery systems.
Sec. 213. State long-term care coordination agencies.
Sec. 214. Incorporation of miscellaneous Medicare-related provisions.
Sec. 215. Nondiscrimination.
 TITLE III--REVENUE

 Subtitle A--Budget Process

Sec. 301. National and State health budgets.
Sec. 302. Payments to States.
Sec. 303. Establishment of exchange program.
 Subtitle B--Payments to Health Care Providers

Sec. 311. Payments to health care providers.
Sec. 312. Payments to institutional health care providers.
Sec. 313. Payments for services by individual health care providers.
Sec. 314. Payments to integrated health service plans.
Sec. 315. Payments for prescription drugs.
Sec. 316. Approved devices and equipment.
Sec. 317. Grievance procedure.
 Subtitle C--Sources of Revenue

Sec. 321. Federal sources of revenue.
Sec. 322. State sources of revenue.
Sec. 323. Cost-sharing.
Sec. 324. National Health Care Trust Fund.
 TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION

 Subtitle A--Federal Administration

Sec. 401. National Health Care Administration.
Sec. 402. National Health Board.
Sec. 403. National Council on Quality Assurance and Consumer 
 Protection.
Sec. 404. Medical Malpractice Commission.
Sec. 405. Utilization and quality control peer review organizations.
Sec. 406. Public Health Functions and Activities Commission.
Sec. 407. Technical assistance centers.
 Subtitle B--State and Local Administration

Sec. 411. State agency.
Sec. 412. State and local planning boards.
 TITLE V--TRANSITION AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROGRAMS

Sec. 501. Effective date.
Sec. 502. Repeals and incorporations.
Sec. 503. Transition.
Sec. 504. Rules governing congressional consideration.
Sec. 505. Relation to Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 601. Bill of rights.
Sec. 602. Research and service delivery improvement program grants.
Sec. 603. Prevention, health promotion, and health awareness program 
 grants.
Sec. 604. Displaced workers.

SEC. 2. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this Act is to establish a single-payer national 
program of health care services that is administered by the States 
under Federal guidelines and provides--
 (1) a right to health care services for every United States 
 citizen and resident, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, 
 national origin, age, health condition, sexual preference, 
 income, language, or geographic residence in an urban or rural 
 area;
 (2) comprehensive health benefits that--
 (A) enable consumers to achieve and maintain 
 physical and mental health, maximize potential for 
 enhanced social and physical functioning, and sustain a 
 meaningful quality of life; and
 (B) provide a major emphasis on primary prevention 
 and health promotion;
 (3) a broad range of involvement on the local level by 
 health care providers, public agencies, consumers, civic 
 organizations, schools, employers, and unions;
 (4) cost-conscious delivery of high-quality services 
 through prospective global budgeting for the States and 
 hospitals, negotiated fee schedules for health care providers, 
 efficient use of health care facilities and equipment, and the 
 elimination of unnecessary medical procedures;
 (5) the right of consumers to participate in the decisions 
 that directly affect their lives, and in the decisions that 
 relate to the design and implementation of covered services;
 (6) a simplified administrative structure that enhances 
 access and reduces administrative waste;
 (7) freedom of choice of consumers to select health care 
 providers within the framework of a national health care 
 program;
 (8) primary financing through progressive Federal taxation;
 (9) an integrated health delivery system that--
 (A) provides a continuum of care that links all 
 levels of the health care program;
 (B) addresses the physical, mental, and 
 psychosocial health needs of the consumer and the 
 family; and
 (C) promotes multidisciplinary collaboration in the 
 delivery of services;
 (10) a health care program that reflects the demographic 
 and sociocultural diversity and needs of the community;
 (11) professional standards linked to performance for all 
 health care providers that ensure the delivery of high-quality 
 health care services and accountability to both health care 
 providers and consumers;
 (12) special resources to address the medical, mental, and 
 social health needs of medically underserved populations and 
 health professional shortage areas;
 (13) education and training programs for professional, 
 allied, and paraprofessional personnel in health professional 
 shortage areas, and the assurance that the programs offer equal 
 access to minorities and women;
 (14) continued commitment to and strengthening of basic 
 public health functions to provide for a safe environment, 
 control of infectious diseases, and promotion of a healthy 
 lifestyle and behavior;
 (15) support of research efforts that will--
 (A) enhance the physical, mental, and social well-
 being of major segments of society;
 (B) improve the delivery of cost-conscious, quality 
 health care services; and
 (C) enable health care providers and consumers to 
 make more informed decisions; and
 (16) continued commitment to basic biomedical and 
 comprehensive mental health research.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the 
 National Health Care Administration, established in section 
 401(a).
 (2) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Administration, appointed under section 
 401(b)(1).
 (3) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the National Health 
 Board, established in section 402.
 (4) Consumer.--The term ``consumer'' means an eligible 
 individual who receives covered services.
 (5) Covered service.--The term ``covered service'' means a 
 service described in section 201, provided under a State 
 program.
 (6) Eligible individual.--The term ``eligible individual'' 
 means an individual who is eligible--
 (A) for enrollment, as described in section 103; 
 and
 (B) with respect to a covered service, to receive 
 the service, as described in section 204.
 (7) Health care facility.--The term ``health care 
 facility'' means a facility entitled under the law of a State 
 to provide covered services.
 (8) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means a person entitled under the law of a State to 
 provide covered services, and a health care facility.
 (9) Health professional shortage area.--The term ``health 
 professional shortage area'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 332(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 254e(a)(1)).
 (10) Integrated health service plan.--The term ``Integrated 
 Health Service Plan'' means a nonprofit, consumer-controlled, 
 health plan that--
 (A) provides all covered services; and
 (B) operates as a single organization in the health 
 care facilities of the organization.
 (11) Local planning area.--The term ``local planning area'' 
 means an area designated under section 412.
 (12) Medically underserved population.--The term 
 ``medically underserved population'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 254c(b)(3).
 (13) National health care data base.--The term ``national 
 health care data base'' means the data base established in 
 section 401(h).
 (14) National health care program.--The term ``national 
 health care program'' means the program established in section 
 101.
 (15) Nursing facility.--The term ``nursing facility'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 1919(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a)).
 (16) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States 
 Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (17) State agency.--The term ``State agency'' means an 
 agency designated under section 411.
 (18) State program.--The term ``State program'' means a 
 program approved under section 102.
 (19) Trust fund.--The term ``Trust Fund'' means, except as 
 otherwise specifically provided, the fund established in 
 section 324.

 TITLE I--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT.

 The Administrator shall establish and carry out a national health 
care program in accordance with this Act. In carrying out the national 
health care program, the Administrator shall make payments under 
section 302 to assist the States in establishing and carrying out State 
programs that provide covered services to eligible individuals.

SEC. 102. APPROVAL OF STATE PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall provide for the review, 
and approval or disapproval, of programs as State programs under this 
Act.
 (b) Application.--For purposes of obtaining the approval described 
in subsection (a), a State agency shall submit an application to the 
Administrator at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Administrator may require, including a State plan 
that contains information describing a State program for providing 
covered services to eligible individuals in the State. At a minimum, 
the plan shall specify--
 (1) procedures for enrollment of individuals described in 
 subsection (a) or (b) of section 103 in the State program in 
 accordance with this title;
 (2) covered services to be provided by the State program in 
 accordance with subtitle A of title II, including a description 
 of the manner in which each health care provider shall provide 
 care coordination services;
 (3) requirements for provision of covered services in the 
 State program in accordance with subtitle B of title II;
 (4) procedures for establishing an exchange program in 
 accordance with section 303;
 (5) procedures for making payments to health care providers 
 in accordance with subtitle B of title III;
 (6) sources of State revenues for the State program, and 
 cost-sharing procedures, in accordance with sections 322 and 
 323, respectively;
 (7) an assurance that the State will comply with the State 
 administrative and planning requirements set forth in subtitle 
 B of title IV;
 (8) an assurance that the State program will reflect the 
 demographic and sociocultural diversity and needs of the 
 communities with the State; and
 (9) an assurance that the State agency shall annually 
 prepare and submit to the Administrator a report concerning the 
 operation of the State program.
 (c) Notification of Approval.--Not later than 90 days after the 
date the State agency submits the plan described in subsection (b) the 
Administrator shall notify the State agency of the decision of the 
Administration approving or disapproving the State plan.
 (d) Enforcement.--
 (1) Monitoring.--The Administration shall monitor the 
 compliance of State programs with the applicable requirements 
 of this Act, including the provisions specified in subsection 
 (b).
 (2) Records.--Each State program shall maintain such 
 records regarding the implementation of the State program as 
 the Administrator may by regulation require.
 (3) Access.--Any officer, employee, or representative of a 
 State program shall, upon request of an officer, employee, or 
 representative of the Administration, duly designated by the 
 Administrator, furnish information relating to the 
 implementation of the State program and permit the officer, 
 employee, or representative at all reasonable times to have 
 access to, and to copy, the records described in paragraph (2).
 (e) Withdrawal of Approval.--If the Administrator determines, after 
notice and opportunity for a hearing, that a program that has been 
previously approved as a State program no longer meets the applicable 
requirements of this Act, the Administrator may require corrective 
action or withdraw approval of the program. If the Administrator 
withdraws approval of a program within a State, the Administrator 
shall, by grant or contract, carry out a program that provides covered 
services to eligible individuals in accordance with the requirements, 
within the State served by the State program.

SEC. 103. ELIGIBILITY FOR ENROLLMENT.

 (a) In General.--An individual shall be eligible to enroll in the 
national health care program for covered services under a State 
program, if the individual--
 (1) maintains a primary residence in the State; and
 (2) is--
 (A) a citizen of the United States;
 (B) a national of the United States;
 (C) a lawful resident alien of the United States; 
 or
 (D) an alien nonimmigrant made eligible under 
 subsection (b).
 (b) Alien Nonimmigrants.--
 (1) In general.--The Administration may make eligible to 
 enroll in the national health care program, as described in 
 subsection (a), individuals within such classes of aliens 
 admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants as the 
 Administrator may provide in regulations prescribed under 
 section 401(e)(1)(A).
 (2) Considerations.--In providing for eligibility under 
 paragraph (1), the Administration shall consider reciprocity in 
 health care services offered to United States citizens who are 
 nonimmigrants to other foreign states, and such other factors 
 as the Administration determines to be appropriate.
 (c) Nondiscrimination.--
 (1) In general.--Any State that receives assistance under 
 this Act shall not discriminate in the enrollment of 
 individuals eligible for enrollment under subsection (a) or (b) 
 in the plan on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, 
 national origin (except in accordance with regulations 
 promulgated under subsection (b)(1)), age, health condition, 
 sexual preference, income, language, or geographic residence in 
 an urban or a rural area within the State.
 (2) Rules and regulations.--
 (A) In general.--In carrying out this section, a 
 State agency shall implement eligibility procedures in 
 accordance with regulations prescribed under section 
 401(e)(1)(A).
 (B) Enforcement.--The Administrator shall 
 promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the 
 enforcement of this section, including provisions for 
 summary suspension of assistance for not more than 30 
 days, on an emergency basis, until the Administration 
 can provide notice and an opportunity to be heard.
 (d) Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``lawful 
resident alien'' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the 
United States under color of law, including an alien granted asylum or 
with lawful temporary status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).

SEC. 104. ENROLLMENT.

 (a) Enrollment Process.--In order to be eligible to receive a 
payment under section 302, each State program shall provide a 
mechanism, in accordance with regulations prescribed under section 
401(e)(1)(B), for the enrollment of individuals described in subsection 
(a) or (b) of section 103 in the national health care program.
 (b) Location.--Enrollment may occur at offices of the State program 
and other locations specified by the State agency.
 (c) Automatic Enrollment.--The mechanism under subsection (a) shall 
include a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the 
time of birth in the United States or at the time of immigration into 
the United States or other acquisition of lawful resident status in a 
State. Such mechanism shall also provide for the enrollment of eligible 
individuals as of January 1, 1995.
 (d) Issuance of Card.--On enrollment of an individual in the 
national health care program, the State program shall issue the 
individual a card that may be used for purposes of identification and 
processing of claims for covered services.

SEC. 105. PORTABILITY.

 (a) Reimbursement.--Each State program shall, in accordance with 
regulations issued by the Administrator, include procedures for 
portability of coverage and reimbursement for individuals who are 
enrolled in the State program and require a covered service in another 
State or country.
 (b) Enrollment in Other State Programs.--Each State agency shall 
agree to provide covered services, under such conditions as the 
Administrator shall by regulation specify, to individuals enrolled in 
other State programs.
 (c) Requirements.--Each State program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the 
 State, or waiting period, in excess of 3 months before 
 residents of the State are eligible for or entitled to covered 
 services; and
 (2) shall provide for, and be administered and operated, so 
 as to provide for the payments of amounts for the cost of 
 covered services provided to enrolled persons while temporarily 
 absent from the State on the basis that--
 (A) if covered services are provided within another 
 State with a State program, payment for covered 
 services shall be at the rate that is approved by the 
 State program in the State in which the services are 
 provided, unless the States concerned agree to 
 apportion the cost between the States in a different 
 manner; and
 (B) if the covered services are provided out of the 
 United States, or in a State that does not have a State 
 program, payment shall be made on the basis of the 
 amount that would have been paid by the State in which 
 the enrolled persons reside for similar services 
 rendered in the State, with due regard, in the case of 
 hospital services, to the size of the hospital, 
 standards of service, and other relevant factors.
 (d) Prior Consent for Services Provided to Temporarily Absent 
Residents Permitted.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
section, a State program may require that the prior consent of the 
State program be obtained for elective insured health services provided 
to a resident of the State while temporarily absent from the State if 
the services in question are available on a substantially similar basis 
in the State.
 (e) Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term 
``elective insured health services'' means covered services other than 
services that are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance 
in which health care services are required without delay.

 TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVISION OF SERVICES

 Subtitle A--Scope of Services

SEC. 201. COVERED SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--The covered services provided under this Act by 
the national health care program are all medically necessary services, 
and any benefit or service described in section 909 of the Civil Rights 
Restoration Act of 1987 (42 U.S.C. 1688), except as provided in section 
202, that contribute to the physical, mental, or psychosocial health of 
an individual or family, as determined in accordance with regulations 
prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(C), including--
 (1) primary prevention and health promotion services;
 (2) primary care services;
 (3) inpatient services, including discharge planning, 
 social services, and emergency and trauma services;
 (4) outpatient hospital services, including emergency and 
 trauma services;
 (5) laboratory and radiology services;
 (6) care coordination services;
 (7) rehabilitation services;
 (8) mental health services;
 (9) substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services;
 (10) long-term care services provided in accordance with 
 section 213(c);
 (11) hospice care services;
 (12) provision of--
 (A) prescription drugs and biologicals that are 
 listed in accordance with section 315 and prescribed by 
 a health care provider;
 (B) such drugs, other than drugs described in 
 subparagraph (A), as are determined by a health care 
 provider to be medically necessary;
 (C) durable medical equipment, and therapeutic 
 devices and equipment (including eyeglasses, hearing 
 aids, and prosthetic appliances), that are listed in 
 accordance with section 316 and prescribed by a health 
 care provider; and
 (D) such medical supplies, other than devices and 
 equipment described in subparagraph (C), as are 
 determined by a health care provider to be medically 
 necessary;
 (13) dental care services;
 (14) hearing and speech services;
 (15) vision care services;
 (16) occupational health services;
 (17) organ transplant services; and
 (18) other inpatient and outpatient professional services.
 (b) Definitions.--As used in this title:
 (1) Care coordination services.--The term ``care 
 coordination services'' means services that--
 (A) are provided through an individual health care 
 provider or a multidisciplinary team of health care 
 providers, including physicians, nurses, social 
 workers, and other nonphysician health care providers; 
 and
 (B)(i) promote physical, mental, and psychosocial 
 health maintenance;
 (ii) provide for the coordination and monitoring of 
 health care services for consumers, as well as 
 maintenance of appropriate records; and
 (iii) provide transition management from inpatient 
 facilities to other needed community-based care 
 services.
 (2) Dental care services.--The term ``dental care 
 services'' means all medically necessary preventive and 
 curative dental care and routine dental examinations, provided 
 as frequently as the Administrator shall by regulation specify 
 for consumers within specified age groups.
 (3) Hearing and speech services.--The term ``hearing and 
 speech services'' means all medically necessary screening, 
 treatment, and provision of devices, relating to promotion of 
 hearing and speech.
 (4) Hospice care services.--The term ``hospice care 
 services'' means--
 (A) hospice care, as defined in section 1861(dd)(1) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(dd)(1))--
 (i) whether provided in the home, through 
 community-based services, or on an inpatient 
 basis; and
 (ii) except that the reference to ``medical 
 social services'' in subparagraph (C) of such 
 section is deemed a reference to ``medical 
 social work services''; and
 (B) counseling services, including bereavement 
 counseling.
 (5) Long-term care coordination services.--The term ``long-
 term care coordination services'' means ongoing services that--
 (A) provide entry to and management of long-term 
 care services and covered services for individuals 
 described in section 204(1); and
 (B) ensure--
 (i) effective, cost-efficient, and 
 coordinated delivery of such services to a 
 consumer; and
 (ii) comprehensive, continuous, and 
 coordinated care that meets the physical, 
 mental, and psychosocial health needs of such 
 individuals.
 (6) Long-term care services.--The term ``long-term care 
 services'' means items and services provided to individuals 
 described in section 204(1) under a written plan of care 
 through home and community-based care programs and nursing 
 facilities and constitutes--
 (A) long-term care coordination services;
 (B) information and referral services;
 (C) skilled and intermediate nursing home services;
 (D) day treatment or partial hospitalization;
 (E) nursing care;
 (F) services of a homemaker or home health aide, 
 personal care services, and heavy chore services;
 (G) social work services;
 (H) physical, occupational, speech, and any other 
 appropriate therapy services;
 (I) day health care services and social day care;
 (J) respite care for caregivers;
 (K) consumer and health care provider education, 
 training, and counseling, regarding health care 
 services;
 (L) medical, skilled nursing, and social support 
 services, for residents of foster care programs, board 
 and care facilities, and other assisted living 
 programs;
 (M) medical supplies and minor remodeling changes 
 to the home required by a health condition;
 (N) Meals on Wheels;
 (O) nutrition and dietary counseling;
 (P) assisted transportation;
 (Q) emergency alarm response systems;
 (R) coverage of health care needs of people with 
 chronic illnesses;
 (S) coverage of acute health care, if required, in 
 a hospital, nursing facility, rehabilitation facility, 
 or other inpatient or outpatient facility; and
 (T) home and community-based services to assist 
 people recovering from illness, disease, or injury.
 (7) Mental health services.--The term ``mental health 
 services'' means services related to the diagnosis and 
 treatment of mental illnesses and the promotion of mental 
 health, including--
 (A) inpatient services, including services provided 
 at hospitals and other inpatient facilities, such as 
 residential treatment centers;
 (B) partial hospitalization and other types of day 
 programs;
 (C) crisis intervention;
 (D) outpatient services, with particular emphasis 
 on outpatient services for children and adolescents, 
 provided through--
 (i) community-based health care facilities 
 and systems; or
 (ii) autonomous health care providers, 
 including psychiatrists, clinical 
 psychologists, clinical social workers, 
 psychiatric nurse specialists, or such other 
 qualified health care providers as the 
 Administrator shall by regulation specify; and
 (E) community-based residential programs, 
 particularly programs that prepare individuals for 
 independent living.
 (8) Occupational health services.--The term ``occupational 
 health services'' means--
 (A) prevention and health promotion activities to 
 be carried out in high risk workplaces and workplaces 
 with sizable work forces; and
 (B) specific health monitoring activities to be 
 carried out in workplaces that are determined, in 
 consultation with the Occupational Safety and Health 
 Administration, by the Federal Government to pose a 
 significant threat to the health and safety of the 
 workers.
 (9) Organ transplant services.--The term ``organ transplant 
 services'' means organ transplants for which screening 
 indicates a likelihood of significant and sustained improvement 
 in the quality of life of the consumer.
 (10) Primary care services.--The term ``primary care 
 services'' means services provided by a health care provider 
 that provide--
 (A) comprehensive services focused on the 
 maintenance of physical, mental and psychosocial 
 health; and
 (B) care coordination services.
 (11) Primary prevention and health promotion services.--The 
 term ``primary prevention and health promotion services'' 
 means--
 (A) comprehensive well-child care services, 
 including health education services, for consumers 
 below age 22, including immunizations and early, 
 routine assessment, diagnosis, and treatment, that--
 (i) help to ensure prevention of disease 
 and early identification before the onset of 
 illness;
 (ii) assess a wide array of health 
 conditions;
 (iii) provide diagnosis and evaluation of 
 suspected health, mental health, or 
 developmental problems; and
 (iv) provide parent and caregiver training 
 as appropriate and necessary to support child 
 health and developmental services for high-risk 
 children;
 (B) perinatal and infant health care services, 
 including prenatal care and follow-up for a mother and 
 an infant through the first year of the life of the 
 infant;
 (C) routine, age-appropriate, clinical health 
 maintenance examinations for consumers age 22 and 
 older;
 (D) comprehensive family planning and reproductive 
 health care services;
 (E) school-based primary prevention and health 
 promotion programs, which may include school-based 
 clinics, mobile programs, or satellite clinics serving 
 several schools in close proximity; and
 (F) home visiting services to provide enhanced 
 risk-appropriate maternal and child health assessment, 
 education, and support.
 (12) Professional services.--The term ``professional 
 services'' means services of physicians, registered nurses, 
 nurse practitioners, nutritionists, podiatrists, physician's 
 assistants, psychologists, social workers, nurse midwives, 
 dietitians, and physical, speech, occupational, and respiratory 
 therapists, and such other health care providers as the 
 Administrator shall approve.
 (13) Rehabilitation services.--The term ``rehabilitation 
 services'' means, except as used within the term ``substance 
 abuse treatment and rehabilitation services''--
 (A) physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech-
 language therapy, pathology, and audiology, provided by 
 autonomous health care providers or by health care 
 facilities;
 (B) social work services;
 (C) provision of medical appliances, including 
 prosthetic devices;
 (D) community-based residential programs for the 
 disabled, including group homes that prepare consumers 
 for independent living; and
 (E) such additional services as the Administrator 
 may determine, after consultation with appropriate 
 State review boards, to be necessary to address special 
 cases or circumstances,
 provided on an inpatient or outpatient basis.
 (14) Substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation 
 services.--The term ``substance abuse treatment and 
 rehabilitation programs'' means services to promote recovery 
 from substance abuse, including--
 (A) inpatient and outpatient hospital services;
 (B) partial hospitalization and other types of day 
 programs;
 (C) crisis intervention;
 (D) residential treatment or rehabilitation 
 programs certified under Federal regulation;
 (E) outpatient substance abuse treatment services 
 provided through--
 (i) community-based health care facilities 
 and treatment programs; or
 (ii) autonomous health care providers, 
 including psychiatrists, clinical 
 psychologists, clinical social workers, 
 psychiatric nurse specialists, and such other 
 qualified health care providers as the 
 Administrator shall by regulation specify; and
 (F) community-based residential programs, 
 particularly programs that prepare individuals for 
 independent living.
 (15) Vision care services.--The term ``vision care 
 services'' means--
 (A) routine eye examinations, provided as 
 frequently as the Administrator shall by regulation 
 specify for consumers within specified age groups;
 (B) provision of glasses and contact lenses, as 
 frequently as the Administrator shall by regulation 
 specify; and
 (C) all medically necessary vision treatment.

SEC. 202. EXCLUSIONS.

 Covered services do not include--
 (1) cosmetic surgery, except medically necessary 
 reconstructive surgery;
 (2) cosmetic orthodontics;
 (3) such amenities in inpatient facilities as the 
 Administrator shall by regulation specify, such as private 
 rooms, unless the amenities are medically necessary;
 (4) medical examinations and medical reports required for 
 purchasing or renewing life insurance policies, or as part of a 
 civil action for the recovery of settlement or damages; or
 (5) any service that a health care provider determines not 
 to be medically necessary.

SEC. 203. PROHIBITIONS ON LIMITATIONS.

 A State program may not limit the covered services provided to a 
consumer on the basis of a health condition of the individual that 
existed on the date of the enrollment of the consumer in the national 
health care program for services under the State program.

SEC. 204. ELIGIBILITY.

 Persons enrolled under section 104 who are eligible for covered 
services shall include--
 (1) with respect to long-term care services, individuals--
 (A) over 18 years of age determined (in a manner 
 specified by the Secretary)--
 (i) to be unable to perform, without the 
 assistance of an individual, at least 2 of the 
 following 5 activities of daily living (or who 
 has a similar level of disability due to 
 cognitive impairment)--
 (I) bathing;
 (II) eating;
 (III) dressing;
 (IV) toileting; and
 (V) transferring in and out of a 
 bed or in and out of a chair; or
 (ii) due to cognitive or mental 
 impairments, requires supervision because the 
 individual behaves in a manner that poses 
 health or safety hazards to the individual or 
 others; or
 (B) under 19 years of age determined (in a manner 
 specified by the Secretary) to meet such alternative 
 standard of disability for children as the Secretary 
 develops;
 (2) with respect to hospice care services, terminally ill 
 individuals, regardless of the cause of illness;
 (3) with respect to services to be provided in schools, 
 workplaces, and assisted living programs, such individuals as 
 may be specified in the State plan described in section 102(b); 
 and
 (4) with respect to covered services not described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3), all individuals.

SEC. 205. ADDITIONAL AND DUPLICATE SERVICES.

 (a) Additional Services.--
 (1) Construction.--Except as provided in section 202, 
 nothing in this Act shall be construed as limiting the health 
 care services that a State program may provide.
 (2) State financing of additional services.--There shall be 
 no Federal financing available under this Act for health care 
 services other than covered services.
 (b) Coverage of Services.--
 (1) Prohibition on duplicate private insurance.--No person 
 may sell private insurance that provides coverage for health 
 care services that duplicate covered services.
 (2) Coverage of additional benefits.--Nothing in this Act 
 shall be construed as prohibiting the sale of private insurance 
 that provides health care services other than covered services.
 (c) Private Care.--
 (1) Arrangements.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting 
 arrangements between a health care provider and an individual 
 for the provision of covered services.
 (2) Limitation.--Arrangements described in paragraph (1) 
 shall provide for acceptance of payment as described in section 
 311(b)(1).

 Subtitle B--Provision of Services

SEC. 211. HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 (a) Certification and Licensing.--State programs shall include 
procedures for certification and licensing of health care providers 
participating in the national health care program in accordance with 
regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(H) and other applicable 
Federal and State law.
 (b) Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection Standards.--State 
agencies shall regulate the health care providers, and shall ensure 
compliance with quality assurance standards prescribed under section 
401(e)(1)(G), consumer protection standards prescribed under section 
401(e)(1)(I), and other applicable Federal and State law.
 (c) Enforcement.--A State agency that determines, after notice and 
an opportunity for a hearing, that a health care provider has 
repeatedly violated the quality assurance standards, or has been 
convicted of an offense involving medical malpractice, shall debar the 
provider from receiving payment under the State program. The State 
agency shall develop appropriate procedures for determining the length 
of the debarment and for terminating a debarment in an appropriate 
case.

SEC. 212. DELIVERY SYSTEMS.

 (a) Innovative Delivery Systems.--State programs may implement 
innovative delivery systems of covered services, including private 
health services, State-operated health services, and Integrated Health 
Service Plans, to provide covered services.
 (b) Integrated Health Service Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Each State agency shall provide for the 
 review, and approval or disapproval, of health plans as 
 Integrated Health Service Plans in the State for purposes of 
 this Act.
 (2) Application.--For purposes of obtaining the approval 
 described in paragraph (1), an entity shall submit an 
 application to the head of the State agency at such time, in 
 such manner, and containing such information as the head of the 
 State agency may require.
 (3) Notification of approval.--Not later than 60 days after 
 the date the entity submits the application described in 
 paragraph (2), the head of the State agency shall notify the 
 entity of the decision of the State agency approving or 
 disapproving the plan.
 (4) Withdrawal of approval.--If the head of the State 
 agency determines, after notice and an opportunity for a 
 hearing, that a health plan that has been previously approved 
 as an Integrated Health Service Plan no longer meets the 
 applicable requirements of this Act, the head of the State 
 agency shall withdraw approval of the plan and shall, in 
 accordance with regulations prescribed under section 
 401(e)(1)(B), provide a procedure under which individuals 
 enrolled in the plan may be enrolled in other Integrated Health 
 Service Plans.

SEC. 213. STATE LONG-TERM CARE COORDINATION AGENCIES.

 (a) Establishment.--State agencies shall establish State long-term 
care coordination agencies, to ensure a continuum of care for every 
individual described in section 204(1).
 (b) Services.--Services provided through the agencies shall 
include--
 (1) services of certified public or nonprofit coordination 
 agencies, provided through qualified professionals that meet 
 such professional standards as the Administrator shall 
 prescribe under section 401(e)(1)(H), to serve as resources for 
 health care facilities, physicians, and other health care 
 providers; and
 (2) long-term care coordination services as an integral 
 part of long-term care services, as described in subsection 
 (c), and of home and community-based benefits.
 (c) Long-Term Care Services.--
 (1) In general.--State long-term care coordination agencies 
 shall be responsible for screening all potential recipients of 
 long-term care services and authorizing needed services.
 (2) Requirements.--State long-term care coordination 
 agencies shall provide services in accordance with the 
 following requirements:
 (A) Setting and level of care.--The setting and 
 level of care to be provided to persons needing long-
 term care services shall be based on an assessment of 
 the severity of cognitive impairment, inability to 
 perform specified activities of daily living (as well 
 as certain functional tasks), the level of disability, 
 the need for regular ongoing care, behavioral and 
 emotional problems, and the ability of family 
 caregivers to care for persons in need.
 (B) Coordination.--Long-term care services shall be 
 coordinated with the provision of acute health care and 
 other health care and mental health services if needed.
 (C) Requests.--All requests for services shall be 
 processed in a timely manner.
 (D) Intensity.--The intensity of care coordination 
 provided under this subsection shall depend on the 
 severity of need and the level of services required to 
 meet the needs.
 (E) Outpatient emphasis.--The agency shall place 
 priority on maintaining consumers in their homes (with 
 the necessary supports) or in community-based 
 residential programs rather than inpatient facilities 
 and nursing homes.
 (F) Emergency situations.--The agency shall make 
 provisions to respond to emergency situations, 
 including first-time requests and consumers who are 
 receiving ongoing services and who have a sudden change 
 of status or condition.
 (G) Cost-efficient approaches.--States shall have 
 the flexibility to develop cost-efficient approaches to 
 respond to requests for limited home and community-
 based services.
 (H) Coordination.--State long-term care 
 coordination agencies shall ensure coordination and 
 continuity of care between service levels and different 
 settings if applicable, which includes the ability to 
 respond to crisis situations.
 (I) Qualification standards.--Care coordination 
 provided under this subsection shall meet defined 
 qualification standards.
 (J) Other health care disciplines.--Care 
 coordinators shall utilize the services of other health 
 care disciplines, and interdisciplinary teams if 
 appropriate.
 (K) Consumer involvement.--Consumers shall, to the 
 extent the consumers are able, be involved in all 
 decisions regarding long-term care services. Family or 
 caregiver involvement shall occur if appropriate.
 (3) Contracts and agreements.--
 (A) In general.--State long-term care coordination 
 agencies shall, with respect to the geographic area 
 served by the agencies--
 (i) enter into contracts or agreements with 
 providers of long-term care services; and
 (ii) authorize and disburse all funds for 
 long-term care services.
 (B) Criteria.--The contracts or agreements shall 
 require performance criteria in accordance with Federal 
 guidelines. Criteria shall address such issues as 
 certification and licensure of the health care 
 provider, expected level of service, staff 
 qualifications, supervision, role of the long-term care 
 coordination agency, rights of the consumer and health 
 care providers, and provisions for necessary changes in 
 level of care.
 (4) Independence.--State long-term care coordination 
 agencies shall be independent from any providers of long-term 
 care services.

SEC. 214. INCORPORATION OF MISCELLANEOUS MEDICARE-RELATED PROVISIONS.

 (a) Provisions in Title XVIII.--Except as otherwise specifically 
provided in this Act, the following provisions of the Social Security 
Act shall apply to this Act in the same manner as the provisions 
applied to title XVIII of the Social Security Act as of the day before 
the date of the enactment of this Act:
 (1) Section 1819 (relating to requirements for, and 
 assuring quality of care in, skilled nursing facilities), 
 except that any reference in the section to a ``skilled nursing 
 facility'' is deemed a reference to a ``nursing facility''.
 (2) Section 1846 (relating to intermediate sanctions for 
 providers of clinical diagnostic laboratory tests).
 (3) Sections 1863 through 1865 (relating to consultation 
 with State agencies and other organizations to develop 
 conditions of participation for providers of services, use of 
 State agencies to determine compliance by providers of services 
 with conditions of participation, and effect of accreditation).
 (4)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1866 (relating 
 to agreements with providers of services).
 (B)(i) The provisions of section 1866(a)(1)(N) shall not 
 apply.
 (ii) Under section 1866(a)(2), a health care provider may 
 not impose any charge for covered services under this Act.
 (iii) In the case of a hospital, the provider agreement 
 under section 1866 shall prohibit a hospital from denying care 
 to any eligible individual on any ground other than the 
 hospital's inability to provide the care required.
 (5) Section 1867 (relating to examination and treatment for 
 emergency medical conditions and women in labor).
 (6) Section 1869 (relating to determinations and appeals).
 (7) Section 1870 (relating to overpayment on behalf of 
 individuals and settlement of claims for covered services on 
 behalf of deceased individuals).
 (8) Sections 1871 through 1874 (relating to regulations, 
 application of certain provisions of title II of the Social 
 Security Act, designation of organization or publication by 
 name, and administration).
 (9)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1876 (relating 
 to payments to health maintenance organizations and competitive 
 medical plans) shall apply to eligible individuals under this 
 Act in the same manner as it applies to individuals entitled to 
 benefits under part A, and enrolled under part B, of title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (B) In applying section 1876 under this Act--
 (i) the provisions of such section relating only to 
 individuals enrolled under part B of title XVIII of the 
 Social Security Act shall not apply;
 (ii) subject to subparagraph (C), any reference to 
 a Trust Fund established under title XVIII of such Act 
 and to benefits under such title is deemed a reference 
 to the National Health Care Trust Fund and to covered 
 services under this Act;
 (iii) subject to subparagraph (C), the adjusted 
 average per capita cost and adjusted community rate 
 shall be determined on the basis of covered services 
 under this Act; and
 (iv) subsection (f) shall not apply.
 (C) For purposes of subparagraph (B), covered services 
 under this Act may, at the option of an eligible organization, 
 not include benefits for nursing facility services that are not 
 post-hospital extended care services and benefits for home and 
 community-based services.
 (10) Section 1877 (relating to limitation on certain 
 physician referrals).
 (11) Section 1878 (relating to the provider reimbursement 
 review board), except that the hearings pursuant to such 
 section shall be on the approval of budgets under section 312 
 rather than the determination of payment amounts under title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (12) Section 1891 (relating to conditions of participation 
 for home health agencies; home health quality).
 (13) Section 1892 (relating to offset of payments to 
 individuals to collect past-due obligations arising from breach 
 of scholarship and loan contract).
 (b) Title XI Provisions.--The following provisions of the Social 
Security Act shall apply to this Act in the same manner as they applied 
to title XVIII of the Social Security Act:
 (1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating 
 to fraud and abuse).
 (2) Section 1134 (relating to nonprofit hospital 
 philanthropy).
 (3) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ 
 procurement and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 (4) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of 
 health care services and procedures), except that any reference 
 in such section to a Trust Fund is deemed a reference to the 
 National Health Care Trust Fund.
 (5) Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act (relating 
 to peer review of the utilization and quality of health care 
 services).

SEC. 215. NONDISCRIMINATION.

 (a) In General.--No individual with responsibility for the 
administration of a State plan that receives assistance under this Act 
shall discriminate in the provision of covered services to eligible 
individuals on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national 
origin, age, health condition, sexual preference, income, language, or 
geographic residence in an urban or rural area within the State.
 (b) Rules and Regulations.--The Administrator shall promulgate 
rules and regulations to provide for the enforcement of this section, 
including provisions for summary suspension of assistance for not more 
than 30 days, on an emergency basis, until the Administration can 
provide notice and an opportunity to be heard.

 TITLE III--REVENUE

 Subtitle A--Budget Process

SEC. 301. NATIONAL AND STATE HEALTH BUDGETS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Expenditures and revenues.--For each calendar year the 
 Administrator shall establish a national health budget and, for 
 each State, a State health budget that specifies--
 (A) the level and application of expenditures to be 
 made under this Act in the year in the United States 
 and in the State, respectively; and
 (B) the amount in and source of revenues of the 
 Trust Fund in such year.
 (2) Basis.--Each State health budget established by the 
 Administrator under this subsection shall--
 (A) be based on--
 (i) the population of the State;
 (ii) reasonable differences in the prices 
 for goods and services;
 (iii) any special social, environmental, or 
 other condition affecting health conditions or 
 the need for health care services; and
 (iv) the geographic distribution of the 
 population of the State population, including 
 the proportion of the population residing in 
 rural or health professional shortage areas;
 (B) be adjusted to account for States--
 (i) with large populations;
 (ii) with substantial numbers of residents 
 in age categories that make disproportionately 
 greater use of covered services;
 (iii) with substantial numbers of residents 
 below the income official poverty line, as 
 defined by the Office of Management and Budget, 
 and revised annually in accordance with section 
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
 of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)); and
 (iv) whose residents exhibit a high 
 incidence of certain health conditions, such as 
 a high incidence of Acquired Immune Deficiency 
 Syndrome or infant mortality; and
 (C) not disproportionately discriminate against 
 States with substantial rural populations.
 (b) Expenditure Level.--The total level of expenditures to be 
specified in the national health budget under subsection (a) for a year 
may not exceed the level of expenditures for covered services under 
this Act made in the year preceding the effective date of this Act 
increased in a compounded manner for each succeeding year (up to the 
year involved) by the annual percentage increase in the gross national 
product for the preceding year.
 (c) Institutional Capital Budget.--
 (1) In general.--Each national health budget established 
 under subsection (a) shall include an amount for total 
 expenditures for capital-related items, provide for State 
 capital budgets and specify the general manner in which such 
 expenditures for capital-related items are to be distributed 
 among the different types of health care facilities.
 (2) Factors.--Each State capital budget under this section 
 shall be established based solely on--
 (A) the factors described in subparagraphs (A) and 
 (C) of subsection (a)(2); and
 (B) reasonable differences in the prices for goods 
 and services, as such differences affect the prices of 
 the appropriate capital goods.
 (d) Health Training Budget.--Each national health budget 
established under subsection (a) shall include an amount for total 
expenditures for direct medical education expenses for institutions 
receiving payments under section 312. Such budgets shall specify the 
general manner in which such expenditures are to be taken into account, 
shall be based on a national plan for training of medical personnel 
developed by the Administrator that shall emphasize training for 
primary and preventive care, and shall provide for State budgets for 
direct medical education expenses. Payments under such budgets for such 
expenditures shall take into account the method for payment for direct 
medical education expenses as described in section 1886(h) of the 
Social Security Act.

SEC. 302. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 The Administrator shall make payments from amounts in the Trust 
Fund to States with approved State programs.

SEC. 303. ESTABLISHMENT OF EXCHANGE PROGRAM.

 The Administration shall establish a program under which a State 
that furnishes covered services to residents of another State receives 
credit for payments for the services against the amounts to which the 
other State is otherwise entitled to receive.

 Subtitle B--Payments to Health Care Providers

SEC. 311. PAYMENTS TO HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--Each State program shall provide for a timely and 
administratively simple mechanism for the payment and reimbursement of 
health care providers in a manner consistent with this subtitle and in 
accordance with regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(E).
 (b) Mandatory Assignment.--
 (1) Acceptance of payments.--Each health care provider that 
 receives funding under the national health care program shall 
 accept the payment amount recognized under the State program 
 for covered services as payment in full for such services, 
 provided to consumers, or to individuals entering into an 
 arrangement described in section 205(c).
 (2) Prohibition on additional charges.--Health care 
 providers shall only impose charges on consumers--
 (A) as provided in section 323; or
 (B) with respect to services that are not covered 
 services.
 (c) Continuum of Health Care Services.--State programs, in order to 
avoid fragmented care and promote a continuum of health care services, 
shall develop financial incentives in the payment and reimbursement 
mechanisms provided under this subtitle.
 (d) Equipment and Construction.--
 (1) Limitations.--A State program shall, in accordance with 
 regulations prescribed by the Administrator--
 (A) limit acquisition of highly specialized or 
 expensive medical equipment, which shall be carefully 
 regulated to ensure appropriate and equitable 
 utilization and distribution; and
 (B) eliminate acquisition of expensive, highly 
 specialized equipment by individual physicians and 
 group practices, although the State program may make 
 exceptions in rural health professional shortage areas.
 (2) Approval.--Approval for construction and renovation 
 funds shall only be considered on the basis of utilization data 
 and within the context of the State planning process under 
 section 412.
 (e) Rural and Health Professional Shortage Areas.--In establishing 
the mechanism for payment and reimbursement of health care providers 
under this subtitle, the State program shall establish schedules and 
incentives in a manner that will encourage health care providers to 
practice or locate in rural and health professional shortage areas.

SEC. 312. PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), payment for 
institutional care, including hospital services, shall be made in each 
State on the basis of an annual prospective budgeting system, 
established by the State consistent with the State health budget 
established under section 301 and after negotiations with institutional 
health care providers.
 (b) Hospitals.--
 (1) Budget.--
 (A) In general.--Each hospital shall receive 
 prospectively a global budget. The budget will be 
 developed through annual negotiations between the State 
 agency and the hospital.
 (B) Factors.--In developing the budget, the State 
 agency shall consider the health needs of the area, the 
 past expenditures of the hospital, inflation, previous 
 financial and clinical performance (based on 
 utilization data collected through the national health 
 care data base), projected levels of services, 
 technological advances or changes, wages and other 
 costs, proposed new programs, type of hospital, and 
 costs associated with meeting Federal and State 
 regulations.
 (C) Adjustments.--End-of-the-year adjustments may 
 be made to hospital budgets based on unforeseen 
 factors, such as an increase or decrease in consumer 
 load.
 (2) Operating expenses.--Global hospital budgets shall be 
 used for operating expenses. Operating expenses shall include 
 replacement of standard equipment and funds to promote 
 innovation in health services. None of the operating budget may 
 be used for physical expansion, profit, marketing, or the 
 purchase of expensive, highly specialized equipment.
 (3) Capital expansion and equipment.--Separate funds for 
 capital expansion and purchase of expensive equipment shall be 
 subject to approval by the State agency, and consistent with 
 the State capital budgets described in section 301(c)(1).
 (4) Fundraising.--Under Federal guidelines, hospitals may 
 raise funds from private sources to pay for special services. 
 Such additional funds may not change the operating budget. Any 
 anticipated changes in the operating budget as a result of 
 special services shall be negotiated with the State agency.
 (5) Health professional shortage areas.--State programs 
 shall provide subsidies to rural and urban hospitals in health 
 professional shortage areas, including teaching hospitals, to 
 ensure the viability of the health care facilities.
 (c) Other Health Care Facilities.--
 (1) Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term 
 ``other health care facilities'' shall include community 
 clinics, migrant health centers, nursing homes, community-based 
 programs, home health agencies, rehabilitation facilities, 
 renal dialysis facilities, birthing centers, and health 
 facilities operated by public health departments.
 (2) Payment.--States may determine whether other health 
 care facilities shall be paid on the basis of a prospective 
 global budget or per capita fee. Certain services, such as day 
 health care centers, may be reimbursed on a per diem basis. The 
 Administration shall determine whether the States may determine 
 the per capita fee rates, or whether the rates shall be set by 
 the Administration with regional variations.
 (3) Limitations.--The same limitations described in 
 subsection (b) regarding capital expenditures and operating 
 expenses for hospitals shall apply to other health care 
 facilities.
 (4) Health care providers.--Health care providers employed 
 in other health care facilities shall be salaried. Contractual 
 arrangements shall be permitted for specialists that are not on 
 the staff of such a facility.
 (5) Rural facilities.--State programs shall provide special 
 State subsidies for other health care facilities that are 
 essential facilities in rural areas, to ensure the viability of 
 the facilities.

SEC. 313. PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES BY INDIVIDUAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 (a) Fee Schedules.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 section, payment for services by individual health care 
 providers shall be on a fee-for-service basis and based on 
 payment schedules established by each State program in 
 accordance with regulations prescribed under section 
 401(e)(1)(E).
 (2) Schedules.--Such schedules--
 (A) shall be established after negotiations with 
 organizations representing physicians and other health 
 care providers;
 (B) shall be based on a national relative value 
 scale, developed by the Administration taking into 
 account the relative value scale developed under 
 section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-4), as in effect on the day before the date of 
 the enactment of this Act;
 (C) shall take into consideration regional 
 variations; and
 (D) shall be in amounts consistent with the State 
 health budget adopted under section 301.
 (3) Targets.--Expenditure targets on the annual State 
 allocation of fee-for-service payments for each category of 
 health care provider shall be established under the State 
 programs. If a group of health care providers exceeds the 
 annual expenditure target, State agencies shall have the 
 flexibility to negotiate with the Administration and the health 
 care provider group to modify the fee schedule for the 
 following year to correct for overspending in the previous 
 budget year.
 (b) Alternative Payment Mechanisms.--Payment for services by 
individual health care providers may be based on alternative payment 
methodologies, including capitation methods, annual salary and hourly 
payments, so long as the amount of payments under such methodology do 
not exceed, in the aggregate, the amount of payments that would 
otherwise be made under the methodology described in subsection (a).
 (c) Billing.--Individual health care providers shall submit bills 
to the State agency.
 (d) Covered Expenses.--Payment to individual health care providers 
shall cover health care provider earnings and basic operating expenses, 
and shall not include reimbursement for expensive, highly specialized 
equipment. Operating expenses shall include administrative overhead, 
employee wages, and replacement of standard equipment.
 (e) Group Practices.--Group practices may elect to be paid 
prospectively on a per capita basis rather than on a fee-for-service 
basis.

SEC. 314. PAYMENTS TO INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICE PLANS.

 (a) Payment.--Integrated Health Service Plans shall be paid 
prospectively on a per capita basis or by means of a negotiated global 
budget, as determined by the State agency.
 (b) Inpatient Care.--Such payment shall not cover inpatient care 
services. Inpatient facilities operated by the Integrated Health 
Service Plans will be paid for covered services on the same basis as 
all other inpatient facilities.
 (c) Hospitals.--Integrated Health Service Plan- operated hospitals 
shall be paid for covered services on the same basis as all other 
hospitals under section 312.
 (d) Health Care Providers.--All health care providers employed by 
the Integrated Health Service Plans shall be salaried. An Integrated 
Health Service Plan may enter into contractual arrangements with 
specialty health care providers not available on staff.
 (e) Development.--State programs shall provide incentives for the 
development of Integrated Health Service Plans.

SEC. 315. PAYMENTS FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND BIOLOGICALS.

 (a) Establishment of List.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish a list 
 of approved prescription drugs and biologicals that the 
 Administrator determines are necessary for the maintenance or 
 restoration of health or of employability or self-management 
 and eligible to be provided as covered services.
 (2) Exclusions.--The Administrator may exclude from the 
 list described in paragraph (1) ineffective, unsafe, or 
 overpriced drugs or biologicals if better alternatives are 
 determined to be available.
 (b) Prices.--For each such listed prescription drug or biological 
that may be provided as a covered service under this Act, the 
Administrator shall from time to time, by regulation promulgated under 
section 401(e)(1)(F), determine a product price or prices that shall 
constitute the maximum to be recognized under this Act as the cost of 
the drug or biological to a health care provider. The Administrator may 
conduct negotiations, on behalf of State programs, with manufacturers 
and distributors of drugs or biologicals in determining the applicable 
product price or prices.
 (c) Charges by Independent Pharmacies.--Each State program shall 
provide for payment for such a listed prescription drug or biological 
furnished by an independent pharmacy based on the cost of the drug or 
biological to the pharmacy (not in excess of the applicable product 
price established under subsection (b)) plus a dispensing fee. In 
accordance with standards established by the Administrator under 
section 401(e)(1)(F), each State program, after consultation with 
representatives of the pharmaceutical profession, shall establish 
schedules of dispensing fees, designed to afford reasonable 
compensation to independent pharmacies after taking into account 
variations in their cost of operation resulting from regional 
differences, differences in the volume of prescription drugs and 
biologicals dispensed, differences in services provided, and other 
relevant factors.
 (d) Definitions.--As used in this section, the terms ``prescription 
drug'' and ``biological'' mean a drug and a biological, respectively, 
described in section 1861(t) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(t)).

SEC. 316. APPROVED DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT.

 (a) Establishment of List.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish a list 
 of approved durable medical equipment and therapeutic devices 
 and equipment (including eyeglasses, hearing aids, and 
 prosthetic appliances), that the Administrator determines are 
 necessary for the maintenance or restoration of health or of 
 employability or self-management and eligible to be provided as 
 covered services.
 (2) Exclusions.--The Administrator may exclude from the 
 list described in paragraph (1) ineffective, unsafe, or 
 overpriced equipment or devices if better alternatives are 
 determined to be available.
 (b) Considerations and Conditions.--In establishing the list under 
subsection (a), the Administrator shall take into consideration the 
efficacy, safety, and cost of each item contained on such list, and 
shall attach to any item such conditions as the Administrator 
determines to be appropriate with respect to the circumstances under 
which, or the frequency with which, the item may be prescribed.
 (c) Prices.--For each such listed item that may be provided as a 
covered service under this Act, the Administrator shall from time to 
time, by regulation promulgated under section 401(e)(1)(F), determine a 
product price or prices that shall constitute the maximum to be 
recognized under this Act as the cost of the item to a health care 
provider. The Administrator may conduct negotiations, on behalf of 
State programs, with manufacturers and distributors of the equipment or 
devices described in subsection (a) in determining the applicable 
product price or prices.
 (d) Definition.--As used in this section, the terms ``durable 
medical equipment'' has the meaning given the term in section 1861(n) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(n)).

SEC. 317. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.

 (a) Board.--The head of each State agency shall establish a State 
Payment Grievance Board. In selecting members of the State Payment 
Grievance Board, the head of the State agency shall ensure that members 
shall not perform duties inconsistent with their duties and 
responsibilities as members, and shall ensure that an employee or agent 
engaged in the performance of investigative or prosecuting functions 
for the State agency in a case shall not, in the case or a factually 
related case, participate or advise in the decision, recommended 
decision, or State agency review of the decision, except as witness or 
counsel in public proceedings.
 (b) Appeals.--
 (1) Health care providers.--A health care provider who is 
 denied payment by an employee of a State agency, or a State 
 long-term care coordination agency, for covered services may 
 appeal the decision of the State agency, not later than 30 days 
 after the decision, to a State Payment Grievance Board.
 (2) Patients.--In any case in which a health care provider 
 determines that a requested service is not medically necessary 
 with respect to a consumer, the health care provider shall 
 inform the consumer of the opportunity to appeal the decision 
 of the health care provider, not later than 30 days after the 
 decision, to a State Payment Grievance Board.
 (c) Procedures.--Each State agency shall provide for effective 
procedures for the State Payment Grievance Board for hearing and 
resolving appeals brought under subsection (b) and for State agency 
review of the appeals.

 Subtitle C--Sources of Revenue

SEC. 321. FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUE.

 (a) Personal Income Tax Rate Increase.--
 (1) In general.--Subsections (a) through (e) of section 1 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed) 
 are each amended by striking ``15%'', ``28%'', and ``31%'' each 
 place they appear and inserting ``20%'', ``31%'', and ``39%'', 
 respectively.
 (2) Technical amendments.--
 (A) Subsection (f) of section 1 of such Code is 
 amended--
 (i) by striking ``1990'' in paragraph (1) 
 and inserting ``1994'', and
 (ii) by striking ``1989'' in paragraph 
 (3)(B) and inserting ``1993''.
 (B) Subparagraph (B) of section 32(i)(1) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``1989'' and inserting 
 ``1993''.
 (C) Subparagraph (C) of section 41(e)(5) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``1989'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``1993''.
 (D) Subparagraph (B) of section 63(c)(4) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``1989'' and inserting 
 ``1993''.
 (E) Clause (ii) of section 135(b)(2)(B) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``1989'' and inserting 
 ``1993''.
 (F) Subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B)(ii) of section 
 151(d)(4) of such Code are each amended by striking 
 ``1989'' and inserting ``1993''.
 (G) Clause (ii) of section 513(h)(2)(C) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``1989'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``1993''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (b) Corporate Income Tax Rate Increase.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 11 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed on 
 corporations) is amended by striking ``34 percent'' each place 
 it appears and inserting ``39 percent''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 852(b)(3)(D)(iii) of such Code is 
 amended by striking ``66 percent'' and inserting ``61 
 percent''.
 (B) Section 1201(a) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``34 percent'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``39 percent''.
 (C) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e) of 
 such Code are each amended by striking ``34 percent'' 
 and inserting ``39 percent''.
 (D) Section 7518(g)(6)(A) of such Code and section 
 607(h)(6)(A) of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 are each 
 amended by striking ``34 percent'' and inserting ``39 
 percent''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (c) Alternative Minimum Tax Increase.--
 (1) General rule.--Subparagraph (A) of section 55(b)(1) 
 (relating to tentative minimum tax) is amended by striking ``20 
 percent (24 percent'' and inserting ``23 percent (27 percent''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (2) of section 897(a) 
 is amended by striking ``21'' in the heading of such paragraph 
 and in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``27''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (d) Increase in Tax on Cigarettes.--
 (1) Rate of tax.--Subsection (b) of section 5701 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on 
 cigarettes) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``$12 per thousand ($10 per 
 thousand on cigarettes removed during 1991 or 1992)'' 
 in paragraph (1) and inserting ``$20 per thousand''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``$25.20 per thousand ($21 per 
 thousand on cigarettes removed during 1991 or 1992)'' 
 in paragraph (2) and inserting ``$42 per thousand''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to articles removed after December 31, 
 1993.
 (3) Floor stocks.--
 (A) Imposition of tax.--On cigarettes manufactured 
 in or imported into the United States which are removed 
 before January 1, 1994, and held on such date for sale 
 by any person, there shall be imposed the following 
 taxes:
 (i) Small cigarettes.--On cigarettes, 
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, 
 $10 per thousand;
 (ii) Large cigarettes.--On cigarettes, 
 weighing more than 3 pounds per thousand, $21 
 per thousand; except that, if more than 6\1/2\ 
 inches in length, they shall be taxable at the 
 rate prescribed for cigarettes weighing not 
 more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 
 2\3/4\ inches, or fraction thereof, of the 
 length of each as one cigarette.
 (B) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (i) Liability for tax.--A person holding 
 cigarettes on January 1, 1994, to which any tax 
 imposed by subparagraph (A) applies shall be 
 liable for such tax.
 (ii) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be treated as a tax 
 imposed under section 5701 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be due and 
 payable on February 15, 1994, in the same 
 manner as the tax imposed under such section is 
 payable with respect to cigarettes removed on 
 January 1, 1994.
 (C) Cigarette.--For purposes of this paragraph, the 
 term ``cigarette'' shall have the meaning given to such 
 term by subsection (b) of section 5702 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (D) Exception for retail stocks.--The taxes imposed 
 by subparagraph (A) shall not apply to cigarettes in 
 retail stocks held on January 1, 1994, at the place 
 where intended to be sold at retail.
 (E) Foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the Act 
 of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81a et seq.) or any other 
 provision of law--
 (i) cigarettes--
 (I) on which taxes imposed by 
 Federal law are determined, or customs 
 duties are liquidated, by a customs 
 officer pursuant to a request made 
 under the first proviso of section 3(a) 
 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 
 81c(a)) before January 1, 1994, and
 (II) which are entered into the 
 customs territory of the United States 
 on or after January 1, 1994, from a 
 foreign trade zone, and
 (ii) cigarettes which--
 (I) are placed under the 
 supervision of a customs officer 
 pursuant to the provisions of the 
 second proviso of section 3(a) of the 
 Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a)) 
 before January 1, 1994, and
 (II) are entered into the customs 
 territory of the United States on or 
 after January 1, 1994, from a foreign 
 trade zone,
 shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) 
 and such cigarettes shall, for purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), be treated as being held on January 1, 1994, for 
 sale.
 (e) Increase in Excise Taxes on Distilled Spirits, Wine, and 
Beer.--
 (1) Distilled spirits.--
 (A) In general.--Paragraphs (1) and (3) of section 
 5001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating 
 to rate of tax on distilled spirits) are each amended 
 by striking ``$13.50'' and inserting ``$29.00''.
 (B) Technical amendment.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
 section 5010(a) of such Code (relating to credit for 
 wine content and for flavors content) are each amended 
 by striking ``$13.50'' and inserting ``$29.00''.
 (2) Wine.--
 (A) Wines containing not more than 14 percent 
 alcohol.--Paragraph (1) of section 5041(b) of such Code 
 (relating to rates of tax on wines) is amended by 
 striking ``$1.07'' and inserting ``$6.00''.
 (B) Wines containing more than 14 (but not more 
 than 21) percent alcohol.--Paragraph (2) of section 
 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``$1.57'' 
 and inserting ``$8.50''.
 (C) Wines containing more than 21 (but not more 
 than 24) percent alcohol.--Paragraph (3) of section 
 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``$3.15'' 
 and inserting ``$11.00''.
 (D) Artificially carbonated wines.--Paragraph (5) 
 of section 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``$3.30'' and inserting ``$11.00''.
 (3) Beer.--
 (A) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 5051(a) 
 of such Code (relating to imposition and rate of tax on 
 beer) is amended by striking ``$18'' and inserting 
 ``$81''.
 (B) Small brewers.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
 5051(a)(2) of such Code (relating to reduced rate for 
 certain domestic production) is amended by striking 
 ``$7'' each place it appears and inserting ``$31.50''.
 (4) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on January 1, 1994.
 (5) Floor stocks taxes.--
 (A) Imposition of tax.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of any tax-
 increased article--
 (I) on which tax was determined 
 under part I of subchapter A of chapter 
 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 or section 7652 of such Code before 
 January 1, 1994, and
 (II) which is held on such date for 
 sale by any person,
 there shall be imposed a tax at the applicable 
 rate on each such article.
 (ii) Applicable rate.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the applicable rate is--
 (I) $15.50 per proof gallon in the 
 case of distilled spirits,
 (II) $4.93 per wine gallon in the 
 case of wine described in paragraph (1) 
 of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (III) $6.93 per wine gallon in the 
 case of wine described in paragraph (2) 
 of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (IV) $7.85 per wine gallon in the 
 case of wine described in paragraph (3) 
 of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (V) $7.70 per wine gallon in the 
 case of wine described in paragraph (5) 
 of section 5041(b) of such Code,
 (VI) $63 per barrel in the case of 
 beer described in paragraph (1) of 
 section 5051(a) of such Code, and
 (VII) $13.50 per barrel in the case 
 of beer described in subparagraph (A) 
 of section 5051(a)(2) of such Code.
 In the case of a fraction of a gallon or 
 barrel, the tax imposed by clause (i) shall be 
 the same fraction as the amount of such tax 
 imposed on a whole gallon or barrel.
 (iii) Tax-increased article.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the term ``tax-increased 
 article'' means distilled spirits, wine 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (5) of 
 section 5041(b) of such Code, and beer.
 (B) Exception for certain small wholesale or retail 
 dealers.--No tax shall be imposed by subparagraph (A) 
 on tax-increased articles held on January 1, 1994, by 
 any dealer if--
 (i) the aggregate liquid volume of tax-
 increased articles held by such dealer on such 
 date does not exceed 500 wine gallons, and
 (ii) such dealer submits to the Secretary 
 (at the time and in the manner required by the 
 Secretary) such information as the Secretary 
 shall require for purposes of this 
 subparagraph.
 (C) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (i) Liability for tax.--A person holding 
 any tax-increased article on January 1, 1994, 
 to which the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) 
 applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be paid in such manner 
 as the Secretary shall prescribe by 
 regulations.
 (iii) Time for payment.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be paid on or before 
 June 30, 1994.
 (D) Controlled groups.--
 (i) Corporations.--In the case of a 
 controlled group the 500 wine gallon amount 
 specified in subparagraph (B), shall be 
 apportioned among the dealers who are component 
 members of such group in such manner as the 
 Secretary shall by regulations prescribe. For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, the term 
 ``controlled group'' has the meaning given to 
 such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of 
 such Code; except that for such purposes the 
 phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be 
 substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 
 percent'' each place it appears in such 
 subsection.
 (ii) Nonincorporated dealers under common 
 control.--Under regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary, principles similar to the principles 
 of clause (i) shall apply to a group of dealers 
 under common control where 1 or more of such 
 dealers is not a corporation.
 (E) Other laws applicable.--
 (i) In general.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, applicable to the 
 comparable excise tax with respect to any tax-
 increased article shall, insofar as applicable 
 and not inconsistent with the provisions of 
 this paragraph, apply to the floor stocks taxes 
 imposed by subparagraph (A) to the same extent 
 as if such taxes were imposed by the comparable 
 excise tax.
 (ii) Comparable excise tax.--For purposes 
 of clause (i), the term ``comparable excise 
 tax'' means--
 (I) the tax imposed by section 5001 
 of such Code in the case of distilled 
 spirits,
 (II) the tax imposed by section 
 5041 of such Code in the case of wine, 
 and
 (III) the tax imposed by section 
 5051 of such Code in the case of beer.
 (F) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
 (i) In general.--Terms used in this 
 paragraph which are also used in subchapter A 
 of chapter 51 of such Code shall have the 
 respective meanings such terms have in such 
 part.
 (ii) Person.--The term ``person'' includes 
 any State or political subdivision thereof, or 
 any agency or instrumentality of a State or 
 political subdivision thereof.
 (iii) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' 
 means the Secretary of the Treasury or his 
 delegate.
 (G) Treatment of imported perfumes containing 
 distilled spirits.--For purposes of this paragraph, any 
 article described in section 5001(a)(3) of such Code 
 shall be treated as distilled spirits; except that the 
 tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be imposed on a 
 wine gallon basis in lieu of a proof gallon basis. To 
 the extent provided by regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary, the preceding sentence shall not apply to 
 any article held on January 1, 1994, on the premises of 
 a retail establishment.
 (f) Payroll Taxes.--
 (1) Tax on employees.--Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees) is amended 
 by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and 
 (e) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) National Health Care Program.--In addition to the taxes 
imposed by the preceding subsections, there is hereby imposed on the 
income of every individual a tax equal to 1.45 percent of the wages (as 
defined in section 3121(a)) received by such individual after December 
31, 1994, with respect to employment (as defined in section 
3121(b)).''.
 (2) Tax on employers.--Section 3111 of such Code (relating 
 to rate of tax on employers) is amended by redesignating 
 subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after 
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 ``(c) National Health Care Program.--In addition to the taxes 
imposed by the preceding subsections, there is hereby imposed on every 
employer an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in such 
employer's employ, equal to 7.45 percent of the wages (as defined in 
section 3121(a)) paid by such employer during each calendar year 
beginning after December 31, 1994, with respect to employment (as 
defined in section 3121(b)).''.
 (3) Tax on self-employment income.--Section 1401 of such 
 Code (relating to rate of tax on self-employment income for 
 hospital insurance) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) 
 as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) National Health Care Program.--In addition to the taxes 
imposed by the preceding subsections, there shall be imposed for each 
taxable year, on the self-employment income of every individual, a tax 
equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) 1.45 percent, plus
 ``(2) 7.45 percent
of the amount of the self-employment income for such taxable year.''.
 (4) Railroad retirement taxes.--Sections 3201(a), 3211(a), 
 and 3221(a) of such Code (relating to tier 1 taxes) are each 
 amended by striking ``subsections (a) and (b)'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``subsections (a), (b), and (c)''.
 (5) Elimination of limit on employer-portion of wages or 
 self-employment income subject to national health care program 
 tax.--
 (A) Wages.--Subsection (x) of section 3121 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to applicable 
 contribution base) is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) National health care program.--For purposes of the 
 taxes imposed by section 3111(c), the applicable contribution 
 base for any calendar year is equal to the remuneration for 
 employment paid to an individual for such calendar year.''.
 (B) Self-employment income.--Subsection (k) of 
 section 1402 of such Code (relating to applicable 
 contribution base) is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) National health care program.--For purposes of the 
 tax imposed by section 1401(c)(2), the applicable contribution 
 base for any calendar year is equal to the individual's net 
 earnings from self-employment for such calendar year.''.
 (C) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Paragraph (2) of section 3121(x) of 
 such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking ``section 3101(b) 
 and 3111(b)'' and inserting ``sections 
 3101(b), 3111(b), and 3101(c)'', and
 (II) by striking ``Hospital 
 insurance'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``Health care''.
 (ii) Paragraph (2) of section 1402(k) of 
 such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking ``section 1401(b)'' 
 and inserting ``sections 1401(b) and 
 1401(c)(1)'', and
 (II) by striking ``Hospital 
 insurance'' in the heading and 
 inserting ``Health care''.
 (iii) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) 
 of such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking ``subclause (II)'' 
 in subclause (I) and inserting 
 ``subclauses (II) and (III)'', and
 (II) by adding at the end thereof 
 the following new subclauses:
 ``(III) Employer-portion of 
 national health care program.--For 
 purposes of applying so much of the 
 rate applicable under section 3221(a) 
 as does not exceed the rate of tax in 
 effect under section 3111(c), and for 
 purposes of applying so much of the 
 rate of tax applicable under section 
 3211(a)(1) as does not exceed the rate 
 of tax in effect under section 
 1401(c)(2), the term `applicable base' 
 means for any calendar year the 
 applicable contribution base determined 
 under section 3121(x)(3) or 1401(k)(3) 
 (as the case may be) for such calendar 
 year.
 ``(IV) Employee-portion of national 
 health care program.--For purposes of 
 applying so much of the rate applicable 
 under section 3201(a) as does not 
 exceed the rate of tax in effect under 
 section 3101(c), and for purposes of 
 applying so much of the rate of tax 
 applicable under section 3211(a)(1) as 
 does not exceed the rate of tax in 
 effect under section 1401(c)(1), the 
 term `applicable base' means for any 
 calendar year the applicable 
 contribution base determined under 
 section 3121(x)(2) or 1401(k)(2) (as 
 the case may be) for such calendar 
 year.''.
 (iv) Subsection (c) of section 6413 of such 
 Code is amended by adding at the end thereof 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Separate application for national health care program 
 taxes.--In applying this subsection with respect to--
 ``(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(c) (or any 
 amount equivalent to such tax), and
 ``(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201 as 
 is determined at a rate not greater than the rate in 
 effect under section 3101(c),
 the applicable contribution base determined under section 
 3121(x)(3) for any calendar year shall be substituted for 
 `contribution and benefit base (as determined under section 230 
 of the Social Security Act)' each place it appears.''.
 (6) Additional state and local employees subject to 
 national health care program taxes.--Paragraph (2) of section 
 3121(u) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraphs (C) 
 and (D).
 (7) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to remuneration paid after December 
 31, 1994, and with respect to earnings from self-employment 
 attributable to taxable years beginning after such date.
 (g) Termination of Hospital Insurance Payroll Taxes.--
 (1) Tax on employees.--Section 3101(b) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees for 
 hospital insurance) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (5), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the 
 following new paragraphs:
 ``(6) with respect to wages received during the calendar 
 years 1986 through 1994, the rate shall be 1.45 percent; and
 ``(7) with respect to wages received after December 31, 
 1994, the rate shall be 0 percent.''.
 (2) Tax on employers.--Section 3111(b) of such Code 
 (relating to rate of tax on employers for hospital insurance) 
 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (5), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the 
 following new paragraphs:
 ``(6) with respect to wages received during the calendar 
 years 1986 through 1994, the rate shall be 1.45 percent;
 ``(7) with respect to wages received after December 31, 
 1994, the rate shall be 0 percent.''.
 (3) Tax on self-employment income.--Section 1401(b) of such 
 Code (relating to rate of tax on self-employment income for 
 hospital insurance) is amended by striking the table and 
 inserting the following new table:

``In the case of a taxable year

 Beginning after: And before: Percent:
 December 31, 1985..... January 1, 1995....... 2.90 
 December 31, 1994..... ...................... 0.''. 

 (4) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to remuneration paid after December 
 31, 1994, and with respect to earnings from self-employment 
 attributable to taxable years beginning after such date.
 (i) Employers' Maintenance of Effort for Retirees.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to normal taxes and surtaxes) is 
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:

 ``PART VIII--HEALTH CARE TAXES

 ``Sec. 59B. Employers health care tax.

``SEC. 59B. EMPLOYERS HEALTH CARE TAX.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of an employer, there is imposed (in 
addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to the 
actuarially equivalent aggregate amount which would have been paid or 
incurred by the employer (or predecessor employer) during the taxable 
year for individual or family coverage of retired employees with 
respect to whom such employer had a contractual obligation on December 
31, 1993, under group health plans (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)) 
in existence on such date.
 ``(b) Termination.--This section shall not apply in any taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 2012.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of parts of subchapter 
 A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new item:

 ``Part VIII. Health care taxes.''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (j) Treatment of Health Care Deductions, Exclusions, and Credits.--
 (1) Limitation on exclusion of compensation for injuries or 
 sickness.--Subsection (a) of section 104 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to compensation for injuries or 
 sickness) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) amounts received through the national health care 
 program for personal injuries or sickness;'', and
 (B) by striking the second sentence thereof.
 (2) Termination of exclusion for amounts received under 
 accident and health plans.--
 (A) In general.--Section 105 of such Code (relating 
 to amounts received under accident and health plans) is 
 amended--
 (i) by striking ``income'' and all that 
 follows in subsection (a) and inserting 
 ``income.'',
 (ii) by striking subsections (b), (e), (f), 
 (g), and (h), and
 (iii) by redesignating subsections (c) and 
 (i) as subsections (b) and (c), respectively.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (6) of section 
 7871(a)(6) of such Code is amended by striking 
 subparagraph (A) and by redesignating subparagraphs 
 (B), (C), and (D) as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), 
 respectively.
 (3) Termination of exclusion for contributions by employer 
 to accident and health plans.--
 (A) In general.--Section 106 of such Code (relating 
 to contributions by employer to accident and health 
 plans) is repealed.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Subsection (c) of section 104 of such 
 Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Cross Reference.--

 ``For exclusion of part of disability 
retirement pay from the application of subsection (a)(4) of this 
section, see section 1403 of title 10, United States Code (relating to 
career compensation laws).''.
 (ii) Sections 414(n)(3)(C), 414(t)(2), and 
 6039D(d)(1) of such Code are each amended by 
 striking ``106,''.
 (4) Limitation on cafeteria plans.--Subsection (g) of 
 section 125 of such Code (relating to cafeteria plans) is 
 amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
 (5) Business expense deduction for employer-provided first 
 aid assistance.--Subsection (l) of section 162 of such Code 
 (relating to trade or business expenses) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(l) First Aid Assistance.--The expenses paid or incurred by an 
employer for on-site first aid assistance provided to the employees of 
such employer shall be allowed as a deduction under this section.''.
 (6) Termination of deduction for medical expenses.--
 (A) In general.--Section 213 of such Code (relating 
 to medical, dental, etc., expenses) is repealed.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Paragraph (1) of section 56 of such 
 Code is amended by striking subparagraph (B) 
 and by redesignating subparagraphs (C), (D), 
 (E), and (F) as subparagraphs (B), (C), (D), 
 and (E), respectively.
 (ii) Subsection (b) of section 67 of such 
 Code is amended by striking paragraph (5) and 
 by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (13) as 
 paragraphs (5) through (12), respectively.
 (iii) Subsection (t) of section 72 of such 
 Code is amended--
 (I) in paragraph (2), by striking 
 subparagraph (B) and by redesignating 
 subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B), 
 and
 (II) by striking ``(B), and (C)'' 
 in paragraph (3)(A) and inserting ``and 
 (B)''.
 (iv) Subsection (e) of section 152 of such 
 Code is amended by striking paragraph (6).
 (7) Termination of pension payment of medical benefits.--
 Subsection (h) of section 401 of such Code (relating to 
 qualified pension, profit-sharing, and stock bonus plans) is 
 repealed.
 (8) Termination of child health insurance credit.--Clause 
 (i) of section 32(b)(2)(A) of such Code (relating to health 
 insurance credit) is amended by inserting ``(0 percent for 
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993)'' after ``6 
 percent''.
 (9) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to taxable years beginning after 
 December 31, 1993.
 (k) Increase in Income Taxes on Social Security Benefits.--
 (1) Increase in amount of benefits taken into account.--
 Subsections (a) and (b) of section 86 of such Code (relating to 
 social security and tier 1 railroad retirement benefits) are 
 each amended by striking ``one-half'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``85 percent''.
 (2) Income thresholds reduced.--Subsection (c) of section 
 86 of such Code (defining base amount) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``$25,000'' in paragraph (1) and 
 inserting ``$8,000'', and
 (B) by striking ``$32,000'' in paragraph (2) and 
 inserting ``$16,000''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (l) Section 15 Not To Apply.--No amendment made by this section 
shall be treated as a change in a rate of tax for purposes of section 
15 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (m) National Health Care Program Premium for the Elderly.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each 
 individual who at any time in a month beginning after December 
 31, 1994, is 65 years of age or older and is eligible for 
 benefits under this Act in the month shall pay a national 
 health care program premium equal to the sum of:
 (A) the amount of the premium for such month 
 determined under section 1839 of the Social Security 
 Act, determined as if such section had not been 
 repealed under this Act, plus
 (B) $25.
 (2) Reduction for low-income elderly.--Individuals with an 
 adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986) which does not exceed 120 percent of the 
 income official poverty line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with 
 section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 
 1981) are not liable for the premium imposed under paragraph 
 (1)(B).
 (3) Collection of premium.--The premium imposed under this 
 subsection shall be collected in the same manner (including 
 deduction from Social Security checks) as the premium imposed 
 under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act was 
 collected under section 1840 of such Act as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 322. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUE.

 (a) In General.--Each State shall be responsible for establishing a 
financing program for the implementation of the State program in the 
State. Such financing program may include State funding from general 
revenues, earmarked taxes, sales taxes, and such other measures 
consistent with this Act, including regulations prescribed under 
section 401(e)(1)(D), as the State may provide.
 (b) Maintenance of Effort.--
 (1) Condition of coverage.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this Act, no individual who is a resident of a 
 State is eligible for covered services under this Act for a 
 month in a calendar year, unless the State makes available 
 under the financing program (in a manner and at a time 
 specified by the Administrator), in addition to funds made 
 available under subsection (c), in the month of the sum of--
 (A) the product of $7.083 and the number of 
 residents who are residents of the State and otherwise 
 eligible for covered services under this Act in the 
 month; and
 (B) 85 percent of \1/12\ of the amount specified in 
 paragraph (2) for the year;
 or, if less, \1/12\ of the limiting amount specified in 
 paragraph (3).
 (2) Maintenance of effort amount.--The amount of payment 
 specified in this paragraph for a State for a year is equal to 
 the amount of payment (net of Federal payments) made by a State 
 under its State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act 
 for the year preceding the effective date of this Act, 
 increased for the year involved by the compounded sum of the 
 percentage increase in the gross national product of the State 
 for each year after that year and up to the year before the 
 year involved.
 (3) Limiting amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
 limiting amount specified in this paragraph--
 (A) for 1995, is the total amount of payment made 
 by a State (net of any Federal payments made to the 
 State) for health care services in 1994; or
 (B) for any subsequent year, is the amount 
 specified in this paragraph for the State for the 
 previous year increased for the year involved by the 
 compounded sum of the percentage increase in the gross 
 national product of the State for each year after 1992 
 and up to the year before the year involved.

SEC. 323. COST-SHARING.

 (a) Minimum Cost-Sharing Requirements.--Except as provided in 
subsection (b), each State program shall impose cost-sharing for 
payment to a health care facility of a portion (not to exceed 25 
percent) of the cost of room and board for consumers receiving--
 (1) the long-term care services described in section 
 201(b)(6)(C);
 (2) the mental health services described in section 
 201(b)(7)(E);
 (3) the rehabilitation services described in subparagraphs 
 (D) and (E) of section 201(b)(13); and
 (4) the substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation 
 services described in section 201(b)(14)(F).
 (b) Waiver.--Each State agency shall waive the cost-sharing 
requirements described in subsection (a) for consumers below the income 
official poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and 
Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)).

SEC. 324. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.

 (a) Trust Fund Established.--
 (1) In general.--There is hereby created on the books of 
 the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as 
 the ``National Health Care Trust Fund''. The Trust Fund shall 
 consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made and such 
 amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to, such Trust 
 Fund as provided in this Act.
 (2) Transfer of amounts equivalent to certain taxes and 
 premiums.--
 (A) Tax and premium revenues.--There are hereby 
 appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts equivalent to 
 the additional revenues received in the Treasury as the 
 result of the provisions of, and amendments made by, 
 section 321.
 (B) Transfers based on estimates.--The amounts 
 appropriated by subparagraph (A) shall be transferred 
 from time to time (not less frequently than monthly) 
 from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust 
 Fund, such amounts to be determined on the basis of 
 estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the taxes 
 and premiums, specified in such subparagraph, paid to 
 or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments 
 shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to 
 the extent prior estimates were in excess of or were 
 less than the taxes and premiums specified in such 
 subparagraph.
 (3) Transfer of funds.--All amounts, not otherwise 
 obligated, that remain in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund and the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund 
 on January 1, 1995 shall be transferred to the Trust Fund.
 (4) Incorporation of trust fund provisions.--The provisions 
 of subsections (b) through (i) of section 1841 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), as in effect on the day before 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, shall apply to the Trust 
 Fund in the same manner as such provisions apply to the Federal 
 Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any 
 reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the 
 Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration shall 
 be deemed a reference to the Administration.
 (5) Appropriation of additional sums.--There are hereby 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Trust Fund such additional 
 sums as may be required to make expenditures referred to in 
 subsection (b).
 (b) Expenditures.--
 (1) To states.--Payments in each calendar year to each 
 State from the Trust Fund under section 302 are hereby 
 authorized and appropriated.
 (2) Other grant programs.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall 
 be available, as provided by appropriation Acts, for grant 
 programs relating to health care services.
 (3) Administrative expenses.--There are hereby authorized 
 and appropriated such sums as are necessary for the 
 administrative expenses of the Administration for each fiscal 
 year, not to exceed 3 percent of the total payments made to the 
 States for such fiscal year under section 302.
 (c) Trust Fund Off-Budget.--The receipts and disbursements of the 
Trust Fund and the taxes described in subsection (a)(2) shall not be 
included in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as 
submitted by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be 
exempt from any general budget limitation imposed by statute on 
expenditures and net lending (budget outlays) of the United States 
Government.

 TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION

 Subtitle A--Federal Administration

SEC. 401. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a National Health Care 
Administration that shall administer the programs established under 
this Act. The Administration shall be an independent establishment, as 
defined in section 104 of title 5, United States Code.
 (b) Administrator of Health Care.--
 (1) Appointment.--There shall be in the Administration an 
 Administrator of Health Care who shall be appointed by the 
 President, with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (2) Compensation.--The Administrator shall be compensated 
 at the rate provided for level I of the Executive Schedule.
 (3) Term.--The Administrator shall be appointed for a term 
 of 4 years coincident with the term of the President, or until 
 the appointment of a qualified successor.
 (4) Qualifications.--The Administrator shall be selected on 
 the basis of proven competence as a manager.
 (5) Powers.--The Administrator shall be responsible for the 
 exercise of all powers and the discharge of all duties of the 
 Administration, and shall have authority and control over all 
 personnel and activities of the Administration.
 (6) Delegation.--The Administrator may, with respect to the 
 administration of the national health care program, assign 
 duties, and delegate, or authorize successive redelegations of, 
 authority to act and to render decisions, to such officers and 
 employees as the Administrator may find necessary. Within the 
 limitations of such delegations, redelegations, or assignments, 
 all official acts and decisions of such officers and employees 
 shall have the same force and effect as though performed or 
 rendered by the Administrator.
 (7) Coordination.--The Administrator and the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall consult, on an ongoing basis, 
 to ensure the coordination of the programs administered by the 
 Administrator under this Act with the programs administered by 
 the Secretary under the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et 
 seq.) and the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et 
 seq.).
 (c) Personnel.--The Administrator shall appoint such additional 
officers and employees as the Administrator considers necessary to 
carry out the functions of the Administration under this Act. Except as 
otherwise provided in any other provision of law, such officers and 
employees shall be appointed, and their compensation shall be fixed, in 
accordance with title 5, United States Code.
 (d) Experts and Consultants.--The Administrator may procure the 
services of experts and consultants in accordance with the provisions 
of section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator may prescribe such 
 policies and regulations regarding the national health care 
 program as the Administrator determines to be necessary or 
 appropriate, including policies and regulations relating to--
 (A) eligibility;
 (B) enrollment;
 (C) covered services;
 (D) State funding levels;
 (E) payment of health care providers, including fee 
 schedules for health care providers;
 (F)(i) standards for dispensing fees for 
 prescription drugs and biologicals (as defined in 
 section 315); and
 (ii) prices for such prescription drugs and 
 biologicals, for durable medical equipment (as defined 
 in section 316), and for therapeutic devices and 
 equipment (including eyeglasses, hearing aids, and 
 prosthetic appliances);
 (G) quality assurance standards for health care 
 facilities, other health care providers, and covered 
 services;
 (H) certification and licensing of health care 
 providers;
 (I) consumer protection standards;
 (J) cost-sharing, as described in section 323;
 (K) health care goals and priorities in 
 consultation with the Public Health Service; and
 (L) education and training programs for health care 
 providers.
 (2) Quality assurance, certification, and licensing.--
 (A) Basis.--
 (i) Information.--In developing regulations 
 under paragraph (1)(G), the Administrator shall 
 take into consideration information from the 
 national health care data base.
 (ii) Professional opinions.--In developing 
 regulations under subparagraphs (G) and (H) of 
 paragraph (1), the Administrator shall consider 
 the opinions of all appropriate professional 
 organizations.
 (iii) Peer review organizations.--In 
 developing regulations under paragraph (1)(G), 
 the Administrator shall consider the 
 recommendations of utilization and quality 
 control peer review organizations established 
 under section 1152 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1320c-1).
 (iv) Council.--In developing regulations 
 under subparagraphs (G) and (I) of paragraph 
 (1), the Administrator shall consider the 
 recommendations of the National Council on 
 Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection.
 (B) Facilities and services.--The Administrator 
 shall prescribe regulations under paragraph (1)(G) 
 covering all covered services and all health care 
 facilities and other health care providers 
 participating in the national health care program, 
 including individual and group practitioners, 
 hospitals, other inpatient and outpatient facilities, 
 ambulatory facilities and services, home health 
 agencies, care coordination services, and hospital 
 discharge planning services.
 (f) Planning Functions.--The Administration shall--
 (1) ensure that State health budgets under section 301 
 reflect the goals and priorities recommended by State and local 
 planning boards; and
 (2) meet at least biannually with representatives of State 
 and local planning boards to--
 (A) assess implementation;
 (B) assist the boards in determining the goals and 
 priorities for meeting health care needs; and
 (C) assist the boards in planning, on the basis of 
 cost and utilization data available through the 
 national health care data base, for the efficient and 
 effective use of existing health resources,
 within each State and local planning area.
 (g) Programs.--The Administration shall establish and carry out, 
directly or through grants or contracts, Federal--
 (1) ombudsman programs;
 (2) hotlines for complaints; and
 (3) consumer and health care provider information and 
 education programs designed to increase public understanding of 
 the national health care program, including programs to 
 distribute information from the national health care data base.
 (h) National Health Care Data Base.--The Administration shall 
establish and maintain a national health care data base, which shall 
include information regarding the quality, effectiveness, utilization, 
and cost of all covered services.

SEC. 402. NATIONAL HEALTH BOARD.

 (a) Establishment of Board.--There shall be established in the 
Administration a National Health Board.
 (b) Functions of the Board.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall advise the Administrator 
 on policies related to the national health care program 
 established under this Act.
 (2) Specific functions.--Specific functions of the Board 
 shall include--
 (A) studying and making recommendations regarding 
 implementation of this Act and the most effective 
 methods of providing covered services under this Act;
 (B) studying and making recommendations relating to 
 the coordination of other programs that provide health 
 care services;
 (C) reviewing and assessing the quality of service 
 that the Administration provides to the public;
 (D) reviewing and assessing the progress of the 
 Administration in developing needed improvements in the 
 management of programs;
 (E) in consultation with the Administrator, 
 reviewing the development and implementation of a long-
 range research and program evaluation plan for the 
 Administration;
 (F) reviewing and assessing any major studies of 
 health care services as may come to the attention of 
 the Board;
 (G) assessing, for each region of the country, the 
 information described in section 412(b)(1); and
 (H) conducting such other reviews and assessments 
 as the Board determines to be appropriate.
 (c) Structure and Membership of the Board.--The Board shall be 
composed of 25 members who shall be appointed by the President, with 
the advice and consent of the Senate, including--
 (1) 4 members representing consumers;
 (2) 4 members representing health care providers, each of 
 whom shall represent a different provider group;
 (3) 4 representatives of Federal departments and agencies, 
 including at least one individual representing a public health 
 agency;
 (4) 4 representatives of State and local governments, 
 including at least one individual representing a public health 
 agency;
 (5) 1 member of the National Council on Quality Assurance 
 and Consumer Protection;
 (6) 1 member representing the business community; and
 (7) 1 member representing organized labor.
 (d) Terms of Appointment.--Each member of the Board shall serve for 
a term of 5 years, except that--
 (1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to 
 the expiration of the term for which a predecessor was 
 appointed, shall be appointed for the remainder of such term; 
 and
 (2) the terms of service of the members initially appointed 
 shall be (as specified by the President) for such fewer number 
 of years as will provide for the expiration of terms on a 
 staggered basis.
 (e) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the 
Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. 
The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining members to 
execute the duties of the Board.
 (f) Chairperson.--The Board shall select a Chairperson from among 
its members.
 (g) Compensation and Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation.--Each member of the Board who is not an 
 employee of the Federal Government shall receive compensation 
 at the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified 
 for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 
 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in 
 the performance of duties for the Board, including attendance 
 at meetings and conferences of the Board, and travel to conduct 
 the duties of the Board.
 (2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Board shall 
 receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of 
 duties away from the home or regular place of business of the 
 member.
 (h) Personnel.--
 (1) Staff director.--The Chairperson of the Board shall, 
 without regard to title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff 
 director who shall be paid at a rate equivalent to the rate for 
 the Senior Executive Service.
 (2) Additional staff.--The Chairperson of the Board is 
 authorized, without regard to title 5, United States Code, to 
 appoint and fix the compensation of such staff as the Board 
 determines to be necessary to carry out the functions of the 
 Board.
 (3) Limitations.--The rate of compensation for each staff 
 member appointed under paragraph (2) shall not exceed the daily 
 equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15 of 
 the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United 
 States Code, for each day the staff member is engaged in the 
 performance of duties for the Board. The Board may otherwise 
 appoint and determine the compensation of staff without regard 
 to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, that govern 
 appointments in the competitive service, and the provisions of 
 chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United 
 States Code, that relate to classification and General Schedule 
 pay rates.
 (i) Termination.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act 
(5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Commission.

SEC. 403. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONSUMER 
 PROTECTION.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish a National 
Council on Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection (referred to in 
this section as the ``Council''), to conduct studies and oversight, and 
prepare recommendations concerning quality assurance and consumer 
protection procedures.
 (b) Duties.--
 (1) Study and report.--The Council shall conduct a study of 
 quality assurance and consumer protection procedures. The 
 Council shall submit a report to the Administrator containing 
 the results of the study, including recommendations for 
 regulations prescribed under subparagraphs (G) and (I) of 
 section 401(e)(1).
 (2) Oversight.--The Council shall collect information 
 regarding the implementation of the regulations on a regular 
 basis. The Council shall submit a report to the Administrator 
 containing the information and recommendations for reform.
 (c) Membership.--The Council shall be composed of 18 members 
appointed by the Administrator, including--
 (1) 6 individuals with expertise regarding quality 
 assurance in medical and mental health fields;
 (2) 6 individuals representing consumers; and
 (3) 4 individuals representing health care providers.
 (d) Term of Office.--Each member of the Council shall serve for a 
term of 5 years, except that--
 (1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to 
 the expiration of the term for which a predecessor was 
 appointed, shall be appointed for the remainder of such term; 
 and
 (2) the term of service of the members initially appointed 
 shall be (as specified by the Administrator) for such fewer 
 number of years as will provide for the expiration of terms on 
 a staggered basis.
 (e) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the 
Council shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment 
for the position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power 
of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Council.
 (f) Chairperson.--The Council shall select a Chairperson from among 
its members.
 (g) Compensation and Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation.--Each member of the Council who is not an 
 employee of the Federal Government shall receive compensation 
 at the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified 
 for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 
 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in 
 the performance of duties for the Council, including attendance 
 at meetings and conferences of the Council, and travel to 
 conduct the duties of the Council.
 (2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Council shall 
 receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of 
 duties away from the home or regular place of business of the 
 member.
 (h) Powers.--The Council is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Council may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of 
the Council.
 (i) Oaths.--Any member of the Council may administer oaths or 
affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Council.
 (j) Obtaining Information From Federal Agencies.--The Chairperson 
of the Council may secure directly from any Federal agency, information 
necessary to enable the Council to carry out the duties of the Council, 
if the information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, 
United States Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of 
the Chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish the information 
to the Council.
 (k) Voluntary Service.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, 
United States Code, the Chairperson of the Council may accept for the 
Council voluntary services provided by a member of the Council.
 (l) Gifts and Donations.--The Council may accept, use, and dispose 
of gifts or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of 
the Council.
 (m) Use of Mail.--The Council may use the United States mails in 
the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) Staff.--
 (1) Appointment and compensation.--The Council may appoint 
 and determine the compensation of such staff as the Council 
 determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the 
 Council.
 (2) Limitations.--The rate of compensation for each staff 
 member shall not exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of 
 the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under 
 section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the 
 staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for the 
 Council. The Council may otherwise appoint and determine the 
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 
 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the 
 competitive service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, 
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) Experts and Consultants.--The Chairperson of the Council may 
obtain such temporary and intermittent services of experts and 
consultants and compensate the experts and consultants in accordance 
with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Council 
determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Council.
 (p) Detail of Federal Employees.--On the request of the Chairperson 
of the Council, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without 
reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Council to 
assist the Council in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not 
interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of 
the Federal employee.
 (q) Technical Assistance.--On the request of the Chairperson of the 
Council, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical 
assistance to the Council as the Council determines to be necessary to 
carry out its duties.
 (r) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Council such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
the provisions of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until 
expended, without fiscal year limitation.
 (s) Termination.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act 
(5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Council.

SEC. 404. MEDICAL MALPRACTICE COMMISSION.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish a Medical 
Malpractice Commission (referred to in this section as the 
``Commission''), to conduct a study and prepare recommendations 
concerning medical malpractice.
 (b) Malpractice Study.--
 (1) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of medical 
 malpractice. In conducting the study, the Commission shall 
 examine methods for--
 (A) reducing costs associated with malpractice 
 insurance;
 (B) reducing the basis for malpractice claims;
 (C) targeting physicians and other health care 
 providers who are incompetent; and
 (D) developing mechanisms that will protect 
 consumers who are victims of malpractice.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this subtitle, the Commission shall prepare and 
 submit to the President and the appropriate committees of 
 Congress a written report containing--
 (A) the findings and conclusions of the Commission 
 resulting from the study conducted under paragraph (1); 
 and
 (B) recommendations for medical malpractice reform, 
 based on the findings and conclusions described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (c) Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 18 members 
appointed by the Administrator, including--
 (1) 3 individuals with expertise regarding health care 
 services;
 (2) 3 individuals representing persons receiving health 
 care services;
 (3) 3 individuals representing public payers;
 (4) 3 individuals representing private payers; and
 (5) 3 individuals representing providers of health care 
 services.
 (d) Term of Office.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the 
Commission.
 (e) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the 
Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original 
appointment for the position being vacated. The vacancy shall not 
affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the 
Commission.
 (f) Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson from 
among its members.
 (g) Compensation and Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation.--Each member of the Commission who is not 
 an employee of the Federal Government shall receive 
 compensation at the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate 
 specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 
 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is 
 engaged in the performance of duties for the Commission, 
 including attendance at meetings and conferences of the 
 Commission, and travel to conduct the duties of the Commission.
 (2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall 
 receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of 
 duties away from the home or regular place of business of the 
 member.
 (h) Powers.--The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties 
of the Commission.
 (i) Oaths.--Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or 
affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (j) Obtaining Information From Federal Agencies.--The Chairperson 
of the Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency, 
information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out the duties 
of the Commission, if the information may be disclosed under section 
552 of title 5, United States Code. Subject to the previous sentence, 
on the request of the Chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish 
the information to the Commission.
 (k) Voluntary Service.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, 
United States Code, the Chairperson of the Commission may accept for 
the Commission voluntary services provided by a member of the 
Commission.
 (l) Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and 
dispose of gifts or donations of property in order to carry out the 
duties of the Commission.
 (m) Use of Mail.--The Commission may use the United States mails in 
the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) Staff.--
 (1) Appointment and compensation.--The Commission may 
 appoint and determine the compensation of such staff as the 
 Commission determines to be necessary to carry out the duties 
 of the Commission.
 (2) Limitations.--The rate of compensation for each staff 
 member shall not exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of 
 the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under 
 section 5332 of title 5, United States Code for each day the 
 staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for the 
 Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine 
 the compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of 
 title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the 
 competitive service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, 
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) Experts and Consultants.--The Chairperson of the Commission may 
obtain such temporary and intermittent services of experts and 
consultants and compensate the experts and consultants in accordance 
with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission 
determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (p) Detail of Federal Employees.--On the request of the Chairperson 
of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without 
reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to 
assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not 
interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of 
the Federal employee.
 (q) Technical Assistance.--On the request of the Chairperson of the 
Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical 
assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be 
necessary to carry out its duties.
 (r) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry 
out the provisions of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available 
until expended, without fiscal year limitation.
 (s) Termination.--Notwithstanding section 14 of the Federal 
Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Commission shall terminate 
3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 405. UTILIZATION AND QUALITY CONTROL PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Organization.--Section 1152 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C 1320c-1) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(1)(A) is composed of a substantial number of licensed 
 health care providers who are--
 ``(i) engaged in the practice of providing covered 
 services under the National Health Care Act of 1993;
 ``(ii) representative of the practicing health care 
 providers in the area, designated by the Secretary 
 under section 1153, with respect to which the entity 
 shall perform services under this part; and
 ``(iii) representative of the groups of health care 
 providers providing services under the Act, with no 
 group providing a majority of the membership of the 
 organization; or
 ``(B) has available to it, by arrangement or otherwise, the 
 services of a sufficient number of the licensed health care 
 providers described in subparagraph (A) to ensure adequate peer 
 review of the services provided by the various medical 
 specialties and subspecialties of health care providers under 
 the Act;''.
 (b) Functions.--Section 1154(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320c-2(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraphs:
 ``(17) The organization shall make recommendations to the 
 Administrator of the National Health Care Administration 
 regarding establishment and revision of regulations prescribed 
 under section 401(e)(1)(G) of the National Health Care Act of 
 1993.
 ``(18) The organization shall submit such reports to a 
 Consumer Board established under section 1165(a) as the 
 Secretary may by regulation require.''.
 (c) Consumer Boards.--Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new section:

``SEC. 1165. CONSUMER BOARDS.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish Peer Review 
Organization Consumer Boards (referred to individually within this 
section as a `Board') within geographic regions specified by the 
Administrator.
 ``(b) Duties.--
 ``(1) Study and report.--A Board shall conduct annual 
 evaluations of the organizations described in section 1152 
 within the geographic region served by the Board. The Board 
 shall submit a report to the Administrator of the National 
 Health Care Administration (hereafter in this section referred 
 to as the `Administrator'), the National Board on Quality 
 Assurance and Consumer Protection, and each Governor of a State 
 within the region, containing the results of the evaluation, 
 including recommendations for awards of contracts under this 
 part.
 ``(2) Education programs.--A Board shall establish and 
 carry out education programs for consumers to provide 
 information related to--
 ``(A) implementation of the quality assurance 
 regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(G) of 
 the National Health Care Act of 1993; and
 ``(B) availability of assistance for consumers.
 ``(c) Membership.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Board shall be composed of 5 to 11 
 members, depending on the size of the region, appointed by the 
 Administrator.
 ``(2) Representation.--In appointing members to the Board, 
 the Administrator shall ensure that the members are 
 representative of the racial and ethnic composition of the 
 geographic region served by the Board.
 ``(3) Organization representatives.--The Administrator 
 shall appoint to each Board not fewer than two members who 
 shall serve on the Board of Directors of an organization 
 described in section 1152 within the region and who shall not 
 be health care providers.
 ``(d) Term of Office.--Each member of the Board shall serve for a 
term of 3 years, except that--
 ``(1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior 
 to the expiration of the term for which a predecessor was 
 appointed, shall be appointed for the remainder of such term; 
 and
 ``(2) the terms of service of the members initially 
 appointed shall be (as specified by the Administrator) for such 
 fewer number of years as will provide for the expiration of 
 terms on a staggered basis.
 ``(e) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the 
Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment 
for the position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power 
of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
 ``(f) Chairperson.--The Board shall select a Chairperson from among 
its members.
 ``(g) Compensation and Expenses.--
 ``(1) Compensation.--Each member of the Board who is not an 
 employee of the Federal Government shall receive compensation 
 at the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified 
 for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 
 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in 
 the performance of duties for the Board, including attendance 
 at meetings and conferences of the Board, and travel to conduct 
 the duties of the Board.
 ``(2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Board shall 
 receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of 
 duties away from the home or regular place of business of the 
 member.
 ``(h) Powers.--The Board is authorized to--
 ``(1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 ``(2) take such testimony;
 ``(3) have such printing and binding done;
 ``(4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 ``(5) make such expenditures; and
 ``(6) take such other actions,
as the Board may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of 
the Board.
 ``(i) Oaths.--Any member of the Board may administer oaths or 
affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Board.
 ``(j) Obtaining Information From Federal Agencies.--The Chairperson 
of the Board may secure directly from any Federal agency, information 
necessary to enable the Board to carry out the duties of the Board, if 
the information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United 
States Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of the 
Chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish the information to 
the Board.
 ``(k) Voluntary Service.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, 
United States Code, the Chairperson of the Board may accept for the 
Board voluntary services provided by a member of the Board.
 ``(l) Gifts and Donations.--The Board may accept, use, and dispose 
of gifts or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of 
the Board.
 ``(m) Use of Mail.--The Board may use the United States mails in 
the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 ``(n) Staff.--
 ``(1) Appointment and compensation.--The Board may appoint 
 and determine the compensation of such staff as the Board 
 determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the 
 Board.
 ``(2) Limitations.--The rate of compensation for each staff 
 member shall not exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of 
 the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under 
 section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the 
 staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for the 
 Board. The Board may otherwise appoint and determine the 
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 
 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the 
 competitive service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, 
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 ``(o) Experts and Consultants.--The Chairperson of the Board may 
obtain such temporary and intermittent services of experts and 
consultants and compensate the experts and consultants in accordance 
with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Board 
determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Board.
 ``(p) Detail of Federal Employees.--On the request of the 
Chairperson of the Board, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, 
without reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Board 
to assist the Board in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not 
interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of 
the Federal employee.
 ``(q) Technical Assistance.--On the request of the Chairperson of 
the Board, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical 
assistance to the Board as the Board determines to be necessary to 
carry out its duties.
 ``(r) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Board such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
the provisions of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until 
expended, without fiscal year limitation.
 ``(s) Termination.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee 
Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Board.''.
 (d) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this 
 subsection, sections 1153, 1154, 1155, 1160, and 1164 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2, 1320c-3, 1320c-4, 
 1320c-9, and 1320c-13) are amended by striking ``title XVIII'' 
 each place the term appears and inserting ``the National Health 
 Care Act of 1993''.
 (2) Section 1153(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1320c-2(a)(2)(B)) is amended by striking ``title XIX'' 
 and inserting ``the National Health Care Act of 1993''.
 (3) Section 1154(a)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(3)(A)) is amended by striking ``title XVIII 
 of this Act'' and inserting ``the National Health Care Act of 
 1993''.
 (4) Section 1154(a)(14) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(14)) is amended by striking ``under such 
 title'' and inserting ``under the National Health Care Act of 
 1993''.
 (5) Section 1156 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1320c-5) is amended by striking ``under this Act'' each place 
 the term appears and inserting ``under the National Health Care 
 Act of 1993''.
 (6) Section 1158(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1320c-7(a)) is amended by striking ``title XIX of this Act'' 
 and inserting ``the National Health Care Act of 1993''.
 (7) Section 1161(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1320c-12(5)) is amended by striking ``title XVIII and XIX of 
 this Act'' and inserting ``the National Health Care Act of 
 1993''.
 (8) Section 1164(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1320c-13(c)(2)) is amended by striking ``part A or part 
 B of title XVIII'' and inserting ``the National Health Care Act 
 of 1993''.

SEC. 406. PUBLIC HEALTH FUNCTIONS AND ACTIVITIES COMMISSION.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall establish a Public Health 
Functions and Activities Commission (referred to in this section as the 
``Commission'').
 (b) Duties.--
 (1) Study and recommendations.--Not later than 6 months 
 after the members of the Commission are appointed under 
 subsection (c), the Commission shall conduct studies and 
 prepare recommendations concerning--
 (A) public health functions and activities that 
 should remain separate from the national health care 
 program;
 (B) the integration of public health programs, 
 including any appropriate programs funded through the 
 maternal and child health block grant funds made 
 available under title V of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 701 et seq.), into the national health care 
 program;
 (C) increased program and funding needs for the 
 training of health and allied health professionals, 
 including professionals trained through the National 
 Health Service Corps Scholarship Program, and the 
 National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program, 
 authorized under subpart III of part D of title III of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l et seq.) 
 and the education and training programs authorized 
 under titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 292 et seq. and 296k et seq.);
 (D) increased funding needs for--
 (i) payments to States under the maternal 
 and child health block grants under title V of 
 the Social Security Act;
 (ii) preventive health block grants under 
 part A of title XIX of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w et seq.);
 (iii) grants to States for community mental 
 health services under subpart I of part B of 
 title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300x-1 et seq.);
 (iv) grants to States for prevention and 
 treatment of substance abuse under subpart II 
 of part B of title XIX of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-21 et seq.); and
 (v) grants for HIV health care services 
 under parts A, B, and C of title XXVI of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-11 
 et seq., 300ff-21 et seq., and 300ff-41 et 
 seq.); and
 (E) the continued need for programs and activities 
 operated by local and State public health departments.
 (2) Report.--The Commission shall prepare and submit to the 
 Administrator a report containing the recommendations described 
 in paragraph (1).
 (c) Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members 
appointed by the Administrator, including--
 (1) 4 individuals representing public health agencies at 
 the Federal, State, and local levels;
 (2) 1 health economist; and
 (3) 3 other health professionals.
 (d) Term of Office.--Each member of the Commission shall serve for 
the life of the Commission.
 (e) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the 
Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original 
appointment for the position being vacated. The vacancy shall not 
affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the 
Commission.
 (f) Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson from 
among its members.
 (g) Compensation and Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall not 
 receive compensation for service on the Commission.
 (2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall 
 receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of 
 duties away from the home or regular place of business of the 
 member.
 (h) Powers.--The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties 
of the Commission.
 (i) Oaths.--Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or 
affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (j) Obtaining Information From Federal Agencies.--The Chairperson 
of the Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency, 
information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out the duties 
of the Commission, if the information may be disclosed under section 
552 of title 5, United States Code. Subject to the previous sentence, 
on the request of the Chairperson, the head of the agency shall furnish 
the information to the Commission.
 (k) Voluntary Service.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, 
United States Code, the Chairperson of the Commission may accept for 
the Commission voluntary services provided by a member of the 
Commission.
 (l) Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and 
dispose of gifts or donations of property in order to carry out the 
duties of the Commission.
 (m) Use of Mail.--The Commission may use the United States mails in 
the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) Staff.--
 (1) Appointment and compensation.--The Commission may 
 appoint and determine the compensation of such staff as the 
 Commission determines to be necessary to carry out the duties 
 of the Commission.
 (2) Limitations.--The rate of compensation for each staff 
 member shall not exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of 
 the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under 
 section 5332 of title 5, United States Code for each day the 
 staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for the 
 Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine 
 the compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of 
 title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the 
 competitive service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, 
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) Experts and Consultants.--The Chairperson of the Commission may 
obtain such temporary and intermittent services of experts and 
consultants and compensate the experts and consultants in accordance 
with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission 
determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (p) Detail of Federal Employees.--On the request of the Chairperson 
of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without 
reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to 
assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not 
interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of 
the Federal employee.
 (q) Technical Assistance.--On the request of the Chairperson of the 
Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical 
assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be 
necessary to carry out its duties.
 (r) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry 
out the provisions of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available 
until expended, without fiscal year limitation.
 (s) Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on submission of 
the report described in subsection (b)(2).

SEC. 407. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS.

 (a) Centers.--The Administration shall provide on a regional basis 
(either directly or through contracts with nonprofit organizations) 
technical assistance centers for States and localities in--
 (1) health program planning, development, and 
 implementation;
 (2) training;
 (3) quality assurance, monitoring, and evaluation;
 (4) budgeting;
 (5) payment procedures; and
 (6) development of integrated automated data processing 
 systems.
 (b) States With Limited Capacity.--The technical assistance centers 
shall provide resources to assist States that lack the capacity to 
implement certain aspects of the national health care program.

 Subtitle B--State and Local Administration

SEC. 411. STATE AGENCY.

 (a) In General.--In order for a State to be eligible to receive 
payments under section 302, the State shall, in accordance with 
regulations established by the Administration, designate a State agency 
to be the sole State agency to carry out a State program under this 
Act.
 (b) Planning Functions.--The State agency shall develop, on the 
basis of recommendations made by State and local planning boards under 
section 412(c)--
 (1) goals and priorities for developing health policy and 
 programs;
 (2) a plan for the equitable distribution of health 
 resources, including the development of specialty health 
 centers that--
 (A) concentrate highly specialized medical 
 procedures, equipment, and trained specialists; and
 (B) avoid duplication of services;
 (3) a plan for the integration of health services with 
 appropriate social and human services; and
 (4) a plan to ensure that quality discharge planning and 
 social services are available to consumers in all inpatient 
 facilities to provide for care coordination and continuity of 
 care.

SEC. 412. STATE AND LOCAL PLANNING BOARDS.

 (a) Planning Boards.--
 (1) State board.--Each State agency shall establish, in 
 accordance with regulations established by the Administration, 
 a State planning board, which shall be composed of 12 members 
 who shall be appointed by the head of the State program, 
 including--
 (A) 4 members representing consumers, who shall be 
 representative of the population of the State;
 (B) 3 members representing health care providers;
 (C) 1 member representing the business community;
 (D) 1 member representing organized labor; and
 (E) 2 representatives of appropriate State 
 agencies, including health, public health, social 
 services, education, public welfare, and employment 
 agencies.
 (2) Local boards.--Each State shall establish, in 
 accordance with regulations established by the Administration, 
 local planning boards, which shall be composed of 7 members who 
 shall be appointed by the head of the State program, 
 including--
 (A) 2 members representing consumers, who shall be 
 representative of the population of the local planning 
 area;
 (B) 2 members representing health care providers; 
 and
 (C) 2 representatives of appropriate local 
 agencies, including health, public health, social 
 services, education, public welfare, and employment 
 agencies.
 (3) Terms of appointment.--Each member of a State or local 
 planning board shall serve for a term of 3 years, except that a 
 member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the 
 expiration of the term for which a predecessor was appointed, 
 shall be appointed for the remainder of such term.
 (4) Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of 
 a State or local planning board shall be filled in the same 
 manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall not 
 affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties 
 of the board.
 (b) Assessment.--
 (1) Information.--The State and local planning boards shall 
 assess, for each State or local planning area, respectively--
 (A) the demand for, and quality, supply, and 
 distribution of, health resources, including--
 (i) acute care hospitals;
 (ii) specialized inpatient facilities;
 (iii) outpatient facilities;
 (iv) health care providers;
 (v) specialized medical equipment; and
 (vi) home and community-based health 
 programs; and
 (B) the medical, mental, and psychosocial health 
 needs.
 (2) Emphasis.--In conducting the assessment described in 
 paragraph (1), the State and local planning boards shall give 
 special attention to health professional shortage areas and 
 special populations of consumers.
 (3) Data.--The Administration shall make available all 
 appropriate data from the national health care data base, and 
 each State with a State program shall make available all 
 appropriate data from any State health care data base, for use 
 by State and local planning boards in conducting the 
 assessment. In conducting the assessment, the State and local 
 planning boards shall consider such data.
 (c) Recommendations.--The State and local planning boards shall 
make recommendations to the State agency regarding the goals, 
priorities, and plans described in section 411(b), and shall make 
recommendations to the Administration regarding the State budget 
described in section 301.

 TITLE V--TRANSITION AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROGRAMS

SEC. 501. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The national health care program shall first apply to covered 
services furnished after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 502. REPEALS AND INCORPORATIONS.

 (a) Repeal of Medicare and Medicaid.--
 (1) Repeal.--Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. and 1396 et seq.) are repealed.
 (b) Repeal of CHAMPUS Provisions.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Amendments to chapter 55 of title 10.--Sections 
 1079 through 1083, 1086, and 1097 through 1100 of title 
 10, United States Code, are repealed.
 (B) Table of sections.--The table of sections at 
 the beginning of chapter 55 of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended by striking the items relating to the 
 sections referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended as follows:
 (A) Definition.--Section 1072 is amended by 
 striking paragraph (4).
 (B) Reimbursement of the department of veterans 
 affairs.--Section 1104(b) is amended--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``from CHAMPUS funds''; and
 (ii) by striking ``from funds'' and all 
 that follows and inserting ``for medical care 
 provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 pursuant to such agreement.''.
 (3) Implementation.--
 (A) Termination of health care.--No health care may 
 be provided under a CHAMPUS contract on or after the 
 effective date of this section.
 (B) Savings provision.--Payments for health care 
 provided pursuant to a CHAMPUS contract before such 
 date shall be made in accordance with such contract and 
 the provisions of law referred to in paragraphs (1)(A) 
 and (2), as such provisions of law were in effect on 
 the day before such effective date.
 (C) Definition.--As used in this subsection, the 
 term ``CHAMPUS contract'' means--
 (i) a contract for an insurance, medical 
 service, or health care plan entered into 
 pursuant to section 1079(a) of title 10, United 
 States Code;
 (ii) a contract for health benefits under 
 such a plan entered into pursuant to section 
 1086(a) of such title; and
 (iii) a contract for the delivery of health 
 care entered into pursuant to section 1097 of 
 such title.
 (c) Repeal of Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Care 
Provisions.--
 (1) In general.--Title 38, United States Code, is amended 
 as follows:
 (A) Chapter 17.--Chapter 17 is repealed.
 (B) Chapter 73.--Chapter 73 is repealed.
 (C) Chapter 81.--Chapter 81 is repealed.
 (D) Chapter 82.--Chapter 82 is repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Relating to chapter 17.--The table of chapters 
 at the beginning of title 38, United States Code, and 
 part II of such title are amended by striking out the 
 item relating to chapter 17.
 (B) Relating to chapter 73.--The table of chapters 
 at the beginning of such title and part V of such title 
 are amended by striking out the item relating to 
 chapter 73.
 (C) Relating to chapters 81 and 82.--The table of 
 chapters at the beginning of such title and part VI of 
 such title are amended by striking out the items 
 relating to chapter 81 and 82.
 (3) Implementation.--
 (A) Termination of health care and other 
 assistance.--No health care, nursing home care, 
 domiciliary care, other medical care, or financial or 
 other assistance related to such care may be provided 
 by contract or otherwise under chapter 17, 73, 81, or 
 82 of title 38, United States Code, on or after the 
 effective date of this section.
 (B) Savings provision.--
 (i) In general.--Payments pursuant to 
 contracts and agreements referred to in clause 
 (ii) before such date shall be made in 
 accordance with such contracts and agreements 
 and the provisions of law referred to in 
 paragraph (1) as such provisions were in effect 
 on the day before such effective date.
 (ii) Contracts and agreements.--Contracts 
 and agreements referred to in clause (i) are 
 contracts and agreements under title 38, United 
 States Code that are:
 (I) contracts for hospital care and 
 medical services in non-Department of 
 Veterans Affairs facilities under 
 section 603;
 (II) contracts with organizations 
 for emergency medical services under 
 section 611;
 (III) contracts for medical 
 treatment in such facilities under 
 section 612(a)(6);
 (IV) contracts for counseling and 
 related medical health services under 
 section 612A(e);
 (V) contracts for prosthetic 
 appliances under section 614(a);
 (VI) contracts for therapeutic and 
 rehabilitative services under section 
 618(b);
 (VII) contracts for nursing home 
 care and adult day health care under 
 section 620(d)(1);
 (VIII) contracts for treatment of 
 alcohol, drug abuse, or abuse 
 disabilities under section 620A(a)(1);
 (IX) contracts for hospital care, 
 medical services and nursing home care 
 abroad under section 624(c);
 (X) contracts to provide care and 
 treatment by the Veterans Memorial 
 Medical Center of the Philippines under 
 section 632(a);
 (XI) contracts for activities 
 conducted by employees of the Federal 
 Government other than employees of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs under 
 section 5010(c);
 (XII) sharing agreements with the 
 Department of Defense under section 
 5011(d);
 (XIII) contracts for furnishing 
 health-care services to members of the 
 Armed Forces under section 5011(b);
 (XIV) contracts for prosthetic 
 appliances under section 5023;
 (XV) contracts for procurement of 
 health-care items under section 
 5025(b); and
 (XVI) contracts for securing 
 specialized medical resources under 
 section 5053(a).
 (d) Repeal of Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.--Chapter 
89 of title 5, United States Code, is repealed.
 (e) Provision of Services by Indian Health Service.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall provide covered services to eligible individuals 
not enrolled in the Program through the Indian Health Service in lieu 
of health services provided by the Service on the date of the enactment 
of this Act, including services provided under sections 201 through 204 
of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1621 et seq.).
 (f) Effective Date.--Except as provided in section 503(b), this 
section and the amendments made by this section shall take effect on 
January 1, 1995.

SEC. 503. TRANSITION.

 (a) State Program Grants.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Administrator shall award grants to 
 States to enable the States--
 (A) to plan and develop State programs; and
 (B) to award grants and make loans to nonprofit 
 organizations to assist the organizations in 
 establishing Integrated Health Service Plans.
 (2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 paragraph (1), a State shall submit an application to the 
 Administrator at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Administrator may require.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection such sums as 
 may be necessary for each of the 1993 through 1995 fiscal 
 years.
 (b) Study and Report.--
 (1) Study.--The Administrator shall, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of 
 Defense, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and the Director of 
 the Office of Personnel Management examine possible strategies 
 for accomplishing the transition and provision of services 
 described in section 502.
 (2) Report.--Not later than January 1, 1993, the 
 Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of 
 Congress a report containing--
 (A) the recommendations of the Public Health 
 Functions and Activities Commission set forth in the 
 report described in section 406(b)(2);
 (B) the findings and conclusions of the 
 Administrator, based on the study described in 
 paragraph (1); and
 (C) recommendations for legislative reform to 
 accomplish the transition and provision of services 
 described in section 502.
 (3) Modification.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this Act and to the extent the Administration determines it is 
 appropriate and fiscally responsible, the Administration may 
 include in the report recommendations to reduce the period 
 between the date of the enactment of this Act and the effective 
 dates otherwise provided in this Act.
 (4) Effect of recommendations.--Unless the Congress enacts 
 a disapproval resolution under the procedures described in 
 section 504 not later than the date that is 60 days after the 
 submission of the report described in paragraph (2), on such 
 date--
 (A) the recommendations contained within the report 
 shall have the force of law; and
 (B) the Secretary shall, in accordance with this 
 Act, provide covered services to all individuals that 
 received the services under the provisions of law 
 specified in section 502.
 (c) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall issue such 
 regulations as are necessary to provide for a transition to the 
 national health care program from the programs that are 
 repealed under subsections (a) through (c) of section 502, and 
 the provisions of services by the Indian Health Service under 
 section 502(d).
 (2) Considerations.--In promulgating the regulations 
 described in paragraph (1) the Administrator shall take into 
 consideration the findings and conclusions of the study 
 described in subsection (b)(1).

SEC. 504. RULES GOVERNING CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.

 (a) Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is 
enacted by the Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such is 
 deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but 
 applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in 
 that House in the case of disapproval resolutions described in 
 subsection (b), and supersedes other rules only to the extent 
 that such rules are inconsistent therewith; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
 either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the 
 procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to 
 the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
 (b) Terms of the Resolution.--For purposes of this Act, the term 
``disapproval resolution'' means only a joint resolution of the two 
Houses of the Congress, providing in--
 (1) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as 
 follows: ``That the Congress disapproves the action of the 
 National Health Care Administration as submitted by the 
 Administration on ____________________________'', the blank 
 space being filled in with the appropriate date; and
 (2) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint Resolution 
 disapproving the action of the National Health Care 
 Administration''.
 (c) Introduction and Referral.--On the day on which the action of 
the Administration is transmitted to the House of Representatives and 
the Senate, a disapproval resolution with respect to such action shall 
be introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the 
Majority Leader of the House, for himself and the Minority Leader of 
the House, or by Members of the House designated by the Majority Leader 
of the House, for himself and the Minority Leader of the House, or by 
Members of the House designated by the Majority Leader and Minority 
Leader of the House; and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate 
by the Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself and the Minority 
Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated by the 
Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate. If either House is 
not in session on the day on which such an action is transmitted, the 
disapproval resolution with respect to such action shall be introduced 
in the House, as provided in the preceding sentence, on the first day 
thereafter on which the House is in session. The disapproval resolution 
introduced in the House of Representatives and the Senate shall be 
referred to the appropriate committees of each House.
 (d) Amendments Prohibited.--No amendment to a disapproval 
resolution shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or 
the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection 
shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either 
House for the Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the 
application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
 (e) Period for Committee and Floor Consideration.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if 
 the committee or committees of either House to which a 
 disapproval resolution has been referred have not reported it 
 at the close of the 45th day after its introduction, such 
 committee or committees shall be automatically discharged from 
 further consideration of the disapproval resolution and it 
 shall be placed on the appropriation calendar. A vote on final 
 passage of the disapproval resolution shall be taken in each 
 House on or before the close of the 45th day after the 
 disapproval resolution is reported by the committees or 
 committee of that House to which it was referred, or after such 
 committee or committees have been discharged from further 
 consideration of the disapproval resolution. If prior to the 
 passage by one House of a disapproval resolution of that House, 
 that House receives the same disapproval resolution from the 
 other House then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same 
 as if no disapproval resolution had been received from 
 the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the 
 disapproval resolution of the other House.
 (2) Computation of days.--For purposes of paragraph (1), in 
 computing a number of days in either House, there shall be 
 excluded any day on which the House is not in session.
 (f) Floor Consideration in the House of Representatives.--
 (1) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the House of 
 Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a 
 disapproval resolution shall be highly privileged and not 
 debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, 
 nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by 
 which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) Debate.--Debate in the House of Representatives on a 
 disapproval resolution shall be limited to not more than 20 
 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring 
 and those opposing the disapproval resolution. A motion further 
 to limit debate shall not be debatable. It shall not be in 
 order to move to recommit a disapproval resolution or to move 
 to reconsider the vote by which a disapproval resolution is 
 agreed to or disagreed to.
 (3) Motions to postpone.--Motions to postpone, made in the 
 House of Representatives with respect to the consideration of a 
 disapproval resolution, and motions to proceed to the 
 consideration of other business, shall be decided without 
 debate.
 (4) Appeals.--All appeals from the decisions of the Chair 
 relating to the application of the Rules of the House of 
 Representatives to the procedure relating to a disapproval 
 resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (5) General rules apply.--Except to the extent specifically 
 provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection, 
 consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be governed by 
 the Rules of the House of Representatives applicable to other 
 bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
 (g) Floor Consideration in the Senate.--
 (1) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the Senate to proceed 
 to the consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be 
 privileged and not debatable. An amendment to the motion shall 
 not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider 
 the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) General debate.--Debate in the Senate on a disapproval 
 resolution, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection 
 therewith, shall be limited to not more than 20 hours. The time 
 shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the 
 Majority Leader and the Minority Leader or their designees.
 (3) Debate of motions and appeals.--Debate in the Senate on 
 any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a disapproval 
 resolution shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be 
 equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the 
 manager of the disapproval resolution, except that in the event 
 the manager of the disapproval resolution is in favor of any 
 such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be 
 controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee. Such 
 leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control 
 on the passage of a disapproval resolution, allot additional 
 time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable 
 motion or appeal.
 (4) Other motions.--A motion in the Senate to further limit 
 debate is not debatable. A motion to recommit a disapproval 
 resolution is not in order.
 (h) Point of Order Requiring Supermajority for Modifications to 
Actions Once Approved.--
 (1) In general.--It shall not be in order in the House of 
 Representatives or the Senate to consider any amendment to the 
 actions of the National Health Care Administration except as 
 provided in paragraph (2).
 (2) Waiver.--The point of order described in paragraph (1) 
 may be waived or suspended in the House of Representatives or 
 the Senate only, by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the 
 Members duly chosen and sworn.

SEC. 505. RELATION TO EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.

 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 
U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) are superseded to the extent inconsistent with the 
requirements of this Act.

 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 601. BILL OF RIGHTS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that consumers 
in the national health care program shall have the rights specified in 
the bill of rights set forth in subsection (b).
 (b) Bill of Rights.--
 (1) Consumers shall have the right to--
 (A) receive timely health-related information; and
 (B) be involved in decisions affecting their 
 health;
 (C) receive prompt evaluation, humane care, and 
 professional treatment;
 (D) receive services without regard to race, color, 
 religion, sex, national origin, age, health condition, 
 sexual preference, income, language, or geographic 
 residence in an urban or rural area;
 (E) refuse treatment or prescribed services and 
 know the consequences of such refusal;
 (F) be treated with dignity and respect;
 (G) maintain privacy and confidentiality;
 (H) maintain confidentiality of financial and 
 health records;
 (I) obtain access to medical records;
 (J) obtain treatment in the least restrictive 
 setting;
 (K) express or file grievances;
 (L) be informed if treatment or services are 
 denied, reduced, or terminated;
 (M) obtain information and forms that are easily 
 understood and that are written in a language 
 understood by the consumer or health care provider;
 (N) obtain health care services that are sensitive 
 to the cultural attitudes of the consumer population 
 being served; and
 (O) receive quality health care services in any 
 penal institution.

SEC. 602. RESEARCH AND SERVICE DELIVERY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall make grants to eligible 
entities to conduct research that will examine, or carry out programs 
that will develop--
 (1)(A) ways of better providing covered services through 
 the national health care program to consumers residing in 
 rural, central city, and other health professional shortage 
 areas; and
 (B) alternative models for delivering primary health and 
 mental health services to medically underserved populations, 
 including the use of outreach mobile services, transportation, 
 home visiting, and systems to promote linkages with essential 
 health and other human services;
 (2) the effectiveness of the national health care program 
 in enabling access to health care services for minorities, 
 women, and other special populations who have traditionally had 
 problems with access to health care (to be initiated 2 years 
 from the date of implementation);
 (3) the relationship between--
 (A) psychosocial well-being; and
 (B) prevention of illness and disease;
 (4) successful health education and treatment approaches in 
 avoiding preventable illnesses and diseases;
 (5) innovative prevention, treatment, and service delivery 
 approaches to health and mental health care delivery to 
 mentally impaired persons;
 (6) innovative prevention, treatment, and service delivery 
 approaches to improve the mental health and psychosocial well-
 being of the elderly;
 (7) the impact of interprofessional collaboration on the 
 effectiveness of care coordination in inpatient and outpatient 
 health care settings, including long-term care settings;
 (8) quality assurance and program effectiveness with 
 respect to mental health care services;
 (9) quality indicators for measuring treatment 
 effectiveness;
 (10) the effectiveness of, and reductions of cost in, 
 selective, widely used diagnostic and treatment procedures;
 (11) alternative approaches to continuing education 
 programs for health care personnel in rural areas; and
 (12) innovations in service delivery that enhance 
 continuity of care, care coordination, and service efficiency 
 and effectiveness.
 (b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall submit an application to the Administrator at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Administrator may require, including an assurance that the entity shall 
submit to the Administrator such information as the Administrator may 
require to comply with subsection (c).
 (c) Annual Report.--The Administrator shall prepare and submit a 
report to Congress by not later than April 1 of each year (beginning 
with 1995) concerning the progress of the research and demonstration 
projects conducted under this section.

SEC. 603. PREVENTION, HEALTH PROMOTION, AND HEALTH AWARENESS PROGRAM 
 GRANTS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Administrator shall make grants to eligible 
entities to establish--
 (1) innovative statewide or local prevention and health 
 promotion programs, such as community-based wellness and 
 outreach programs and school-based programs;
 (2) health awareness programs in schools, workplaces, 
 health and social agencies; and
 (3) community-based programs to prevent community health 
 problems, such as adolescent pregnancy, drug abuse, family 
 violence, and violence in the schools.
 (b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall submit an application to the Administrator at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Administrator may require.

SEC. 604. DISPLACED WORKERS.

 Section 301(a)(1)(B) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 
1651(a)(1)(B)) is amended by adding before the semicolon the following: 
``, or as a result of reductions in health insurance industry jobs due 
to the establishment of the national health care program under the 
National Health Care Act of 1993, as determined in accordance with 
regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services''.

 <all>

S 684 IS----2
S 684 IS----3
S 684 IS----4
S 684 IS----5
S 684 IS----6
S 684 IS----7
S 684 IS----8
S 684 IS----9
S 684 IS----10
S 684 IS----11