S 345 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 345
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave under certain
circumstances, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 2 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. DODD (for himself, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. PACKWOOD, Mr. METZENBAUM, Mr. HATFIELD,
Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. JEFFORDS, Mr. PELL, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. KERRY, Mr. SIMON,
Mr. ADAMS, Mr. INOUYE, Mr. BURDICK, Mr. BIDEN, Mr. ROCKEFELLER, Mr. GORE,
Mr. WIRTH, Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. KOHL, and Mr. LAUTENBERG) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor
and Human Resources
A BILL
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave under certain
circumstances, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Family and Medical Leave
 Act of 1989'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE
Sec. 101. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 102. Definitions.
Sec. 103. Family leave requirement.
Sec. 104. Temporary medical leave requirement.
Sec. 105. Certification.
Sec. 106. Employment and benefits protection.
Sec. 107. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 108. Administrative enforcement.
Sec. 109. Enforcement by civil action.
Sec. 110. Investigative authority.
Sec. 111. Relief.
Sec. 112. Notice.
TITLE II--FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Sec. 201. Family leave and temporary medical leave.
TITLE III--COMMISSION ON FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
Sec. 301. Establishment.
Sec. 302. Duties.
Sec. 303. Membership.
Sec. 304. Compensation.
Sec. 305. Powers.
Sec. 306. Termination.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 401. Effect on other laws.
Sec. 402. Effect on existing employment benefits.
Sec. 403. Encouragement of more generous leave provisions.
Sec. 404. Regulations.
Sec. 405. Effective dates.
TITLE I--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FAMILY LEAVE AND MEDICAL LEAVE
SEC. 101. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) the number of two-parent households in which both parents work and
 the number of single-parent households in which the single parent works
 are increasing significantly;
 (2) it is important for the development of children and the family unit
 that fathers and mothers be able to participate in early child rearing
 and the care of children who have serious health conditions;
 (3) the lack of employment policies to accommodate working parents forces
 many individuals to choose between job security and parenting;
 (4) there is inadequate job security for employees who have serious health
 conditions that prevent the employees from working for temporary periods;
 (5) due to the nature of the roles of men and women in our society,
 the primary responsibility for family caretaking often falls on women,
 and such responsibility affects their working lives more than it affects
 the working lives of men; and
 (6) employment standards that apply to one gender only have serious potential
 for encouraging employers to discriminate against employees and applicants
 for employment who are of that gender.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families;
 (2) to promote the economic security and stability of families;
 (3) to entitle employees to take reasonable leave for medical reasons,
 for the birth or adoption of a child, and for the care of a child or parent
 who has a serious health condition;
 (4) to accomplish such purposes in a manner which accommodates the legitimate
 interests of employers;
 (5) to accomplish such purposes in a manner which, consistent with the Equal
 Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, minimizes the potential for
 employment discrimination on the basis of sex by ensuring generally that
 leave is available for eligible medical reasons (including maternity-related
 disability) and for compelling family reasons, on a gender-neutral basis; and
 (6) to promote the goal of equal employment opportunity for women and men,
 pursuant to such clause.
SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title:
 (1) COMMERCE- The terms `commerce' and `industry or activity affecting
 commerce' mean any activity, business, or industry in commerce or in
 which a labor dispute would hinder or obstruct commerce or the free flow
 of commerce, including `commerce' and any activity or industry `affecting
 commerce' within the meaning of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947
 (29 U.S.C 141 et seq.).
 (2) EMPLOY- The term `employ' has the same meaning given the term in
 section 3(g) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(g)).
 (3) EMPLOYEE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The term `employee' means an individual that is included
 under the definition of such term in section 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)) who has been employed by the employer with
 respect to whom benefits are sought under this Act for at least--
 (i) 900 hours of service during the previous 12-month period; and
 (ii) 12 months.
 `(B) EXCLUSION- The term `employee' does not include any Federal officer
 or employee covered under subchapter III of chapter 63 of title 5, United
 States Code (as added by title II of this Act).
 (4) EMPLOYER- The term `employer'--
 (A) means any person engaged in commerce or in any industry or activity
 affecting commerce who employs 20 or more employees at any one worksite
 for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the
 current or preceding calendar year;
 (B) includes--
 (i) any person who acts directly or indirectly in the interest of an
 employer to one or more employees; and
 (ii) any successor in interest of such an employer; and
 (C) includes any public agency, as defined in section 3(x) of the Fair
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(x)).
 (5) EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS- The term `employment benefits' means all benefits
 provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group life
 insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave,
 educational benefits, and pensions, regardless of whether the benefits are
 provided by a policy or practice of an employer or by an employee benefit
 plan as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)).
 (6) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means--
 (A) any person licensed under Federal, State, or local law to provide
 health care services, or
 (B) any other person determined by the Secretary to be capable of providing
 health care services.
 (7) PARENT- The term `parent' means a biological, foster, or adoptive
 parent, a parent-in-law, a stepparent, or a legal guardian.
 (8) PERSON- The term `person' has the same meaning given the term in
 section 3(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(a)).
 (9) REDUCED LEAVE SCHEDULE- The term `reduced leave schedule' means leave
 scheduled for fewer than the usual number of hours of an employee per
 workweek or hours per workday.
 (10) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
 (11) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- The term `serious health condition' means an
 illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves--
 (A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 (B) continuing treatment or continuing supervision by a health care provider.
 (12) SON OR DAUGHTER- The term `son or daughter' means a biological,
 adopted, or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a de
 facto parent, who is--
 (A) under 18 years of age; or
 (B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a mental
 or physical disability.
 (13) STATE- The term `State' has the same meaning given the term in section
 3(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(c)).
SEC. 103. FAMILY LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE- An employee shall be entitled, subject to section
 105, to 10 workweeks of family leave during any 24-month period--
 (A) as the result of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee;
 (B) as the result of the placement, for adoption or foster care, of a son
 or daughter with the employee; or
 (C) in order to care for the employee's son or daughter or parent who has
 a serious health condition.
 (2) EXPIRATION OF ENTITLEMENT- The entitlement to leave under paragraphs
 (1)(A) and (1)(B) shall expire at the end of the 12-month period beginning
 on the date of such birth or placement.
 (3) INTERMITTENT LEAVE- In the case of a son or daughter or parent who
 has a serious health condition, such leave may be taken intermittently
 when medically necessary, subject to subsection (e).
 (b) REDUCED LEAVE- On agreement between the employer and the employee,
 leave under this section may be taken on a reduced leave schedule, however,
 such reduced leave schedule shall not result in a reduction in the total
 amount of leave to which the employee is entitled.
 (c) UNPAID LEAVE PERMITTED- Except as provided in subsection (d), leave
 granted under subsection (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 (d) RELATIONSHIP TO PAID LEAVE-
 (1) UNPAID LEAVE- If an employer provides paid family leave for fewer
 than 10 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave added to attain the 10
 workweek total may be unpaid.
 (2) SUBSTITUTION OF PAID LEAVE- An employee or employer may elect to
 substitute any of the employee's accrued paid vacation leave, personal
 leave, or other appropriate paid leave for any part of the 10-week period.
 (e) FORESEEABLE LEAVE-
 (1) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under this section is foreseeable based on an expected birth or adoption,
 the employee shall provide the employer with prior notice of such expected
 birth or adoption in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 (2) DUTIES OF EMPLOYEE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under this section is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment or
 supervision, the employee shall--
 (A) make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision so
 as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employer, subject to the
 approval of the health care provider of the employee's son or daughter; and
 (B) provide the employer with prior notice of the treatment or supervision
 in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 (3) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under section
 108(a) that define the term `reasonable and practicable' for purposes of
 paragraphs (1) and (2)(B).
 (f) SPOUSES EMPLOYED BY THE SAME EMPLOYER- In any case in which a husband
 and wife entitled to family leave under this section are employed by the
 same employer, the aggregate number of workweeks of family leave to which
 both may be entitled may be limited to 10 workweeks during any 24-month
 period, if such leave is taken--
 (1) under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1); or
 (2) to care for a sick parent under subparagraph (C) of such subsection.
SEC. 104. TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE- Any employee who, as the result of a serious
 health condition, becomes unable to perform the functions of the position
 of the employee, shall be entitled to temporary medical leave, subject to
 section 105.
 (2) PERIOD OF ENTITLEMENT- The entitlement under paragraph (1) shall continue
 for as long as the employee is unable to perform the functions, except
 that the leave shall not exceed 13 workweeks during any 12-month period.
 (3) INTERMITTENT LEAVE- Leave taken under this subsection may be taken
 intermittently when medically necessary, subject to subsection (d).
 (b) UNPAID LEAVE PERMITTED- Except as provided in subsection (c), leave
 granted under subsection (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 (c) RELATIONSHIP TO PAID LEAVE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If an employer provides paid temporary medical leave or
 paid sick leave for fewer than 13 weeks, the additional weeks of leave
 added to attain the 13-week total may be unpaid.
 (2) SUBSTITUTION OF PAID LEAVE- An employee or employer may elect to
 substitute the employee's accrued paid vacation leave, sick leave, or
 other appropriate paid leave for any part of the 13-week period, except
 that nothing in this Act shall require an employer to provide paid sick
 leave or paid medical leave in any situation in which such employer would
 not normally provide any such paid leave.
 (d) FORESEEABLE LEAVE-
 (1) DUTIES OF EMPLOYEE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under this section is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment or
 supervision, the employee shall--
 (A) make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision so
 as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employer, subject to the
 approval of the employee's health care provider, and
 (B) provide the employer with prior notice of the treatment or supervision
 in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 (2) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under section
 108(a) that define the term `reasonable and practicable' for purposes of
 paragraph (1).
SEC. 105. CERTIFICATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An employer may require that a claim for family leave
 under section 103(a)(1)(C), or temporary medical leave under section 104,
 be supported by certification issued by the health care provider of the
 son, daughter, parent, or employee, whichever is appropriate. The employee
 shall provide a copy of such certification to the employer.
 (b) SUFFICIENT CERTIFICATION- The certification shall be considered
 sufficient if it states--
 (1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 (2) the probable duration of the condition;
 (3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the provider
 regarding the condition; and
 (4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 104, a statement that the
 employee is unable to perform the functions of the employee's position; and
 (B) for purposes of leave under section 103(a)(1)(C), an estimate of the
 amount of time that the employee is needed to care for the son, daughter,
 or parent.
 (c) SECOND OPINION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the employer has reason to doubt the
 validity of the certification provided under subsection (a), the employer
 may require, at its own expense, that the employee obtain the opinion
 of a second health care provider designated or approved by the employer
 concerning the information certified under subsection (b).
 (2) LIMITATION- Any health care provider designated or approved under
 paragraph (1) may not be employed on a regular basis by the employer.
 (d) RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTING OPINIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the second opinion described in
 subsection (c) differs from the original certification provided under
 subsection (a), the employer may require, at its own expense, that the
 employee obtain the opinion of a third health care provider designated or
 approved jointly by the employer and the employee concerning the information
 certified under subsection (b).
 (2) FINALITY- The opinion of the third health care provider concerning
 the information certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be
 final and shall be binding on the employer and the employee.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT RECERTIFICATION- The employer may require that the employee
 obtain subsequent recertifications on a reasonable basis.
SEC. 106. EMPLOYMENT AND BENEFITS PROTECTION.
 (a) RESTORATION TO POSITION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any employee who takes leave under section 103 or 104 for
 its intended purpose shall be entitled, on return from the leave--
 (A) to be restored by the employer to the position of employment held by
 the employee when the leave commenced; or
 (B) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 (2) LOSS OF BENEFITS- The taking of leave under this title shall not
 result in the loss of any employment benefit accrued before the date on
 which the leave commenced.
 (3) LIMITATIONS- Except as provided in subsection (b), nothing in this
 section shall be considered to entitle any restored employee to--
 (A) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave; or
 (B) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than that to which
 the employee was entitled to on the date the leave was commenced.
 (4) CERTIFICATION- As a condition to restoration under paragraph (1),
 the employer may have a policy that requires each employee to receive
 certification from the employee's health care provider that the employee
 is able to resume work.
 (5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
 an employer from requiring an employee on leave under section 103 or 104 to
 periodically report to the employer on the employee's status and intention
 to return to work.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF HEALTH BENEFITS- During any period an employee takes
 leave under section 103 or 104, the employer shall maintain coverage under
 any group health plan (as defined in section 162(i)(3) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1954) for the duration of such leave at the level and
 under the conditions coverage would have been provided if the employee had
 continued in employment continuously from the date the employee commenced
 the leave until the date the employee is restored under subsection (a).
SEC. 107. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 (a) INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS-
 (1) EXERCISE OF RIGHTS- It shall be unlawful for any employer to interfere
 with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any
 right provided under this title.
 (2) DISCRIMINATION- It shall be unlawful for any employer to discharge or
 in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any
 practice made unlawful by this title.
 (b) INTERFERENCE WITH PROCEEDINGS OR INQUIRIES- It shall be unlawful for
 any person to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any
 individual because the individual--
 (1) has filed any charge, or has instituted or caused to be instituted
 any proceeding, under or related to this title;
 (2) has given or is about to give any information in connection with any
 inquiry or proceeding relating to any right provided under this title; or
 (3) has testified or is about to testify in any inquiry or proceeding
 relating to any right provided under this title.
SEC. 108. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as
 are necessary to carry out this section, including rules and regulations
 concerning service of complaints, notice of hearings, answers and amendments
 to complaints, and copies of orders and records of proceedings.
 (b) CHARGES-
 (1) FILING- Any person alleging an act that violates this title may file
 a charge respecting the violation with the Secretary. Charges shall be
 in such form and contain such information as the Secretary shall require
 by regulation.
 (2) NOTIFICATION- Not later than 15 days after the Secretary receives
 notice of a charge under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 (A) serve a notice of the charge on the person charged with the violation;
 and
 (B) inform such person and the charging party as to the rights and procedures
 provided under this title.
 (3) TIME OF FILING- A charge may not be filed later than 1 year after the
 date of the last event constituting the alleged violation.
 (c) PROCESS ON NOTICE OF A CHARGE- Investigation; Complaint-
 (1) INVESTIGATION- Within the 60-day period after the Secretary receives
 any charge, the Secretary shall investigate the charge and issue a complaint
 based on the charge or dismiss the charge.
 (2) COMPLAINT BASED ON CHARGE- If the Secretary determines that there is a
 reasonable basis for the charge, the Secretary shall issue a complaint based
 on the charge and promptly notify the charging party and the respondent
 as to the issuance.
 (3) DISMISSAL- If the Secretary determines that there is no reasonable
 basis for the charge, the Secretary shall dismiss the charge and promptly
 notify the charging party and the respondent as to the dismissal.
 (4) SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS-
 (A) WITH CHARGING PARTY- The charging party and the respondent may enter
 into a settlement agreement concerning the violation alleged in the
 charge before any determination is reached by the Secretary under this
 subsection. To be effective such an agreement must be determined by the
 Secretary to be consistent with the purposes of this title.
 (B) WITH SECRETARY- On the issuance of a complaint, the Secretary and the
 respondent may enter into a settlement agreement concerning a violation
 alleged in the complaint. Any such settlement may not be entered into over
 the objection of the charging party, unless the Secretary determines that
 the settlement provides a full remedy for the charging party.
 (5) CIVIL ACTIONS- If, at the end of the 60-day period referred to in
 paragraph (1), the Secretary--
 (A) has not issued a complaint under paragraph (2);
 (B) has dismissed the charge under paragraph (3); or
 (C) has not approved or entered into a settlement agreement under
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (4);
the charging party may elect to bring a civil action under section 109.
 (6) COMPLAINT AND RELIEF ON SECRETARY'S INITIATIVE-
 (A) ISSUANCE- The Secretary may issue and serve a complaint alleging a
 violation of this title on the basis of information and evidence gathered
 as a result of an investigation initiated by the Secretary pursuant to
 section 110.
 (B) RELIEF-
 (i) IN GENERAL- On issuance of a complaint, the Secretary shall have the
 power to petition the United States district court for the district in
 which the violation is alleged to have occurred, or in which the respondent
 resides or transacts business, for appropriate temporary relief or a
 restraining order.
 (ii) NOTICE- On the filing of any such petition, the court shall cause
 notice of the petition to be served on the respondent.
 (iii) TYPE OF RELIEF- The court shall have jurisdiction to grant to the
 Secretary such temporary relief or restraining order as the court considers
 just and proper.
 (d) RIGHTS OF PARTIES-
 (1) SERVICE OF COMPLAINT- In any case in which a complaint is issued under
 subsection (c), the Secretary shall, not later than 10 days after the date
 on which the complaint is issued, cause to be served on the respondent a
 copy of the complaint.
 (2) PARTIES TO COMPLAINT- Any person filing a charge alleging a violation of
 this title may elect to be a party to any complaint filed by the Secretary
 alleging the violation. The election must be made before the commencement
 of a hearing.
 (3) CIVIL ACTION- The failure of the Secretary to comply in a timely
 manner with any obligation assigned to the Secretary under this title
 shall entitle the charging party to elect, at the time of such failure,
 to bring a civil action under section 109.
 (e) CONDUCT OF HEARING-
 (1) PROSECUTION BY SECRETARY- The Secretary shall prosecute any complaint
 issued under subsection (c).
 (2) HEARING- An administrative law judge shall conduct a hearing on the
 record with respect to a complaint issued under this title. The hearing
 shall be conducted in accordance with sections 554, 555, and 556 of title 5,
 United States Code, and shall be commenced within 60 days after the issuance
 of the complaint, unless the judge, in the judge's discretion, determines
 that the purposes of this Act would best be furthered by commencement of
 the action after the expiration of such period.
 (f) FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- After a hearing is conducted under this section,
 the administrative law judge shall promptly make findings of fact and
 conclusions of law, and, if appropriate, issue an order for relief as
 provided in section 111.
 (2) NOTIFICATION CONCERNING DELAY- The administrative law judge shall
 inform the parties, in writing, of the reason for any delay in making
 the findings and conclusions if the findings and conclusions are not made
 within 60 days after the conclusion of the hearing.
 (g) FINALITY OF DECISION; REVIEW-
 (1) FINALITY- The decision and order of the administrative law judge shall
 become the final decision and order of the Secretary unless, on appeal
 by an aggrieved party taken not later than 30 days after the action, the
 Secretary modifies or vacates the decision, in which case the decision of
 the Secretary shall be the final decision.
 (2) REVIEW- Not later than 60 days after the entry of the final order of
 the Secretary under paragraph (1), any person aggrieved by the final order
 may obtain a review of the order in the United States court of appeals
 for the circuit in which the violation is alleged to have occurred or in
 which the employer resides or transacts business.
 (3) JURISDICTION- On the filing of the record with the court, the
 jurisdiction of the court shall be exclusive and its judgment shall be final,
 except that the same shall be subject to review by the Supreme Court of
 the United States on writ of certiorari or certification as provided in
 section 1254 of title 28, United States Code.
 (h) COURT ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS-
 (1) POWER OF SECRETARY- If a respondent does not appeal an order of the
 Secretary under subsection (g)(2), the Secretary may petition the United
 States district court for the district in which the violation is alleged to
 have occurred, or in which the respondent resides or transacts business,
 for the enforcement of the order of the Secretary, by filing in the court
 a written petition praying that the order be enforced.
 (2) JURISDICTION- On the filing of the petition, the court shall have
 jurisdiction to make and enter a decree enforcing the order of the
 Secretary. In the proceeding, the order of the Secretary shall not be
 subject to review.
 (3) DECREE OF ENFORCEMENT- If, on appeal of an order under subsection
 (g)(2), the United States court of appeals does not reverse or modify the
 order, the court shall have the jurisdiction to make and enter a decree
 enforcing the order of the Secretary.
SEC. 109. ENFORCEMENT BY CIVIL ACTION.
 (a) RIGHT TO BRING CIVIL ACTION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the limitations in this section, an employee
 or the Secretary may bring a civil action against any employer to enforce
 the provisions of this title in any appropriate court of the United States
 or in any State court of competent jurisdiction.
 (2) NO CHARGE FILED- Subject to paragraph (3), a civil action may be
 commenced under this subsection without regard to whether a charge has
 been filed under section 108(b).
 (3) LIMITATIONS- No civil action may be commenced under paragraph (1)
 if the Secretary--
 (A) has approved, or has failed to disapprove, a settlement agreement under
 section 108(c)(4), in which case no civil action may be filed under this
 subsection if the action is based on a violation alleged in the charge
 and resolved by the agreement; or
 (B) has issued a complaint under section 108(c)(2) or 108(c)(6), in which
 case no civil action may be filed under this subsection if the action is
 based on a violation alleged in the complaint.
 (4) TO ENFORCE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS- Notwithstanding paragraph (3)(A),
 a civil action may be commenced to enforce the terms of any such settlement
 agreement.
 (5) TIMING OF COMMENCEMENT OF CIVIL ACTION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), no civil action
 may be commenced more than 1 year after the date on which the alleged
 violation occurred.
 (B) EXCEPTION- In any case in which--
 (i) a timely charge is filed under section 108(b); and
 (ii) the failure of the Secretary to issue a complaint or enter into
 a settlement agreement based on the charge (as provided under section
 108(c)(4)) occurs more than 11 months after the date on which any alleged
 violation occurred,
the employee may commence a civil action not more than 30 days after the
date on which the employee is notified of the failure.
 (6) AGENCIES- The Secretary may not bring a civil action against any agency
 of the United States.
 (b) VENUE- An action brought under subsection (a) in a district court of
 the United States may be brought--
 (1) in any appropriate judicial district under section 1391 of title 28,
 United States Code; or
 (2) in the judicial district in the State in which--
 (A) the employment records relevant to the violation are maintained and
 administered; or
 (B) the aggrieved person worked or would have worked but for the alleged
 violation.
 (c) NOTIFICATION OF THE SECRETARY; RIGHT TO INTERVENE- A copy of the
 complaint in any action brought by an employee under subsection (a) shall be
 served on the Secretary by certified mail. The Secretary shall have the right
 to intervene in a civil action brought by an employee under subsection (a).
 (d) ATTORNEYS FOR THE SECRETARY- In any civil action brought under subsection
 (a), attorneys appointed by the Secretary may appear for and represent
 the Secretary, except that the Attorney General and the Solicitor General
 shall conduct any litigation in the Supreme Court.
SEC. 110. INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To ensure compliance with the provisions of this title,
 or any regulation or order issued under this title, subject to subsection
 (c), the Secretary shall have the investigative authority provided under
 section 11(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (b) OBLIGATION TO KEEP AND PRESERVE RECORDS- An employer shall keep and
 preserve records in accordance with section 11(c) of such Act, and in
 accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary.
 (c) REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS GENERALLY LIMITED TO AN ANNUAL BASIS- The
 Secretary may not under this section require any employer or any plan,
 fund, or program to submit to the Secretary any books or records more than
 once in any 12-month period, unless the Secretary has reasonable cause
 to believe there may exist a violation of this title or any regulation or
 order issued pursuant to this title, or is investigating a charge brought
 pursuant to section 108.
 (d) SUBPOENA POWERS, ETC- For purposes of any investigation conducted under
 this section, the Secretary shall have the subpoena authority provided
 under section 9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).
 (e) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION- The Secretary may make available to
 any person substantially affected by any matter that is the subject of an
 investigation under this section, and to any department or agency of the
 United States, information concerning any matter that may be the subject
 of the investigation.
SEC. 111. RELIEF.
 (a) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF-
 (1) CEASE AND DESIST- On finding a violation under section 108 by a person,
 an administrative law judge shall issue an order requiring the person to
 cease and desist from any act or practice that violates this title.
 (2) INJUNCTIONS- In any civil action brought under section 109, a court may
 grant as relief any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining
 order, or other equitable relief as the court considers appropriate.
 (b) MONETARY DAMAGES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any employer that violates this title shall be liable to
 the injured party in an amount equal to--
 (A) any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied
 or lost to the employee by reason of the violation, plus interest on the
 total monetary damages calculated at the prevailing rate; and
 (B) an additional amount equal to the greater of--
 (i) the amount determined under subparagraph (A), as liquidated damages; or
 (ii) the amount of consequential damages but not to exceed three times
 the amount determined under subparagraph (A).
 (2) GOOD FAITH- If an employer who has violated this title proves to the
 satisfaction of the court that the act or omission which violated this title
 was in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for believing
 that the act or omission was not a violation of this title, the court may,
 in its discretion, reduce the amount of the liability or penalty provided
 for under this subsection to the amount determined under paragraph (1)(A).
 (c) ATTORNEYS' FEES- A prevailing party (other than the United States) may
 be awarded a reasonable attorneys' fee as part of the costs, in addition
 to any relief awarded. The United States shall be liable for costs in the
 same manner as a private person.
 (d) LIMITATION- Damages awarded under subsection (b) may not accrue from
 a date more than 2 years before the date on which a charge is filed under
 section 108(b) or a civil action is brought under section 109.
SEC. 112. NOTICE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each employer shall post and keep posted, in conspicuous
 places on the premises of the employer where notices to employees and
 applicants for employment are customarily posted, a notice, approved by
 the Secretary, setting forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the pertinent
 provisions of this title and information pertaining to the filing of
 a charge.
 (b) PENALTY- Any employer who willfully violates this section shall be
 fined not more than $100 for each separate offense.
TITLE II--FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
SEC. 201. FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) Chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subchapter:
`SUBCHAPTER III--FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE
` 6331. Definitions
 `For purposes of this subchapter:
 `(1) `employee' means--
 `(A) an employee as defined by section 6301(2) of this title (excluding
 an individual employed by the government of the District of Columbia); and
 `(B) an individual under clause (v) or (ix) of such section;
who has been employed for at least 12 months and completed at least 900
hours of service during the previous 12-month period.
 `(2) `serious health condition' means an illness, injury, impairment,
 or physical or mental condition that involves--
 `(A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 `(B) continuing treatment, or continuing supervision, by a health care
 provider;
 `(3) `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted, or foster child,
 a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a de facto parent, who is--
 `(A) under 18 years of age; or
 `(B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a
 mental or physical disability; and
 `(4) `parent' means a biological, foster, or adoptive parent, a
 parent-in-law, a stepparent, or a legal guardian.
` 6332. Family leave requirement
 `(a)(1) An employee shall be entitled, subject to section 6334, to 10
 workweeks of family leave during any 24-month period--
 `(A) as the result of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee;
 `(B) as the result of the placement, for adoption or foster care, of a
 son or daughter with the employee; or
 `(C) in order to care for the employee's son or daughter or parent who
 has a serious health condition.
 `(2) The entitlement to leave under paragraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B) shall
 expire at the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date of such
 birth or placement.
 `(3) In the case of a son or daughter or parent who has a serious health
 condition, such leave may be taken intermittently when medically necessary,
 subject to subsection (e).
 `(b) On agreement between the employing agency and the employee, leave
 under this section may be taken on a reduced leave schedule, however,
 such reduced leave schedule shall not result in a reduction in the total
 amount of leave to which the employee is entitled.
 `(c) Except as provided in subsection (d), leave granted under subsection
 (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 `(d)(1) If an employing agency provides paid family leave for fewer than
 10 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave added to attain the 10 workweek
 total may be unpaid.
 `(2) An employee or employing agency may elect to substitute any of the
 employee's accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, or other appropriate
 paid leave for any part of the 10-week period.
 `(e)(1) In any case in which the necessity for leave under this section
 is foreseeable based on an expected birth or adoption, the employee shall
 provide the employing agency with prior notice of such expected birth or
 adoption in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 `(2) In any case in which the necessity for leave under this section
 is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment or supervision, the
 employee shall--
 `(A) make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision so as
 not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employing agency, subject to the
 approval of the health care provider of the employee's son or daughter; and
 `(B) provide the employing agency with prior notice of the treatment or
 supervision in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 `(3) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall promulgate
 regulations that define the term `reasonable and practicable' for purposes
 of paragraphs (1) and (2)(B).
` 6333. Temporary medical leave requirement
 `(a)(1) Any employee who, as the result of a serious health condition,
 becomes unable to perform the functions of the position of the employee,
 shall be entitled to temporary medical leave, subject to section 6334.
 `(2) The entitlement under paragraph (1) shall continue for as long as
 the employee is unable to perform the functions, except that the leave
 shall not exceed 13 administrative workweeks of the employee during any
 12-month period.
 `(3) Leave taken under this subsection may be taken intermittently when
 medically necessary, subject to subsection (d).
 `(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), leave granted under subsection
 (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 `(c)(1) If an employing agency provides paid temporary medical leave or
 paid sick leave for fewer than 13 weeks, the additional weeks of leave
 added to attain the 13-week total may be unpaid.
 `(2) An employee or employing agency may elect to substitute the employee's
 accrued paid vacation leave, sick leave, or other appropriate paid leave
 for any part of the 13-week period, except that nothing in this Act shall
 require an employing agency to provide paid sick leave or paid medical
 leave in any situation in which such employing agency would not normally
 provide any such paid leave.
 `(d)(1) In any case in which the necessity for leave under this section
 is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment or supervision, the
 employee shall--
 `(A) make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or supervision so
 as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employing agency, subject
 to the approval of the employee's health care provider, and
 `(B) provide the employing agency with prior notice of the treatment or
 supervision in a manner which is reasonable and practicable.
 `(2) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall promulgate
 regulations that define the term `reasonable and practicable' for purposes
 of paragraph (1).
` 6334. Certification
 `(a) An employing agency may require that a claim for family leave under
 section 6332(a)(10)(C), or temporary medical leave under section 6333,
 be supported by certification issued by the health care provider of the
 son, daughter, parent, or employee, whichever is appropriate. The employee
 shall provide a copy of such certification to the employing agency.
 `(b) The certification shall be considered sufficient if it states--
 `(1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 `(2) the probable duration of the condition;
 `(3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the provider
 regarding the condition; and
 `(4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 6333, a statement that the
 employee is unable to perform the functions of the employee's position; and
 `(B) for purposes of leave under section 6332(a)(1)(C), an estimate of the
 amount of time that the employee is needed to care for the son, daughter,
 or parent.
 `(c)(1) In any case in which the employing agency has reason to doubt the
 validity of the certification provided under subsection (a), the employing
 agency may require, at its expense, that the employee obtain the opinion
 of a second health care provider designated or approved by the employing
 agency concerning the information certified under subsection (b).
 `(2) Any health care provider designated or approved under paragraph (1)
 may not be employed on a regular basis by the employing agency.
 `(d)(1) In any case in which the second opinion described in subsection
 (c) differs from the original certification provided under subsection
 (a), the employing agency may require, at its expense, that the employee
 obtain the opinion of a third health care provider designated or approved
 jointly by the employing agency and the employee concerning the information
 certified under subsection (b).
 `(2) The opinion of the third health care provider concerning the information
 certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be final and shall
 be binding on the employing agency and the employee.
 `(e) The employing agency may require that the employee obtain subsequent
 recertifications on a reasonable basis.
` 6335. Job protection
 `An employee who uses leave under section 6332 or 6333 of this title shall
 be entitled, on return from the leave--
 `(1) to be restored to the position of employment held by the employee
 when the leave commenced; or
 `(2) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
` 6336. Prohibition of coercion
 `(a) An employee may not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or
 coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce, any other employee
 for the purpose of interfering with the exercise of the rights of the
 employee under this subchapter.
 `(b) For the purpose of this section, `intimidate, threaten, or coerce'
 includes promising to confer or conferring any benefit (such as appointment,
 promotion, or compensation), or taking or threatening to take any reprisal
 (such as deprivation of appointment, promotion, or compensation).
` 6337. Health insurance
 `An employee enrolled in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of this
 title who is placed in a leave status under section 6332 or 6333 of this
 title may elect to continue the health benefits enrollment of the employee
 while in leave status and arrange to pay into the Employees Health Benefits
 Fund (described in section 8909 of this title), through the employing
 agency of the employee, the appropriate employee contributions.
` 6338. Regulations
 `The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations necessary
 for the administration of this subchapter. The regulations prescribed
 under this subchapter shall be consistent with the regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary of Labor under title I of the Family and Medical Leave
 Act of 1989.'.
 (2) The table of contents for chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
`SUBCHAPTER III--FAMILY LEAVE AND TEMPORARY MEDICAL LEAVE
`6331. Definitions.
`6332. Family leave requirement.
`6333. Temporary medical leave requirement.
`6334. Certification.
`6335. Job protection.
`6336. Prohibition of coercion.
`6337. Health insurance.
`6338. Regulations.'.
 (b) EMPLOYEES PAID FROM NONAPPROPRIATED FUNDS- Section 2105(c)(1) of title
 5, United States Code, is amended by striking out `53' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `53, subchapter III of chapter 63,'.
TITLE III--COMMISSION ON FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established a Commission to be known as the
 Commission on Family and Medical Leave (hereinafter in this title referred
 to as the `Commission').
SEC. 302. DUTIES.
 The Commission shall--
 (1) conduct a comprehensive study of--
 (A) existing and proposed policies relating to family leave and temporary
 medical leave; and
 (B) the potential costs, benefits, and impact on productivity of such
 policies on employers;
 (2) to the extent practicable, include in the study of family leave and
 temporary medical leave policies required under subsection (1)(A), a review
 of all studies of existing and proposed methods designed to provide workers
 with full or partial salary replacement or other income protection during
 periods of family leave and temporary medical leave that are consistent
 with the legitimate business interests of employers;
 (3) within 2 years after the date on which the Commission first meets,
 submit a report to Congress that outlines the findings of the Commission.
SEC. 303. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) COMPOSITION-
 (1) APPOINTMENTS- The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members
 and 2 ex-officio members appointed not more than 60 days after the date
 of the enactment of this Act as follows:
 (A) One Senator shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate,
 and one Senator shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
 (B) One member of the House of Representatives shall be appointed by the
 Speaker of the House of Representatives, and one member of the House of
 Representatives shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House
 of Representatives.
 (C)(i) Two members each shall be appointed by--
 (I) the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
 (II) the majority leader of the Senate,
 (III) the minority leader of the House of Representatives, and
 (IV) the minority leader of the Senate.
 (ii) Such members shall be appointed by virtue of demonstrated expertise
 in relevant family, temporary disability, and labor-management issues and
 shall include representatives of employers.
 (2) EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the
 Secretary of Labor shall serve on the Commission as nonvoting ex-officio
 members.
 (b) VACANCIES- Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same
 manner in which the original appointment was made.
 (c) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall elect a
 chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
 (d) QUORUM- Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
 all purposes, except that a lesser number may constitute a quorum for the
 purpose of holding hearings.
SEC. 304. COMPENSATION.
 (a) PAY- Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
 (b) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Members of the Commission shall be allowed reasonable
 travel expenses, including a per diem allowance, in accordance with
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, while performing duties of
 the Commission.
SEC. 305. POWERS.
 (a) MEETINGS- The Commission shall first meet not more than 30 days after
 the date on which all members are appointed. The Commission shall meet
 thereafter on the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
 (b) HEARINGS AND SESSIONS- The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and
 act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence
 as the Commission considers appropriate. The Commission may administer
 oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (c) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The Commission may secure directly from any
 Federal agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry
 out this Act. On the request of the chairperson or vice chairperson of
 the Commission, the head of the agency shall furnish the information to
 the Commission.
 (d) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR- The Commission may appoint an Executive Director
 from the personnel of any Federal agency to assist the Commission in
 carrying out the duties of the Commission.
 (e) USE OF SERVICES AND FACILITIES- On the request of the Commission,
 the head of any Federal agency may make available to the Commission any
 of the facilities and services of the agency.
 (f) PERSONNEL FROM OTHER AGENCIES- On the request of the Commission, the
 head of any Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of the agency
 to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
SEC. 306. TERMINATION.
 The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of the submission
 of the final report of the Commission to Congress.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 401. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 (a) FEDERAL AND STATE ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAWS- Nothing in this Act shall
 be construed to modify or affect any Federal or State law prohibiting
 discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin,
 sex, age, or handicapped status.
 (b) STATE AND LOCAL LAWS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to supersede
 any provision of any State or local law that provides greater employee
 family or medical leave rights than the rights established under this Act.
SEC. 402. EFFECT ON EXISTING EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.
 (a) MORE PROTECTIVE- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to diminish the
 obligation of an employer to comply with any collective-bargaining agreement
 or any employment benefit program or plan that provides greater family and
 medical leave rights to employees than the rights provided under this Act.
 (b) LESS PROTECTIVE- The rights provided to employees under this Act may
 not be diminished by any collective-bargaining agreement or any employment
 benefit program or plan.
SEC. 403. ENCOURAGEMENT OF MORE GENEROUS LEAVE POLICIES.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to discourage employers from adopting
 or retaining leave policies more generous than any policies that comply
 with the requirements under this Act.
SEC. 404. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out title I.
SEC. 405. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) ADVISORY COMMISSION- Title III shall become effective on the date of
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) OTHER TITLES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), titles I, II, and IV
 shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- In the case of a collective bargaining
 agreement in effect on the effective date described in paragraph (1),
 title I shall apply on the earlier of--
 (A) the date of the termination of such agreement, or
 (B) the date which occurs 12 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.