HR 5510 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5510
To amend the Black Lung Benefits Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 3, 1990
Mr. MURPHY (for himself, Mr. PERKINS, Mr. HAWKINS, Mr. POSHARD, Mr. JONTZ,
Mr. RAHALL, Mr. MOLLOHAN, Mr. STAGGERS, Mr. WISE, Mr. BEVILL, Mr. YATRON,
Mr. KANJORSKI, Mr. DYMALLY, Mr. CLAY, Mr. WILLIAMS, Mr. MILLER of California,
Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. TOWNS, Mr. MCCLOSKEY, Mr. EVANS, Mr. APPLEGATE,
Mr. GAYDOS, Mr. KOLTER, Mr. BOUCHER, and Mr. WALGREN) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Black Lung Benefits Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE: REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Black Lung Benefits
 Restoration Act of 1990'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Black Lung Benefits Act.
TITLE I--INTERIM PRESUMPTION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR BLACK LUNG BENEFITS
SEC. 101. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Black Lung Benefits Act of 1972 (Public Law 92-303) sought in part
 to expedite the adjudication of benefit claims generated by the Federal
 Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 (Public Law 91-173) and to reduce
 the number of Social Security Administration benefit denials through the
 adoption of interim evidentiary rules and disability evaluation criteria.
 (2) Pursuant to this mandate, the Social Security Administration promulgated
 an interim presumption by which a claimant would prove disability based
 on a single piece of qualifying evidence to invoke the presumption.
 (3) The Black Lung Benefits Act of 1972 provided for the Department of
 Labor to assume responsibility for the benefits program on July 1, 1973,
 for claims filed after such date.
 (4) Due to the absence of an interim presumption, the Department of Labor's
 benefit approval rate remained low causing Congress, in the Black Lung
 Benefits Reform Act of 1977 (Public Law 95-239), to require the Department
 of Labor to promulgate an interim presumption not less restrictive than
 that adopted by the Social Security Administration.
SEC. 102. CLARIFICATION OF CONGRESSIONAL INTENT REGARDING THE INTERIM
PRESUMPTION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR BLACK LUNG BENEFITS.
 Section 422 (30 U.S.C. 932) is amended by adding after subsection (l)
 the following:
 `(m)(1) Notwithstanding any other law, rule, or regulation, in the case
 of any claim filed under this part between July 1, 1973, and April 1,
 1980, by a miner who has engaged in coal mining employment for at least
 ten years (or by an eligible survivor of such miner), such miner shall
 be presumed to be totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis, or to have been
 totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis, or the death of such miner shall
 be presumed to be due to pneumoconiosis, arising out of that employment
 if any medical requirement described in paragraph (2) is met.
 `(2) The medical requirements described in this paragraph are the following:
 `(A) A single positive chest roentgenogram (X-ray), biopsy, or autopsy
 indicates the existence of pneumoconiosis.
 `(B) A single set of positive ventilatory studies indicates the presence
 of a chronic respiratory or pulmonary disease.
 `(C) A single set of positive blood gas studies indicates the presence of
 an impairment in the transfer of oxygen from the lungs to the blood.
 `(D) Other medical evidence, including the documented opinion of a physician
 exercising reasonable medical judgment, indicates the presence of totally
 disabling respiratory impairment.
 `(3) The presentation of evidence which meets any of the requirements
 under subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph (2) shall be sufficient
 to invoke the presumption under such paragraph.
 `(4) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require proof of
 any such medical requirement by a preponderance of the evidence or by any
 higher evidentiary standard.
 `(n) All relevant medical evidence shall be considered only in connection
 with rebuttal of the presumption under subsection (m). Such presumption
 shall be rebutted if:
 `(1) The evidence establishes that the individual is, in fact, doing his
 usual coal mine work or comparable and gainful work.
 `(2) In light of all relevant evidence it is established that the individual
 is able to do his usual coal mine work or comparable and gainful work.
 `(3) The evidence establishes that the total disability or death of the
 miner did not arise in whole or in part out of coal mine activity.
 `(4) The evidence establishes that the miner does not have, or did not
 have, pneumoconiosis.'.
TITLE II--CLAIMS REVIEW
SEC. 202. REVIEW OF CERTAIN CLAIMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) Notwithstanding section 435 of the Black Lung Benefits
 Act (30 U.S.C. 945), or any other law, rule, or regulation, the Secretary
 of Labor shall review any claim that--
 (A) was filed under part C of such Act before April 1, 1980, or under part
 B at any time; and
 (B) is either pending on the date of enactment of this Act, or has been
 denied on or before that date,
to determine if the evidence establishes eligibility under 20 CFR 410.490
(except that the language limiting application of that regulation to claims
filed before July 1, 1973, or to claims in cases in which the miner died
before January 1, 1974, shall be inapplicable), taking into account the
amendments made to the Act before and by the enactment of the Black Lung
Benefits Reform Act of 1977 (as well as the regulations promulgated to
effectuate such amendments, except regulations under 20 CFR 727.203) and
excluding any amendments to the Act made after such date of the enactment
(as well as the regulations promulgated pursuant to such amendments).
 (2) The Secretary shall review each such claim regardless of whether the
 claimant also filed any subsequent claim under the Act, even if any such
 claim resulted in an award of benefits.
 (b) NOTICE TO CLAIMANTS- The Secretary shall promptly notify each claimant
 having a claim subject to review under subsection (a) that the claim shall
 be reviewed by the Secretary in accordance with this section.
 (c) APPROVAL OF CLAIM- The Secretary shall approve any claim reviewed
 under this section if the evidence meets the criteria of eligibility set
 forth in subsection (a) and shall immediately make or otherwise provide
 for payment under the claim.
 (d) CONCERNING CERTAIN ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE- (1) In carrying out the review
 of a claim under this section, the Secretary shall not allow the claimant
 or any other party to submit additional medical or other evidence if
 the Secretary determines that the evidence on file meets the criteria of
 eligibility set forth in subsection (a).
 (2) If the Secretary determines that the evidence on file does not meet
 the criteria of eligibility set forth in subsection (a) of this section,
 the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for the claimant to present
 additional medical or other evidence to substantiate his or her claim
 under such criteria and shall notify the claimant of that opportunity.
 (e) AWARDS- Any individual whose claim is approved pursuant to this section
 shall be awarded benefits prospectively (unless, at the time of such
 approval, the individual is receiving black lung benefits prospectively
 pursuant to an award made in connection with a separate claim) and
 retroactively for any period beginning on or after January 1, 1974, for
 which the claimant (1) has not received benefits, and (2) is eligible
 under the statutory and regulatory provisions governing the retroactive
 payment of benefits for claims that are not subject to the special review
 required by this section.
 (f) ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW- Each claim reviewed under this
 section shall be afforded the administrative and judicial review that is
 afforded claims that are not subject to this section.
 (g) BENEFITS ASSESSED AGAINST TRUST FUND- Any benefits granted in accordance
 with this provision shall be assessed against the Black Lung Disability
 Trust Fund.
TITLE III--REPAYMENT OF BENEFITS
SEC. 301. BENEFIT REPAYMENT.
 Part C is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `SEC. 436. (a) In the administration of the benefits payable under this
 part, if a claimant receives benefits under this part for at least two
 years before final adjudication of the claim for benefits is made and if
 the final adjudication is that the claimant is ineligible for benefits,
 the payment of such benefits to the claimant shall not be considered an
 overpayment of benefits and the claimant shall not be legally responsible
 for the return of such benefits.
 `(b) If, before the date of the enactment of this section, a claimant
 received benefits under this part for at least two years before a final
 adjudication of the claim for benefits was made, the claimant will not
 be required to repay such benefits. If, before the date of the enactment
 of this section, a claimant who received benefits under this part for at
 least two years before final adjudication of the claim for benefits was
 made was required under regulations of the Secretary to repay the benefits
 as an overpayment of benefits, the Secretary shall refund to the claimant
 the amount repaid by the claimant.'.
TITLE IV--TO EXTEND THE MORATORIUM ON INTEREST OWED BY THE BLACK LUNG
DISABILITY TRUST FUND TO THE UNITED STATES TREASURY.
SEC. 401. EXTENSION OF MORATORIUM.
 No interest shall accrue for the period beginning October 1, 1990, and
 ending on September 30, 1995, with respect to any repayable advance to
 the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund
TITLE V--CONTINGENCY FEE ARRANGEMENTS
SEC. 501. CONTINGENCY FEE ARRANGEMENTS.
 Section 422(a) (30 U.S.C. 932(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `Subject to' and inserting in lieu thereof `(1) Except
 as provided in paragraph (2), subject to', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) Notwithstanding section 28 of the Longshore and Harbor Worker's
 Compensation Act (33 U.S.C. 928) and the regulations of the Secretary in
 effect under this section on the date of the enactment of this paragraph,
 the following provisions govern any proceeding under this section:
 `(A) Any person who files a claim under this section may enter into an
 arrangement with an attorney for representation in a proceeding under this
 section under which--
 `(i) the attorney will receive compensation for such representation only
 if such person prevails in such proceeding, and
 `(ii) will, except as provided in subparagraph (B)(i), receive compensation
 only for periods during which the attorney represents such person.
 `(B) An arrangement described in subparagraph (A) shall provide that the
 attorney will receive as compensation for representation--
 `(i) in the first proceeding initiated by such person in which such person
 is represented by an attorney, an amount which is not more than 25 percent
 of the benefits paid to such person--
 `(I) from the date of the person's retirement or if an attorney began
 representation of such person after such proceeding had been initiated,
 from the date the attorney began representation of such person, and
 `(II) to the date such person prevails in such proceeding or the attorney no
 longer represents such person in such proceeding, whichever occurs first, and
 `(ii) in a subsequent proceeding initiated by such person, an amount which is
 not more than 25 percent of the benefits paid to such person from the date
 the attorney files a notice of appearance in such subsequent proceeding
 to the date such person prevails in such proceeding or the attorney no
 longer represents such person in such proceeding, whichever occurs first.
 `(C) An attorney may, as prescribed in an agreement, be paid upon the
 completion of any level of the proceeding.
 `(D) An attorney who enters into a contingency arrangement described in
 subparagraph (A) shall file notice of such arrangement with the Secretary
 of Labor and the coal mine operator or the Black Lung Disability Trust
 Fund against whom the proceeding is brought.
 `(E) If a person has entered into an arrangement described in subparagraph
 (A) and is being paid benefits under this section, the coal mine operator
 or the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund paying the benefits shall establish
 an escrow account for the payment of the compensation prescribed by such
 arrangement. If in a subsequent proceeding the employee does not prevail,
 the amount held in the escrow account shall be paid to the coal mine
 operator or the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund which paid the benefits.
 `(F) If a person who filed a claim under this section has been paid benefits
 under this section and if a coal mine operator or the Black Lung Disability
 Trust Fund is no longer required to pay such benefits to such person under
 this section, the employee will not have to repay any amount paid to an
 attorney from the account described in subparagraph (E).
 `(G) If a coal mine operator or the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund is
 required to pay benefits under this section to a person who has entered
 into an arrangement described in subparagraph (A), the coal mine operator
 or Fund shall, within 30 days of the date--
 `(I) the period for appeal from the proceeding which required such benefits
 to be paid has lapsed, or
 `(II) of the termination of such proceeding if there is no appeal from
 such proceeding,
pay the fees required by subparagraph (B).'.