S 834 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 834
To amend the Clayton Act regarding cable communications, and for other
purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 18 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. PRESSLER, and Mr. LIEBERMAN) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Clayton Act regarding cable communications, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Competition in Cable Television Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 2. Subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12)
 is amended by--
 (1) inserting between the first and second paragraphs the following:
 `The term `cable system' has the meaning given such term in section 602(2)
 of the Communications Act of 1934, as added by section 2 of the Cable
 Communications Policy Act of 1984.', and
 (2) inserting between the second and third paragraphs the following:
 `The term `multichannel video programming distributor' means a person,
 such as, but not limited to, a cable system, a multi-channel multipoint
 distribution service, or a television receive-only satellite program
 distributor who makes available for purchase by subscribers or customers
 multiple channels of video programming.'.
 SEC. 3. Section 2 of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 13) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following:
 `(g) No person, engaged in the production, creation, or distribution of video
 programming that is owned or controlled by, or affiliated through substantial
 common ownership with, any one or more cable systems, shall discriminate in
 the price, terms, conditions, or availability of sale of its programming
 among cable systems, cable system operators, or other multichannel video
 programming distributors who purchase such programming for the purpose of
 delivery to consumers: Provided, That such person may impose reasonable,
 non-discriminatory requirements for creditworthiness, service, and financial
 stability: Provided further, That nothing in this section shall prohibit
 price differentials which are attributable to differences in cost in the
 creation, sale, delivery, or transmission of such programming: Provided
 further, That nothing in this section shall prohibit price differentials
 which are made in good faith to meet the equally low price of a competitor.'.
 SEC. 4. The Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following:
 `SEC. 28. It shall be unlawful for any cable system operator, directly
 or through any parent or affiliate, to acquire an interest in any cable
 television system where such person owns, controls, or is affiliated
 through substantial common ownership of, cable television systems that are
 available to more than 25 percent of all cable television subscribers in
 the United States.'.