S 2810 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2810
To prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from issuing oil and gas leases
on certain portions of the Outer Continental Shelf off the State of Florida.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 28 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1990
Mr. MACK (for himself and Mr. GRAHAM) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from issuing oil and gas leases
on certain portions of the Outer Continental Shelf off the State of Florida.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PROHIBITION.
 The Secretary of the Interior shall not--
 (1) prepare for, or conduct, any preleasing or leasing activity under the
 Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.) including, but
 not limited to, calls for information, tract selection, notices of sale,
 receipt of bids, and award of leases;
 (2) approve any plan of exploration pursuant to section 11 of the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1340); or
 (3) approve any development or production plan pursuant to section 25 of
 the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1351),
with respect to any submerged lands of the Outer Continental Shelf (as such
term is defined in section 2(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
(43 U.S.C. 1331(a)) located south of 26 degrees north latitude and east of
86 degrees west longitude.
SEC. 2. GUIDELINES FOR BUYING BACK EXISTING LEASES.
 (a) DECLARATION- To the extent that it is determined that there is a legal
 obligation to buy back any existing oil or gas lease on the submerged
 lands described in section 1, the Congress declares that it is the sole
 responsibility of the United States to buy back such leases.
 (b) GUIDELINES- The Secretary of the Interior shall issue guidelines for
 the buying back by the United States of any existing oil or gas lease on
 submerged lands described in section 1.
SEC. 3. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to
 buy back leases described in section 2(a).