HR 3742 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3742
To amend the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act to improve
the safety of pesticides, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 7, 1991
Mr. ROSE introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Agriculture and Energy and Commerce
March 10, 1992
Additional sponsor: Mr. Brown
A BILL
To amend the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act to improve
the safety of pesticides, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Pesticide Safety Improvement
 Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--PESTICIDE SAFETY
Sec. 101. References to Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
Sec. 102. Definitions.
Sec. 103. Safer pesticides.
Sec. 104. Tolerance reevaluation as part of reregistration.
Sec. 105. Cancellation after five years.
Sec. 106. Cancellation or modification of registration.
Sec. 107. Suspension.
Sec. 108. Burden of persuasion.
Sec. 109. Periodic update of information supporting registration.
Sec. 110. Registration of establishments.
Sec. 111. Records.
Sec. 112. Inspections.
Sec. 113. Data disclosure to States.
Sec. 114. Certification and training for pesticide applicators.
Sec. 115. Unlawful acts.
Sec. 116. Penalties.
Sec. 117. Authority of States.
Sec. 118. Scientific Advisory Panel and Pesticide Advisory Board.
Sec. 119. Cooperation with Secretary of Agriculture.
Sec. 120. Collection of exposure information.
Sec. 121. Minor use pesticides.
Sec. 122. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 123. Conforming amendments to table of contents.
Sec. 124. Technical amendments.
TITLE II--TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES
Sec. 201. References to Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
Sec. 203. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 204. Adulterated food.
Sec. 205. Tolerances and exemptions for pesticide chemical residues.
Sec. 206. Authorization of appropriations for increased monitoring.
TITLE III--ADULTERATED POULTRY PRODUCTS
Sec. 301. Definitions.
TITLE IV--ADULTERATED MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS
Sec. 401. Definitions.
TITLE V--ADULTERATED EGGS AND EGG PRODUCTS
Sec. 501. Definitions.
TITLE I--PESTICIDE SAFETY
SEC. 101. REFERENCES TO FEDERAL INSECTICIDE, FUNGICIDE, AND RODENTICIDE ACT.
 Whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an
 amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference
 shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the
 Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.),
 except to the extent otherwise specifically provided.
SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 2 (7 U.S.C. 136) is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (e) to read as follows:
 `(e) APPLICATORS-
 `(1) COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR-
 `(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `commercial applicator'
 means a person who--
 `(i) uses or supervises the use of any pesticide that is classified for
 restricted use;
 `(ii) uses or supervises the use of any pesticide for hire as the principal
 part of the business or work of the person; or
 `(iii) as an employee of a person described in clause (ii), uses or
 supervises the use of any pesticide.
 `(B) The term `commercial applicator' does not include a person when the
 person is using or supervising the use of a pesticide as described in
 paragraph (2).
 `(2) PRIVATE APPLICATOR- The term `private applicator' means a person
 who uses or supervises the use of any pesticide that is classified for
 restricted use for purposes of producing any agricultural commodity--
 `(A) on property owned or rented by the person or the employer of the
 person; or
 `(B) on other property if applied without compensation (other than trading
 of personal services between producers of agricultural commodities).
 `(3) CERTIFIED APPLICATOR- The term `certified applicator' means a commercial
 or private applicator who is certified under section 11.
 `(4) UNDER THE DIRECT SUPERVISION OF A CERTIFIED APPLICATOR- Unless
 otherwise prescribed by its labeling, a pesticide shall be considered
 to be applied under direct supervision of a certified applicator if the
 pesticide is applied by a person acting under the instructions and control
 of a certified applicator who is available if and when needed, even though
 the certified applicator is not physically present at the time and place
 the pesticide is used.';
 (2) in paragraph (bb)--
 (A) by inserting `(1)' after `means'; and
 (B) by inserting before the period at the end: `, or (2) a human dietary risk
 from residues that result from use of a pesticide and that generally occur
 in or on any food above the level the Administrator determines will protect
 the public health within the meaning of section 408 of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 346a) (as in effect immediately after
 the date of enactment of the Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of 1991)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(hh) PESTICIDE TESTING FACILITY- The term `pesticide testing facility'
 means any place where any test, study, survey, or investigation of the
 properties, effects, or behavior of any pesticide (or any ingredient,
 metabolite, or degradation product thereof), device, or container or
 packaging of any pesticide or device, is conducted by or on behalf of any
 registrant, applicant for registration, or other person who distributes or
 sells the pesticide. The term does not include any place solely on account
 of the participation of an agricultural producer as a cooperator in field
 testing of a pesticide.'.
SEC. 103. SAFER PESTICIDES.
 Section 3(c)(3)(B) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(3)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (ii)(I), by inserting after `45 days' the following: `,
 or in the case of an application described in clause (iii) 90 days,';
 (2) in clause (ii)(II), by inserting after `90 days' the following: `,
 or in the case of an application described in clause (iii) 180 days,'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) The Administrator shall prioritize the review of applications for
 the registration of pesticide active ingredients that appear to have a
 significantly lower risk, considering risks to both human health and to the
 environment, than registered pesticide active ingredients for the same use.'.
SEC. 104. TOLERANCE REEVALUATION AS PART OF REREGISTRATION.
 Section 4(g)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136a-1(g)(2)) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) Any time after the Administrator has sufficient information with
 respect to the dietary risk of a particular active ingredient, but in any
 event no later than the time the Administrator makes a determination under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) with respect to pesticides containing such active
 ingredient, the Administrator shall--
 `(i) reassess each associated tolerance and exemption from the requirement
 for a tolerance issued under section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 346a);
 `(ii) determine whether the tolerance or exemption meets the requirements
 of such Act;
 (iii) determine whether additional tolerances or exemptions should be issued;
 `(iv) publish in the Federal Register a notice setting forth the
 determinations made under this subparagraph; and
 `(v) commence promptly such proceedings under this Act and section 408
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as are warranted by the
 determinations.'.
SEC. 105. CANCELLATION AFTER FIVE YEARS.
 Section 6(a)(1) (7 U.S.C. 136d(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking `shall' and inserting `may'; and
 (2) in the second sentence, by inserting after `canceled' the following:
 `or suspended under this Act'.
SEC. 106. CANCELLATION OR MODIFICATION OF REGISTRATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (b) of section 6 (7 U.S.C. 136d(b)) is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(b) CANCELLATION OR MODIFICATION OF REGISTRATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) The Administrator may issue a final order under this subsection to
 ensure that--
 `(i) a pesticide, its labeling, or other material required to be submitted
 to the Administrator complies with the requirements of this Act; and
 `(ii) the pesticide, when used in accordance with its labeling or widespread
 or commonly recognized practice, will not generally cause unreasonable
 adverse effects on the environment.
 `(B) A final order under this subsection may--
 `(i) cancel the registration of a pesticide (or the registrations of a
 group of pesticides containing a common active or inert ingredient) and
 prohibit the future registration of such a pesticide;
 `(ii) prescribe requirements regarding the composition, packaging, or
 labeling of any such pesticide, or any other conditions of registration,
 state that the registration of any such currently-registered pesticide
 is to be canceled if its registration is not modified to comply with the
 requirements, and prohibit the future registration of any pesticide that
 does not comply with the requirements; or
 `(iii) classify the pesticide for restricted use or change the classification
 of the pesticide.
 `(2) INITIATION-
 `(A) The Administrator may initiate a proceeding in accordance with this
 subsection if the Administrator determines, on the basis of criteria
 regarding data and information regarding adverse effects and exposure
 supplied pursuant to regulations published by the Administrator, that
 there are prudent concerns that a pesticide may cause unreasonable adverse
 effects on man or the environment.
 `(B) Except as provided by paragraphs (3) and (12)(E)(ii), a proceeding
 under this subsection may not be initiated unless the Administrator first
 makes the determination described in subparagraph (A).
 `(C)(i) The Administrator shall enter into a written memorandum of
 understanding with the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services that shall specify when consultation shall occur
 between them under this section and stipulate how such consultation shall
 be accomplished.
 `(ii) Before issuing a proposed order under paragraph (5), the Administrator
 shall consult with the Secretary of Agriculture and, on the proposed action
 is based on potential adverse effects to human health, the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services, of the proposed action and the bases for the
 action. The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall have an adequate opportunity to submit written comments
 and consult effectively with the Administrator on the proposed order and
 the bases for such order, and on any scientific, agricultural, health,
 or economic issues or other matters related to the proposed order.
 `(3) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (2)(B) shall not apply to a proceeding under
 this subsection if--
 `(A) the proceeding and any proposed order or final order--
 `(i) concern only general requirements for labeling and packaging of
 pesticides;
 `(ii) relate to the chemical properties or effects of a group of pesticides;
 and
 `(iii) do not unconditionally prohibit the use of any pesticide or group
 of pesticides on any crop or site; or
 `(B) the proceeding and any proposed order or final order are limited to
 questions relating to--
 `(i) whether a pesticide is misbranded within the meaning of section 2(q)
 (other than subparagraph (F) or (G) of section 2(q)(1)); or
 `(ii) whether material required to be submitted does not comply with the
 requirements of this Act.
 `(4) ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD-
 `(A) The Administrator shall establish an administrative record for each
 proceeding initiated under paragraph (1). The administrative record shall
 be made available to the public consistent with the requirements of section
 10 and shall include a copy of--
 `(i) any proposed order published under paragraph (5);
 `(ii) each comment received under paragraph (5);
 `(iii) the transcript of any hearing conducted pursuant to paragraph (6);
 `(iv) any report submitted by the Scientific Advisory Panel under paragraph
 (7);
 `(v) the transcript of any meeting conducted by the Science Advisory Panel
 under paragraph (7);
 `(vi) any decision by the Administrator to withdraw a proposed order
 published under paragraph (9); and
 `(vii) any final order issued under paragraph (9).
 `(B) The person who submits a document for inclusion in the administrative
 record shall also submit a copy of any study or information on which the
 document is based, unless--
 `(i) such study or information is already a part of the record; or
 `(ii) such study or information is widely available to the public without
 restriction.
 `(5) PROPOSED ORDER-
 `(A) A proposed order shall--
 `(i) set forth the factual and legal bases and purpose of the proposed order;
 `(ii) summarize the relevant scientific data and studies that the
 Administrator considered in developing the proposed order;
 `(iii) provide a summary of the methods used to estimate risk;
 `(iv) if the pesticide is used to produce an agricultural commodity, include
 a general analysis of the impact of the proposed action on consumers,
 retail food prices, production of agricultural commodities, and otherwise
 on the agricultural economy;
 `(v) summarize the available information on the risks and the benefits
 of the pesticides, including any benefit and use data, an analysis of
 the data that includes a multi-attribute comparison of the risks and
 benefits associated with all known methods for controlling the pest,
 or any other comments submitted by the Secretary of Agriculture or the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, as appropriate, and the response
 of the Administrator to the comments;
 `(vi) include an analysis and preliminary conclusions by the Administrator
 concerning the balancing of the risks and benefits of use of the pesticide;
 and
 `(vii) provide a summary of comments received.
 `(B) The Administrator shall provide a period for public comment of 90
 days after the date of publication of the proposed order.
 `(C)(i) The Administrator shall send a copy of a proposed order to cancel
 or change the classification of a pesticide to the Secretary of Agriculture
 and, if the proposed order to cancel or change classification is based on
 potential adverse effects on human health, to the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 `(ii) The Administrator shall allow the Secretary of Agriculture and, in
 the case of a proposed order based on potential adverse effects on human
 health, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to consult with the
 Administrator and to submit written comments on the proposed order.
 `(D) If no comments opposing the proposed order are timely received, the
 Administrator may issue a final order identical to the proposed order. The
 final order shall be effective on its publication in the Federal Register,
 and shall not be subject to judicial review. In such a case, paragraphs (6)
 and (7), and subparagraphs (B) through (E) of paragraph (9), shall not apply.
 `(6) INFORMAL HEARING-
 `(A) Any person may, not later than 10 days after the end of the comment
 period described in paragraph (5)(C), request that the Administrator hold
 an informal hearing for the purpose of discussing significant issues with
 regard to the order published under paragraph (5).
 `(B)(i) If the Administrator receives any timely requests for a hearing
 under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall make a determination
 concerning the questions raised by the requests.
 `(ii) If the Administrator determines that any such question is significant,
 the Administrator shall schedule an informal hearing and designate a
 presiding officer to conduct the hearing, schedule presentations, and
 ensure the completion of the hearing in accordance with clauses (i) and
 (ii) of subparagraph (C).
 `(iii) The Administrator shall publish a notice of the hearing in the
 Federal Register that includes information concerning the time, place,
 and purpose of the hearing.
 `(C) A hearing conducted under this paragraph--
 `(i) shall not exceed 20 days in duration;
 `(ii) shall terminate not later than 45 days after the end of the comment
 period described in paragraph (5)(C); and
 `(iii) shall be limited in scope to addressing the significant issues
 raised in any request for the hearing.
 `(D) For each hearing conducted under this paragraph, the Administrator
 shall designate not less than one employee of the Environmental Protection
 Agency for the purpose of participating in the hearing. Any person who
 requests a hearing may present evidence or argument in oral or written form
 on issues within the scope of the hearing. A transcript shall be made of
 any oral presentation.
 `(7) REVIEW BY SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL-
 `(A) After the close of the comment period and following any hearing
 conducted under paragraph (6), the Administrator shall--
 `(i) transmit to the Scientific Advisory Panel established under section
 25(d) all of the material contained in the administrative record and a
 summary of the significant scientific issues raised by the comments; and
 `(ii) request the Panel to prepare a report containing the comments,
 evaluations, and recommendations of the Panel on any scientific issues
 identified by the Panel or by the Administrator in the summary of comments or
 other scientific issues of significance as determined by the Administrator.
 `(B) The Panel may hold a public meeting to discuss the issues raised in
 subparagraph (A)(ii) and shall include a transcript of any such meeting
 in the report to the Administrator.
 `(C) The Panel shall file any report to the Administrator not later than 60
 days after the request of the Administrator for the comments of the Panel,
 unless the Administrator provides additional time for filing the report. If
 the report is not filed within the 60-day period or any extension of the
 period, the Administrator may proceed to issue a final order in accordance
 with paragraph (9).
 `(8) SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION- After a proceeding under this subsection
 has commenced, if the Administrator determines that further information is
 needed in order to reach a decision in the proceeding, the Administrator
 shall take such steps as are necessary to collect all such needed information
 including the issuance of requests as appropriate under section 3(c)(2)(B)
 for various items of needed information, as promptly as possible and to avoid
 delays in order to complete the proceeding within 18 months of the date of
 its initiation. The Administrator shall also carefully monitor the responses
 to the requests and to the extent possible avoid sequential requests.
 `(9) FINAL ACTION-
 `(A) After considering all material in the administrative record, the
 Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register either a final order
 or a withdrawal of the proposed order. A final order shall state any
 requirements, classifications, or prohibitions imposed by the order, and
 shall contain a summary of the provisions of paragraph (10). The action
 of the Administrator shall be consistent with paragraph (1).
 `(B) If a final order to cancel or change classification differs
 significantly from a proposed order, the Administrator shall consult with
 the Secretary of Agriculture and, as appropriate, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services prior to issuing the final order.
 `(C) A final order or a withdrawal of a proposed order shall include a
 statement that--
 `(i) explains the reasons for the action;
 `(ii) responds to any comments made by the Secretary of Agriculture or the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, and responds to any report of the
 Scientific Advisory Panel submitted in accordance with paragraph (7); and
 `(iii) responds to each significant comment contained in the administrative
 record.
 `(D) A final order shall also include a statement that--
 `(i) explains the reasons for any major differences between the final
 order and the proposed order;
 `(ii) analyzes the effect of the final order on consumers, the production
 and prices of agricultural commodities, retail food prices, and otherwise
 on the agricultural economy;
 `(iii) explains any significant disagreements the Administrator may have
 with the report of the Scientific Advisory Panel submitted under paragraph
 (7) or the comments of the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services under paragraph (5)(D); and
 `(iv) with respect to any agricultural use of the pesticide, considers
 whether agricultural practices such as integrated pest management, crop
 rotation, or other alternative practices are being used or could be used
 to decrease the exposure to the pesticide to an acceptable level, to the
 extent the information is available.
 `(E) In issuing a final order under this subsection, the Administrator
 shall--
 `(i) allow a registrant to apply to amend the terms and conditions of
 a registration as an alternative to cancellation if the Administrator
 determines that such an amendment will ensure that the pesticide, when
 used in accordance with its labeling or widespread or commonly recognized
 practice, will not generally cause unreasonable adverse effects on the
 environment;
 `(ii) take into account the effect of the action on production and prices
 of agricultural commodities, retail food prices, and otherwise on the
 agricultural economy; and
 `(iii) take into account any significant differences in risk between
 agricultural and nonagricultural pesticides.
 `(F) A final order issued under this subsection shall become effective
 on the date of the publication of the order in the Federal Register or on
 such later date as is stated in the order.
 `(G) The Administrator may issue a final order under this subsection whenever
 the registration of a pesticide is canceled to allow the continued sale
 or use of existing stocks of the pesticide, subject to such conditions
 and limitations as the Administrator considers appropriate to satisfy the
 purposes of this Act.
 `(H) The Administrator shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary
 to allow final action to be taken under subparagraph (A) within a period
 of 18 months after the publication of the proposed order under paragraph (5).
 `(10) MODIFICATION OR CANCELLATION OF REGISTRATION-
 `(A) A registrant whose registration is affected by a final order published
 under paragraph (9) may, during the 30-day period beginning on the date
 of the publication in the Federal Register of the final order--
 `(i) apply for an amendment to the registration to make the registration
 comply with the order; or
 `(ii) request voluntary cancellation of the registration.
 `(B) If a final order unconditionally prohibits all uses of a pesticide,
 the order may provide that the cancellation of the registration of the
 pesticide is effective on the effective date of the order.
 `(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, if an application
 for an amendment to the registration to make the registration comply with
 an order issued under subparagraph (A) is not submitted within the 30-day
 period, the Administrator may publish in the Federal Register a notice
 that the registration of the pesticide has been canceled, effective on
 the date of publication of the notice.
 `(11) EFFECT OF ORDER ON CERTAIN APPLICATIONS- If a final order prohibiting
 the registration of a pesticide has been issued under paragraph (9) and is
 in effect, the Administrator shall not approve an application for initial
 or amended registration of any pesticide under section 3 or 24(c) that is
 prohibited under such final order.
 `(12) PETITION TO ISSUE, MODIFY, OR REVOKE ORDER-
 `(A) Any interested person may petition the Administrator to initiate a
 proceeding to--
 `(i) issue a new order under this subsection; or
 `(ii) amend or revoke a final order that has been issued under this
 subsection.
 `(B) A petition submitted under subparagraph (A) shall describe the factual
 material and argument that form the basis for the petition.
 `(C) On receipt of a petition described in subparagraph (A), the
 Administrator shall publish a notice of receipt of the petition in the
 Federal Register.
 `(D) The Administrator shall provide a period for public comment of not
 less than 60 days after the date of the publication of the notice described
 in subparagraph (C).
 `(E)(i) Not later than 180 days after the date of publication of the
 notice described in subparagraph (C), the Administrator shall determine
 what action to take on the petition and publish the determination and the
 basis for the action in the Federal Register.
 `(ii) In the case of a petition to issue a new order, the Administrator shall
 either deny the petition utilizing the standard set forth in paragraph (2)(A)
 (and state the basis for denial) or commence a proceeding in accordance
 with this subsection.
 `(iii) In the case of a petition to amend or revoke an existing order,
 the Administrator shall either deny the petition (and state the basis
 for denial) or initiate a proceeding to amend or revoke the order. If
 the Administrator initiates such a proceeding, the proceeding shall be
 conducted in accordance with this subsection, except that paragraph (2)
 shall not be applicable to such a proceeding. In determining whether to
 deny a petition to amend or revoke an existing order, the Administrator
 shall give due regard to the desirability of finality, to the opportunity
 that the petitioner had to present the factual material and argument in
 question in the prior proceeding, and to any substantial new evidence
 submitted by the petitioner.
 `(D) A denial of a petition under this paragraph shall be judicially
 reviewable as provided in paragraph (13).
 `(13) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(A) A final order or a withdrawal of a proposed order published under
 paragraph (9) or a denial of a petition submitted under paragraph (12)
 shall be judicially reviewable under section 16(b)(2).
 `(B) Nothing in this section relating to the provision of notice to other
 Federal agencies and the opportunity for consultation with other Federal
 agencies shall be construed as creating any right or benefit, substantive
 or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States,
 or an agency or officer of the United States, or any person.
 `(C) No court of the United States shall have jurisdiction to review any
 challenge to any action or failure to take action by the agency pursuant
 to this section if the challenge is based on an assertion that the agency
 failed to notify or consult with, or improperly notified or consulted with,
 any other Federal agency.'.
 (b) IMPLEMENTATION-
 (1) PUBLIC INTERIM ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEEDING- If the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, on or before the date of
 enactment of this Act, has published a document instituting a public
 interim administrative review proceeding or has issued a notice under
 section 3(c)(6), 6(b), or 6(c) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
 and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(6), 136(b), or 136(d)) (as those
 sections were in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this
 Act) with respect to a particular pesticide or active ingredient thereof,
 in order to avoid delay or duplication of effort, the Administrator may, in
 lieu of proceeding under section 6(b) of such Act (as amended by subsection
 (a) of this section), elect to continue the review proceeding and, on its
 completion, take action as warranted in accordance with sections 3(c)(6),
 6(b), 6(c), and 6(d) of such Act (as those sections were in effect on the
 day before the date of enactment of this Act).
 (2) CRITERIA IN EXISTING REGULATIONS- For purposes of implementing section
 6(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (as
 amended by subsection (a) of this section), the Administrator shall deem
 the criteria for initiating a special review set forth in the regulations
 appearing in part 154 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, as in
 effect on November 1, 1991, to be `criteria regarding data and information
 regarding adverse effects and exposure set forth in regulations published by
 the Administrator', unless and until the regulations are modified or revoked.
SEC. 107. SUSPENSION.
 Subsection (c) of section 6 (7 U.S.C. 136d(c)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) SUSPENSION-
 `(1) ORDER- If the Administrator determines, in accordance with paragraph
 (8), that the use of a pesticide may result in an imminent hazard, the
 Administrator may issue an order immediately suspending the registration of
 such pesticide. The order shall explain the bases for the Administrator's
 determination that an imminent hazard exists. The Administrator shall
 send to the registrant by certified mail a copy of the suspension order,
 and shall publish the order in the Federal Register. The suspension
 order shall become effective either upon publication in the Federal
 Register or upon receipt by the registrant of the suspension order,
 whichever occurs first. The suspension shall automatically expire 180
 days after becoming effective unless, on or before such expiration date,
 the Administrator has published in the Federal Register a proposed order
 to cancel the suspended registration. If a proposed cancellation order is
 issued before the expiration date, the suspension shall continue in effect
 until terminated in accordance with paragraph (4).
 `(2) PRIOR CONSULTATION WITH FEDERAL AGENCIES- Prior to issuing a suspension
 order under this subsection, the Administrator shall notify the Secretary
 of Agriculture and, if the proposed suspension is based upon potential
 adverse effects on human health, the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 of the proposed suspension and the bases therefor. No proposed suspension
 order shall be issued until the Administrator has provided the Secretary
 of Agriculture and, where appropriate, the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, an adequate opportunity, consistent with the need to take prompt
 action, to consult effectively with the Administrator on the proposed
 suspension and the bases therefor, and on any scientific, agricultural,
 health, and economic issues or other matters related to the proposed
 suspension.
 `(3) EXISTING STOCKS- The Administrator may, at the discretion of the
 Administrator, allow continued sale or use of existing stocks of a pesticide
 for which the registration has been suspended subject to such conditions
 and limitations as the Administrator deems necessary and appropriate.
 `(4) DURATION OF SUSPENSION-
 `(A) A suspension order issued under this subsection may be terminated
 by the Administrator at any time. A suspension order issued under this
 subsection shall terminate upon completion of a proceeding to cancel a
 registration of a pesticide under subsection (b) or upon cancellation by
 the Administrator of the suspended registration.
 `(B) If an order by the Administrator to cancel the suspended registration
 is overturned by a reviewing court, the suspension order issued under this
 subsection shall be reinstated if the decision of the court overturning
 the cancellation order allows for further substantive deliberations by
 the Administrator on the proposed cancellation. A suspension order that
 is reinstated under this subparagraph shall terminate 45 days after such
 reinstatement.
 `(5) PETITION TO RECONSIDER SUSPENSION-
 `(A) A registrant, or any other interested person with the concurrence of
 the registrant, may, within 60 days of the publication of the suspension
 order in the Federal Register, petition the Administrator to reconsider
 the issuance of the suspension order. A petitioner must include in the
 petition specific objections to the suspension order, and must include the
 specific bases supporting the petitioner's conclusion that the standard
 for suspension has not been met. A petition must be accompanied by any
 information the petitioner wishes the Administrator to consider in reviewing
 the petition. The Administrator shall, within 90 days of receipt of the final
 petition, issue an order granting or denying petitions received under this
 subparagraph. Each such order responding to a petition for reconsideration
 shall be sent to the petitioner and published in the Federal Register,
 and shall include the factual and legal bases for the Administrator's
 determination on the petition. A denial of a petition by the Administrator
 shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to paragraph (6).
 `(B) A registrant, or any other interested person with the concurrence of
 the registrant, may file with the Administrator a petition to reconsider
 the issuance of a suspension order more than 60 days after publication
 of the suspension order in the Federal Register only if the petition is
 based upon substantial new information that--
 `(i) may materially affect the basis for or content of the suspension order;
 `(ii) was not available to the Administrator at the time the Administrator
 issued the suspension order or denied any petition submitted under
 subparagraph (A); and
 `(iii) could not, through the exercise of due diligence, have been submitted
 to the Administrator within 60 days of the issuance of a suspension order.
In addition, such petition must include specific objections to the suspension
order and the specific bases supporting the petitioner's conclusion that the
standard for suspension has not been met. Such a petition must be accompanied
by any information the petitioner wishes the Administrator to consider in
reviewing the petition. The Administrator shall issue an order granting or
denying a petition filed under this subparagraph within 90 days of receipt
of the petition. Such order shall be sent to the petitioner and published in
the Federal Register, and shall include the factual and legal bases for the
Administrator's determination on the petition. A denial of a petition by the
Administrator shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to paragraph (6).
 `(6) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any suspension order issued under paragraph (1)
 or denial of petition to reconsider a suspension order issued under
 paragraph (5) shall be subject to review under section 16(b)(1), solely
 to determine whether the order of suspension or denial of petition was
 arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion, or whether the order
 of suspension or denial of petition was issued in accordance with the
 procedures established by law. No such action may be entertained by the
 court unless the action is filed--
 `(A) in the case of a suspension order, by the registrant or by any
 interested person with the concurrence of the registrant, within 20 days
 of publication of the suspension order in the Federal Register; or
 `(B) in the case of a denial of a petition to reconsider suspension, by
 the petitioner within 20 days of publication of the Administrator's order
 denying the petition for reconsideration.
The commencement of proceedings under this paragraph shall not operate as
a stay of the suspension order unless otherwise ordered by the court. The
effect of any order of the court will be only either to stay or uphold the
effectiveness of the suspension order, pending the Administrator's final
determination with respect to cancellation.
 `(7) MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING- The Administrator shall enter into a
 written Memorandum of Understanding with the Secretary of Agriculture and
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services which shall specify the points
 in the process at which consultation provided for in this subsection shall
 occur and stipulate how such consultation shall be accomplished.
 `(8) INFORMATION AND FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In making the determination
 in paragraph (1), the Administrator shall act consistent with the need
 to take prompt action under the circumstances and shall consider, but may
 limit consideration to--
 `(A) information that is reasonably available concerning--
 `(i) the nature of the potential adverse effects from use of the pesticide;
 `(ii) the magnitude and scope of the risk to human health or the environment
 based on expected exposure to the pesticide;
 `(iii) the nature of the information on which the risk assessment is based
 and the degree of confidence or certainty that the risk actually exists; and
 `(iv) the benefits of the pesticide that would be affected by a suspension
 order, including, where relevant, the impacts of a suspension on the price
 and availability of raw agricultural commodities and processed food;
 `(B) whether the risk could be regulated adequately by cancellation of
 the registration without prior suspension, taking into account, to the
 extent information is reasonably available, the exposure to the pesticide
 that may occur during the period likely to be required for cancellation,
 whether or not the adverse effects from the exposure would be manifested
 during the period; and
 `(C) whether the benefits of use of the pesticide outweigh the risks of
 continued use.'.
SEC. 108. BURDEN OF PERSUASION.
 Subsection (h) of section 6 (7 U.S.C. 136d(h)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(h) BURDEN OF PERSUASION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 with respect to any proceeding under subsection (b), (c), or (d), the party
 contesting an order or proposed order by the Administrator to deny, suspend,
 classify, or otherwise modify or restrict the registration of a pesticide,
 or the party contesting an order or proposed order by the Administrator
 to modify or restrict the distribution, sale, or use of a pesticide,
 shall have the burden of persuasion.'.
SEC. 109. PERIODIC UPDATE OF INFORMATION SUPPORTING REGISTRATION.
 Section 6 (7 U.S.C. 136d) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(i) PERIODIC UPDATE OF INFORMATION SUPPORTING REGISTRATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Every registrant of a pesticide registered under this
 Act shall, in accordance with the schedule established in paragraph (3),
 update the information supporting each pesticide registration held by the
 registrant in order to ensure that the Administrator has the same level of
 information supporting the registration as is required of new applicants
 for registration. In determining what information shall be required to be
 submitted by registrants pursuant to this subsection, the Administrator
 shall consider whether additional information would be duplicative of
 information previously submitted to the Administrator.
 `(2) NOTIFICATION TO REGISTRANTS OF REQUIREMENTS- The Administrator shall
 provide to registrants notification of the specific items of information
 required to be submitted by registrants or classes of registrants pursuant to
 this subsection. No order of suspension may be issued pursuant to paragraph
 (6) for failure to submit an item of information unless the registrant
 has received notification of the requirement to submit the information
 at least 2 years before issuance of such an order, except that if the
 Administrator routinely allows registrants more than 2 years to develop a
 particular piece of information, no order of suspension shall be issued
 as a result of a failure to submit the information unless a registrant
 received notification of the requirement to submit the information and
 was afforded at a minimum the amount of time routinely allowed by the
 Administrator to submit the information.
 `(3) TIME PERIODS-
 `(A) A registrant of a pesticide product containing an active ingredient
 contained in any pesticide first registered before November 1, 1984, shall
 initially be required to supply the information required by paragraph (1)
 by the later of--
 `(i) 20 years after the date on which the first product containing the
 active ingredient was first registered; or
 `(ii) 10 years after the date on which the Administrator determines,
 pursuant to section 4(g)(2)(A), that pesticide products containing the
 active ingredient are eligible for reregistration.
Thereafter, a registrant of a pesticide product containing the active
ingredient shall be required to supply the information required by paragraph
(1) every 10 years after the date on which the information was first required
pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(B) A registrant of a pesticide product containing an active ingredient
 contained in a pesticide first registered after October 31, 1984, shall
 initially be required to supply the information required by paragraph (1)
 10 years after the date on which the first product containing the active
 ingredient was first registered. Thereafter, a registrant of a pesticide
 product containing the active ingredient shall be required to supply the
 information required by paragraph (1) every 10 years after the date on
 which the information was first required pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(4) PUBLICATION OF DATES IN FEDERAL REGISTER- The Administrator shall
 publish in the Federal Register the dates by which registrants are initially
 required to supply the information required by paragraph (1).
 `(5) EXTENSIONS OF TIME- The Administrator, at the discretion of the
 Administrator or on application by a registrant, may extend the time period
 required for submitting any portion of the information required to be
 submitted pursuant to this subsection if circumstances beyond the control
 of the registrant prevent the registrant from submitting data within the
 prescribed period. If an extension is granted pursuant to this paragraph,
 the Administrator shall establish a reasonable deadline for the submission
 of the information.
 `(6) ORDER OF SUSPENSION-
 `(A) If a registrant fails to submit the information required by this
 subsection within the time period required by this subsection, the
 Administrator may issue an order suspending the registration, except that,
 if the Administrator determines that a registrant made a good faith effort
 to submit the required information, the Administrator shall provide the
 registrant with a reasonable additional period of time to submit the
 information before issuing an order suspending the registration.
 `(B) The Administrator may make such provisions concerning the sale or use
 of existing stocks of a pesticide that has had its registration suspended
 pursuant to this paragraph as the Administrator considers appropriate to
 carry out this Act.
 `(C) A suspension order issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be sent
 to the registrant and shall be effective on receipt by the registrant.
 `(D) The order shall include a statement of the factual and legal basis
 for the suspension, and shall include any provisions the Administrator
 has made concerning the sale and use of existing stocks of the pesticide.
 `(E) A registration suspended under this paragraph shall be reinstated
 by the Administrator if the Administrator determines that the registrant
 has complied fully with the requirements that served as the basis for the
 suspension of the registration.
 `(F) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing the
 Administrator from initiating cancellation or suspension action under the
 appropriate provisions of this section if the Administrator determines that
 the action is warranted based on the information submitted by a registrant
 pursuant to this subsection.
 `(7) CANCELLATION AFTER 3 YEARS- If a registration remains suspended for
 more than 3 years after an order of suspension has been issued pursuant
 to paragraph (6), the Administrator may issue an order canceling the
 registration. The cancellation order shall be published in the Federal
 Register and sent to the registrant. A cancellation order issued pursuant
 to this paragraph shall be effective on publication in the Federal Register.
 `(8) FEES-
 `(A) On or after September 30, 1997, the Administrator is authorized to
 issue regulations to assess fees from registrants reasonably calculated
 to cover the costs (or some portion of the costs) associated with the
 periodic review of registrations pursuant to this subsection.
 `(B) If any fee prescribed by regulations issued pursuant to this paragraph
 with respect to the registration of a pesticide is not paid by the time
 prescribed by the regulations, the Administrator, by order and without
 hearing, may cancel the registration.
 `(9) EFFECT ON AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR TO REQUIRE INFORMATION- Nothing in
 this subsection shall be construed as limiting in any way the authority of
 the Administrator to require registrants to submit data to maintain in effect
 an existing registration of a pesticide pursuant to section 3(c)(2)(B).'.
SEC. 110. REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 7(c) (7 U.S.C. 136e(c)(1)) is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) Any producer operating an establishment registered under this section
 shall inform the Administrator within 30 days after the establishment is
 registered of the types and quantities of pesticides and active ingredients
 used in producing pesticides that the producer--
 `(i) is currently producing;
 `(ii) has produced in the past 365-day period; and
 `(iii) has sold or distributed during the past 365-day period.
 `(B) The information required by this paragraph shall be kept current and
 submitted to the Administrator annually as required under such regulations
 as the Administrator may prescribe.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 7(c)(2) is amended by striking `Any'
 and inserting `STOP SALE ORDERS- Any'.
SEC. 111. RECORDS.
 Section 8 (7 U.S.C. 136f) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 8. RECORDS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator, by regulation, may require any producer,
 importer, or exporter of a pesticide, registrant, applicant for registration,
 applicant for or holder of an experimental use permit, owner or operator
 of a pesticide testing facility, or any holder of a pesticide that is the
 subject of a regulation or requirement issued under subsection (a) or (b)
 of section 19--
 `(1) to prepare, and to maintain for reasonable periods of time, such
 records as the Administrator finds to be necessary for the effective
 implementation or enforcement of this Act;
 `(2) to furnish to the Administrator reports stating the location where
 the records are maintained; and
 `(3) to furnish a copy of any such record to the Administrator on written
 request.
 `(b) RECORDS OF COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS- The Administrator, by regulation
 or request, may require any commercial applicator--
 `(1) to prepare, and to maintain for reasonable periods of time, records
 of each pesticide application, including the identity and quantity of
 pesticide applied and the date and location of the application;
 `(2) to furnish to the Administrator reports stating the location where
 the records are maintained; and
 `(3) to furnish a copy of any such record to the Administrator on written
 request.
 `(c) RECORDS OF PESTICIDE DEALERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator, by regulation, shall require each
 pesticide dealer to prepare and maintain a record of each sale or
 distribution of--
 `(A) a pesticide classified for restricted use; or
 `(B) any other pesticide designated for purposes of this subsection by
 the Administrator by regulation that states why such a designation is
 necessary to carry out this Act.
 `(2) CONTENTS- The records shall include the identity of the pesticide
 sold or distributed, the identity of the person to whom the pesticide was
 distributed or sold, the date of the distribution or sale, and the quantity
 of the pesticide distributed or sold.
 `(3) DURATION- A pesticide dealer shall maintain the records required under
 this subsection for at least 3 years after the date of the distribution
 or sale.
 `(4) DEFINITION- For the purposes of this subsection, the term `pesticide
 dealer' means any person who, in the ordinary course of business, distributes
 or sells any pesticide that is classified for restricted use or designated
 under paragraph (1)(B).
 `(d) LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (a), the Administrator
 may not require any person to prepare, maintain, or submit any records
 that consist of--
 `(A) financial data, pricing data, or sales data other than shipment data;
 `(B) personnel data, except for data concerning exposure of employees to
 pesticides or ingredients of pesticides, or concerning health effects on
 employees that could reasonably be attributable to the exposure; or
 `(C) research or test data, other than data relating to--
 `(i) a registered pesticide;
 `(ii) any pesticide for which an application for registration or for an
 experimental use permit has been filed;
 `(iii) a pesticide for which an exemption pursuant to section 18 has
 been requested;
 `(iv) a pesticide the distribution, sale, or use of which has been limited
 by a regulation that has been promulgated pursuant to section 3(a);
 `(v) testing at a pesticide testing facility; or
 `(vi) the storage or disposal of a pesticide whose registration has been
 suspended or canceled.
 `(2) PRIVATE APPLICATORS- This Act shall not be construed to require,
 or to authorize the Administrator to require, any private applicator to
 prepare, maintain, or submit records or reports.'.
SEC. 112. INSPECTIONS.
 Section 9 (7 U.S.C. 136g) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 9. INSPECTIONS.
 `(a) AUTHORITY- An officer or employee of the United States or of any State,
 duly designated by the Administrator, is authorized--
 `(1) to enter and inspect--
 `(A) any place where any pesticide, active ingredient, or device is produced,
 packaged, distributed, or sold;
 `(B) any place where any records required under this Act are maintained
 or any place reported under section 8 as a place where the records are
 maintained;
 `(C) any pesticide testing facility; or
 `(D) any place where the officer or employee has reason to believe that
 this Act has been or is being violated; and
 `(2) to obtain, in connection with the entry or inspection--
 `(A) samples of any pesticide (or any ingredient, metabolite, or degradation
 product thereof), of any device, of any container or packaging of any
 pesticide or device, or of any label or labeling of a pesticide, active
 ingredient, or device;
 `(B) copies of any records required by or under this Act;
 `(C) copies of any data, or samples of any specimens, involved in the
 testing of any pesticide (or of any ingredient, metabolite, or degradation
 product thereof), or in the testing of any device, at any pesticide testing
 facility; and
 `(D) samples of any things in or on which pesticide residues may be found,
 including, without limitation, agricultural commodities, animals, pests,
 soil, or water.
 `(b) WARRANTS-
 `(1) ENTRY BY CONSENT OR PURSUANT TO WARRANT- This section shall not be
 construed to authorize any entry or inspection of a place not open to the
 general public unless--
 `(A) the person who holds the current possessory interest in the place,
 or the person in charge of the place, has consented to the entry and
 inspection; or
 `(B) the entry and inspection is authorized by a warrant issued in accordance
 with this section.
 `(2) OBTAINING WARRANTS-
 `(A) An officer or employee of the United States or of any State, duly
 authorized by the Administrator, is empowered to obtain from a court of
 competent jurisdiction and execute a warrant authorizing--
 `(i) entry, inspection, and obtaining of evidence, in accordance with
 subsection (a);
 `(ii) inspection and copying of records required by or under this Act; and
 `(iii) seizure of any pesticide, device, active ingredient, labeling,
 or packaging that is in violation of this Act.
 `(B) An officer or employee of the United States or of any State, duly
 designated by the Attorney General, may obtain and execute a warrant in
 accordance with rule 41 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, if a
 court or magistrate determines under the rule that there is probable cause
 to believe that--
 `(i) a criminal violation of this Act has occurred or is occurring on the
 place to be entered or searched; or
 `(ii) evidence of a criminal violation of this Act will be found on
 the place.
 `(c) PROCEDURE-
 `(1) CREDENTIALS AND STATEMENTS- Before any entry or inspection of any
 place not open to the general public is made under this section, the person
 conducting the inspection shall present to the person in charge of the
 place appropriate identifying credentials and a written statement of the
 reason for the entry and inspection and whether a violation of this Act is
 suspected, unless the entry is made pursuant to a warrant that authorizes
 entry without the presentation of credentials and statement.
 `(2) PROMPTNESS- Each entry or inspection shall be commenced and completed
 with reasonable promptness.
 `(3) SAMPLES- If the person conducting the entry or inspection obtains
 any samples as authorized by subsection (a)(2), before leaving the place
 the person shall give to the person in charge of the place a receipt
 describing the sample and, if requested and practicable, a portion of
 each such sample equal in volume or weight to the portion retained. If an
 analysis is made of any such sample, a copy of the results of the analysis
 shall be furnished on request to the person in charge of the place.
 `(d) COORDINATION- The Administrator shall coordinate actions taken under
 this section with actions taken under other Federal laws, including the
 Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq.), for the purpose of avoiding
 unnecessary duplication of inspections.'.
SEC. 113. DATA DISCLOSURE TO STATES.
 Subsection (b) of section 10 (7 U.S.C. 136h(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `(b) DISCLOSURE- If the Administrator' and inserting
 `(b) DISCLOSURE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the Administrator', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) COOPERATION WITH STATES- The Administrator is encouraged to cooperate
 fully with the States in compiling and analyzing data, sharing information,
 and otherwise supporting each other in the enforcement of this Act and State
 pesticide regulations. The Administrator shall, on request by a State,
 disclose to the State any data or information acquired under this Act if
 the State assures the Administrator, and the Administrator determines, that--
 `(A) the submitter of confidential business information will receive no
 less protection with respect to the disclosure and use of the data or
 information by the State than is otherwise provided by this Act; and
 `(B) the laws of the State allow the submitter of the data or information
 to recover just compensation in a civil action against the State for losses
 resulting from the disclosure or use of confidential business information
 by the State or its employees or agents in a manner inconsistent with
 this Act.'.
SEC. 114. CERTIFICATION AND TRAINING FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATORS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 11 (7 U.S.C. 136i) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking out in the second sentence `and
 shall not require private applicators to take any examination to establish
 competency in the use of pesticides' and by striking out the ninth and
 tenth sentences;
 (2) by striking subsection (d);
 (3) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (1); and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsections:
 `(d) USE BY COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- It shall be a violation of this Act for any person to
 use any pesticide as a commercial applicator unless the person is--
 `(A) a certified commercial applicator; or
 `(B) a registered commercial applicator under the direct supervision of
 a certified commercial applicator.
 `(2) CERTIFIED COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS- To be considered to be a certified
 commercial applicator, a person, at a minimum, shall--
 `(A) meet the standards prescribed under subsection (a) and have received
 training--
 `(i) prescribed by the State agency, including training in the material
 referred to in subsection (g);
 `(ii) conducted by a trainer who has met the requirements prescribed under
 subsection (h); and
 `(iii) that satisfies the minimum standards for training programs prescribed
 under subsection (h);
 `(B) have had field, institutional, or industrial experience in pesticide
 use and application;
 `(C) have passed an examination prescribed by the State agency; and
 `(D) possess a valid commercial applicator certification issued by the
 State agency.
 `(3) REGISTERED COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS-
 `(A) To be considered to be a registered commercial applicator, a person,
 at a minimum, shall--
 `(i) have received training--
 `(I) prescribed by the State agency, including training in the material
 referred to in subsection (g); and
 `(II) conducted by a trainer who has met the requirements prescribed under
 subsection (h); and
 `(ii) possess a valid registration issued by the State agency.
 `(B) A person may obtain a registration by providing to the State agency a
 report, signed and dated by the trainer and by the person who received the
 training, stating that the prescribed minimum training has been provided
 and received.
 `(e) USE BY PRIVATE APPLICATORS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A restricted use pesticide shall be considered to have
 been applied by, or under the direct supervision of, a certified private
 applicator only if the pesticide is applied by a person who is either--
 `(A) a certified private applicator; or
 `(B) a supervised private applicator who uses the pesticide under the
 direct supervision of a certified private applicator.
 `(2) CERTIFIED PRIVATE APPLICATORS- To be considered to be a certified
 private applicator, a person, at a minimum, shall--
 `(A) have met the standards prescribed under subsection (a) and have
 received training--
 `(i) prescribed by the State agency, including training in the material
 described in subsection (g);
 `(ii) conducted by a trainer who has met the requirements prescribed under
 subsection (h); and
 `(iii) that satisfies the minimum standards for training prescribed under
 subsection (h); and
 `(B) possess a valid private applicator certification issued by the
 State agency.
 `(3) SUPERVISED PRIVATE APPLICATORS-
 `(A) To be considered to be a supervised private applicator, a person,
 at a minimum, shall have received basic instruction--
 `(i) prescribed by the State agency or based on material prescribed by
 the State agency, including basic instruction material concerning the use
 of appropriate pesticide application and safety procedures, appropriate
 clothing and protective equipment for pesticide applications, the detection
 of common symptoms of pesticide poisoning, the means of obtaining emergency
 medical treatment, hazards posed by pesticides to workers, the public health,
 and the environment, and the requirements of applicable laws, regulations,
 and labeling; and
 `(ii) given by a certified private applicator, a commercial applicator who
 is certified in the pest control category appropriate for the instruction
 being provided, or a trainer who has met the requirements prescribed under
 subsection (h).
 `(B) The State agency may require the employer of a supervised private
 applicator to confirm that the basic instruction described in subparagraph
 (A)(i) has been received.
 `(f) RECERTIFICATION AND REREGISTRATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each certified applicator and each registered commercial
 applicator within a State shall undergo refresher training and be recertified
 or reregistered within a period established by the State agency of the
 State of not more than 5 years.
 `(2) TRAINING MATERIAL- The refresher training shall be prescribed by the
 State agency and shall include training in the materials referred to in
 subsection (g) and the relevant requirements of this section and sections
 3(d), 12, and 14.
 `(3) RECERTIFICATION- To be recertified, an applicator, at a minimum,
 shall meet--
 `(A) the requirements of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (D) of subsection
 (d)(2); or
 `(B) the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (e).
 `(4) REREGISTRATION- To be reregistered, a commercial applicator, at a
 minimum, shall meet the requirements of subsection (d)(3).
 `(g) TRAINING MATERIAL-
 `(1) DEVELOPMENT- The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Agriculture, shall develop training material on the use of appropriate
 procedures for the application of pesticides (including integrated pest
 management, integrated crop management, and management of genetically
 resistant pest populations), safety procedures for pesticide application
 (including prevention of surface and ground water contamination), clothing
 and protective equipment for pesticide application, the detection of common
 symptoms of pesticide poisoning, the means of obtaining emergency medical
 treatment, hazards posed by pesticides to workers, the public health,
 and the environment, specific commercial application categories, and the
 requirements of applicable laws, regulations, and labeling.
 `(2) REVISIONS- Within 12 months after the date of the enactment of this
 subsection, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Agriculture, shall revise and make current the material and thereafter
 shall update the material as appropriate.
 `(h) MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR TRAINERS AND TRAINING PROGRAMS-
 `(1) TRAINING OF COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS-
 `(A) The Administrator shall establish within 1 year after the date of
 the enactment of this subsection--
 `(i) minimum standards of competency, and experience or expertise, for
 trainers referred to in subsection (d); and
 `(ii) minimum standards for the training programs referred to in subsection
 (d).
 `(B)(i) Training programs prescribed by any State under subsection (d)
 shall comply with the minimum standards established by the Administrator
 under subparagraph (A) not later than 2 years after the effective date of
 the standards.
 `(ii) If on the expiration of the 2-year period the training program of a
 State fails to meet the minimum standards, or if a State fails to prescribe
 such a program, the Administrator shall notify the State of the failure.
 `(iii) After receipt of a notice, a State shall have 90 days to bring the
 training program of the State into compliance with the standards.
 `(iv) If on expiration of the 90-day period, the training program of the
 State does not meet the standards, the Administrator shall prescribe the
 training programs referred to in subsection (d) for use in the State.
 `(2) TRAINING OF PRIVATE APPLICATORS-
 `(A) The Administrator shall establish within 2 years after the date of
 the enactment of this subsection--
 `(i) minimum standards of competency, and experience or expertise, for
 trainers referred to in subsection (e); and
 `(ii) minimum standards for the training programs referred to in subsection
 (e).
 `(B)(i) Training programs prescribed by any State under subsection (e)
 shall comply with the minimum standards established by the Administrator
 under subparagraph (A) not later than 2 years after the effective date of
 the standards.
 `(ii) If on the expiration of the 2-year period the training program of a
 State fails to meet the minimum standards, or if a State fails to prescribe
 such a program, the Administrator shall notify the State of the failure.
 `(iii) After receipt of a notice, a State shall have 90 days to bring the
 training program of the State into compliance with the standards.
 `(iv) If on expiration of the 90-day period the training program of the
 State does not meet the standards, the Administrator shall prescribe the
 training programs referred to in subsection (e) for use in the State.
 `(i) PRIVATELY ADMINISTERED TRAINING PROGRAMS- A State agency may approve
 any privately administered training program that the Administrator determines
 meets the more stringent of--
 `(1) requirements established under this section; or
 `(2) requirements established by the State agency.
 `(j) ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TRAINING- Federal and State field personnel
 responsible for on-site observations and inspections of pesticide use shall
 have training that, at a minimum, includes training covering materials
 specified in subsection (g) for the commercial application categories for
 which the personnel are assigned enforcement responsibility.
 `(k) DEFINITION OF STATE AGENCY- For purposes of this section, the term
 `State agency' means the agency of a State that is designated under
 subsection (a)(2)(A) if the State has primary enforcement responsibility
 for pesticide use violations, as provided for by section 26. In the case of
 a State that does not have the primary enforcement responsibility or that
 does not have an agency designated under subsection (a)(2)(A), a reference
 to a State agency shall be considered a reference to the Administrator.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), subsection
 (d) of section 11 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
 Act (as added by subsection (a)) shall become effective in a State on the
 expiration of the period prescribed by subsection (h) of such section (as
 added by subsection (a)) within which training programs of the State under
 subsection (d) are required to be in compliance with minimum standards
 prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 under such subsection (h).
 (B) CERTIFIED COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS- If an applicator in a State is
 certified as a commercial applicator under subsection (a) of section 11 of
 the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act before the effective
 date prescribed by subparagraph (A) and the Administrator has determined
 that the previous certification or recertification requirements in that
 State do not conform to the requirements of subsection (d) of such section
 (as added by subsection (a)), the applicator shall be recertified--
 (i) within 2 years after the date the training programs of the State under
 such subsection (d) comply with the minimum standards of the Administrator;
 or
 (ii) within such earlier time as the State may prescribe.
 (C) REGISTERED COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS- The requirements of subsection
 (d) of section 11 of such Act (as added by subsection (a)) for registered
 commercial applicators shall become effective 1 year after the expiration
 of the period prescribed by subsection (h) of such section (as added by
 subsection (a)) within which training programs of the State under such
 subsection (d) are required to be in compliance with minimum standards
 prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 under such subsection (h).
 (2) PRIVATE APPLICATORS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), subsection
 (e) of section 11 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
 Act (as added by subsection (a)) shall become effective in a State on
 the expiration of the period prescribed by subsection (h) of such section
 (as added by subsection (a)) within which training programs of the State
 under such subsection (e) are required to be in compliance with minimum
 standards prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency under such subsection (h).
 (B) CERTIFIED PRIVATE APPLICATORS- If an applicator in a State is certified
 as a private applicator under subsection (a) of section 11 of such Act before
 the effective date prescribed by subparagraph (A) and the Administrator has
 determined that the previous certification or recertification requirements
 in the State do not conform to the requirements of subsection (d) of such
 section, the applicator shall be recertified--
 (i) within 2 years after the date the training programs of the State under
 subsection (e) comply with the minimum standards of the Administrator; or
 (ii) within such earlier time as the State may prescribe.
 (C) SUPERVISED PRIVATE APPLICATORS- The requirements of subsection (e)
 of section 11 of such Act for supervised private applicators shall become
 effective 1 year after the expiration of the period prescribed by subsection
 (h) of such section within which training programs of the State under
 subsection (e) are required to be in compliance with minimum standards
 prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 under such subsection.
 (3) ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TRAINING- The requirements of subsection (j) of
 section 11 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
 (as added by subsection (a)) shall become effective 1 year after the
 Administrator issues the training materials specified in subsection (g)
 of such section.
SEC. 115. UNLAWFUL ACTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 12(a)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136j(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraphs (M) and (N) and inserting the following
 new subparagraphs:
 `(M) to knowingly make any false material statement, false representation,
 or false certification in--
 `(i) any application filed under this Act;
 `(ii) any data or information submitted under this Act to support the
 issuance or continuation in effect of any registration, permit, or exemption;
 `(iii) any record required to be maintained by this Act; or
 `(iv) any report filed under this Act;
 `(N) to fail to file any report required by this Act;';
 (2) by striking `or' at the end of subparagraphs (O) and (R);
 (3) by striking the period at the end of subparagraphs (P) and (S) and
 inserting a semicolon;
 (4) by adding after subparagraph (S) the following:
 `(T) who is a registrant, to violate any term or condition of a registration
 issued pursuant to this Act; or
 `(U) to knowingly or recklessly export a pesticide or device in violation
 of section 17.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 12 (7 U.S.C. 136j) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new subsection:
 `(c) ACTS OF OFFICERS, AGENTS, ETC- When construing and enforcing the
 provisions of this Act, the act, omission, or failure of any officer, agent,
 or other person acting for or employed by any person shall in every case
 be also deemed to be the act, omission, or failure of the person as well
 as that of the person employed.'.
SEC. 116. PENALTIES.
 Section 14 (7 U.S.C. 136l) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 14. PENALTIES.
 `(a) CIVIL PENALTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If any registrant, applicant for registration, producer,
 pesticide testing facility, seller, distributor, or exporter of pesticides or
 devices, commercial applicator, or holder of a pesticide that is subject to
 an order or regulation under section 19(b) violates any provision of this
 Act, the Administrator may assess a civil penalty against such violator
 of not more than $25,000 for each violation. If such a person violates any
 provision of this Act after having been issued a notice of violation under
 this section for violating the same or a similar provision of this Act,
 the Administrator may assess a civil penalty against the person of not
 more than $50,000 for each such subsequent violation.
 `(2) PRIVATE APPLICATOR- Any private applicator who violates any provision
 of this Act may be assessed a civil penalty by the Administrator of not
 more than $1,000 for each offense, except that in the case of a private
 applicator that has never previously violated a provision of this Act,
 the Administrator may issue a notice of violation in lieu of assessing
 penalty under this paragraph. If the applicator violates any provision
 of this Act after violating the same or similar provision of this Act,
 the Administrator may assess a civil penalty of not more than $2,000 for
 each subsequent violation.
 `(3) OTHER PERSONS- Any other person not included in paragraph (1) or
 (2) who violates any provision of this Act subsequent to receiving a
 written notice of violation from the Administrator or following a notice
 of violation for a prior violation may be assessed a civil penalty by the
 Administrator of not more than $1,000 for each offense. If the person
 violates any provision of this Act after violating the same or similar
 provision of this Act, the Administrator may assess a civil penalty of
 not more than $2,000 for each subsequent violation. The Administrator may
 determine not to issue a notice of violation for a first offense if the
 Administrator determines that the violation was intentional or caused (or
 had the potential to cause) significant harm to health or the environment.
 `(4) HEARING- No civil penalty shall be assessed unless the person charged
 shall have been given notice and opportunity for a hearing at a time and
 place that is reasonably convenient for the person to attend.
 `(5) DETERMINATION OF PENALTY- In determining the amount of the civil penalty
 to be assessed under this subsection, the Administrator shall consider the
 appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the person
 charged, the effect of the penalty on the ability of the person to continue
 in business, the economic gains that resulted from the violation, and the
 gravity of the violation. If the Administrator finds that the violation
 occurred despite the exercise of due care and the violation did not cause
 significant harm to health or the environment, the Administrator shall
 consider issuing a warning in lieu of assessing a penalty.
 `(6) REFERENCE TO ATTORNEY GENERAL- If a person fails to pay the full
 amount of a civil penalty the Administrator shall refer the matter to the
 Attorney General, who shall recover any unpaid amount by action in the
 appropriate United States district court.
 `(b) CRIMINAL PENALTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any person who is a registrant, applicant for registration,
 producer, pesticide testing facility, seller, distributor, or exporter of a
 pesticide or device, commercial applicator, or a holder of a pesticide that
 is subject to an order or regulation under section 19(b), and who, acting
 in such capacity, knowingly violates any provision of this Act, shall be
 fined not more than $50,000 or imprisoned for not more than 3 years, or both.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION- Any person who, with intent to defraud,
 uses or reveals information relative to the formula of a pesticide product
 acquired under section 3 shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned
 for not more than 3 years, or both.
 `(3) KNOWING ENDANGERMENT-
 `(A) Any person who knowingly commits any violation described in section 12
 and who knows at the time of the violation that the violation places another
 person in danger of death or serious bodily injury shall, on conviction,
 be subject to a fine of not more than $250,000 or imprisonment for not
 more than 15 years, or both, except that any such person who is not an
 individual shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,000.
 `(B) If the conviction of a person who is not an individual is for a
 violation committed after a first violation under this paragraph, the maximum
 punishment shall be doubled with respect to both fine and imprisonment.
 `(C) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `serious bodily injury' means
 bodily injury that involves a substantial risk of death, unconsciousness,
 extreme physical pain, protracted and obvious disfigurement, or protracted
 loss of impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental
 facility.
 `(4) OTHER PERSONS- Any person not included in paragraph (1), (2), or (3)
 who knowingly violates any provision of this Act shall on conviction be
 fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than 1 year, or both.'.
SEC. 117. AUTHORITY OF STATES.
 (a) AUTHORITY OF STATES- Subsection (a) of section 24 (7 U.S.C. 136v(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) REGULATION- A State may regulate the sale or use of any federally
 registered pesticide or device in the State if the Administrator approves a
 State plan for such regulation and if and to the extent the State regulation
 does not permit any sale or use prohibited by this Act.
 `(2) STATE PLAN- The Administrator may approve a plan submitted by a
 State that provides for the regulation of pesticides within the State if
 such plan--
 `(A) includes a procedure for the approval by the State, subject to paragraph
 (3), of the regulation of the sale or use of a pesticide by a political
 subdivision of the State or specifically prohibits such local regulation; and
 `(B) is consistent with the purposes of and prohibits the violation of
 any provision of this Act.
 `(3) LOCAL REGULATION- A State that has submitted a plan to the Administrator
 under paragraph (2) and has received approval for the regulation of
 pesticides within the State may authorize a political subdivision of
 the State to regulate the sale or use of a pesticide (hereafter in this
 subsection referred to as `local regulation') within such political
 subdivision if such local regulation--
 `(A) is approved by the State pursuant to the procedures outlined in
 such plan;
 `(B) is designed to protect against the risk of adverse effects on man or
 the environment;
 `(C) provides a significantly higher degree of protection from such risk
 than the existing Federal regulation; and
 `(D) does not unduly burden interstate commerce.'.
 (b) DEFINITION- Section 2(aa) (7 U.S.C. 136(aa)) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new sentence: `Use of the term `State' shall not
 be construed to grant any authority to or to otherwise refer to political
 subdivisions of a State.'.
SEC. 118. SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL.
 Section 25(d) (7 U.S.C. 136w(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `(d) SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL- The Administrator shall'
 and inserting:
 `(d) SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall';
 (2) by aligning the remainder of paragraph (1) (as so redesignated) two
 ems to the right;
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) CONFLICTS OF INTEREST- Within 18 months after the date of enactment
 of this paragraph, the Administrator shall develop and issue regulations
 governing the participation of members of the Science Advisory Panel in
 matters under this Act. In developing the regulations, the Administrator
 shall--
 `(A) consider the general availability of members with specific needed
 expertise; and
 `(B) consider information that is necessary to determine the financial or
 other interests or activities of members that may constitute an actual or
 apparent conflict of interest, and provide for the proper disclosure of
 the information.';
 (4) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking in the first sentence `in notice of intent issued under
 subsection (6(b) and';
 (B) by striking `notice of intent and' in the second sentence; and
 (C) by striking `6(b) or' in the second sentence.
SEC. 119. COOPERATION WITH SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE.
 Section 28(a) (7 U.S.C. 136w-3(a)) is amended by striking `pests that must
 be brought under control' in the first sentence and inserting `crop-pest
 combinations that appear vulnerable to excessive losses because of pest
 resistance or because of the potential loss of existing pest control
 options and the chemical, biological, and alternative control measures
 available to control the pests'.
SEC. 120. COLLECTION OF EXPOSURE INFORMATION.
 The Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating sections 29, 30, and 31 (7 U.S.C. 136w-4, 136x,
 and 136y) as sections 31, 32, and 33, respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after section 28 the following new section:
`SEC. 29. PESTICIDE USE AND DIETARY EXPOSURE INFORMATION.
 `(a) FOOD CONSUMPTION INFORMATION- The Secretary of Agriculture shall
 establish and operate a program to gather, organize, and furnish to the
 Administrator, on an ongoing basis, statistically reliable information
 and data on the food consumption patterns of food consumers and major
 identifiable subgroups of food consumers in the United States. The
 Administrator shall notify the Secretary of Agriculture in a timely manner
 of specific needs and standards regarding information on food consumption
 patterns.
 `(b) USE INFORMATION- The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish and
 operate a program to gather, organize, and furnish to the Administrator,
 on an ongoing basis, information on the extent of use of pesticides in
 commercial-scale agricultural production, and in the storage, transportation,
 and processing of food and food items. The Administrator shall notify the
 Secretary of Agriculture in a timely manner of specific needs and standards
 regarding information on pesticides and food items.
 `(c) RESIDUE INFORMATION- The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services shall establish and operate programs to gather,
 organize, and furnish to the Administrator, on an ongoing basis, information
 on the representative actual levels of pesticide residues, at appropriate
 intervals in food production and processing, on food items. The Administrator
 shall notify the Secretary of Agriculture in a timely manner of specific
 needs and standards regarding information on pesticides and food items.
 `(d) OPERATION- The programs established under subsections (a), (b), and (c)
 shall be designed and operated in such a manner as to ensure to the extent
 possible that information on the approximate actual level of human dietary
 exposure to pesticides will be readily available to the Administrator on an
 ongoing basis in order to avoid delays in reaching sound decisions by the
 Administrator under subsections (b) and (c) of section 6. The Administrator
 shall consult with the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services regarding the types and amounts of information needed.
 `(e) STORAGE- The Administrator shall establish and operate a program
 for the efficient storage, management, retrieval, and utilization of
 information obtained by the Administrator concerning pesticide use and on
 levels of dietary exposure to pesticide chemical residues, including the
 information from the programs established under subsections (a), (b), and (c)
 and information made available from other sources. The Administrator shall
 use the information if available in reaching decisions under subsections
 (b) and (c) of section 6 and in other actions as appropriate under this
 Act and the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.).
 `(f) ASSUMPTION BY ADMINISTRATOR- On or after January 1, 1994, if appropriate
 information regarding actual extent of use and actual residue levels
 has not been made available to the Administrator under subsections (a),
 (b), and (c) or otherwise, the Administrator shall assume, for purposes
 of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6, that a pesticide used in the
 production, storage, transportation, or processing of a food results in
 dietary residues on each article of the food at the highest level--
 `(1) permitted by a tolerance; or
 `(2) reasonably foreseeable under an exemption,
in effect under section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION FOR APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated for each of the 1992 and subsequent fiscal years $9,000,000
 to carry out subsection (b) and $16,000,000 to carry out subsection (c).'.
SEC. 121. MINOR USE PESTICIDES.
 (a) REGISTRATION DATA- Section 3(c)(2)(A) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(2)(A)) is
 amended by inserting after the fifth sentence the following new sentence:
 `In determining the data requirements for both new and existing registrations
 of pesticides for minor uses, the Administrator shall consult with the
 Secretary of Agriculture and with potentially affected user groups prior
 to making any decision regarding appropriate data requirements for minor
 crops or minor uses.'.
 (b) VOLUNTARY CANCELLATION- Subsection (f) of section 6 (7 U.S.C. 136d(f))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(f) GENERAL PROVISIONS-
 `(1) VOLUNTARY CANCELLATION- A registrant at any time may request that a
 pesticide registration of the registrant be canceled or be amended to delete
 one or more uses. Before acting on such request, the Administrator shall
 publish in the Federal Register a notice of the receipt of the request. The
 Administrator shall notify, prior to publication of a cancellation request
 in the Federal Register, the Secretary of Agriculture of--
 `(A) the chemical or chemicals that may be affected;
 `(B) all pesticide uses that may be affected;
 `(C) the available biological, cultural, integrated pest management,
 and alternative chemical control options; and
 `(D) the extent of the acreage and geographic distribution of the acreage
 of the crop affected by the target pest controlled by the pesticide use
 subject to cancellation and regions where the crop is currently grown
 without significant problems for such pest.
The Administrator shall take all reasonable steps to notify user groups
of the proposed cancellation or amendment. In addition, the Administrator
shall calculate and publish in the Federal Register the best estimate by the
Administrator of the dietary risks associated with a given minor use. The
Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register a summary of the data
the Administrator would generally require to support the tolerance. The
Administrator shall not approve any request for voluntary cancellation or
deletion of one or more uses of a pesticide prior to 180 days following the
publication of the Federal Register notice under this paragraph.
 `(2) TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION- If, prior to the expiration of the 180-day
 period described in paragraph (1), the registrant of a pesticide notifies the
 Administrator that the registrant has agreed to transfer the registration
 to a person that has the capability to support the registered use, as
 determined by the Administrator, the registration shall be transferred to
 that person. After the registration has been transferred, the Administrator
 shall take no further regulatory action regarding the product for a period
 of 90 days if the new registrant is making a good faith effort to support
 the registration and to satisfy concerns of the Administrator, unless the
 Administrator determines that the continued registration or use of the
 pesticide may cause unreasonable adverse effects on the environment. During
 the 90-day period, the third party registrant shall have the opportunity
 to develop data and petition the Administrator to reduce requirements if
 new data indicates a limited risk for a minor use of the product.
 `(3) PETITION TO DELAY CANCELLATION FOR A MINOR USE-
 `(A) Within the 180-day period described in paragraph (1), any person may
 petition the Administrator to delay cancellation of a minor use registration,
 for up to 3 years. The petition shall provide--
 `(i) an explanation as to why alternative means of pest control are not
 practicable and provide supporting documentation, including the efficacy
 of available chemical control alternatives;
 `(ii) information on use of the pesticide by crop, geographical region,
 and pesticide application method;
 `(iii) documentation demonstrating that continued use of the pesticide is
 expected to pose less than a negligible risk;
 `(iv) documentation demonstrating that the continued use of the pesticide is
 consistent with biologically-intensive sustainable crop protection systems,
 including integrated pest management; and
 `(v) a processing fee determined by the Administrator which shall not
 exceed $5,000.
 `(B) Within 90 days of the filing of a petition to delay cancellation
 under subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall make a determination to
 grant or deny the petition. The Administrator may grant the petition if
 the Administrator finds that--
 `(i) the petitioned minor use provides at most a de minimis contribution
 to the aggregate risk of the pesticide;
 `(ii) no efficacious alternative means of pest control are available; and
 `(iii) in no case will the petitioned minor use present an unreasonable
 risk with a 3-year period following the approval of the petition,
 `(C) If the risk presented by the pesticide for which a petition has been
 filed may exceed current standards for de minimis risk, the Administrator
 shall consider reductions in the risk that would be the result of limiting
 use of such pesticide to most essential uses. Such restrictions may include
 prescription uses, integrated pest management, and limitations suggested
 by experts knowledgeable in the biology of cropping systems.
 `(D) The delay in cancellation shall last 3 years from the date of the
 approval of the petition, except that, if at any time the Administrator
 determines that the minor use may present an unreasonable risk, the
 Administrator may immediately cancel the use.
 `(E) Data that is generated to support the continuation of the registration
 beyond the 3-year period shall be submitted--
 `(i) by the latest due date for any study otherwise required to support
 the reregistration of the active ingredient; or
 `(ii) within 18 months after the date of enactment of the Pesticide Safety
 Improvement Act of 1991, if the due date under clause (i) falls within 18
 months after such date of enactment.
The Administrator may set a later due date only if the Administrator finds
that the study could not be completed within 18 months through the exercise
of due diligence.
 `(F) If data is generated and timely submitted to support continued
 registration of the minor use, no further fees shall be assessed for
 that registration.
 `(G) If required data is not submitted by the due date, the use shall be
 immediately canceled after the 3-year period. The Administrator may not
 extend or renew the 3-year period.
 `(H) For each minor use registration for which a delay in cancellation
 has been granted, the Secretary of Agriculture shall require the Assistant
 Secretary for Science and Education to research alternative pest control
 methods, including--
 `(i) least use practices;
 `(ii) prescription use options;
 `(iii) other pesticide options; and
 `(iv) integrated pest management and biological, cultural, and organic
 pest management options.
The Secretary shall inform the Administrator of the findings and shall
publish such findings in the Federal Register. The Secretary shall submit an
annual status report on alternative pest control methods to the Committee on
Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate. The Administrator shall submit
an annual report on efforts to expedite the registration of biological
alternatives to conventional pesticides to the Committee on Agriculture of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition,
and Forestry of the Senate.'.
 (c) MINOR USE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES- The Act (as amended by section 120
 of this Act) is further amended by inserting after section 29 the following
 new section:
`SEC. 30. MINOR USE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
 `(a) MINOR USE SUPPORT PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a minor use
 registration support program within the Office of the Assistant Secretary
 for Science and Education. In carrying out this subsection, the Assistant
 Secretary shall seek registrations for agricultural minor uses, gather
 data to support existing registrations for minor uses, seek tolerances
 and tolerance exemptions, and gather data to support new tolerances and
 the maintenance of existing tolerances for minor uses.
 `(2) AUTHORIZATION FOR APPROPRIATION- There is authorized $5,000,000 for
 each of fiscal years 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the support
 program established under paragraph (1).
 `(b) WAIVER OF FEES- The Administrator shall waive all fees for any minor
 use registration or reregistration, except those required under section
 6(f)(3)(A)(v).
 `(c) DATA REQUIREMENTS FOR GEOGRAPHICALLY LIMITED LABELS- The Administrator
 shall require residue data to support tolerances only for those geographical
 areas of the United States where the registration of any product allows
 the use. If the registrant wishes to expand the geographical area where
 the product may be used, the Administrator may require additional residue
 data from the expanded geographical area if the Administrator considers
 it necessary to ensure that the treated commodities will be within the
 established tolerance.'.
SEC. 122. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) DENIAL OF REGISTRATION- Paragraph (6) of section 3(c) (7
 U.S.C. 136a(c)(6)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) DENIAL OF REGISTRATION-
 `(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if the Administrator proposes
 to deny an application for registration because it does not satisfy the
 requirements of paragraph (5), the Administrator shall notify the applicant
 of the denial and the reasons for the denial (including the factual basis
 for the denial). Unless the applicant makes the necessary corrections to
 the application and notifies the Administrator during the 30-day period
 beginning with the day after the date the applicant receives the notice,
 or during such period the applicant submits a request for a hearing, the
 Administrator may issue an order denying the application. The order shall
 be published in the Federal Register and shall not be subject to judicial
 review. If during such period, the Administrator receives a request for a
 hearing, a hearing shall be conducted under section 6(d). If the hearing
 is held, a decision after completion of the hearing shall be final and
 shall be subject to judicial review under section 16(b)(1).
 `(B) The Administrator shall deny an application for registration if the
 application does not comply with the requirements of a final order issued
 under section 6(b). The Administration shall notify the applicant of the
 denial. The notice shall explain why the application does not comply with
 the requirements and shall state that the applicant may petition to amend
 or revoke the order under section 6(b)(12).'.
 (b) INTERIM REVIEW- Section 3(c) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (8).
 (c) CLASSIFICATION- Section 3(d) (7 U.S.C. 136a(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `on the initial classification and
 registered pesticides' and inserting `under section 6(b). Registered
 pesticides'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking all that follows `on the environment,' and
 inserting `the Administrator may initiate a proceeding under section 6(b).'.
 (d) REREGISTRATION- Section 4(e)(3)(B)(iii)(III) (7
 U.S.C. 136a-1(e)(3)(B)(iii)(III)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `section 6(d), except that the' and inserting `section
 6(d). The'; and
 (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: `If a
 hearing is held, a decision after completion of the hearing shall be final.'.
 (e) PUBLIC HEARINGS- Section 6(d) (7 U.S.C. 136d(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the first sentence and inserting the following new sentence:
 `If a hearing is requested pursuant to section 3(c)(2)(B)(iv), section
 3(c)(6), section 4(e)(3)(B)(iii)(III), subsection (c)(3) of this section,
 subsection (e)(2) of this section, or section 17(d), the hearing shall be
 held for the purpose of receiving evidence and material relevant to the
 issues raised by the request for a hearing.'; and
 (2) by striking all that follows the eighth sentence and inserting the
 following: `A hearing under this subsection shall be held in accordance with
 sections 551 and 554 through 559 of title 5, United States Code. As soon as
 practicable after the completion of the hearing, the Administrator shall
 issue a final order setting forth the decision of the Administrator. The
 order and decision shall be based only on substantial evidence of record of
 the hearing, shall set forth detailed findings of fact on which the order
 is based, and shall be subject to judicial review under section 16(b)(1).'.
 (f) INSTRUCTION IN INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES- The first
 sentence of section 11(c) (7 U.S.C. 136i(c)) is amended by striking `,
 but such plans may not require' and all that follows through the period
 at the end of the sentence and inserting a period.
 (g) GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION- Section 15(a) (7 U.S.C. 136m(a)) is amended
 by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, if--
 `(A) the Administrator publishes a suspension order under section 6(c);
 `(B) the registration in question thereafter is canceled under section 6(b),
 6(d), or 6(f); and
 `(C) any person who owned any quantity of the pesticide immediately
 before the publication of the suspension order suffered losses by reason
 of suspension or cancellation of the registration,
the Administrator shall make an indemnity payment to the person.'.
 (h) INDEMNIFICATION OF END USERS, DEALERS, AND DISTRIBUTORS- Section 15(b)
 (7 U.S.C. 136m(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(1) END USERS- If--
 `(A) the Administrator publishes a suspension order under section 6(c);
 `(B) the registration in question thereafter is canceled under section 6(b),
 6(d), or 6(f); and
 `(C) any person who, immediately before the publication of the suspension
 order, owned any quantity of the pesticide for purposes of applying or using
 the pesticide as an end user, rather than for purposes of distributing or
 selling the pesticide or further processing the pesticide for distribution
 or sale, suffered a loss by reason of suspension or cancellation of the
 registration,
the person shall be entitled to an indemnity payment under this subsection
for the quantity of the pesticide.';
 (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by amending clauses (i) and (ii) to read as follows:
 `(i) the Administrator publishes a suspension order under section 6(c);
 `(ii) the registration in question thereafter is canceled under section
 6(b), 6(d), or 6(f);'; and
 (3) in paragraph (2)(B)(iii), by striking `notice to the registrant under
 clause (i)' and inserting `publication in the Federal Register'.
 (i) INDEMNITY PAYMENTS- Section 15(c)(1) (7 U.S.C. 136m(c)(1)) is amended
 by striking `issuance of the notice to the registrant' and inserting
 `publication of the suspension order'.
 (j) DISTRICT COURT REVIEW- Subsection (a) of section 16 (7 U.S.C. 136n(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) DISTRICT COURT REVIEW- Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any
 final action of the Administrator is judicially reviewable in accordance with
 sections 701 through 706 of title 5, United States Code, by a district court
 of the United States on complaint filed within 30 days of the effective date
 of the final action, unless the action is reviewable under subsection (b).'.
 (k) REVIEW BY COURT OF APPEALS- Section 16(b) (17 U.S.C. 136n(b))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `(b) REVIEW BY COURT OF APPEALS- In the case of' and
 inserting the following:
 `(b) REVIEW BY COURT OF APPEALS-
 `(1) REVIEW OF CERTAIN ORDERS- In the case of';
 (2) by aligning the remainder of paragraph (1) (as so redesignated) two
 ems to the right;
 (3) by striking out `following a public hearing' and inserting `other than
 any action that is reviewable under paragraph (2)';
 (4) by striking the fifth sentence of paragraph (1) (as so redesignated)
 and inserting the following new sentences: `If a party applies to the court
 for leave to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the
 court that the additional evidence is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce the evidence in the proceeding before
 the Administrator, the court may order that the additional evidence (and
 evidence in rebuttal thereof) shall be taken before the Administrator. The
 Administrator may modify prior findings as to the facts by reason of the
 additional evidence so taken and may modify the order accordingly. The
 Administrator shall file with the court any such modified finding or
 order. The standard of review shall be that set forth in section 706 of
 title 5, United States Code.';
 (5) by striking `under this section' wherever it appears in such subsection
 and inserting `under this paragraph'; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) REVIEW OF CERTAIN DECISIONS UNDER SECTION 6(b)-
 `(A) In the case of an actual controversy as to the validity of any final
 order issued by the Administrator under section 6(b)(9), any decision by
 the Administrator under section 6(b)(5) or 6(b)(9) not to issue a proposed
 order or to withdraw a proposed order, or any denial under section 6(b)(12)
 of a petition to issue, revoke, or amend a final order, any person who
 will be adversely affected by the order, decision, or denial may obtain
 judicial review by filing a petition in the United States court of appeals
 for the circuit in which the person resides or has a place of business,
 within 60 days after the publication in the Federal Register of the order,
 decision, or denial.
 `(B) A copy of the petition shall be immediately transmitted to the
 Administrator or any officer designated by the Administrator for the
 purpose. On receipt, the Administrator shall file in court the record
 of the proceedings on which the Administrator based the order, decision,
 or denial, as provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code.
 `(C) If a party applies to the court for permission to supplement the
 administrative record with additional factual information, and shows to
 the satisfaction of the court that the additional information is material
 and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to submit the
 information in the proceeding before the Administrator, the court may
 order that the additional information (and evidence in rebuttal thereof)
 shall be added to the administrative record by the Administrator in the
 manner and on the terms and conditions the court considers proper.
 `(D) The Administrator may modify prior findings as to the facts by
 reason of the additional information and may modify the order, decision,
 or denial accordingly.
 `(E) The Administrator shall file with the court any such modified order,
 decision, or denial.
 `(F) On the filing of the petition, the court shall have exclusive
 jurisdiction to affirm or set aside the order, decision, or denial in
 whole or in part.
 `(G) The standard of review shall be that set forth in section 706 of
 title 5, United States Code, except that section 706(2)(E) of such title
 shall not apply.
 `(H) The judgment of the court under this paragraph shall be final,
 subject to review by the Supreme Court on certiorari or certification,
 as provided in section 1254 of title 28, United States Code.
 `(I) The commencement of proceedings under this paragraph shall not,
 unless specifically ordered by the court to the contrary, operate as a
 stay of an order, decision, or denial.'.
 (l) AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR- Section 25(a) (7 U.S.C. 136w(a)) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) EXCEPTION- The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to
 any action or proceeding under section 6(b).'.
SEC. 123. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 The table of contents in section 1(b) (7 U.S.C. prec. 121) is amended--
 (1) by striking the items relating to subsection (e) of section 2 and
 inserting the following new items:
`(e) Applicators.
 `(1) Commercial applicator.
 `(2) Private applicator.
 `(3) Certified applicator.
 `(4) Under the direct supervision of a certified applicator.';
 (2) by adding at the end of the items relating to section 2 the following
 new item:
`(hh) Pesticide testing facility.';
 (3) by striking the item relating to paragraph (8) of section 3(c);
 (4) by striking the items relating to subsections (b) and (c) of section
 6 and inserting the following new items:
`(b) Cancellation or modification of registration.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Initiation.
 `(3) Exceptions.
 `(4) Administrative record.
 `(5) Proposed order.
 `(6) Informal hearing.
 `(7) Review by Scientific Advisory Panel.
 `(8) Supplemental information.
 `(9) Final action.
 `(10) Modification or cancellation of registration.
 `(11) Effect of order on certain applications.
 `(12) Petition to issue, modify, or revoke order.
 `(13) Judicial review.
`(c) Suspension.
 `(1) Order.
 `(2) Prior consultation with Federal agencies.
 `(3) Existing stocks.
 `(4) Duration of suspension.
 `(5) Petition to reconsider suspension.
 `(6) Judicial review.
 `(7) Memorandum of understanding.
 `(8) Information and factors to be considered.';
 (5) by striking the items relating to subsection (f) of section 6 and
 inserting the following new items:
`(f) General provisions.
 `(1) Voluntary cancellation.
 `(2) Transfer of minor use registration.
 `(3) Petition to delay cancellation.';
 (6) by striking the item relating to subsection (h) of section 6 and
 inserting the following new items:
`(h) Burden of persuasion.
`(i) Periodic update of information supporting registration.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Notification to registrants of requirements.
 `(3) Time periods.
 `(4) Publication of dates in Federal Register.
 `(5) Extensions of time.
 `(6) Order of suspension.
 `(7) Cancellation after 3 years.
 `(8) Fees.
 `(9) Effect on authority of Administrator to require information.';
 (7) by striking the item relating to subsection (c) of section 7 and
 inserting the following new item:
`(c) Information required.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Stop sale orders.';
 (8) by striking the items relating to sections 8 and 9 and inserting the
 following new items:
`Sec. 8. Records.
`(a) In general.
`(b) Records of commercial applicators.
`(c) Records of pesticide dealers.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Contents.
 `(3) Duration.
 `(4) Definition.
`(d) Limitations.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Private applicators.
`Sec. 9. Inspections.
`(a) Authority.
`(b) Warrants.
 `(1) Entry by consent or pursuant to warrant.
 `(2) Obtaining warrants.
`(c) Procedure.
 `(1) Credentials and statements.
 `(2) Promptness.
 `(3) Samples.
`(d) Coordination.';
 (9) by striking the items relating to subsections (d) and (e) of section
 11 and inserting the following new items:
`(d) Use by commercial applicators.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Certified commercial applicators.
 `(3) Registered commercial applicators.
`(e) Use by private applicators.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Certified private applicators.
 `(3) Supervised private applicators.
`(f) Recertification and reregistration.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Training material.
 `(3) Recertification.
 `(4) Reregistration.
`(g) Training material.
 `(1) Development.
 `(2) Revisions.
`(h) Minimum standards for trainers and training programs.
 `(1) Training of commercial applicators.
 `(2) Training of private applicators.
`(i) Privately administered training programs.
`(j) Enforcement officer training.
`(k) Definition of State agency.
`(l) Separate standards.';
 (10) by adding at the end of the items relating to section 12 the following
 new item:
`(c) Acts of officers, agents, etc.';
 (11) by striking the items relating to section 14 and inserting the
 following new items:
`Sec. 14. Penalties.
`(a) Civil penalties.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Private applicator.
 `(3) Other persons.
 `(4) Hearing.
 `(5) Determination of penalty.
 `(6) Reference to Attorney General.
`(b) Criminal penalties.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Disclosure of information.
 `(3) Knowing endangerment.
 `(4) Other persons.
`(c) Warning in lieu of penalty.';
 (12) by striking the item relating to subsection (b) of section 16 and
 inserting the following new items:
`(b) Review by Court of Appeals.
 `(1) Review of certain orders.
 `(2) Review of certain decisions under section 6(b).';
 (13) by striking the item relating to subsection (a) of section 24 and
 inserting the following new items:
`(a) In general.
 `(1) Regulation.
 `(2) State plan.
 `(3) Local regulation.';
 (14) by adding at the end of the items relating to section 25(a) the
 following new item:
 `(5) Exception.';
 (15) by striking the item relating to subsection (d) of section 25 and
 inserting the following new item:
`(d) Scientific Advisory Panel.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Conflicts of interest.';
and
 (17) by striking the items relating to sections 28 through 31 and inserting
 the following new items:
`Sec. 28. Cooperation with Secretary of Agriculture.
`(a) In general.
`(b) Development of methods.
`Sec. 29. Pesticide use and dietary exposure information.
`(a) Food consumption information.
`(b) Use information.
`(c) Residue information.
`(d) Operation.
`(e) Storage.
`(f) Assumption by Administrator.
`(g) Authorization for appropriations.
`Sec. 30. Minor use policies and procedures.
`(a) Minor use support program.
 `(1) In general.
 `(2) Authorization for appropriation.
`(b) Waiver of fees.
`(c) Data requirements for geographically limited labels.
`Sec. 31. Annual report.
`Sec. 32. Severability.
`Sec. 33. Authorization for appropriations.'.
SEC. 124. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Act is amended--
 (1) in section 2(e)(1) (7 U.S.C. 136(e)(1))--
 (A) by striking `section 4' and inserting `section 11';
 (B) by striking `use' in the second sentence and inserting `uses'; and
 (C) by striking `section 2(ee) of this Act' and inserting `paragraph (ee)';
 (2) in section 2(q)(2)(A)(i) (7 U.S.C. 136(q)(2)(A)(i)), by striking
 `size of form' and inserting `size or form';
 (3) in section 3(c)(1) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(1))--
 (A) by striking subparagraphs (E) and (F);
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (F);
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following:
 `(D) the complete formula of the pesticide;
 `(E) a request that the pesticide be classified for general use or for
 restricted use, or for both; and'; and
 (D) in subparagraph (F) (as so redesignated)--
 (i) by striking `(i) with' and inserting `(i) With';
 (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end of clauses (i), (ii), and (iii)
 and inserting a period;
 (iii) by striking `(ii) except' and inserting `(ii) Except'; and
 (iv) by striking `(iii) after' and inserting `(iii) After';
 (4) by conforming the left margin of paragraph (3) of section 4(f)
 (7 U.S.C. 136a-1(f)) to the left margin of the preceding paragraph;
 (5) in section 6(f)(3)(B) (7 U.S.C. 136d(f)(3)(B)), by striking `an
 unreasonable adverse affect' and inserting `an unreasonable adverse effect';
 (6) in section 11 (7 U.S.C. 136i)--
 (A) in the section heading, by striking `applicators' and inserting
 `applicators';
 (B) in subsection (b), by striking `this paragraph' each place it appears
 and inserting `subsection (a)(2)'; and
 (C) in subsection (c), by striking `subsections (a) and (b)' and inserting
 `subsection (a)';
 (7) in section 12(a)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136j(a)(2)) by striking `thereunder. It'
 in subparagraph (F) and inserting `thereunder, except that it';
 (8) in section 14(a)(2) (7 U.S.C. 1361(a)(2)), by striking `: Provided,
 That' and inserting `, except that';
 (9) in section 17(a) (7 U.S.C. 136o), by removing the last sentence from
 paragraph (2) and placing it as full measure sentence under such paragraph;
 (10) in section 20(a) (7 U.S.C. 136r(a)), by striking `insure' and inserting
 `ensure'; and
 (11) in section 26(c) (7 U.S.C. 136w-1(c)), by striking `use' and inserting
 `uses'.
 (b) GENDER-
 (1) The Act is amended by striking `he' each place it appears in sections
 3(c)(2)(A), 3(c)(5), 3(c)(6), 3(d)(1)(A), 3(d)(1)(B), 3(d)(1)(C), 5(b),
 5(e), 5(f), 6(a)(1), 7(b), 10(c), 11(b), 16(b), 16(d), 18, 20(a), 21(b),
 25(a)(3), 25(b), 25(c)(5), and 25(d) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(2)(A), 136a(c)(5),
 136a(c)(6), 136a(d)(1)(A), 136a(d)(1)(B), 136a(d)(1)(C), 136c(b), 136c(e),
 136c(f), 136d(a)(1), 136e(b), 136h(c), 136i(b), 136n(b), 136n(d), 136p,
 136r(a), 136s(b), 136w(a)(3), 136w(b), 136w(c)(5), and 136w(d)) and inserting
 `the Administrator'.
 (2) The Act is amended by striking `his' each place it appears in sections
 3(c)(2)(A), 3(c)(3)(A), 3(c)(6), 6(d), 10(b), 11(a)(2), 16(b), 17(c), 18,
 21(b), and 25(c)(4) (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(2)(A), 136a(c)(3)(A), 136a(c)(6),
 136d(b), 136h(b), 136i(a)(2), 136n(b), 136o(c), 136p, 136s(b), and
 136w(c)(4)) and inserting `the Administrator's'.
 (3) The Act is amended--
 (A) in section 6(a)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136d(a)(2), by striking `he' and inserting
 `the registrant';
 (B) in section 6(d), by striking `him' and inserting `the Administrator';
 (C) in section 7(c)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136e(c)(2)--
 (i) by striking `him' and inserting `the Administrator'; and
 (ii) by striking `he' and inserting `the producer';
 (D) in section 10(a) (7 U.S.C. 136h(a)), by striking `his' and inserting
 `the applicant's';
 (E) in the last sentence of section 11(a)(1) (7 U.S.C. 136i(a)(1)), by
 striking `him' and inserting `the Administrator';
 (F) in section 12(a)(2)(C) (7 U.S.C. 136j(a)(2)(C))--
 (i) by striking `his' and inserting `the person's'; and
 (ii) by striking `he' and inserting `the person';
 (G) in section 12(a)(2)(D), by striking `his' and inserting `the person's';
 (H) in section 12(b)(1)--
 (i) by striking `he' and inserting `the person';
 (ii) by striking `him' and inserting `the person';
 (I) in section 12(b)(3), by striking `his official duties' and inserting
 `the official duties of the public official'; and
 (J) in the second sentence of section 16(b) (7 U.S.C. 136n(b)), by striking
 `him' and inserting `the Administrator'.
 (c) UNEXECUTABLE AMENDMENT- The phrase sought to be struck in section
 102(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
 Amendments of 1988 (Public Law 100-532; 102 Stat 2667) shall be deemed to be
 `an end-use product'.
 (d) RECORDKEEPING- Section 1491 of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation,
 and Trade Act of 1990 (7 U.S.C. 136i-1) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking `(7 U.S.C. 136a(d)(1)(C))' and inserting
 `(7 U.S.C. 136a(d)(1)(C)))'; and
 (2) in subsection (d)(1), by inserting `of' after `fine'.
TITLE II--TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES
SEC. 201. REFERENCES TO FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT.
 Whenever in this title an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment
 to a section or other provision, or refers to a section or other provision,
 the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.).
SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) PESTICIDE CHEMICAL- Subsection (q) of section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321(q))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(q)(1) The term `pesticide chemical' means--
 `(A) any substance that is a pesticide within the meaning of the Federal
 Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.), or
 `(B) any active or inert ingredient of a pesticide within the meaning of
 such Act.
 `(2) The term `pesticide chemical residue' means a residue in or on any
 agricultural commodity or processed food of--
 `(A) a pesticide chemical, or
 `(B) any other added substance that is present in or on the commodity or
 food primarily as a result of the metabolism or other degradation of a
 pesticide chemical.
 `(3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), the Administrator may by
 regulation exempt a substance from the definition of `pesticide chemical'
 or `pesticide chemical residue' if--
 `(A) the Administrator determines that the occurrence of the substance as
 a residue on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food is attributable
 primarily to--
 `(i) human activities not involving the use of any substance for a pesticidal
 purpose in the production, storage, processing, or transportation of any
 raw agricultural commodity or processed food, or
 `(ii) natural causes (which shall not include the result of the prior use
 of any substance for such a pesticidal purpose), and
 `(B) the Administrator, after consultation with the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, or the Secretary of Agriculture, or both, as appropriate,
 also determines that the substance more appropriately should be regulated
 under one or more provisions of this Act other than sections 402(a)(2)(B)
 and 408.'.
 (b) FOOD ADDITIVE- Section 201(s) is amended by striking paragraphs (1)
 and (2) and inserting the following:
 `(1) a pesticide chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity
 or processed food, or
 `(2) a pesticide chemical, or'.
 (c) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS- Section 201 is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsections:
 `(bb) The term `processed food' means any food other than a raw agricultural
 commodity and includes any raw agricultural commodity that has been subject
 to processing, such as canning, cooking, freezing, dehydration, or milling.
 `(cc) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the United States
 Environmental Protection Agency.'.
SEC. 203. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 Section 301(j) (21 U.S.C. 331(j)) is amended by inserting before the
 period at the end the following: `, or the violation of section 408(h)
 or any regulation or order issued under such section'.
SEC. 204. ADULTERATED FOOD.
 Paragraph (2) of section 402(a) (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(2)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(2)(A) If it bears or contains any added poisonous or added deleterious
 substance (other than a substance that is a pesticide chemical residue
 in or on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food, a food additive,
 a color additive, or a new animal drug) that is unsafe within the meaning
 of section 406.
 `(B) If it bears or contains a pesticide chemical residue that is unsafe
 within the meaning of section 408(b).
 `(C) If it is or if it bears or contains--
 `(i) any food additive that is unsafe within the meaning of section 409, or
 `(ii) a new animal drug (or conversion product thereof) that is unsafe
 within the meaning of section 512.'.
SEC. 205. TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES.
 Section 408 (21 U.S.C. 346a) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 408. TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES.
 `(a) DEFINITION OF FOOD- For the purposes of this section, the term `food',
 when used as a noun without distinguishing modification, shall mean a raw
 agricultural commodity or processed food.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT FOR TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2) or (3), any pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a food shall be deemed unsafe for the purpose
 of section 402(a)(2)(B) unless--
 `(A) a tolerance for the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food
 is in effect under this section and the concentration of the residue is
 within the limits of the tolerance, or
 `(B) an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance is in effect under
 this section for the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food.
 `(2) PROCESSED FOOD- Notwithstanding paragraph (1)--
 `(A) if a tolerance is in effect under this section for a pesticide chemical
 residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity, a pesticide chemical residue
 that is present in or on a processed food because the food is made from
 that raw agricultural commodity shall not be considered unsafe within the
 meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B), despite the lack of a tolerance for the
 pesticide chemical residue in or on the processed food, if the concentration
 of the pesticide chemical residue in or on the processed food when ready
 for consumption or use is not greater than the tolerance prescribed for
 the pesticide chemical residue in or on the raw agricultural commodity, and
 `(B) if an exemption from the requirement for a tolerance is in effect under
 this section for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural
 commodity, a pesticide chemical residue that is present in or on a processed
 food because the food is made from that raw agricultural commodity shall
 not be considered unsafe within the meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B).
 `(3) RESIDUES OF DEGRADATION PRODUCTS- If a pesticide chemical residue is
 present in or on a food because it is a metabolite or other degradation
 product of a precursor substance that itself is a pesticide chemical or
 pesticide chemical residue, such a residue shall not be considered to be
 unsafe within the meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B), despite the lack of a
 tolerance or exemption from the need for a tolerance for the residue in
 or on the food, if--
 `(A)(i) a tolerance is in effect under this section for residues of the
 precursor substance in or on the food, and the combined level of residues
 of the precursor substance and each metabolite or other degradation product
 in or on the food is at or below the stoichiometrically equivalent level
 that would be permitted by the tolerance if the residue consisted only
 of the precursor substance rather than the combination of the precursor
 substance and any metabolite or other degradation product thereof, or
 `(ii) an exemption from the requirement for a tolerance is in effect under
 this section for residues of the precursor substance in or on the food, and
 `(B) the tolerance or exemption from the requirement of a tolerance for
 residues of the precursor chemical in or on the food--
 `(i) does not state that it applies only to residues of the precursor
 chemical, and
 `(ii) does not state that it does not apply to the metabolite or degradation
 product.
 `(4) EFFECT OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION- While a tolerance or exemption
 from the requirement for a tolerance is in effect under this section for
 a pesticide chemical residue with respect to any food, the food shall
 not by reason of bearing or containing any quantity of such a residue be
 considered to be adulterated within the meaning of section 402(a)(1).
 `(c) AUTHORITY AND STANDARD FOR TOLERANCES-
 `(1) AUTHORITY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may issue regulations establishing,
 modifying, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or
 on a food--
 `(i) in response to a petition filed under subsection (e), or
 `(ii) on the initiative of the Administrator under subsection (f).
 `(B) EXPIRATION DATE- A regulation establishing or modifying a tolerance for
 a pesticide chemical residue or pesticide chemical may contain a provision
 stating an expiration date for the tolerance.
 `(2) STANDARD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A tolerance may not be established for a pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a food at a level that is higher than a level
 that the Administrator determines will protect the public health, based
 on the information available to the Administrator.
 `(B) MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION- The Administrator shall modify or revoke
 a tolerance if the tolerance is at a level higher than the level that the
 Administrator determines will protect the public health.
 `(C) FACTORS- In making a determination under this paragraph, the
 Administrator shall take into account (among other relevant factors)--
 `(i) the validity, completeness, and reliability of the available data
 from studies of the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(ii) the nature of any adverse effects shown to be caused by the pesticide
 chemical in the studies,
 `(iii) available information and reasonable assumptions concerning the
 relationship of the results of the studies to human risk,
 `(iv) available information and reasonable assumptions concerning the
 dietary exposure levels of food consumers (and major identifiable subgroups
 of food consumers) to the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(v) available information and reasonable assumptions concerning the
 variations in exposure levels and sensitivities of individual food
 consumers, and
 `(vi) other factors, to the extent required by subparagraph (E).
 `(D) NEGLIGIBLE RISKS- For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B), a tolerance
 level for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food will protect the
 public health if the dietary risk posed to food consumers by the level of
 the pesticide chemical residue is not greater than negligible. Such a risk
 shall be considered negligible--
 `(i) with regard to a type of adverse human health effect that the
 Administrator determines would not be caused by dietary exposure to the
 pesticide chemical residue below an identifiable exposure level, if the
 level of dietary exposure allowed by the tolerance and all other tolerances
 in effect for the pesticide chemical will result in a total level of dietary
 exposure to residues of the pesticide chemical that is lower by a generally
 accepted margin of safety than the identifiable exposure level, and
 `(ii) with regard to a type of adverse human health effect as to which the
 Administrator determines that there is no such identifiable level (which
 shall include an oncogenic risk unless the Administrator determines otherwise
 by regulation with respect to a particular pesticide chemical residue),
 if the level of dietary exposure to a residue in or on a particular food
 to a person in the 90th percentile of consumption of that food is at or
 below a level that the Administrator has determined will present at most
 a negligible increase in the lifetime risk to such a person experiencing
 such an adverse human health effect.
For purposes of clause (ii), an increased risk shall be considered negligible
if the Administrator determines that the upper bound increase in risk to
such a person from lifetime dietary exposure to the residue, determined by
reasonable methods, does not exceed 1 x 10-6.
 `(E) CONSIDERATION OF BENEFITS- For purposes of subparagraphs (A) and
 (B), the Administrator may establish a tolerance for a pesticide chemical
 residue that results in a greater than negligible risk if the Administrator
 determines that the risk is not unreasonable because--
 `(i) use of the pesticide chemical that produces the residue protects humans
 or the environment from adverse effects that would, directly or indirectly,
 result in greater risk to humans or the environment than the dietary risk
 from the pesticide chemical residue,
 `(ii) use of the pesticide chemical avoids a greater risk to humans
 or the environment than would be expected to result from the use of an
 alternative pesticide chemical on the same food and the Administrator has
 taken action to remove such alternative pesticide chemical under section 6
 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136d)
 and has initiated a tolerance revocation action under this section for
 the alternative pesticide chemical, or
 `(iii) the unavailability of the pesticide chemical would reduce the
 availability of an adequate, wholesome, and economical domestic supply of
 the food, and the adverse economic or health effects from the reduction
 would outweigh the dietary risk from the pesticide chemical residue.
 `(3) LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) OTHER CONSIDERATIONS- A tolerance may not be issued on the basis of
 paragraph (2)(E), and a petition to revoke an existing tolerance may not
 be denied on the basis of paragraph (2)(E), unless--
 `(i) the Administrator has assessed the extent to which efforts are being
 made to develop either an alternative method of pest control (including
 modified use of the pesticide chemical) or an alternative pesticide
 chemical for use on the commodity or food that would meet the requirements
 of paragraph (2)(D),
 `(ii) the tolerance is limited in duration to a period of 5 years or less
 from the date of the issuance or denial, unless the tolerance is reissued
 in accordance with this section, and
 `(iii) the Administrator has proposed the issuance or denial in accordance
 with subsection (f) and has allowed not less than 60 days for comment
 thereon.
 `(B) METHOD OF DETECTION OR MEASUREMENT- A tolerance for a pesticide chemical
 residue in or on a food shall not be established by the Administrator unless
 the Administrator determines, after consultation with the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services or the Secretary of Agriculture, as appropriate,
 that there is a practical method for detecting and measuring the levels
 of the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food.
 `(C) MINIMUM LEVEL- A tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a
 food shall not be established at a level lower than the limit of detection
 of the method for detecting and measuring the pesticide chemical residue
 specified by the Administrator under subparagraph (B).
 `(d) AUTHORITY AND STANDARD FOR EXEMPTIONS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- The Administrator may issue a regulation establishing,
 modifying, or revoking an exemption from the requirement for a tolerance
 for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food--
 `(A) in response to a petition filed under subsection (e), or
 `(B) on the initiative of the Administrator under subsection (f).
 `(2) STANDARD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- An exemption from the requirement for a tolerance for
 a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food may be established only if
 the Administrator determines that a tolerance is not needed to protect the
 public health, in view of the levels of dietary exposure to the pesticide
 chemical residue that could reasonably be expected to occur.
 `(B) REVOCATION- An exemption from the requirement for a tolerance for
 a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food shall be revoked if the
 Administrator, determines that the exemption does not satisfy the criterion
 of subparagraph (A).
 `(C) FACTORS- In making a determination under this subparagraph, the
 Administrator shall take into account, among other relevant factors,
 the factors set forth in subsection (c)(2)(C).
 `(e) PETITION FOR TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION-
 `(1) PETITIONS AND PETITIONERS- Any person may file with the Administrator
 a petition proposing the issuance of a regulation--
 `(A) establishing, modifying, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a food, or
 `(B) establishing, modifying, or revoking an exemption from the requirement
 of a tolerance for such a residue.
 `(2) PETITION CONTENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A petition under paragraph (1) to establish a tolerance or
 exemption for a pesticide chemical residue shall be supported by such data
 and information as are specified in regulations issued by the Administrator,
 including--
 `(i)(I) an informative summary of the petition and of the data, information,
 and arguments submitted or cited in support of the petition, and
 `(II) a statement that the petitioner agrees that the summary or any
 information the summary contains may be published as a part of the notice
 of filing of the petition to be published under this subsection and as
 part of a proposed or final regulation issued under this section,
 `(ii) the name, chemical identity, and composition of the pesticide chemical
 residue and of the pesticide chemical that produces the residue,
 `(iii) data showing the recommended quantity, frequency, method, and time
 of application of the pesticide chemical,
 `(iv) full reports of tests and investigations made with respect to the
 safety of the pesticide chemical, including full information as to the
 methods and controls used in conducting the tests and investigations,
 `(v) full reports of tests and investigations made with respect to the nature
 and quantity of the pesticide chemical residue that is likely to remain
 in or on the food, including a description of the analytical methods used,
 `(vi) analytical methods for detecting and measuring the levels of the
 pesticide chemical residue in or on the food, or a statement why such a
 method is not needed,
 `(vii) a proposed tolerance level for the pesticide chemical residue,
 if a tolerance is proposed,
 `(viii) reports of investigations conducted using the processing methods
 associated with the food, if the tolerance is for residues in or on a
 processed food,
 `(ix) such information as the Administrator may require to make the
 determination under subsection (c)(2)(E), and
 `(x) such other data and information as the Administrator requires to
 support the petition.
If information or data required by this subparagraph is available to the
Administrator, the person submitting the petition may cite the availability
of the information or data in lieu of submitting the information or data. The
Administrator may require a petition to be accompanied by samples of the
pesticide chemical with respect to which the petition is filed.
 `(B) MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION- The Administrator may by regulation
 establish the requirements for information and data to support a petition to
 modify or revoke a tolerance or to revoke an exemption from the requirement
 for a tolerance.
 `(3) NOTICE- A notice of the filing of a petition that the Administrator
 determines has met the requirements of paragraph (2) shall be published
 in the Federal Register by the Administrator within 30 days after the
 determination. The notice shall announce the availability of a description
 of the analytical methods available to the Administrator for the detection
 and measurement of the pesticide chemical residue with respect to which
 the petition is filed or shall set forth the statement of the petitioner
 of why such a method is not needed. The notice shall include the summary
 required by paragraph (2)(A)(i).
 `(4) ACTIONS BY THE ADMINISTRATOR- The Administrator shall (after giving
 due consideration to a petition filed under paragraph (1) and any other
 information available to the Administrator)--
 `(A) issue a final regulation (which may vary from the regulation sought
 by the petition) establishing, modifying, or revoking a tolerance for
 the pesticide chemical residue or an exemption of the pesticide chemical
 residue from the requirement of a tolerance,
 `(B) issue a proposed regulation under subsection (f), and thereafter
 either issue a final regulation under subsection (f) or an order denying
 the petition, or
 `(C) issue an order denying the petition.
 `(5) EFFECTIVE DATE- A final regulation issued under paragraph (4) shall
 take effect on the date of the publication of the final regulation in the
 Federal Register.
 `(6) FURTHER PROCEEDINGS-
 `(A) OBJECTIONS- Within 60 days after the date of publication in the
 Federal Register of a final regulation or order issued under paragraph (4),
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (f)(1), or subsection (g), any person
 may file objections to the regulation or order with the Administrator,
 specifying with particularity the provisions of the regulation or order
 considered objectionable and stating reasonable grounds for the objection. If
 the regulation or order was issued in response to a petition under subsection
 (e)(1), a copy of each objection filed by a person other than the petitioner
 shall be served by the Administrator on the petitioner. The Administrator
 shall publish the objections in the Federal Register and allow a period
 of not less than 30 days for comment.
 `(B) ISSUANCE OF ORDER- As soon as practicable after the comment period
 has closed, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register an
 order stating the action taken on each such objection and setting forth
 any revision to the regulation or prior order that the Administrator has
 found to be warranted.
 `(C) EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDER- An order issued under this paragraph ruling on
 an objection shall not take effect before the 90th day after the publication
 of the order, unless the Administrator finds that emergency conditions exist
 necessitating an earlier effective date, in which event the Administrator
 shall specify in the order the findings of the Administrator as to the
 conditions.
 `(7) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(A) FILING OF PETITION- In a case of an actual controversy as to the
 validity of any order issued under paragraph (6) or any regulation that is
 the subject of such an order, any person who will be adversely affected by
 the order or regulation may obtain judicial review by filing in the United
 States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the person resides or has
 its principal place of business, or in the United States Court of Appeals
 for the District of Columbia Circuit, within 60 days after publication of
 the order, a petition praying that the order or regulation be set aside
 in whole or in part.
 `(B) RECORD- A copy of the petition shall be immediately transmitted by
 the clerk of the court to the Administrator, or any officer designated
 by the Administrator for the purpose. On receipt, the Administrator shall
 file in the court the record of the proceedings on which the Administrator
 based the order or regulation, as provided in section 2112 of title 28,
 United States Code.
 `(C) JURISDICTION- On the filing of such a petition, the court shall have
 exclusive jurisdiction to affirm or set aside the order or regulation
 complained of in whole or in part.
 `(D) ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE- If a party applies to the court for leave to
 adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court
 that the additional evidence is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce the evidence in the proceeding before
 the Administrator, the court may order that the additional evidence (and
 evidence in rebuttal to the additional evidence) shall be taken before the
 Administrator. The Administrator may modify prior findings as to the facts
 by reason of the additional evidence so taken and may modify the order or
 regulation accordingly. The Administrator shall file with the court any
 such modified finding, order, or regulation.
 `(E) FINALITY- The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside,
 in whole or in part, any order under paragraph (6) and any regulation
 that is the subject of such an order shall be final, subject to review
 by the Supreme Court of the United States as provided in section 1254 of
 title 28 of the United States Code. The commencement of proceedings under
 this paragraph shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court to the
 contrary, operate as a stay of a regulation or order.
 `(F) REVIEW- Any issue that was or could have been reviewed under paragraph
 (6) and this paragraph shall not be the subject of judicial review under
 any other provision of law.
 `(f) ACTION ON ADMINISTRATOR'S OWN INITIATIVE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may issue a regulation--
 `(A) establishing, modifying, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide
 chemical or a pesticide chemical residue, or
 `(B) establishing or revoking an exemption of a pesticide chemical residue
 from the requirement of a tolerance.
 `(2) EFFECTIVE DATE- A final regulation issued under paragraph (1) shall
 become effective on the date of the publication of the regulation in the
 Federal Register and shall on publication be subject to subsection (e)(6).
 `(3) NOTICE- Before issuing a final regulation under paragraph (1), the
 Administrator shall issue a notice of proposed rulemaking and provide
 a period of not less than 60 days for public comment on the proposed
 regulation, except that a shorter period for comment may be provided if
 the Administrator for good cause finds that it would be contrary to the
 public interest to do so and states the reasons for the finding in the
 notice of proposed rulemaking.
 `(g) SPECIAL DATA REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) ADDITIONAL DATA- If the Administrator determines that additional
 data or information are reasonably required to support the continuation
 of a tolerance or exemption that is in effect under this section for a
 pesticide chemical residue in or on a food, the Administrator shall--
 `(A) issue a notice requiring the persons holding the pesticide
 registrations associated with the tolerance or exemption to submit the
 data or information under section 3(c)(2)(B) of the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)(2)(B)), or
 `(B) publish in the Federal Register, after first providing notice and an
 opportunity for comment of not less than 90 days' duration, an order--
 `(i) requiring the submission to the Administrator by one or more interested
 persons of a notice identifying the person or persons who will submit the
 required data and information,
 `(ii) describing the type of data and information required to be submitted
 to the Administrator and stating why the data and information could not be
 obtained under section 3(c)(2)(B) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
 and Rodenticide Act,
 `(iii) describing the reports to the Administrator required to be prepared
 during and after the collection of the data and information,
 `(iv) requiring the submission to the Administrator of the data, information,
 and reports referred to in clauses (ii) and (iii), and
 `(v) establishing dates by which the submissions described in clauses (i)
 and (iv) must be made.
 `(2) ERRORS- The Administrator may revise any order issued under paragraph
 (1) to correct an error.
 `(3) NONCOMPLIANCE- If a submission required by a notice issued in accordance
 with paragraph (1)(A), or an order issued under paragraph (1)(B), is not
 made by the time specified in the notice or order, the Administrator may
 by order published in the Federal Register modify or revoke the tolerance
 or exemption in question or suspend the tolerance or exemption until the
 submission has been made. The order shall become effective on the date of
 the publication of the order in the Federal Register or on such later date
 as is stated in the order.
 `(4) REVIEW- An order issued under this subsection shall be effective on the
 date of the publication of the order in the Federal Register and shall be
 subject to review in accordance with paragraphs (6) and (7) of subsection
 (e).
 `(h) CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Data and information that are submitted to the Administrator
 under this section, and are also submitted to the Administrator to
 support an application for a registration under the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.) or to maintain such
 a registration in effect, shall be entitled to confidential treatment for
 reasons of business confidentiality to the same extent provided by section
 10 of such Act (7 U.S.C. 136h). Disclosure of data and information submitted
 under this section otherwise shall be governed by section 552 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- Data that are entitled to confidential treatment under
 paragraph (1)--
 `(A) shall on request be disclosed to either House of Congress and, to the
 extent of matter within its jurisdiction, to any committee or subcommittee
 and to any joint committee or any subcommittee of a joint committee,
 `(B) may be disclosed under such security arrangements as the Administrator
 may by regulation or order provide--
 `(i) to any officer or employee of the United States or of any State,
 in connection with the official duties of the officer or employee under
 any law for the protection of health or the environment, or for specific
 law enforcement purposes,
 `(ii) to contractors with the United States and employees of the contractors,
 if, in the opinion of the Administrator, the disclosure is necessary for
 the satisfactory performance by the contractor of a contract with the
 United States for performance of work in connection with this section or
 with other Federal laws intended to protect the public health,
 `(iii) to other persons, to the extent the Administrator determines
 disclosure is necessary to protect public health, or
 `(iv) when relevant in any proceeding under this section, except that
 disclosure in such a proceeding shall be made in such manner as to preserve
 confidentiality to the extent practicable without impairing the proceeding.
 `(3) SUMMARIES- Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection or other
 law, the Administrator may publish the informative summary required by
 subsection (e)(2)(A)(i) and may, in issuing a proposed or final regulation
 or order under this section, publish an informative summary of the data
 relating to the regulation or order.
 `(i) STATUS OF PREVIOUSLY ISSUED REGULATIONS-
 `(1) REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 406- Regulations affecting pesticide
 chemical residues in or on raw agricultural commodities promulgated,
 in accordance with section 701(e), under the authority of section 406(a)
 on the basis of public hearings instituted before January 1, 1953, shall
 be deemed to be regulations issued under this section and shall be subject
 to modification or revocation under subsection (e) or (f).
 `(2) REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 409- Regulations that established or
 modified tolerances or exemptions from the requirement for a tolerance
 for substances that are pesticide chemical residues on or in processed
 food, or that otherwise stated the conditions under which the pesticide
 chemicals could be safely used, and that were issued under section 409 on or
 before the date of the enactment of this subsection, shall be deemed to be
 regulations issued under this section and shall be subject to modification
 or revocation under subsection (e) or (f).
 `(3) REGULATIONS UNDER THIS SECTION- Regulations that established or modified
 tolerances or exemptions under this section that were issued on or before
 the date of the enactment of the Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of 1991
 shall remain in effect unless modified or revoked under subsection (e) or
 (f).
 `(j) TRANSITIONAL PROVISION- If, on the day before the date of enactment of
 the Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of 1991, a substance that is a pesticide
 chemical was, with respect to a particular pesticidal use of the substance
 and any resulting pesticide chemical residue in or on a particular food--
 `(1) regarded by the Administrator or the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services as generally recognized as safe for use within the meaning of
 subsection (b) or section 201(s) as then in effect, or
 `(2) regarded by the Administrator, the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, or the Secretary of Agriculture, as appropriate, as a substance
 described by section 201(s)(4),
such a pesticide chemical residue shall be regarded as exempt from the
requirement for a tolerance, as of the date of enactment of this section. The
Administrator shall by regulation indicate which substances are described
by this subsection. An exemption under this subsection may be revoked or
modified as if it had been issued under subsection (d).
 `(k) HARMONIZATION WITH ACTION UNDER OTHER LAWS-
 `(1) LIMITATION- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a final
 rule under this section that revokes, modifies, or suspends a tolerance or
 exemption for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food may be issued
 only if the Administrator has taken any necessary action under the Federal
 Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.) with
 respect to the registration of the pesticide whose use results in the residue
 to ensure that any use of the pesticide authorized by this Act in producing,
 storing, processing, or transporting food that occurs after the issuance
 of the final rule under this section will not result in pesticide chemical
 residues on the food that are unsafe within the meaning of subsection (b).
 `(2) REVOCATION OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION FOLLOWING CANCELLATION OF
 ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the Administrator, acting under the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, cancels the registration of each pesticide
 that contains a particular pesticide chemical and that is labeled for
 use on a particular food, or requires that the registration of each such
 pesticide be modified to prohibit the use of the pesticide in connection
 with the production, storage, processing, or transportation of the food,
 due in whole or in significant part to dietary risks to humans posed by
 residues of the pesticide chemical in or on the food, the Administrator
 shall revoke any tolerance or exemption that allows the presence of the
 pesticide chemical, or any pesticide chemical residue that results from
 its use, in or on the food.
 `(B) PROCEDURES- The Administrator shall use the procedures set forth in
 subsection (f) in taking action under this paragraph.
 `(C) EFFECTIVE DATE- A revocation under this paragraph shall become
 effective not later than 180 days after--
 `(i) the date by which each such cancellation of a registration has become
 effective, or
 `(ii) the date on which the use of the canceled pesticide becomes unlawful
 under the terms of the cancellation,
whichever is later.
 `(3) SUSPENSION OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION FOLLOWING SUSPENSION OF ASSOCIATED
 REGISTRATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the Administrator, acting under the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.), suspends the
 use of each registered pesticide that contains a particular pesticide
 chemical and that is labeled for use on a particular food, due in whole
 or in part to dietary risks to humans posed by residues of the pesticide
 chemical in or on the food, the Administrator shall suspend any tolerance
 or exemption that allows the presence of the pesticide chemical, or any
 pesticide chemical residue that results from its use, in or on the food.
 `(B) PROCEDURES- The Administrator shall use the procedures set forth in
 subsection (f) in taking action under this paragraph.
 `(C) EFFECTIVE DATE- A suspension under this paragraph shall become
 effective not later than 120 days after the date by which the suspension
 of the registration has become effective.
 `(D) TERM- The suspension of a tolerance or exemption under subparagraph (A)
 shall be effective as long as each associated registration of a pesticide
 is suspended under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
 `(E) EFFECT OF SUSPENSION- While a suspension of a tolerance or exemption
 is effective the tolerance or exemption shall not be considered to be in
 effect. If the suspension of the associated registration of the pesticide
 under such Act is terminated, leaving the registration of the pesticide
 for the use in effect under such Act, the Administrator shall rescind any
 associated suspension of a tolerance or exemption.
 `(4) TOLERANCES FOR UNAVOIDABLE RESIDUES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In connection with action taken under paragraph (2) or
 (3) or taken with respect to pesticides whose registrations were canceled
 prior to the date of enactment of the Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of
 1991, if the Administrator determines that a residue of the canceled or
 suspended pesticide chemical will unavoidably persist in the environment
 and be present in or on a food, the Administrator may establish a tolerance
 for the pesticide chemical residue at a level that permits the unavoidable
 residue to remain in the food and will not pose an unreasonable dietary
 risk. In establishing such a tolerance, the Administrator shall use the
 procedures set forth in subsection (f).
 `(B) REVIEW- The Administrator shall review any such tolerance periodically
 and modify the tolerance as necessary so that the tolerance allows only
 that level of the pesticide chemical residue that is unavoidable.
 `(5) DELAY OF EFFECTIVE DATE-
 `(A) LOWER LEVEL- The Administrator shall delay the effective date of a
 modification or revocation of a tolerance or exemption from the requirement
 of a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food under this
 section if the modification or revocation would require a lower level
 of the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food than the level in
 effect under the tolerance or exemption immediately before the date the
 modification or revocation would otherwise take effect.
 `(B) SAME LEVEL- The Administrator shall delay the effective date,
 to permit the tolerance or exemption to remain at the level in effect
 immediately before the date the modification or revocation would otherwise
 take effect, for the period of time that the Administrator determines is
 necessary to allow foods that could contain the pesticide chemical residue
 as a result of lawful application of the pesticide chemical prior to the
 date the modification or revocation would otherwise take effect to be
 sold to consumers in the course of the usual practice for the production,
 processing, transportation, storage, and distribution of that type of food.
 `(C) ORDER- The Administrator shall designate the delayed effective date
 and describe the determinations supporting the selection of the date in
 the order modifying or revoking the tolerance or exemption.
 `(D) SHORTER PERIOD OR NO DELAY- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the
 Administrator may, in the order modifying or revoking the tolerance or
 exemption, establish a shorter period of time for delay of the effective
 date, or provide for no delay of the effective date, for the modification
 or revocation, if the Administrator determines that the shorter period, or
 no delay of the effective date, is necessary to protect the public health
 during the period of the delay that would be required under subparagraph (A).
 `(l) FEES- The Administrator shall by regulation require the payment of
 such fees as will in the aggregate, in the judgment of the Administrator,
 be sufficient over a reasonable term to carry out this section, except that
 no fee shall be imposed under this subsection on tolerances or exemptions
 from tolerances for any minor use. Under the regulations, the performance
 of the services or other functions of the Administrator under this section,
 including--
 `(1) the acceptance for filing of a petition submitted under subsection (e),
 `(2) the promulgation of a regulation establishing, modifying, or revoking
 a tolerance or establishing or revoking an exemption from the requirement
 of a tolerance under this section, or
 `(3) the acceptance for filing of objections under subsection (e)(6),
may be conditioned on the payment of the fees, except that no fee may be
imposed under this subsection on a tolerance or an exemption from a tolerance
for a minor use. The regulations may further provide for waiver or refund
of fees in whole or in part when in the judgment of the Administrator such
a waiver or refund is equitable and not contrary to the purposes of this
subsection.
 `(m) NATIONAL UNIFORMITY-
 `(1) Preemption of state and local limits-
 `(A) STANDARD- Except as provided in paragraph (2), no State or political
 subdivision of a State may establish or enforce any limit on a pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a particular food, unless the limit is identical to
 the tolerance or exemption from the requirement of a tolerance established by
 the Administrator for the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food under
 this section, including any modification of the tolerance or exemption, if--
 `(i) the Administrator has established the tolerance or exemption on the
 basis of periodically updated data pursuant to section 6(i) of the Federal
 Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136d(i)), and
 `(ii) either--
 `(I) the tolerance or exemption is established or modified by the
 Administrator for the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food after
 the date of enactment of the Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of 1991,
 based on a complete data set for the pesticide chemical as of the date
 the tolerance or exemption is established or modified, or
 `(II) in the case of any other tolerance or exemption established by the
 Administrator, or modified, for the pesticide chemical residue in or on the
 food the Administrator has determined, after the date of enactment of the
 Pesticide Safety Improvement Act of 1991, that the tolerance or exemption,
 or modification, complies with subsection (c) or (d), based on a complete
 data set for the pesticide chemical as of the date of the determination.
 `(B) DEFINITION- For purposes of clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph
 (A), a `complete data set' means a set of data that the Administrator
 determines would meet all of the requirements under the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.), in effect at the
 time of the determination, for unconditional registration of pesticide
 products containing the pesticide chemical, the use of which results in
 the pesticide chemical residue.
 `(C) PROCEDURE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In establishing a tolerance or exemption from the
 requirement of a tolerance, or a modification, described in subparagraph
 (A)(i) for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food, the Administrator
 shall, in establishing the tolerance or exemption, or modifying the order,
 state that the tolerance or exemption is established or modified based
 on a data set that the Administrator has determined is a complete data
 set and that the tolerance or exemption has the effect of preempting any
 limit on the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food established by
 any State or political subdivision of a State.
 `(ii) ORDER- To make the determination described in clause (i) for a
 tolerance or exemption from the requirement of a tolerance for a pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a food, or a modification of the tolerance or
 exemption, the Administrator shall issue an order (after notice and an
 opportunity for comment)--
 `(I) stating that the tolerance or exemption, or modification, complies
 with subsection (c) or (d) based on a data set that the Administrator has
 determined is a complete data set; and
 `(II) amending the order that established or modified the tolerance or
 exemption to state that the tolerance or exemption has the effect of
 preempting any limit on the pesticide chemical residue in or on the food
 established by any State or political subdivision of a State.
 `(iii) COMBINED ACTION- The procedure for issuing the orders described in
 this subparagraph may be combined with any other action the Administrator
 is undertaking with respect to the pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical
 residue.
 `(2) WAIVER-
 `(A) PETITION- Any State may petition the Administrator for authority
 to establish in the State a limit for a pesticide chemical residue in
 or on a food that is more stringent than the tolerance or exemption from
 the requirement of a tolerance established by the Administrator for the
 pesticide chemical residue in or on the food.
 `(B) STANDARD- The Administrator may, by order, after public notice and
 an opportunity for comment, grant the State petition if the Administrator
 determines that--
 `(i) the limit proposed by the State would be more stringent than the
 tolerance or exemption established by the Administrator under this
 section, and
 `(ii) the State limit is warranted by special local circumstances in
 the State.
 `(C) EFFECTIVE DATE- If the Administrator grants a petition under this
 paragraph, the State limit shall go into effect no earlier than 6 months from
 the date of the publication in the Federal Register of the determination
 of the Administrator, unless the Administrator determines, in the order,
 that the special local circumstances in the State warrant allowing the
 State limit to go into effect in less than 6 months.
 `(D) RULES- The Administrator shall, by regulation, establish procedures
 and requirements for filing petitions under this paragraph and criteria
 for acting on petitions under this paragraph.
 `(3) ALTERNATIVE ACTION- In lieu of any action authorized under paragraph
 (2)(B), the Administrator may treat a petition under paragraph (2)(A) as
 a petition to revoke or modify a tolerance or to revoke an exemption, if
 the Administrator determines that the action is consistent with protection
 of public health. If the Administrator elects to treat a petition under
 paragraph (2)(A) as a petition to revoke or modify a tolerance or to
 revoke an exemption, the Administrator shall thereafter act on the petition
 pursuant to subsection (e).'.
SEC. 206. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR INCREASED MONITORING.
 There are authorized to be appropriated $12,000,000 for each of the 1992
 and subsequent fiscal years, in addition to any other amounts authorized
 to be appropriated, for increased monitoring by the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services of pesticide residues in imported and domestic food.
TITLE III--ADULTERATED POULTRY PRODUCTS
SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) ADULTERATED- Section 4(g)(2) of the Poultry Products Inspection Act
 (21 U.S.C. 453(g)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and
 inserting the following new subparagraphs:
 `(A) if it bears or contains (by reason of administration of any substance
 to the live poultry or otherwise) any added poisonous or added deleterious
 substance (other than one that is (i) a pesticide chemical or pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food;
 (ii) a food additive; or (iii) a color additive) that may, in the judgment
 of the Secretary, make the article unfit for human food;
 `(B) if it is, in whole or in part, a raw agricultural commodity or processed
 food and the raw agricultural commodity or processed food bears or contains
 a pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical residue that is unsafe within
 the meaning of section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 346a);'.
 (b) REFERENCE TO FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT- Subsection (y)
 of section 4 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 453(y)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(y) The terms `pesticide chemical', `pesticide chemical residue', `food
 additive', `color additive', raw agricultural commodity', and `processed
 food' shall have the same meanings for purposes of this Act as under the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).'.
TITLE IV--ADULTERATED MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS
SEC. 401. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) ADULTERATED- Section 1(m)(2) of the Federal Meat Inspection Act
 (21 U.S.C. 601(m)(2)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 and inserting the following new subparagraphs:
 `(A) if it bears or contains (by reason of administration of any substance
 to the live animal or otherwise) any added poisonous or added deleterious
 substance (other than one that is (i) a pesticide chemical or pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food,
 (ii) a food additive, or (iii) a color additive) that may, in the judgment
 of the Secretary, make the article unfit for human food;
 `(B) if it is, in whole or in part, a raw agricultural commodity or processed
 food and the raw agricultural commodity or processed food bears or contains
 a pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical residue that is unsafe within
 the meaning of section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 346a);'.
 (b) REFERENCE TO FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT- Subsection (r)
 of section 1 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 601(r)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(r) The terms `pesticide chemical', `pesticide chemical residue', `food
 additive', `color additive', raw agricultural commodity', and `processed
 food' shall have the same meanings for purposes of this Act as under the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).'.
TITLE V--ADULTERATED EGGS AND EGG PRODUCTS
SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) ADULTERATED- Section 4(a)(2) of the Egg Products Inspection Act
 (21 U.S.C. 1033(a)(2)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (2) and inserting the following new subparagraphs:
 `(A) if it bears or contains any added poisonous or added deleterious
 substance (other than one that is (i) a pesticide chemical or pesticide
 chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food,
 (ii) a food additive, or (iii) a color additive) that may, in the judgment
 of the Secretary, make the article unfit for human food;
 `(B) if it is, in whole or in part, a raw agricultural commodity or processed
 food and the raw agricultural commodity or processed food bears or contains
 a pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical residue that is unsafe within
 the meaning of section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 346a);'.
 (b) REFERENCES TO THE FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT- Subsection (u)
 of section 4 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 1033(u)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(u) The terms `pesticide chemical', `chemical residue', `food additive',
 `color additive', raw agricultural commodity', and `processed food' shall
 have the same meanings for purposes of this Act as under the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).'.