HR 2037 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2037
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to enhance air carrier competition
and improve air carrier passenger services, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 24, 1991
Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to enhance air carrier competition
and improve air carrier passenger services, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Airline Competition and Passenger Protection
 Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. REPORTING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1301 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new title:
`TITLE XVII--AIRLINE PASSENGER PROTECTION
`SEC. 1701. MISSED CONNECTIONS.
 `(a) INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM AIR CARRIERS- In accordance with such time
 limits as the Secretary shall establish by regulation, a covered air carrier
 shall submit to the Secretary for each calendar month beginning after the
 120th day following the date of the enactment of this title a list of each
 airport which served as a hub airport for the carrier, together with the
 percentage of all passengers of the carrier for whom the carrier was to
 provide air transportation which included a scheduled transfer from one
 aircraft of the carrier to another aircraft of the carrier at such airport
 who missed such scheduled transfer.
 `(b) CODE SHARING PARTNERS- For the purposes of subsection (a), a scheduled
 transfer involving an aircraft of a covered air carrier and an aircraft
 of a code sharing partner of such carrier shall be considered to be a
 scheduled transfer from one aircraft of such carrier to another aircraft
 of the carrier.
 `(c) MONTHLY REPORTS- Not later than the 30th day following the last day of
 each calendar month for which the Secretary receives information relating
 to missed transfers pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall publish
 for such month a report containing such information.
 `(d) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than 18 months after the last day of
 the first calendar month for which the Secretary receives information
 relating to missed transfers pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary
 shall transmit to Congress a report on the quality of service provided
 by each covered air carrier to passengers at airports which serve as hub
 airports for the carrier, including recommendations on methods to improve
 such service. Such report shall be based on the information received under
 subsection (a) and service quality data collected under part 234 of title
 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
`SEC. 1702. AGREEMENTS BETWEEN HUB AIRPORTS AND AIR CARRIERS.
 `An agreement involving the use or expansion of gates or other airport
 facilities between an air carrier and an airport which serves as a hub
 airport for the carrier may only take effect if--
 `(1) at least 30 days before such agreement is to take effect, the carrier
 submits a copy of such agreement to the Attorney General; and
 `(2) the Attorney General does not determine, before the last day of such
 30-day period, that the agreement would substantially lessen competition
 between air carriers or tend to create a monopoly.
`SEC. 1703. LATE ARRIVALS.
 `(a) INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM AIR CARRIERS-
 `(1) SUBMISSION TO DOT- In accordance with such regulations as the Secretary
 shall issue, a covered air carrier shall submit to the Secretary for each
 calendar month a list of the flights of the carrier in the calendar month
 which arrived more than 15 minutes after their scheduled arrival times,
 together with the reason or reasons for such late arrival.
 `(2) CATEGORIES OF REASONS- Not later than 180 days after the date of the
 enactment of this title, the Secretary shall establish, by regulation,
 categories of reasons for flights arriving more than 15 minutes after their
 scheduled arrival times for use by covered air carriers in complying with
 paragraph (1).
 `(3) ANNUAL REPORT- The Secretary shall transmit to Congress an annual report
 which contains a summary of the information submitted under paragraph (1)
 for the preceding 12-month period, together with any recommendations for
 improving air service by reducing the number of flights which arrive late.
 `(b) NOTIFICATION OF PASSENGERS; REFUND OFFER- If a covered air carrier
 knows, before the boarding of passengers, of any delay of 1 hour or more
 in the scheduled departure or arrival time of a flight of the carrier,
 the carrier shall--
 `(1) notify passengers holding an airline ticket for such flight, before
 boarding, of--
 `(A) the approximate length of the delay; and
 `(B) the reasons for the delay; and
 `(2) offer each such passenger a refund of the purchase price of such ticket.
 `(c) LANDING FEE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any contract
 between an airport and an air carrier, an airport may impose and collect
 a higher fee for landing an aircraft during a peak hour for air traffic at
 the airport for the purpose of reducing delays and congestion at the airport.
 `(2) PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATORY FEES- Fees under this subsection
 may only be imposed on a nondiscriminatory basis.
 `(3) EFFECTIVE PERIOD- Fees may only be imposed and collected under this
 subsection in the 3-year period beginning on the 365th day following the
 date of the enactment of this title.
 `(4) REPORT- Not later than 36 months after the date of the enactment
 of this title, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report on the
 results of the demonstration program conducted under this subsection,
 including recommendations on whether or not to continue the program.
`SEC. 1704. BAGGAGE.
 `(a) REVISION OF BAGGAGE REPORTING SYSTEM- Not later than 180 days after
 the date of the enactment of this title, the Secretary shall revise the
 air carrier baggage reporting system of the Department of Transportation
 to require each covered air carrier to submit to the Secretary monthly
 reports on each of the following:
 `(1) The number of pieces of baggage which were placed in the custody of
 the carrier in the preceding calendar month by its passengers.
 `(2) The number of pieces of such baggage which were permanently lost
 while in the custody of the carrier.
 `(3) The number of pieces of such baggage which were temporarily lost
 while in the custody of the carrier.
 `(4) The number of passengers who filed mishandled baggage reports with
 the carrier in such calendar month.
 `(5) The average elapsed time for such calendar month between the arrival
 of a flight of the carrier at an airport which serves as a hub airport
 for the carrier and the delivery of baggage to passengers on such flight.
 `(b) MINIMUM LIABILITY LIMIT- A covered air carrier shall not limit its
 liability for provable direct or consequential damages resulting from the
 disappearance of, damage to, or delay in delivery of a passenger's baggage
 in the custody of such carrier to an amount less than $2,500.
 `(c) TIME LIMITS CLAIMS FOR LOST OR DAMAGED BAGGAGE- Within 60 days after
 a passenger of a covered air carrier submits a claim to the carrier for
 lost or damaged baggage, together with reasonable documentation supporting
 such claim, the carrier must--
 `(1) make a decision on the validity of such claim;
 `(2) notify such passenger of such decision; and
 `(3) if such claim is determined to be valid, reimburse such passenger for
 such baggage in accordance with this section and applicable regulations
 of the Department of Transportation.
 `(d) CONNECTIONS BETWEEN CODE SHARING PARTNERS-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- If the baggage of a passenger who is scheduled to transfer
 from an aircraft of a covered air carrier to an aircraft of a code sharing
 partner of the covered air carrier or from the aircraft of the code sharing
 partner to the aircraft of the covered air carrier disappears, is damaged,
 or is delayed in delivery, the covered air carrier shall be responsible
 for reimbursing the passenger for the provable direct or consequential
 damages resulting from such disappearance, damage, or delay.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection
 shall be construed as limiting the authority of a covered air carrier to
 seek reimbursement from a code sharing partner of the covered air carrier
 for any liability incurred in complying with paragraph (1).
 `(e) FALSE REPORTS- Any person who makes a false report to an air carrier
 regarding lost, damaged, or delayed delivery of baggage with the intent
 of defrauding the carrier shall, upon conviction, shall be subject--
 `(1) for a first offense, to a fine of not more than $2,500, and
 `(2) for any subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $5,000,
or to imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.
`SEC. 1705. CANCELLATIONS.
 `(a) INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM AIR CARRIERS-
 `(1) SUBMISSION TO DOT- In accordance with such regulations as the Secretary
 shall issue, a covered air carrier shall submit to the Secretary for each
 calendar month a list of the flights of the carrier, and the flights of each
 of the code sharing partners of the carrier, in the calendar month which
 are canceled, together with the reason or reasons for such cancellations.
 `(2) CATEGORIES OF REASONS- Not later than 180 days after the date of
 the enactment of this title, the Secretary shall establish by regulation
 categories of reasons for cancellations of flights for use by covered air
 carriers in complying with paragraph (1).
 `(3) ANNUAL REPORT- The Secretary shall transmit to Congress an annual report
 which contains a summary of the information submitted under paragraph (1)
 for the preceding 12-month period, together with any recommendations for
 reducing the number of cancellations of flights.
 `(b) PROHIBITION OF ECONOMIC CANCELLATIONS-
 `(1) CANCELLATIONS WITHIN 72 HOURS OF DEPARTURE- An air carrier may not
 cancel any flight of scheduled air transportation within 72 hours of its
 scheduled departure time for any reason, other than safety or there being
 no passengers present at the scheduled departure time.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF SAFETY-RELATED ADJUSTMENTS IN SCHEDULES- If an air
 carrier is unable to operate enough aircraft to make all its scheduled
 flights because aircraft are unavailable for safety-related reasons and the
 carrier makes adjustments in schedules to accommodate the greatest number
 of passengers which results in a flight of such carrier being canceled,
 such cancellation shall, for purposes of this section, be treated as a
 cancellation for a safety-related reason.
 `(c) COMPENSATION OF PASSENGERS- Any air carrier who cancels any flight
 of scheduled air transportation in violation of subsection (b) shall
 compensate any person holding an airline ticket for such flight in the
 same manner and to the same extent as such carrier would be required to
 compensate such person under part 250 of title 14 of the Code of Federal
 Regulations, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this title,
 if such person were bumped from such flight.
`SEC. 1706. FILING OF COMPLAINTS WITH DOT.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment
 of this title, the Secretary shall issue regulations to enable passengers
 of air carriers to file in an easier and more expeditious manner complaints
 relating to air carrier service with the Department of Transportation. Such
 regulations shall include either of the following requirements:
 `(1) That the Department of Transportation establish a toll-free telephone
 system for filing such complaints, including the printing of the toll-free
 telephone number or numbers on airline tickets.
 `(2) That a postcard addressed to the office of the Department of
 Transportation in the District of Columbia which handles complaints
 of passengers of air carriers be given to each passenger purchasing an
 airline ticket.
 `(b) AIRPORT OFFICES OF DOT-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary shall establish, at hub airports, offices
 of the Department of Transportation for receiving complaints described
 in subsection (a), monitoring air carrier passenger service performance,
 ensuring that air carriers are properly reporting information to the
 Department, and providing assistance to passengers of air carriers.
 `(2) FIRST-YEAR STANDARD- Not later than 1 year after the date of the
 enactment of this title, the Secretary shall have established at least 4
 of the offices described in paragraph (1).
`SEC. 1707. COMPARATIVE AIR CARRIER SERVICE.
 `Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Secretary shall develop and implement a system for ranking covered air
 carriers on the basis of quality of services that such carriers provide. The
 quality of such services shall be derived by using information relating
 to on-time performance, canceled flights, missed connections, mishandled
 baggage, bumping, and passenger complaints reported to the Department
 of Transportation by air carriers. Such system must provide for the
 quarterly publishing by the Department of Transportation of the ranking
 of air carriers.
`SEC. 1708. BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION.
 `If an air carrier becomes a debtor in a case under title 11, United States
 Code, and is not providing air transportation of passengers between 2 points,
 covered air carriers providing air transportation of passengers between such
 points must provide, on a space available basis, such air transportation
 for persons holding airline tickets sold by the debtor air carrier or an
 agent thereof for such air transportation. Any such transportation shall
 be provided at no additional charge.
`SEC. 1709. ADVERTISING REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) FARES OF LIMITED AVAILABILITY- An air carrier may advertise a fare for
 air transportation between any 2 points, or other promotion with respect
 to such transportation, which is not available with respect to any flight
 operated by the carrier between such points only if the advertisement
 states that the fare or promotion is not available with respect to certain
 flights operated by the carrier.
 `(b) FARES TO WHICH RESTRICTIONS APPLY- An air carrier may advertise a
 fare for air transportation between any 2 points, or other promotion with
 respect to such transportation, to which any restriction (including a
 restriction pertaining to advance purchase of tickets, refundability of
 money, or minimum stay requirements) applies only if the advertisement
 states that such restriction exists and applies to the fare or promotion.
`SEC. 1710. FREQUENT FLYER PROGRAMS.
 `Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding--
 `(1) to consider methods of ensuring that each air carrier makes enough
 seats available for persons redeeming frequent flyer awards to meet
 anticipated demand; and
 `(2) to consider whether or not frequent flyer mileage obtained under a
 frequent flyer program of a covered air carrier should be transferable to a
 frequent flyer program of another covered air carrier or from 1 passenger
 to another passenger as a means of reducing the anticompetitive effects
 of such programs.
`SEC. 1711. TRANSFERABILITY OF NONREFUNDABLE TICKETS.
 `A covered air carrier shall permit the transfer from 1 passenger to
 another of--
 `(1) nonrefundable airline tickets, and
 `(2) airline tickets with a cancellation penalty,
purchased after the date of the enactment of this title for interstate or
overseas air transportation to be provided by the carrier.
`SEC. 1712. ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- In accordance with the provisions of the Federal
 Advisory Committee Act, the Secretary shall establish an advisory committee
 to advise the Secretary on issues relating to air carrier practices,
 rights of passengers of air carriers, complaints of such passengers,
 reporting of air carriers to the Department of Transportation regarding
 passenger services, reservations for air transportation, ticketing of air
 carrier passengers, bumping, flight delays and cancellations, air carrier
 baggage handling, frequent flyer programs, and other matters relating to
 air carrier passenger services.
 `(b) MEMBERSHIP- The members of the advisory committee established under
 this section shall be appointed by the Secretary and shall consist of
 representatives from air carrier passenger organizations, representatives of
 major and regional commercial air carriers, representatives of airports,
 representatives of travel agencies, and representatives of other air
 carrier-related organizations.
 `(c) WEIGHT TO BE GIVEN TO RECOMMENDATIONS- In exercising the duties and
 powers of the Secretary with regard to air carrier passenger protection
 issues, the Secretary shall give substantial weight to the views and
 recommendations of the advisory committee established under this section.
 `(d) DURATION OF COMMITTEE- Notwithstanding section 14(a)(2) of the Federal
 Advisory Committee Act, the advisory committee established under this
 section shall continue in existence until terminated by law.
`SEC. 1713. DEFINITIONS.
 `For the purposes of this title, the following definitions apply:
 `(1) AIRLINE TICKET- The term `airline ticket' means any written instrument
 that embodies a contract of carriage between an air carrier and a passenger
 thereof for air transportation.
 `(2) BUMPING- A person is bumped from a flight if such person holds a
 confirmed reservation for a seat for the flight and is not allowed to
 board the aircraft solely on the grounds that there were more reservations
 confirmed for the flight than seats available on the flight.
 `(3) COVERED AIR CARRIER- The term `covered air carrier' means an air
 carrier which, in the most recent calendar year for which data is available,
 accounted for at least 1 percent of the scheduled passenger revenues
 derived from interstate and overseas air transportation in such year.
 `(4) CODE SHARING PARTNER- The term `code sharing partner' means an air
 carrier (other than a covered air carrier) who enters into an agreement
 with a covered air carrier to operate under or use a single air carrier
 designator code to provide interstate or overseas air transportation.
 `(5) HUB AIRPORT- The term `hub airport' means an airport at which an air
 carrier has 75 or more flights per day scheduled for departure. For purposes
 of this paragraph, a flight scheduled by a code sharing partner of an air
 carrier shall be considered to be a flight scheduled by the carrier.
 `(6) FLIGHT- the term `flight' means any nonstop or single plane
 transportation between two points provided by an air carrier.
 `(7) PEAK HOUR FOR AIR TRAFFIC AT AN AIRPORT- The term `peak hour for air
 traffic at an airport' has such meaning as the Secretary shall determine
 by regulation.
 `(8) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents
 contained in the first section of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is
 amended by adding at the end the following:
`Title XVII--Airline Passenger Protection
`Sec. 1701. Missed connections.
`Sec. 1702. Agreements between hub airports and air carriers.
`Sec. 1703. Late arrivals.
`Sec. 1704. Baggage.
`Sec. 1705. Cancellations.
`Sec. 1706. Filing of complaints with DOT.
`Sec. 1707. Comparative air carrier service.
`Sec. 1708. Bankruptcy protection.
`Sec. 1709. Advertising requirements.
`Sec. 1710. Frequent flyer programs.
`Sec. 1711. Transferability of nonrefundable tickets.
`Sec. 1712. Advisory committee.
`Sec. 1713. Definitions.
SEC. 3. CIVIL PENALTIES.
 (a) AIRLINE PASSENGER PROTECTION VIOLATIONS- Section 901(a)(1) of the
 Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1471(a)(1)) is amended by
 striking `or XII,' and inserting `XII, or XVII (other than sections 1701,
 1703(a), 1704(a), 1704(e), and 1705),'.
 (b) REPORTING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PENALTY- Title IX of such Act (49 U.S.C. App. 1471-1475)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 906. SPECIAL CIVIL PENALTIES.
 `(a) PENALTIES WITH RESPECT TO PERFORMANCE REPORTS-
 `(1) LATE FILINGS- Any person who violates section 1701, 1703(a), 1704(a),
 or 1705(a) of this Act or any rule, regulation, or order issued thereunder
 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each
 such violation.
 `(2) FALSE OR MISLEADING INFORMATION- Any person who submits to the
 Secretary under section 1701, 1703(a), 1704(a), or 1705(a) or any rule,
 regulation, or order issued thereunder information which contains any
 false or misleading statement shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
 to exceed $10,000 for each such statement.
 `(b) PENALTIES FOR ECONOMIC CANCELLATIONS- Any person who violates subsection
 (b) or (c) of section 1705 of this Act or any rule, regulation, or order
 issued thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed
 $100,000 for each such violation.
 `(c) FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN DETERMINING AMOUNT- In determining the amount of
 a civil penalty under this section, the Secretary shall take into account
 the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation committed
 and, with respect to the person found to have committed such violation,
 the degree of culpability, any history of prior offenses, ability to pay,
 effect on ability to continue to do business, and such other matters as
 justice may require.
 `(d) COMPROMISE- Any civil penalty under this section may be compromised
 by the Secretary.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- That portion of the table of contents in the
 first section of such Act which appears under the center heading
`Title IX--Penalties'
is amended by inserting after
`Sec. 905. Civil penalty assessment demonstration program.'
the following:
`Sec. 906. Special civil penalties.
`(a) Penalties with respect to performance reports.
`(b) Penalties for economic cancellations.
`(c) Factors to consider in determining amount.
`(d) Compromise.'.
SEC. 4. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 Section 902(a) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1472(a))
 is amended by striking `and XII' and inserting `XII, and XVII'.
SEC. 5. ELIMINATION OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF COMPUTER RESERVATION
SYSTEMS.
 (a) FINAL RULE- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue a final regulation
 to eliminate the anti-competitive effects of computer reservation systems.
 (b) ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED- In issuing a regulation under subsection (a),
 the Secretary shall consider the following issues (among others):
 (1) Liquidated damages to an owner of a computer reservation system for
 breach or termination of a contract between the owner and a ticket agent
 for use of computer reservation system services.
 (2) Extension of a contract described in paragraph (1) as a condition for
 the provision of additional equipment or services under the contract.
 (3) Duration of a contract described in paragraph (1).
 (4) Minimum use by a ticket agent of a computer reservation system under
 a contract described in paragraph (1).
 (5) Fees charged to air carriers which do not own the computer reservation
 system for reservations made on flights of such carriers through the use
 of such system.
 (6) Expedited payment by the owner of a computer reservation system to air
 carriers for tickets purchased through such system for air transportation
 to be provided by such carriers.
 (c) GAO REPORT- Not later than 180 days after the issuance of a regulation
 under subsection (a), the Comptroller General shall report to Congress on
 the effectiveness of such regulation in eliminating the anti-competitive
 effects of computer reservation systems.
SEC. 6. TRANSFERS OF CERTIFICATES FOR FOREIGN AIR TRANSPORTATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 401(h) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1371(h)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(h) LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFERS OF CERTIFICATES-
 `(1) INTERSTATE AND OVERSEAS AIR TRANSPORTATION- No certificate to provide
 interstate or overseas air transportation may be transferred unless such
 transfer is approved by the Secretary as being consistent with the public
 interest.
 `(2) FOREIGN AIR TRANSPORTATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No certificate to provide service on a route in foreign
 air transportation issued to an air carrier under this section may be
 transferred unless--
 `(i) the air carrier has provided the service for at least 1 year;
 `(ii) the Secretary has provided other air carriers an opportunity to bid
 on providing the service; and
 `(iii) the Secretary determines that such transfer is in the public interest.
 `(B) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In determining whether or not transfer of a
 certificate under this paragraph is in the public interest, the Secretary
 shall consider, among other things, the following factors:
 `(i) The effect of the transfer on the financial viability of each of the
 air carriers involved.
 `(ii) The effect of the transfer on competition in interstate and overseas
 air transportation.
 `(iii) The ability of the carrier to whom the certificate would be
 transferred to compete effectively against foreign air carriers serving
 the route covered by the certificate.
 `(iv) The promotion of entry into air transportation markets by new air
 carriers.
 `(v) The strengthening of smaller air carriers in order to enhance
 competition and inhibit concentration in the air carrier industry.
 `(vi) The quality of service likely to be provided to passengers by the
 carrier to whom the certificate would be transferred as demonstrated by
 information submitted under title XVII of this Act and part 234 of title
 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
 `(C) OTHER WILLING COMPETITIVE CARRIERS- If another air carrier is
 willing to pay a comparable price for a certificate to be transferred
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall select the air carrier to whom
 the certificate should be transferred on the basis of a determination of
 which air carrier would best serve the public interest if the certificate
 was transferred to the carrier. This determination shall be based on the
 factors set forth in subparagraph (B).
 `(D) USE OF PROCEEDS- The Secretary shall take such action as may be
 necessary to ensure that the proceeds of any certificate transferred
 under this paragraph are used to enhance the viability and competitive
 strength of the air carrier receiving such proceeds, including requiring
 the submission to, and approval by, the Secretary of a financial plan for
 use of such proceeds.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO TABLE OF CONTENTS- That portion of the table
 of contents contained in the first section of the Federal Aviation Act of
 1958 relating to section 401 is amended by striking
`(h) Transfer of certificate.'
and inserting
`(h) Limitations on transfers of certificates.'.