[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1681 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

110th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1681

 To provide for a paid family and medical leave insurance program, and 
 for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 June 21, 2007

 Mr. Dodd (for himself and Mr. Stevens) introduced the following bill; 
 which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for a paid family and medical leave insurance program, and 
 for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Family Leave Insurance Act of 
2007''.

SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Since its passage, the Family and Medical Leave Act of 
 1993 (referred to in this section as the ``FMLA'') has assisted 
 millions of employees in balancing the demands of their jobs 
 with their family responsibilities. However, many eligible 
 employees are not able to utilize the benefits of the FMLA 
 because FMLA leave is unpaid. According to a 2000 survey on the 
 FMLA by the Department of Labor, among those employees who need 
 FMLA leave and don't take it, 78 percent don't take it because 
 they can't afford it.
 (2) An analysis of national data from the 2000 FMLA survey 
 by the Center for Women and Work at Rutgers University suggests 
 that employees suffer severe financial hardship in order to be 
 responsible family members and provide minor children and aging 
 parents with the care they need. For example, among employees 
 who needed to care for a seriously ill child--
 (A) 42 percent took time off even though they 
 received no pay while doing so;
 (B) 46 percent received full or partial pay during 
 at least part of the time off (including receiving pay 
 for reasons such as use of vacation time); and
 (C) 12 percent could not take time off to care for 
 the child due to lack of pay.
 (3) Americans who provide direct care for their family 
 members prevent the worsening of illnesses and promote strong 
 recovery. For example, the length of a child's stay in the 
 hospital decreases by 31 percent when parents are able to be 
 present.
 (4) Forty-three percent of private sector employees do not 
 have access to paid sick leave, as reported in the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey in March 2006. Of 
 those employees who do have paid sick leave, many are not able 
 to use their own sick leave to receive payment while caring for 
 family members who are ill.
 (5) Family and medical leave benefits strengthen and 
 support the business sector through health care savings and 
 increased employee retention and productivity.
 (6) Demographic changes over the past few decades have 
 altered the face and needs of the workforce. It is now common 
 for both parents to be in the workforce and for men and women 
 to also serve as the primary caregivers for elderly spouses or 
 parents.
 (7) According to the Bureau of the Census and the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics, 56 percent of women with children under age 1 
 are in the labor force, while 71 percent of all women with 
 dependent children under age 18 are in the labor force.
 (8) Nearly \2/3\ of Americans under the age of 60 expect to 
 be responsible for the care of an elderly relative in the next 
 10 years.

SEC. 3. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--The definitions provided by section 101 of the 
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611), other than the 
definitions of the terms ``eligible employee'' and ``employer'', shall 
apply for purposes of this Act.
 (b) Additional Definitions.--In this Act, the following additional 
definitions shall apply:
 (1) Board of trustees.--The term ``Board of Trustees'' 
 means the Board of Trustees of the Insurance Fund.
 (2) Insurance fund.--The term ``Insurance Fund'' means the 
 Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund established under 
 section 301.
 (3) Managing trustee.--The term ``Managing Trustee'' means 
 the Managing Trustee of the Board of Trustees of the Insurance 
 Fund.

 TITLE I--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE INSURANCE PROGRAM

SEC. 101. PROGRAM DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Eligible employee.--The term ``eligible employee'' 
 means any of the following:
 (A) An employee who--
 (i) is an eligible employee, as defined in 
 section 101(2) of the Family and Medical Leave 
 Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611(2)) but is not an 
 employee of the Federal Government; and
 (ii) earned wages with a covered employer 
 for 12 of the last 18 months, prior to filing 
 an application for leave benefits under this 
 title.
 (B) An employee--
 (i) of a small employer that has elected to 
 participate in the Program under this title in 
 accordance with such regulations as the 
 Secretary shall prescribe;
 (ii) who meets the requirements of 
 subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 101(2) of 
 such Act (29 U.S.C. 2611(2)), but is not an 
 employee of the Federal Government; and
 (iii) earned wages with a covered employer 
 for 12 of the last 18 months, prior to filing 
 an application for leave benefits under this 
 title.
 (C) A self-employed individual who has--
 (i) elected to participate in the Program 
 under this title in accordance with such 
 regulations as the Secretary shall prescribe;
 (ii) self-employment income while a covered 
 employer for 12 of the last 18 months, prior to 
 filing an application for leave benefits under 
 this title; and
 (iii) paid premiums under section 1401(c) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with 
 respect to such self-employment income.
 (2) Employer-related definitions.--
 (A) Covered employer.--The term ``covered 
 employer'' means a person--
 (i) that is--
 (I) an employer;
 (II) a small employer that has 
 elected to participate in the Program 
 under this title in accordance with 
 such regulations as the Secretary shall 
 prescribe; or
 (III) a self-employed individual 
 who has elected to so participate; and
 (ii) that is not a voluntary plan employer.
 (B) Employer.--The term ``employer'' means a person 
 that--
 (i) is an employer, as defined in section 
 101(4) of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 
 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611(4)); but
 (ii) is not an entity of the Federal 
 Government.
 (C) Small employer.--The term ``small employer''--
 (i) means any person engaged in commerce or 
 in any industry or activity affecting commerce 
 who employs not less than 2 and not more than 
 49 employees for each working day during each 
 of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current 
 or preceding calendar year; and
 (ii) includes--
 (I) any person who acts, directly 
 or indirectly, in the interest of an 
 employer described in clause (i) to any 
 of the employees of such employer;
 (II) any successor in interest of 
 an employer described in clause (i); 
 and
 (III) any public agency, as defined 
 in section 3(x) of the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 203(x)) that is an employer described 
 in clause (i) but is not an entity of 
 the Federal Government.
 (D) Voluntary plan employer.--The term ``voluntary 
 plan employer'' means an employer for which the 
 Secretary has approved a voluntary plan under section 
 104 for the period involved.
 (3) Leave benefit.--The term ``leave benefit'' means a 
 family and medical leave insurance benefit described in section 
 103.
 (4) Program.--The term ``Program'' means the Family and 
 Medical Leave Insurance Program established under section 102.
 (5) Voluntary paid benefit.--The term ``voluntary paid 
 benefit'' means a family and medical leave insurance benefit 
 provided under a voluntary plan approved under section 104 for 
 the period involved.

SEC. 102. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.

 (a) Federal Program.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish a 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program. In carrying out the 
Program, the Secretary shall ensure that covered employers provide 
family and medical leave insurance benefits described in section 103 to 
eligible employees. At the direction of the Secretary, the Managing 
Trustee shall pay funds from the Insurance Fund to reimburse the 
covered employers for the leave benefits.
 (b) Employer Participation.--Each covered employer shall 
participate in the Program.

SEC. 103. PROGRAM BENEFITS.

 (a) Entitlement.--Subject to subsections (b), (d), and (e), an 
eligible employee of a covered employer shall be entitled to a family 
and medical leave insurance benefit for a total of 8 workweeks of leave 
taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 or other authority 
during any 12-month period for 1 or more of the following reasons:
 (1) Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the 
 employee and in order to care for such son or daughter.
 (2) Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the 
 employee for adoption or foster care.
 (3) In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or 
 parent, of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or 
 parent has a serious health condition.
 (4) Because of a serious health condition that makes the 
 employee unable to perform the functions of the position of 
 such employee.
 (b) Waiting Period.--During each 12-month period described in 
subsection (a), each eligible employee shall be subject to a waiting 
period of 5 consecutive workdays of leave described in subsection (a) 
(but not more than 7 calendar days), during which a leave benefit shall 
not be paid to the employee. The waiting period shall not reduce the 8 
workweeks of leave benefits available under subsection (a).
 (c) Benefit Amount.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an eligible 
 employee's leave benefit for any workday on which the employee 
 takes leave as described in subsection (a) shall be calculated 
 as--
 (A) in the case of an employee with an annual 
 income of not more than $20,000, an amount equal to 100 
 percent of that employee's daily earnings;
 (B) in the case of an employee with an annual 
 income of more than $20,000 and not more than $30,000, 
 an amount equal to the greater of--
 (i) 75 percent of that employee's daily 
 earnings; or
 (ii) 100 percent of the daily earnings of 
 an employee with an annual income of $20,000;
 (C) in the case of an employee with an annual 
 income of more than $30,000 and not more than $60,000, 
 an amount equal to the greater of--
 (i) 55 percent of that employee's daily 
 earnings; or
 (ii) 75 percent of the daily earnings of an 
 employee with an annual income of $30,000;
 (D) in the case of an employee with an annual 
 income of more than $60,000 and not more than $97,000, 
 an amount equal to the greater of--
 (i) 40 percent of that employee's daily 
 earnings; or
 (ii) 55 percent of the daily earnings of an 
 employee with an annual income of $60,000; and
 (E) in the case of an employee with an annual 
 income of more than $97,000, an amount equal to 40 
 percent of the daily earnings of an employee with an 
 annual income of $97,000.
 (2) Indexing of annual income categories.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall index the 
 annual income amounts specified in paragraph (1) for 
 each calendar year, using the national average wage 
 index, as determined under section 209(k) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 409(k)).
 (B) Publication.--Not later than the November 1 
 preceding each calendar year, the Secretary shall 
 publish in the Federal Register the indexed amount 
 determined under subparagraph (A) for that calendar 
 year.
 (d) Application.--
 (1) In general.--To be qualified to receive a leave benefit 
 under the Program, an eligible employee shall submit an 
 application to the covered employer of the employee at such 
 time, in such manner, and containing the information specified 
 in paragraph (2), as appropriate, and such additional 
 information as the Secretary may by regulation require.
 (2) Certification requirements.--
 (A) In general.--The covered employer shall require 
 that an application submitted under paragraph (1) for a 
 leave benefit related to leave taken for a basis 
 described in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a) 
 contain a certification, submitted in a timely manner, 
 issued by the health care provider of the eligible 
 employee or of the son, daughter, spouse, or parent, as 
 appropriate, and meeting the requirements of subsection 
 (b) of section 103 of the Family and Medical Leave Act 
 of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2613) in connection with such leave.
 (B) Recertification.--In any case in which the 
 covered employer has reason to doubt the validity of 
 the certification provided under subparagraph (A), the 
 covered employer may require, at the expense of the 
 covered employer, that the eligible employee obtain the 
 opinion of a second health care provider designated or 
 approved by the covered employer (subject to subsection 
 (c) of such section 103) concerning the information 
 certified under subparagraph (A). The employee shall 
 submit the opinion as an amendment to the application.
 (C) Resolution.--In any case in which the second 
 opinion described in subparagraph (B) differs from the 
 opinion in the original certification provided under 
 subparagraph (A), the covered employer may require, at 
 the expense of the covered employer, that the employee 
 obtain the opinion of a third health care provider 
 designated or approved jointly by the covered employer 
 and the employee concerning the information certified 
 under subparagraph (A). The opinion of the third health 
 care provider concerning such information shall be 
 considered to be final and shall be binding on the 
 covered employer and the employee. The employee shall 
 submit the opinion as an amendment to the application.
 (e) Payment of Benefits to Eligible Employees.--
 (1) Determination.--The covered employer shall review the 
 application of the eligible employee and determine whether to 
 certify a leave benefit payment for the employee.
 (2) Provision of payment.--If the covered employer 
 determines that the employer will certify the payment, the 
 employer shall provide the payment to the eligible employee. 
 Subject to subsection (d)(2) and paragraph (4), the covered 
 employer shall provide the payment to the employee so as to 
 maintain, as closely as possible, the regular payment schedule 
 used for the employee.
 (3) Review.--Any eligible employee dissatisfied with any 
 initial determination under paragraph (1) shall be entitled 
 to--
 (A) reconsideration of the determination by the 
 covered employer;
 (B) an appeal to the Secretary of the employer's 
 final determination after such reconsideration; and
 (C) judicial review of the Secretary's final 
 decision after that appeal.
 (4) Withholding of certification and payment.--In any case 
 in which reconsideration, an appeal, or a review, relating to a 
 covered employer's determination about certification of a leave 
 benefit payment, is or may be sought under paragraph (3), the 
 covered employer may withhold certification of the payment, and 
 provision of the payment, pending such reconsideration, appeal, 
 or review.
 (5) Other compensation.--Except as otherwise provided in 
 this title, no employee shall be eligible to receive a leave 
 benefit under the Program for any period during which--
 (A) the employee is receiving worker's 
 compensation, or unemployment compensation, in 
 connection with the event for which the employee is 
 taking the leave; or
 (B) the employee is receiving a voluntary paid 
 benefit from an employer under a voluntary plan 
 approved under section 104 for the period.
 (f) Reimbursement to Covered Employers for Benefits.--
 (1) Certification to secretary.--Subject to subsection 
 (e)(4), on the final decision of the covered employer or on the 
 final judgment of a court pursuant to subsection (e)(3) that 
 any eligible employee is entitled to any payment under this 
 section, and not later than 1 year after making the payment to 
 the employee, the covered employer shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application in which the employer--
 (A) certifies the name of the employee, the date on 
 which the payment was made, the amount of the payment, 
 and the address of the employer; and
 (B) requests reimbursement of the payment.
 (2) Review and reimbursement.--
 (A) Review period.--The Secretary shall review the 
 application. Not later than 30 days after receiving the 
 application, the Secretary shall approve or deny the 
 application.
 (B) Reimbursement.--If the Secretary approves the 
 application--
 (i) the Secretary shall certify to the 
 Managing Trustee the name and address of the 
 covered employer, and the amount of the 
 payment; and
 (ii) the Managing Trustee shall immediately 
 reimburse the covered employer by paying the 
 amount certified by the Secretary from the 
 Insurance Fund to the covered employer, subject 
 to paragraph (4).
 (3) Payment from insurance fund.--In making reimbursements 
 for leave benefit payments under this section, the Managing 
 Trustee may only use amounts paid from the Insurance Fund.
 (4) Limitation on payments.--
 (A) In general.--The Managing Trustee shall not pay 
 an amount from the Insurance Fund that is greater than 
 the amount remaining in the Insurance Fund.
 (B) Notice of insufficient funds.--The Managing 
 Trustee shall publish in the Federal Register a notice 
 of insufficient funds when the Managing Trustee 
 determines that insufficient funds remain in the 
 Insurance Fund to reimburse covered employers for leave 
 benefit payments. When such a notice is in effect, the 
 employers shall not be required to pay leave benefits 
 under this section.
 (C) Revocation of notice.--If a notice of 
 insufficient funds is in effect, and the Managing 
 Trustee determines that sufficient funds have been 
 deposited to the Insurance Fund to make such 
 reimbursements, the Managing Trustee shall revoke the 
 notice, by publication in the Federal Register. On 
 revocation of the notice, covered employers shall be 
 required to pay leave benefits under this section 
 (including leave benefits requested by eligible 
 employees for periods when the notice was in effect).
 (5) Finding regarding congressional authority.--Congress 
 finds that Congress has the authority to appropriate funds to 
 the Insurance Fund, including appropriating such funds in 
 periods of national crisis such as a period following a 
 national disaster.

SEC. 104. VOLUNTARY EMPLOYER PLAN.

 (a) In General.--Any employer may submit an application to the 
Secretary for approval of a voluntary plan. The Secretary may require 
the employer to resubmit the plan for approval on a annual basis. 
During a period for which the Secretary has approved a plan, the 
applicant shall provide a voluntary paid benefit under the plan rather 
than participating in the Program.
 (b) Approval.--The Secretary shall approve the voluntary plan of 
the applicant if the Secretary finds each of the following with respect 
to the applicant:
 (1) The rights afforded to the employees covered under the 
 plan are equal to or greater than the rights afforded through 
 the Program.
 (2) The plan has been made available to all of the 
 employees of the applicant employed in the United States or to 
 all employees at any 1 distinct, separate establishment 
 maintained by the applicant in the United States.
 (3) The plan provides for insurance to be issued by an 
 admitted disability insurer approved by the Secretary or 
 equivalent insurance (which may be self-insurance).
 (4) The applicant has consented to the plan and has agreed 
 to make the premium contributions required, if any, and 
 transmit the proceeds to the disability insurer, if any.
 (5) The plan provides for the inclusion of future 
 employees.
 (6)(A) The plan will be in effect for a period of not less 
 than 1 year and, thereafter, continuously unless the Secretary 
 finds that the applicant has given notice of intent to 
 terminate the plan, as described in subparagraph (B), and that 
 the fee described in subparagraph (C) has been paid.
 (B) The notice shall be filed in writing with the Secretary 
 and shall be effective--
 (i) on the anniversary of the effective date of the 
 plan next following the date of the filing of the 
 notice; or
 (ii) if such anniversary would occur less than 30 
 days after the date of the filing of the notice, on the 
 next anniversary of that effective date.
 (C) The applicant shall pay a fee to the Secretary in such 
 amount as the Secretary determines to be adequate to provide 
 leave benefits under this title to all eligible employees of 
 the applicant for a period of at least 4 months, plus an amount 
 to pay administrative costs related to processing and paying 
 such benefits.
 (D) Amounts received by the Secretary under this paragraph 
 shall be deposited in the Insurance Fund.
 (7) The amount of deductions from the wages of an employee 
 that is in effect for the plan shall not be increased on any 
 date other than on the date of an anniversary of the effective 
 date of the plan.
 (c) Orders and Withdrawal of Approval.--If the Secretary finds that 
a voluntary plan employer is not paying voluntary paid benefits 
required under the voluntary plan to the employees under the plan, the 
Secretary may order the employer to make the payments. If the Secretary 
finds that a voluntary plan employer is not complying with the 
provisions of the plan, including by not paying voluntary paid benefits 
required under the plan, the Secretary may revoke the Secretary's 
approval for the plan, and require the employer to participate in the 
Program.

SEC. 105. ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.

 (a) Additional Employer Benefits.--
 (1) Covered employers.--Nothing in this title shall be 
 construed to discourage a covered employer from providing an 
 additional benefit in conjunction with leave described in 
 section 103(a) to an eligible employee, in addition to the 
 leave benefit provided to that employee. The additional 
 employer benefit shall not reduce the amount of the leave 
 benefit that an eligible employee receives under this title.
 (2) Voluntary plan employers.--Nothing in this title shall 
 be construed to discourage a voluntary plan employer from 
 providing an additional benefit in conjunction with leave 
 described in section 103(a) to an employee, in addition to the 
 voluntary paid benefit provided to that employee. The 
 additional employer benefit shall not reduce the amount of the 
 voluntary paid benefit that an employee receives under a 
 voluntary plan described in section 104.
 (b) Collective Bargaining.--
 (1) More protective.--Nothing in this title shall be 
 construed to diminish the obligation of a covered employer or 
 voluntary plan employer to comply with any collective 
 bargaining agreement or any employment benefit program or plan 
 that provides greater paid leave rights to employees than the 
 rights established under this title (including rights 
 established under a plan described in section 104).
 (2) Less protective.--The rights established for employees 
 under this title (including rights established under a plan 
 described in section 104) shall not be diminished by any 
 collective bargaining agreement or any employment benefit 
 program or plan.
 (c) Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that 
Federal law should be enacted to permit a State to continue to 
implement an existing (as of the date of enactment of this Act) paid 
family and medical leave or temporary disability insurance program that 
is determined by the Secretary to provide to employees equal or greater 
rights than the rights established under the Program.

SEC. 106. PROHIBITED ACTS BY EMPLOYER.

 (a) Interference With Rights.--It shall be unlawful for any covered 
employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the 
attempt to exercise, any right provided under this title.
 (b) Discrimination.--It shall be unlawful for any covered employer 
to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual 
for opposing any practice made unlawful by this title.
 (c) Interference With Proceedings or Inquiries.--It shall be 
unlawful for any person to discharge or in any other manner 
discriminate against any individual because such individual--
 (1) has filed any charge, or has instituted or caused to be 
 instituted any proceeding, under or related to this title;
 (2) has given, or is about to give, any information in 
 connection with any inquiry or proceeding relating to any right 
 provided under this title; or
 (3) has testified, or is about to testify, in any inquiry 
 or proceeding relating to any right provided under this title.

SEC. 107. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Action by Employees.--
 (1) Liability.--Any covered employer who violates section 
 106 shall be liable to any eligible employee affected--
 (A) for damages equal to--
 (i) the amount of--
 (I) any wages, salary, employment 
 benefits, or other compensation denied 
 or lost to such employee by reason of 
 the violation; or
 (II) in a case in which wages, 
 salary, employment benefits, or other 
 compensation have not been denied or 
 lost to the employee, any actual 
 monetary losses sustained by the 
 employee as a direct result of the 
 violation, such as the cost of 
 providing care, up to a sum equal to 8 
 weeks of wages or salary for the 
 employee;
 (ii) the interest on the amount described 
 in clause (i) calculated at the prevailing 
 rate; and
 (iii) an additional amount as liquidated 
 damages equal to the sum of the amount 
 described in clause (i) and the interest 
 described in clause (ii), except that if a 
 covered employer who has violated section 106 
 proves to the satisfaction of the court that 
 the act or omission which violated section 106 
 was in good faith and that the employer had 
 reasonable grounds for believing that the act 
 or omission was not a violation of section 106, 
 such court may, in the discretion of the court, 
 reduce the amount of the liability to the 
 amount and interest determined under clauses 
 (i) and (ii), respectively; and
 (B) for such equitable relief as may be 
 appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and 
 promotion.
 (2) Right of action.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), an action to recover the damages or equitable 
 relief prescribed in paragraph (1) may be maintained 
 against any covered employer (including a public 
 agency) in any Federal or State court of competent 
 jurisdiction by any 1 or more employees for and on 
 behalf of--
 (i) the employees; or
 (ii) the employees and other employees 
 similarly situated.
 (B) Limitation.--The right provided by subparagraph 
 (A) to bring an action by or on behalf of any employee 
 shall terminate--
 (i) on the filing of a complaint by the 
 Secretary in an action under subsection (b)(3) 
 in which restraint is sought of any further 
 delay in the payment of the amount described in 
 paragraph (1)(A) to such employee by an 
 employer responsible under paragraph (1) for 
 the payment; or
 (ii) on the filing of a complaint by the 
 Secretary in an action under paragraph (1) or 
 (2) of subsection (b) in which a recovery is 
 sought of the damages described in paragraph 
 (1)(A) owing to an eligible employee by an 
 employer liable under paragraph (1),
 unless the action described in clause (i) or (ii) is 
 dismissed without prejudice on motion of the Secretary.
 (3) Fees and costs.--The court in an action brought under 
 this subsection shall, in addition to any judgment awarded to 
 the plaintiff, allow a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable 
 expert witness fees, and other costs of the action to be paid 
 by the defendant.
 (b) Actions by the Secretary.--
 (1) Administrative action.--The Secretary shall receive, 
 investigate, and attempt to resolve complaints of violations of 
 section 106 in the same manner that the Secretary receives, 
 investigates, and attempts to resolve complaints of violations 
 of sections 6 and 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 
 U.S.C. 206 and 207).
 (2) Civil action.--
 (A) Right of action.--The Secretary may bring an 
 action in any court of competent jurisdiction to 
 recover the damages described in subsection (a)(1)(A).
 (B) Sums recovered.--Any sums recovered by the 
 Secretary pursuant to this paragraph shall be held in a 
 special deposit account and shall be paid, on order of 
 the Secretary, directly to each employee affected. Any 
 such sums not paid to an employee because of inability 
 to do so within a period of 3 years shall be deposited 
 into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous 
 receipts.
 (3) Action for injunction by the secretary.--The district 
 courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause 
 shown, in an action brought by the Secretary--
 (A) to restrain violations of section 106, 
 including the restraint of any withholding of payment 
 of wages, salary, employment benefits, or other 
 compensation, plus interest, found by the court to be 
 due to eligible employees; or
 (B) to award such other equitable relief as may be 
 appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and 
 promotion.
 (4) Solicitor of labor.--The Solicitor of Labor may appear 
 for and represent the Secretary on any litigation brought under 
 this subsection.
 (c) Limitation.--
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action may be 
 brought under subsections (a) or (b) not later than 2 years 
 after the date of the last event constituting the alleged 
 violation for which the action is brought.
 (2) Willful violation.--In the case of such action brought 
 for a willful violation of section 106, such action may be 
 brought within 3 years of the date of the last event 
 constituting the alleged violation for which such action is 
 brought.
 (3) Commencement.--In determining when an action is 
 commenced by the Secretary for the purposes of this subsection, 
 it shall be considered to be commenced on the date when the 
 complaint is filed.
 (d) Investigative Authority.--
 (1) In general.--To ensure compliance with the provisions 
 of this title, or any regulation or order issued under this 
 title, the Secretary shall have, subject to paragraph (3), the 
 investigative authority provided under section 11(a) of the 
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (2) Obligation to keep and preserve records.--Any covered 
 employer shall make, keep, and preserve records pertaining to 
 compliance with this title in accordance with section 11(c) of 
 the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(c)) and in 
 accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary. The 
 Secretary shall have access to the records for purposes of 
 conducting audits.
 (3) Required submissions generally limited to an annual 
 basis.--The Secretary shall not under the authority of this 
 subsection require any covered employer or any plan, fund, or 
 program to submit to the Secretary any books or records more 
 than once during any 12-month period, unless the Secretary has 
 reasonable cause to believe there may exist a violation of this 
 title or any regulation or order issued pursuant to this title, 
 or is investigating a charge pursuant to subsection (b).
 (4) Subpoena power.--For the purposes of any investigation 
 provided for in this section, the Secretary shall have the 
 subpoena authority provided for under section 9 of the Fair 
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).

SEC. 108. PENALTIES.

 (a) Penalties for Submission of False Certifications.--If the 
Secretary finds that any individual submits a false certification of 
the health condition of any person in order to obtain leave benefits 
under this title with the intent to defraud, the Secretary shall assess 
a penalty against the individual in an amount up to 100 percent of the 
benefits paid as a result of the false certification. Penalties 
collected under this subsection shall be deposited in the Insurance 
Fund, notwithstanding the provisions of title 31, United States Code 
and used to reimburse the covered employers involved for the amount of 
the leave benefits.
 (b) Criminal Penalties for False Statements and Solicitations.--
Whoever--
 (1) makes or causes to be made any false statement in 
 support of an application for leave benefits under this title;
 (2) knowingly presents or causes to be presented any false 
 written or oral material statement in support of any claim for 
 leave benefits under this title;
 (3) knowingly solicits, receives, offers, pays, or accepts 
 any rebate, refund, commission, preference, patronage, 
 dividend, discount, or other consideration, whether in the form 
 of money or otherwise, as compensation or inducement for 
 soliciting a claimant to apply for leave benefits under this 
 title, except to the extent authorized by a law of the United 
 States; or
 (4) knowingly assists, abets, solicits, or conspires with 
 any person to engage in an act that is prohibited under 
 paragraph (1), (2), or (3),
shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction shall be fined under 
title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, 
or both.

SEC. 109. EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Authority.--The Secretary shall develop and maintain a program 
of education concerning the rights and leave benefits under this title.
 (b) Notice to Employers.--The Secretary shall provide to each 
covered employer a notice informing employees of the rights and leave 
benefits available under this title. The notice shall be given by every 
covered employer to each employee hired, and to each employee taking 
leave as described in section 103(a).

SEC. 110. TREATMENT OF PAYMENTS AND REIMBURSEMENTS.

 For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986--
 (1) any payment of a leave benefit by any covered employer 
 shall not be deductible; and
 (2) any reimbursement of such payment shall not be included 
 in gross income.

SEC. 111. REGULATIONS.

 The Secretary shall issue regulations to carry out this title.

SEC. 112. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This title shall take effect on January 1, 2008, and shall apply to 
periods of leave that commence on or after January 1, 2009.

 TITLE II--CIVIL SERVICE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE INSURANCE PROGRAM

SEC. 201. PROGRAM DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' means an agency covered 
 under subchapter V of chapter 63 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Agency employee.--The term ``agency employee'' means an 
 employee who--
 (A) meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of 
 section 6381 of title 5, United States Code; and
 (B) has earned wages with an agency for 12 of the 
 last 18 months, prior to filing an application for 
 leave benefits under this title.

SEC. 202. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Office of Personnel Management 
shall establish a Civil Service Family and Medical Leave Insurance 
Program, and shall issue regulations providing for the implementation 
of the program. In issuing the regulations, the Director shall require 
that the Director shall provide, or that the agencies shall provide, 
family and medical leave insurance benefits described in section 103 to 
agency employees. The regulations issued under this subsection shall 
include provisions that are the same as regulations issued by the 
Secretary to implement the statutory provisions of sections 103, 105, 
109, and 110, except insofar as the Director may determine, for good 
cause shown and stated together with the regulations, that a 
modification of the regulations would be more effective for the 
implementation of the rights and protections under those sections. The 
regulations shall provide for appropriate remedies and procedures for 
violations of this title.
 (b) Payment.--At the direction of the Director or the head of an 
agency, as specified in the regulations, the Managing Trustee shall pay 
funds from the Insurance Fund for the leave benefits.

 TITLE III--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE INSURANCE FUND

SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) In General.--There is created in the Treasury of the United 
States a trust fund to be known as the Family and Medical Leave 
Insurance Fund. The Insurance Fund shall consist of such amounts as may 
be deposited in, or appropriated to, such fund as provided in this 
section.
 (b) Appropriations to Insurance Fund.--
 (1) Amounts appropriated.--There is appropriated to the 
 Insurance Fund for fiscal year 2008 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, amounts equivalent to 100 percent of--
 (A) the family and medical leave premiums imposed 
 by sections 3101(c) and 3111(c) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 with respect to wages (as defined in 
 section 3121 of such Code) reported to the Secretary of 
 the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate under subtitle 
 F of such Code after December 31, 2007, as determined 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury by applying the 
 applicable rates of premium payment under such sections 
 to such wages, which wages shall be certified by the 
 Commissioner of Social Security on the basis of the 
 records of wages established and maintained by the 
 Commissioner of Social Security in accordance with such 
 reports; and
 (B) the family and medical leave premiums imposed 
 by section 1401(c) of such Code with respect to self-
 employment income (as defined in section 1402 of such 
 Code) reported to the Secretary of the Treasury or the 
 Secretary's delegate on tax returns under subtitle F of 
 such Code after December 31, 2007, as determined by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury by applying the applicable 
 rate of premium payment under such section 1401(c) to 
 such self-employment income, which self-employment 
 income shall be certified by the Commissioner of Social 
 Security on the basis of the records of self-employment 
 income established and maintained by the Commissioner 
 of Social Security in accordance with such returns.
 (2) Transfers.--Such appropriated amounts shall be 
 transferred from time to time from the general fund of the 
 Treasury to the Insurance Fund. Such amounts shall be 
 determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury of the premiums, specified in paragraph (1), paid to 
 or deposited into the Treasury, and proper adjustments shall be 
 made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior 
 estimates were in excess of or were less than such premiums.
 (3) Investments.--All amounts transferred to the Insurance 
 Fund under paragraph (2) shall be invested by the Managing 
 Trustee referred to in section 302(c) in the same manner and to 
 the same extent as the other assets of the Insurance Fund.

SEC. 302. BOARD OF TRUSTEES.

 (a) Establishment and Membership.--With respect to the Insurance 
Fund, there is established a body to be known as the Board of Trustees 
of the Insurance Fund which shall be composed of the Secretary of the 
Treasury, the Secretary of Labor, the Commissioner of Social Security, 
and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, all ex officio, and of 
two members of the public (both of whom may not be from the same 
political party), who shall be nominated by the President, by and with 
the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (b) Terms and Vacancies.--Members of the Board of Trustees shall 
serve for a period of 4 years. A member of the Board of Trustees 
nominated and confirmed as a member of the public to fill a vacancy 
occurring during a term shall be nominated and confirmed only for the 
remainder of such term. An individual nominated and confirmed as a 
member of the public may serve in such position after the expiration of 
such member's term until the earlier of the date on which the member's 
successor takes office or the date on which a report of the Board is 
first issued under paragraph (2) after the expiration of the member's 
term.
 (c) Managing Trustee and Secretary.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall be the Managing Trustee of the Board of Trustees. The Secretary 
of Labor shall serve as the Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
 (d) Basic Duties of the Board of Trustees.--The Board of Trustees 
shall meet not less frequently than once each calendar year. It shall 
be the duty of the Board of Trustees to--
 (1) hold the Insurance Fund;
 (2) report to Congress not later than April 1 of each 
 year--
 (A) on the operation and status of the Insurance 
 Fund during the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year 
 in which the report is made; and
 (B) on the expected operation and status of the 
 Insurance Fund during the fiscal year in which the 
 report is made and the next 2 fiscal years;
 (3) report immediately to Congress whenever the Board is of 
 the opinion that the amount in the Insurance Fund is unduly 
 small; and
 (4) review the general policies followed in managing the 
 Insurance Fund, and recommend changes in such policies, 
 including necessary changes in the provisions of law that 
 govern the way in which the Insurance Fund is to be managed.
 (e) Requirements Relating to Annual Report.--The report provided 
for in subsection (d)(2) shall include a statement of the assets of, 
and the disbursements made from, the Insurance Fund during the fiscal 
year preceding the fiscal year in which the report is made, an estimate 
of the expected income to, and disbursements to be made from, the 
Insurance Fund during the fiscal year in which the report is made and 
each of the next two fiscal years, and a statement of the actuarial 
status of the Insurance Fund. Such report shall also include an 
actuarial opinion by an appropriate employee of the Department of Labor 
certifying that the techniques and methodologies used for the report 
are generally accepted within the actuarial profession and that the 
assumptions and cost estimates used for the report are reasonable.
 (f) Liability.--A person serving as a member of the Board of 
Trustees shall not be considered to be a fiduciary and shall not be 
personally liable for actions taken in such capacity with respect to 
the Insurance Fund.

SEC. 303. INVESTMENT OF THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE INSURANCE FUND.

 (a) Obligations.--It shall be the duty of the Managing Trustee to 
invest such portion of the Insurance Fund as is not, in the trustee's 
judgment, required to meet current withdrawals. Such investments may be 
made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in 
obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United 
States.
 (b) Acquisition.--The obligations referred to in subsection (a) may 
be acquired--
 (1) on original issue at the issue price; or
 (2) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market 
 price.
 (c) Obligations Issued for Purchase by Fund.--The purposes for 
which obligations of the United States may be issued under chapter 31 
of title 31, United States Code, are extended to authorize the issuance 
at par of public debt obligations for purchase by the Insurance Fund. 
Such obligations issued for purchase by the Insurance Fund shall have 
dates of maturity fixed with due regard for the needs of the Insurance 
Fund. Such obligations shall bear interest at a rate equal to--
 (1) except as provided in paragraph (2), the average market 
 yield (computed by the Managing Trustee on the basis of market 
 quotations as of the end of the calendar month preceding the 
 date of such issue) on all marketable interest-bearing 
 obligations of the United States forming a part of the public 
 debt that are not due or callable until after the expiration of 
 four years from the end of such calendar month; or
 (2) in a case in which such average market yield is not a 
 multiple of 0.1 percent, the multiple of 0.1 percent nearest 
 such market yield.
 (d) Other Obligations.--The Managing Trustee may purchase interest-
bearing obligations of the United States that are not described in 
subsection (c) or obligations guaranteed as to both principal and 
interest by the United States, on original issue or at the market 
price, only in cases in which the trustee determines that the purchase 
of obligations described in this paragraph is in the public interest.
 (e) Disposition and Redemption of Obligations.--Any obligations 
acquired by the Insurance Fund (except public debt obligations issued 
exclusively to the Insurance Fund) may be sold by the Managing Trustee 
at the market price, and such public debt obligations may be redeemed 
at par plus accrued interest.
 (f) Crediting of Interest and Proceeds.--The interest on, and the 
proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the 
Insurance Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Insurance 
Fund.

SEC. 304. PAYMENTS FROM FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE INSURANCE FUND.

 The Managing Trustee shall pay from time to time from the Insurance 
Fund such amounts as the Secretary of Labor certifies are necessary to 
make the payments provided for by section 103, and payments with 
respect to administrative expenses under section 305.

SEC. 305. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.

 (a) Availability of Insurance Fund.--Under regulations that shall 
be prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, funds shall be made available 
from the Insurance Fund in connection with the administration of this 
Act and the administration of related provisions of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 in the same manner and extent as funds are made 
available from the trust funds referred to in section 201(g) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401(g)) in connection with the 
administration of the relevant provisions referred to in such section.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
made available for expenditure such amounts as Congress may determine 
to be appropriate to pay the costs of the part of the administration of 
this Act (including start-up costs, technical assistance, and costs for 
small employers electing to participate in the Family and Medical Leave 
Insurance Program) for which the Secretary of Labor is responsible.
 (c) Gifts and Bequests.--The Managing Trustee may accept on behalf 
of the United States money gifts and bequests made unconditionally to 
the Insurance Fund for the benefit of the Insurance Fund or any 
activity financed through the Insurance Fund and such gifts and 
bequests shall be deposited into the Insurance Fund.
 (d) Processing of Tax Data.--Section 232 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 432) shall apply with respect to this Act, in the same 
manner and to the same extent as such section applies with respect to 
title II of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401 et seq.).

SEC. 306. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.

 (a) Employee Premiums.--Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 (relating to tax on employees) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Family and Medical Leave Premiums.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to the taxes imposed by 
 subsections (a) and (b), there is imposed on the income of 
 every individual a family and medical leave premium equal to 
 the applicable percentage of the wages (as defined in section 
 3121(a)) received by the individual with respect to employment 
 (as defined in section 3121(b)).
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable percentage is--
 ``(A) 0.1 percent with respect to periods of 
 employment by a small employer (as defined in section 
 3(b) of the Family Leave Insurance Act of 2007) 
 electing to participate in the Family and Medical Leave 
 Insurance Program (established under section 102 of 
 such Act); and
 ``(B) 0.2 percent with respect to all other periods 
 of employment.
 ``(3) Exception for certain employment.--Paragraph (1) 
 shall not apply with respect to a period of employment--
 ``(A) by an employer during which the Secretary of 
 Labor determines the employer has in effect a plan 
 which is equivalent to or better than the Family and 
 Medical Leave Insurance Program (established under 
 section 102 of the Family Leave Insurance Act of 2007); 
 or
 ``(B) by a small employer (as so defined) who has 
 not elected to participate in such Program.
 For purposes of the preceding sentence, the Secretary of Labor 
 shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate or 
 necessary, including regulations requiring documentation of 
 employer programs.''.
 (b) Employer Premiums.--Section 3111 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 (relating to tax on employers) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Family and Medical Leave Premiums.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to the excise taxes imposed 
 by subsections (a) and (b), there is imposed on every employer 
 a family and medical leave premium, with respect to having 
 individuals in such employer's employ, equal to the applicable 
 percentage of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid by 
 such employer with respect to employment (as defined in section 
 3121(b)).
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable percentage is--
 ``(A) 0.1 percent with respect to small employers 
 (as defined in section 3(b) of the Family Leave 
 Insurance Act of 2007) electing to participate in the 
 Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program (established 
 under section 102 of such Act); and
 ``(B) 0.2 percent with respect to all other 
 employers.
 ``(3) Exception for certain employers.--Paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply for any period with respect to an employer to whom 
 paragraph (1) of section 3101(c) does not apply by reason of 
 paragraph (3) thereof.''.
 (c) Self-Employed Premiums.--Section 1401 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Family and Medical Leave Premiums.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to the taxes imposed by 
 subsections (a) and (b), there is imposed for each taxable 
 year, on the self-employment income of every individual, a 
 family and medical leave premium equal to 0.2 percent of the 
 amount of the self-employment income for such taxable year.
 ``(2) Exception for certain employers.--Paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply for any period with respect to an employer who has 
 not elected to participate in the Family and Medical Leave 
 Insurance Program (established under section 102 of the Family 
 Leave Insurance Act of 2007).''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments to Social Security Act.--Section 201 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``sections 3101(b) and 3111(b)'' both 
 places it appears in subsection (a)(3) and inserting ``sections 
 3101(b), 3101(c), 3111(b), and 3111(c)'', and
 (2) by striking ``section 1401(b)'' both places it appears 
 in subsection (a)(4) and inserting ``sections 1401(b) and 
 1401(c)''.
 (e) Effective Date.--
 (1) Employment premiums.--The amendments made by 
 subsections (a), (b), and (d)(1) shall apply to wages paid 
 after December 31, 2007.
 (2) Self-employment premiums.--The amendments made by 
 subsections (c) and (d)(2) shall apply to taxable years 
 beginning after December 31, 2007.
 <all>