[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 6637 Introduced in House (IH)]

110th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 6637

To provide additional protections for farmers and ranchers that may be 
 harmed economically by genetically engineered seeds, plants, or 
animals, to ensure fairness for farmers and ranchers in their dealings 
with biotech companies that sell genetically engineered seeds, plants, 
 or animals, to assign liability for injury caused by genetically 
 engineered organisms, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 July 29, 2008

Mr. Kucinich (for himself, Mr. Shays, Ms. Schakowsky, Mr. Grijalva, Ms. 
 Lee, Ms. Linda T. Sanchez of California, Mr. DeFazio, Mr. McDermott, 
 Mr. Stark, and Mr. Hinchey) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Agriculture, and in addition to the 
 Committees on Energy and Commerce and Judiciary, for a period to be 
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration 
 of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee 
 concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To provide additional protections for farmers and ranchers that may be 
 harmed economically by genetically engineered seeds, plants, or 
animals, to ensure fairness for farmers and ranchers in their dealings 
with biotech companies that sell genetically engineered seeds, plants, 
 or animals, to assign liability for injury caused by genetically 
 engineered organisms, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Genetically 
Engineered Technology Farmer Protection Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--GENETICALLY ENGINEERED CROP AND ANIMAL FARMER PROTECTION

Sec. 101. Short title; findings.
Sec. 102. Definitions.
Sec. 103. Information requirements regarding sale of genetically 
 engineered seeds, plants, and animals.
Sec. 104. Contract limitations regarding sale of genetically engineered 
 seeds, plants, and animals.
Sec. 105. Prevention of noncompetitive practices involving technology 
 fees.
Sec. 106. Measures to avoid cross pollination involving genetically 
 engineered seeds or plants.
Sec. 107. Resistance of agricultural pests to certain naturally 
 occurring pesticide; amendment to Federal 
 insecticide, fungicide, and Rodenticide 
 Act.
Sec. 108. Prohibition on labeling certain seeds as non-genetically 
 engineered.
Sec. 109. Prohibition on certain non-fertile plant seeds.
Sec. 110. Prohibition on loan discrimination.
Sec. 111. Civil penalties for violation.
Sec. 112. Citizen suits.
 TITLE II--GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ORGANISM LIABILITY

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Findings.
Sec. 203. Liability.

 TITLE I--GENETICALLY ENGINEERED CROP AND ANIMAL FARMER PROTECTION

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS.

 (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Genetically 
Engineered Crop and Animal Farmer Protection Act''.
 (b) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Agribusiness and biotechnology companies have rapidly 
 consolidated market power at the same time as the average 
 farmer's profits and viability have significantly declined.
 (2) Policies promoted by biotech corporations, such as 
 patenting of seeds, depriving farmers the right to save seed, 
 unreasonable seed contracts, and intrusion into everyday farm 
 operations, have systematically acted to remove basic farmer 
 rights enjoyed since the beginning of agriculture and essential 
 for agricultural sustainability and the survival of family 
 farms.
 (3) The introduction of genetically engineered crops has 
 also created obstacles for farmers, including the loss of 
 markets and increased liability concerns.
 (4) To mitigate the abuses upon farmers, a clear set of 
 farmer rights must be established.

SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Genetically engineered animal.--The term ``genetically 
 engineered animal'' means an animal that contains a genetically 
 engineered material or was produced with a genetically 
 engineered material. An animal shall be considered to contain a 
 genetically engineered material or to have been produced with a 
 genetically engineered material if the animal has been injected 
 or otherwise treated with a genetically engineered material or 
 is the offspring of an animal that has been so injected or 
 treated.
 (2) Genetically engineered plant.--The term ``genetically 
 engineered plant'' means a plant that contains a genetically 
 engineered material or was produced from a genetically 
 engineered seed. A plant shall be considered to contain a 
 genetically engineered material if the plant has been injected 
 or otherwise treated with a genetically engineered material 
 (except that the use of manure as a fertilizer for the plant 
 may not be construed to mean that the plant is produced with a 
 genetically engineered material).
 (3) Genetically engineered seed.--The term ``genetically 
 engineered seed'' means a seed that contains a genetically 
 engineered material or was produced with a genetically 
 engineered material. A seed shall be considered to contain a 
 genetically engineered material or to have been produced with a 
 genetically engineered material if the seed (or the plant from 
 which the seed is derived) has been injected or otherwise 
 treated with a genetically engineered material (except that the 
 use of manure as a fertilizer for the plant may not be 
 construed to mean that any resulting seeds are produced with a 
 genetically engineered material).
 (4) Genetically engineered material.--The term 
 ``genetically engineered material'' means material that has 
 been altered at the molecular or cellular level by means that 
 are not possible under natural conditions or processes 
 (including recombinant DNA and RNA techniques, cell fusion, 
 microencapsulation, macroencapsulation, gene deletion and 
 doubling, introducing a foreign gene, and changing the 
 positions of genes), other than a means consisting exclusively 
 of breeding, conjugation, fermentation, hybridization, in vitro 
 fertilization, tissue culture, or mutagenesis.
 (5) Biotech company.--The term ``biotech company'' means a 
 person engaged in the business of creating genetically 
 engineered material or obtaining the patent rights to that 
 material for the purposes of commercial exploitation of that 
 material. The term does not include the employees of such 
 person.
 (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.

SEC. 103. INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS REGARDING SALE OF GENETICALLY 
 ENGINEERED SEEDS, PLANTS, AND ANIMALS.

 (a) Full Disclosure of Risks of Use.--A biotech company that sells 
any genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or 
genetically engineered seed that the biotech company knows, or has 
reason to believe, will be used by the purchaser in the United States 
to produce an agricultural commodity shall provide written notice to 
the purchaser that fully and clearly discloses the possible legal and 
environmental risks that the use of the genetically engineered animal, 
genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed may pose 
to the purchaser.
 (b) Effect of Disclosure.--The provision of written notice under 
subsection (a) regarding the risks of using a genetically engineered 
animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed 
does not relieve the biotech company from any liability that may result 
from the release of genetically engineered material into the 
environment. The receipt of the written notice by the purchaser shall 
not be construed to create any liability on the purchaser.
 (c) Rulemaking.--The Secretary shall issue such rules as may be 
necessary to implement and enforce this section.

SEC. 104. CONTRACT LIMITATIONS REGARDING SALE OF GENETICALLY ENGINEERED 
 SEEDS, PLANTS, AND ANIMALS.

 (a) Certain Contract Terms and Limitations Unenforceable.--If a 
contract for the sale of a genetically engineered animal, genetically 
engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed to a purchaser for use 
in agricultural production contains a provision described in subsection 
(b), the provision is hereby declared to be against public policy and 
therefore void and unenforceable as a matter of law.
 (b) Prohibited Terms and Limitations.--The provisions referred to 
in subsection (a) are any of the following:
 (1) In the case of a sale of genetically engineered plants 
 or genetically engineered seeds, a provision that prohibits the 
 purchaser from retaining a portion of the harvested crop for 
 future crop planting by the purchaser or that charges a fee to 
 retain a portion of the harvested crop for future crop 
 planting.
 (2) A provision that limits the ability of the purchaser to 
 recover damages from the biotech company for a genetically 
 engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically 
 engineered seed that does not perform as advertised.
 (3) A provision that shifts any liability from the biotech 
 company to the purchaser.
 (4) A provision that requires the purchaser to grant agents 
 of the seller access to the purchaser's property.
 (5) A provision that mandates arbitration of any disputes 
 between the biotech company and the purchaser.
 (6) A provision that mandates any court of jurisdiction for 
 settlement of disputes.
 (7) A provision that mandates that the purchaser pay 
 liquidated damages of more than a technology fee or similar fee 
 itself, plus interest.
 (8) A provision that imposes any unfair condition upon the 
 purchaser, as determined by the Secretary or a court.

SEC. 105. PREVENTION OF NONCOMPETITIVE PRACTICES INVOLVING TECHNOLOGY 
 FEES.

 (a) Disclosure of Technology Fees.--Any biotech company that sells 
a genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or 
genetically engineered seed for use in agricultural production in the 
United States shall notify the Secretary, at such times and in such 
manner as the Secretary shall require, of--
 (1) the nature and amount of any technology, nonproduction, 
 royalty, or similar fees collected by the biotech company in 
 each country where that genetically engineered animal, plant, 
 or seed is marketed, and
 (2) in the case of genetically engineered plants or 
 genetically engineered seeds, the prices charged by the biotech 
 company for herbicides associated with that genetically 
 engineered seed or plant.
 (b) Prohibition on Noncompetitive Practices.--A biotech company 
that sells a genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered 
plant, or genetically engineered seed for use in agricultural 
production in the United States may not charge higher technology, 
nonproduction, royalty, or similar fees for sales of the genetically 
engineered animal, plant, or seed in the United States than in other 
countries in which the genetically engineered animal, plant, or seed is 
sold.
 (c) Publication of Data.--The Secretary shall publish all data 
received under subsection (a)(1) every six months in an electronic 
format and in the Federal Register.

SEC. 106. MEASURES TO AVOID CROSS POLLINATION INVOLVING GENETICALLY 
 ENGINEERED SEEDS OR PLANTS.

 (a) Designation of Predominately Outcrossed Pollinators.--The 
Secretary shall determine which plants are predominately outcrossed 
pollinators and make such information available to persons who sell or 
purchase such plants or the seeds of such plants for use in 
agricultural production.
 (b) Minimizing the Negative Effects of Predominately Outcrossed 
Pollinators.--The Secretary shall issue rules to require effective 
mitigation strategies for any crop that is a predominately outcrossed 
pollinator.
 (c) Providing Instructions To Avoid Cross Pollination.--The seller 
of any genetically engineered plant or genetically engineered seed that 
has been identified as a predominately outcrossed pollinator shall 
provide written instructions to each purchaser of the plants or seeds 
regarding how to plant and cultivate the plants or seeds so as to avoid 
cross contamination.

SEC. 107. RESISTANCE OF AGRICULTURAL PESTS TO CERTAIN NATURALLY 
 OCCURRING PESTICIDE; AMENDMENT TO FEDERAL INSECTICIDE, 
 FUNGICIDE, AND RODENTICIDE ACT.

 Section 3(c) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide 
Act (7 U.S.C. 136a(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
subsection:
 ``(11) Bt resistance regarding plant-incorporated 
 pesticides.--
 ``(A) Not later than six months after the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph, the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the advisory panel established under 
 subparagraph (D), shall establish the best achievable 
 resistance plan for plant-incorporated pesticides 
 engineered to include toxins derived from the bacterium 
 Bacillus thuringiensis (which bacterium is referred to 
 in this paragraph as `Bt').
 ``(B) Once the best achievable resistance plan is 
 established under subparagraph (A), the Administrator 
 shall revoke all Bt registrations that are not in 
 compliance with the plan and may not issue new 
 registrations unless the applicant has achieved the 
 plan.
 ``(C) If pursuant to subparagraph (A) the 
 Administrator determines that plant-incorporated Bt 
 pesticides may have an unreasonable adverse effect on 
 the environment by facilitating the development of Bt-
 toxin resistance in pests, or that the review has been 
 inconclusive on whether the pesticide facilitates such 
 resistance, the Administrator shall take such actions 
 under this Act as may be necessary to significantly 
 reduce the extent to which such pesticides are used.
 ``(D) Before establishing the best achievable 
 resistance plan under subparagraph (A), the 
 Administrator shall, in accordance with procedures 
 under section 25(d), establish an advisory panel to 
 provide advice to the Administrator on scientific 
 matters involved in the review.
 ``(E) For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
 `plant-incorporated Bt pesticide' means a plant-
 incorporated pesticide described in subparagraph 
 (A).''.

SEC. 108. PROHIBITION ON LABELING CERTAIN SEEDS AS NON-GENETICALLY 
 ENGINEERED.

 A seed company or other person may not sell, or offer for sale, 
seeds for planting that are labeled as non-genetically engineered or 
otherwise represented as not containing genetically engineered material 
if the Secretary finds that any sample of the seeds contains 
genetically engineered material.

SEC. 109. PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN NON-FERTILE PLANT SEEDS.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, effective 45 days after 
the date of the enactment of this title, a person may not manufacture, 
distribute, sell, plant, or otherwise use any seed that is genetically 
engineered to produce a plant whose seeds are not fertile or are 
rendered infertile by the application of an external chemical inducer.

SEC. 110. PROHIBITION ON LOAN DISCRIMINATION.

 A financial institution may not discriminate against an 
agricultural producer that refuses to use genetically engineered plants 
or animals or add as condition to a loan the requirement that the 
producer use genetically engineered plants or animals.

SEC. 111. CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

 (a) Authority to Assess Penalties.--The Secretary may assess, by 
written order, a civil penalty against a biotech company or other 
person that violates a provision of this title, including a regulation 
promulgated or order issued under this title. Each violation, and each 
day during which a violation continues, shall be a separate offense.
 (b) Amount and Factors in Assessing Penalties.--The maximum amount 
that may be assessed under this section for a violation may not exceed 
$100,000. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Secretary 
shall take into account--
 (1) the gravity of the violation;
 (2) the degree of culpability;
 (3) the size and type of the business; and
 (4) any history of prior offenses under this title or other 
 laws administered by the Secretary.
 (c) Notice and Opportunity for Hearing.--The Secretary shall not 
assess a civil penalty under this section against a biotech company or 
other person unless the company is given notice and opportunity for a 
hearing on the record before the Secretary in accordance with sections 
554 and 556 of title 5, United States Code.
 (d) Judicial Review.--(1) An order assessing a civil penalty 
against a person under subsection (a) may be reviewed only in 
accordance with this subsection. The order shall be final and 
conclusive unless the person--
 (A) not later than 30 days after the effective date of the 
 order, files a petition for judicial review in the United 
 States court of appeals for the circuit in which the person 
 resides or has its principal place of business or in the United 
 States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia; and
 (B) simultaneously sends a copy of the petition by 
 certified mail to the Secretary.
 (2) The Secretary shall promptly file in the court a certified copy 
of the record on which the violation was found and the civil penalty 
assessed.
 (e) Collection Action for Failure To Pay Assessment.--If a person 
fails to pay a civil penalty after the order assessing the civil 
penalty has become final and unappealable, the Secretary shall refer 
the matter to the Attorney General, who shall bring a civil action to 
recover the amount of the civil penalty in United States district 
court. In the collection action, the validity and appropriateness of 
the order of the Secretary imposing the civil penalty shall not be 
subject to review.

SEC. 112. CITIZEN SUITS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), any person 
may commence a civil action in an appropriate district court of the 
United States against--
 (1) a person who has introduced a genetically engineered 
 organism into the environment without approval under this 
 title;
 (2) the Secretary, where there is alleged a failure of the 
 Secretary to perform any act or duty under this title that is 
 the responsibility of the Secretary and is not discretionary; 
 or
 (3) the head of another Federal agency, if there is alleged 
 a failure of the agency head to perform any act or duty under 
 this title that is the responsibility of the agency head and is 
 not discretionary.
 (b) Relief.--In a civil action under this section, the district 
court involved may, as the case may be--
 (1) enforce the compliance of a person with the applicable 
 provisions referred to in the complaint; or
 (2) order the Secretary or the agency head to perform the 
 act or duty referred to in the complaint.
 (c) Limitations.--
 (1) Notice to secretary.--A civil action may not be 
 commenced under subsection (a)(1) prior to 60 days after the 
 plaintiff has provided to the Secretary notice of the violation 
 involved.
 (2) Relation to actions of secretary.--A civil action may 
 not be commenced under subsection (a)(1) against the Secretary 
 if the Secretary has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a 
 civil or criminal action in a district court of the United 
 States to enforce compliance with the applicable provisions 
 referred to in the complaint.
 (d) Right of Secretary To Intervene.--In any civil action under 
subsection (a)(1), the Secretary , if not a party, may intervene as a 
matter of right.
 (e) Award of Costs; Filing of Bond.--In a civil action under 
subsection (a), the district court involved may award costs of 
litigation (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to 
any party whenever the court determines such an award is appropriate. 
The court may, if a temporary restraining order or preliminary 
injunction is sought, require the filing of a bond or equivalent 
security in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (f) Savings Provision.--This section does not restrict any right 
that a person (or class of persons) may have under any statute or 
common law to seek enforcement of the provisions of this title, or to 
seek any other relief (including relief against the Secretary or the 
head of another Federal agency).

 TITLE II--GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ORGANISM LIABILITY

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Genetically Engineered Organism 
Liability Act of 2007''.

SEC. 202. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds the following:
 (1) The negative consequences of genetically engineered 
 crops may impact farmers who grow these crops, neighbor farmers 
 who do not grow these crops, and consumers.
 (2) Biotech companies are selling a technology that is 
 being commercialized ahead of the new and unknown science of 
 genetic engineering.
 (3) Farmers may suffer from crop failures, neighbor and 
 nearby farmers may suffer from cross pollination, increased 
 insect resistance, and unwanted volunteer genetically 
 engineered plants, and consumers may suffer from health and 
 environmental impacts.
 (4) Therefore, biotech companies should be found liable for 
 the failures of genetically engineered crops when they arise.

SEC. 203. LIABILITY.

 (a) Cause of Action.--A biotech company is liable to any party 
injured by the release of a genetically engineered organism into the 
environment if that injury results from that genetic engineering. The 
prevailing plaintiff in an action under this subsection may recover 
reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation expenses as a part of 
the costs.
 (b) Indemnity.--For the purposes of subsection (a), the term 
``injury'' includes any liability of a person who uses that organism in 
accordance with applicable Federal and other law, if that liability 
arises from that use.
 (c) Not Waivable.--The liability created by subsection (a) may not 
be waived or otherwise avoided by contract.
 (d) Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``biotech 
company'' means a person--
 (1) engaged in the business of genetically engineering an 
 organism; or
 (2) obtaining the patent rights to such an organism for the 
 purposes of commercial exploitation of that organism.
 <all>