[Congressional Bills 118th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4773 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

118th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 4773

 To improve the health of minority individuals, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 25, 2024

 Ms. Hirono (for herself, Mr. Padilla, Mr. Booker, Ms. Warren, Ms. 
 Duckworth, Mr. Warnock, Mr. Cardin, Mr. Welch, and Mr. Blumenthal) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
 Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To improve the health of minority individuals, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Health Equity and Accountability Act 
of 2024''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING

Sec. 1001. Strengthening data collection, improving data analysis, and 
 expanding data reporting.
Sec. 1002. Elimination of prerequisite of direct appropriations for 
 data collection and analysis.
Sec. 1003. Collection of data for the Medicare program.
Sec. 1004. Revision of HIPAA claims standards.
Sec. 1005. National Center for Health Statistics.
Sec. 1006. Disparities data collected by the Federal Government.
Sec. 1007. Data collection and analysis grants to minority-serving 
 institutions.
Sec. 1008. Safety and effectiveness of drugs with respect to racial and 
 ethnic background.
Sec. 1009. Improving health data regarding Native Hawaiians and Pacific 
 Islanders.
Sec. 1010. Clarification of simplified administrative reporting 
 requirement.
Sec. 1011. Data collection regarding pandemic preparedness, testing, 
 infections, and deaths.
Sec. 1012. Commission on Ensuring Data for Health Equity.
Sec. 1013. Task Force on Preventing Bias in AI and Algorithms.
Sec. 1014. Report on the health of the Middle Eastern and North African 
 population.
 TITLE II--CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE HEALTH AND HEALTH 
 CARE

Sec. 2001. Definitions.
Sec. 2002. Improving access to services for individuals with limited 
 English proficiency.
Sec. 2003. Ensuring standards for culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate services in health care.
Sec. 2004. Culturally and linguistically appropriate health care in the 
 Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 2005. Pilot program for improvement and development of State 
 medical interpreting services.
Sec. 2006. Training tomorrow's doctors for culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate care: graduate 
 medical education.
Sec. 2007. Federal reimbursement for culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate services under the Medicare, 
 Medicaid, and State Children's Health 
 Insurance Programs.
Sec. 2008. Increasing understanding of and improving health literacy.
Sec. 2009. Requirements for health programs or activities receiving 
 Federal funds.
Sec. 2010. Report on Federal efforts to provide culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate health care 
 services.
Sec. 2011. English instruction for individuals with limited English 
 proficiency.
Sec. 2012. Implementation.
Sec. 2013. Language access services.
Sec. 2014. Medically underserved populations.
 TITLE III--HEALTH WORKFORCE DIVERSITY

Sec. 3001. Amendment to the Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 3002. Hispanic-serving institutions, historically Black colleges 
 and universities, historically Black 
 professional or graduate institutions, 
 Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institutions, Tribal 
 Colleges, regional community-based 
 organizations, and national minority 
 medical associations.
Sec. 3003. Loan repayment program of Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention.
Sec. 3004. Cooperative agreements for online degree programs at schools 
 of public health and schools of allied 
 health.
Sec. 3005. National Health Care Workforce Commission.
Sec. 3006. Scholarship and fellowship programs.
Sec. 3007. McNair Postbaccalaureate Achievement Program.
Sec. 3008. Rules for determination of full-time equivalent residents 
 for cost-reporting periods.
Sec. 3009. Developing and implementing strategies for local health 
 equity.
Sec. 3010. Health Professions Workforce Fund.
Sec. 3011. Future advancement of academic nursing.
Sec. 3012. Sense of Congress relating to graduate medical education.
Sec. 3013. Career support for skilled, internationally educated health 
 professionals.
Sec. 3014. Study and report on strategies for increasing diversity.
Sec. 3015. Conrad State 30 program; physician retention.
Sec. 3016. Grants for schools of medicine and schools of osteopathic 
 medicine in underserved areas.
 TITLE IV--IMPROVING HEALTH CARE ACCESS AND QUALITY

Sec. 4000. Definition.
 Subtitle A--Reducing Barriers to Accessing Care

Sec. 4001. Protecting protected areas.
Sec. 4002. Repeal of requirement for documentation evidencing 
 citizenship or nationality under the 
 Medicaid program.
Sec. 4003. LIFT the BAR Act.
Sec. 4004. Improve affordability and reduce premium costs of health 
 insurance for consumers.
Sec. 4005. Removing citizenship and immigration barriers to access to 
 affordable health care under the ACA.
Sec. 4006. HEAL for Immigrant Families Act.
Sec. 4007. Study on the uninsured.
Sec. 4008. Medicaid fallback coverage program for low-income adults in 
 non-expansion States.
Sec. 4009. Increase and extension of temporary enhanced FMAP for States 
 which begin to expend amounts for certain 
 mandatory individuals.
 Subtitle B--Improvement of Coverage

Sec. 4101. Medicaid in the territories.
Sec. 4102. Extension of the Supplemental Security Income Program to 
 Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
Sec. 4103. Extension of Medicare secondary payer.
Sec. 4104. Indian defined in title I of the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act.
Sec. 4105. Removing Medicare barrier to health care.
Sec. 4106. Lowering Medicare premiums and prescription drug costs.
Sec. 4107. Reducing cost-sharing, aligning income and resource 
 eligibility tests, simplifying enrollment, 
 and other program improvements for low-
 income beneficiaries.
Sec. 4108. 100 percent FMAP for medical assistance provided by urban 
 Indian organizations.
Sec. 4109. 100 percent FMAP for medical assistance provided to a Native 
 Hawaiian through a federally qualified 
 health center or a Native Hawaiian health 
 care system under the Medicaid program.
Sec. 4110. Repeal of requirement for estate recovery under the Medicaid 
 program.
Sec. 4111. Allow for suspension of Medicare benefits and premium 
 liability for individuals who are 
 incarcerated and provide a special 
 enrollment period around the date of 
 release.
Sec. 4112. Federal employee health benefits plans.
Sec. 4113. Continuation of Medicaid income eligibility standard for 
 pregnant individuals and infants.
 Subtitle C--Expansion of Access

 Part 1--General Provisions

Sec. 4201. Amendment to the Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 4202. Border health grants.
Sec. 4203. Critical access hospital improvements.
Sec. 4204. Medicare remote monitoring pilot projects.
Sec. 4205. Community health center collaborative access expansion.
Sec. 4206. Facilitating the provision of telehealth services across 
 State lines.
Sec. 4207. Scoring of preventive health savings.
Sec. 4208. Sense of Congress on maintenance of effort provisions 
 regarding children's health.
Sec. 4209. Protection of the HHS Offices of Minority Health.
Sec. 4210. Office of Minority Health in Veterans Health Administration 
 of Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 4211. Study of DSH payments to ensure hospital access for low-
 income patients.
Sec. 4212. Reauthorization of programs under the Native Hawaiian Health 
 Care Improvement Act.
 Part 2--Rural

Sec. 4221. Establishment of Rural Community Hospital (RCH) Program.
Sec. 4222. Rural Health Quality Advisory Commission and demonstration 
 projects.
Sec. 4223. Rural health care services.
 Part 3--Indian Communities

Sec. 4231. Assistant Secretary of the Indian Health Service.
Sec. 4232. Extension of full Federal medical assistance percentage to 
 Indian health care providers.
Sec. 4233. Conferring with urban Indian organizations.
 Part 4--Providers

Sec. 4241. Availability of non-English language speaking providers.
Sec. 4242. Access to essential community providers.
Sec. 4243. Provider network adequacy in communities of color.
 Part 5--Dental

Sec. 4251. Improving access to dental care.
Sec. 4252. Oral health literacy and awareness campaign.
Sec. 4253. Ensuring Kids Have Access to Medically Necessary Dental Care 
 Act.
Subtitle D--Advancing Health Equity Through Payment and Delivery Reform

Sec. 4301. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services reporting and 
 value-based programs.
Sec. 4302. Development and testing of disparity reducing delivery and 
 payment models.
Sec. 4303. Diversity in Centers for Medicare and Medicaid consultation.
Sec. 4304. Supporting safety net and community-based providers to 
 compete in value-based payment systems.
Sec. 4305. Improving access to care for Medicare and Medicaid 
 beneficiaries.
 Subtitle E--Health Empowerment Zones

Sec. 4401. Designation of health empowerment zones.
Sec. 4402. Assistance to those seeking designation.
Sec. 4403. Benefits of designation.
Sec. 4404. Definition of Secretary.
Sec. 4405. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle F--Equitable Health Care for All

Sec. 4501. Data collection and reporting.
Sec. 4502. Requiring equitable health care in the hospital value-based 
 purchasing program.
Sec. 4503. Provision of inequitable health care as a basis for 
 permissive exclusion from Medicare and 
 State health care programs.
Sec. 4504. Office for Civil Rights and Health Equity of the Department 
 of Health and Human Services.
Sec. 4505. Prohibiting discrimination in health care.
Sec. 4506. Federal Health Equity Commission.
Sec. 4507. Grants for hospitals to promote equitable health care and 
 outcomes.
 Subtitle G--Investing in Equity

Sec. 4601. Definitions.
Sec. 4602. Strategy to incentivize health equity.
Sec. 4603. Pay for Equity Advisory Council.
 TITLE V--IMPROVING HEALTH OUTCOMES FOR WOMEN, GENDER-DIVERSE PEOPLE, 
 CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES

 Subtitle A--Underserved Communities

Sec. 5001. Grants to promote health for underserved communities.
 Subtitle B--Pregnancy Screening

Sec. 5101. Pregnancy intention screening initiative demonstration 
 program.
Sec. 5102. Birth defects prevention, risk reduction, and awareness.
 Subtitle C--Pregnancy-Related Care

Sec. 5201. Community access, resources, and empowerment for moms.
Sec. 5202. MOMMIES.
Sec. 5203. Social determinants for moms.
Sec. 5204. Kira Johnson Act.
Sec. 5205. Perinatal workforce.
Sec. 5206. Data to Save Moms Act.
Sec. 5207. Moms matter.
Sec. 5208. Justice for Incarcerated Moms.
Sec. 5209. Tech to save moms.
Sec. 5210. IMPACT To Save Moms Act.
Sec. 5211. Protecting moms and babies against climate change.
Sec. 5212. Protect moms from domestic violence.
Sec. 5213. Midwives schools and programs expansion.
Sec. 5214. Gestational diabetes.
Sec. 5215. Consumer education campaign.
Sec. 5216. Bibliographic database of systematic reviews for care of 
 childbearing individuals and newborns.
Sec. 5217. Development of interprofessional maternity care educational 
 models and tools.
Sec. 5218. Dissemination of the quality family planning guidelines.
 Subtitle D--Federal Agency Coordination on Maternal Health

Sec. 5301. Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Promotion of 
 Optimal Maternity Outcomes.
Sec. 5302. Expansion of CDC Prevention Research Centers Program to 
 include Centers on Optimal Maternity 
 Outcomes.
Sec. 5303. Expanding models to be tested by Center for Medicare and 
 Medicaid Innovation to explicitly include 
 maternity care and children's health 
 models.
Sec. 5304. Interagency update to the quality family planning 
 guidelines.
 Subtitle E--Reproductive and Sexual Health

Sec. 5401. Sense of Congress on urgent issues concerning barriers to 
 abortion access and vital solutions.
Sec. 5402. Emergency contraception education and information programs.
Sec. 5403. Duties of pharmacies to ensure provision of FDA-approved 
 contraception.
Sec. 5404. Real Education and Access for Healthy Youth Act.
Sec. 5405. Compassionate assistance for rape emergencies.
Sec. 5406. Menstrual Equity for All Act of 2024.
Sec. 5407. Additional focus area for the Office on Women's Health.
Sec. 5408. Including services furnished by certain students, interns, 
 and residents supervised by certified nurse 
 midwives or certified midwives within 
 inpatient hospital services under Medicare.
Sec. 5409. Grants to professional organizations and minority-serving 
 institutions to increase diversity in 
 maternal, reproductive, and sexual health 
 professionals.
 Subtitle F--Children's Health

Sec. 5501. CARING for Kids Act.
Sec. 5502. End Diaper Need Act of 2024.
Sec. 5503. Decreasing the risk factors for sudden unexpected infant 
 death and sudden unexplained death in 
 childhood.
 Subtitle G--Elder Care

Sec. 5601. Expenses for household and elder care services necessary for 
 gainful employment.
 Subtitle H--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 5701. Clarification supporting permissible use of funds for 
 stillbirth prevention activities.
 TITLE VI--MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS

Sec. 6001. Sense of Congress.
 Subtitle A--Access to Care and Funding Streams

Sec. 6101. Coverage of substance use disorder counselor services and 
 peer support specialist services under part 
 B of the Medicare program.
Sec. 6102. Reauthorization of Minority Fellowship Program.
Sec. 6103. Additional funds for National Institutes of Health.
Sec. 6104. Additional funds for National Institute on Minority Health 
 and Health Disparities.
Sec. 6105. Grants for increasing racial and ethnic minority access to 
 high-quality trauma support services and 
 mental health care.
 Subtitle B--Interprofessional Care

Sec. 6201. Health professions competencies to address racial and ethnic 
 mental health inequities.
Sec. 6202. Interprofessional health care teams for behavioral health 
 care.
Sec. 6203. Integrated Health Care Demonstration Program.
 Subtitle C--Workforce Development

Sec. 6301. Building an effective workforce in mental health.
Sec. 6302. Demonstration program to increase language access at 
 eligible health centers.
Sec. 6303. Health professions competencies to address racial and ethnic 
 minority mental health disparities.
 Subtitle D--Children's Mental Health

Sec. 6401. Grant programs to support pediatric behavioral health care.
Sec. 6402. Increasing Federal investment in pediatric behavioral health 
 services.
Sec. 6403. Mental health in schools.
Sec. 6404. Additional support for youth and young adult mental health 
 service provision.
Sec. 6405. Early intervention and prevention programs for transition-
 age youth.
Sec. 6406. Strategies to increase access to telehealth under Medicaid 
 and Children's Health Insurance Program.
Sec. 6407. Youth and young adult mental health promotion, prevention, 
 intervention, and treatment.
 Subtitle E--Community-Based Care

Sec. 6501. Mental health at the border.
Sec. 6502. Asian American, African American, Native Hawaiian, Pacific 
 Islander, Indigenous, Middle Eastern and 
 North African, and Hispanic and Latino 
 behavioral health outreach and education 
 strategy.
 Subtitle F--Reports

Sec. 6601. Addressing racial and ethnic minority mental health 
 disparities research gaps.
Sec. 6602. Research on adverse health effects associated with 
 interactions with law enforcement.
Sec. 6603. GeoAccess study.
Sec. 6604. Co-occurring conditions.
Sec. 6605. Study and report on the AANHPI youth mental health crisis.
Sec. 6606. Study and report on strategies on the AANHPI behavioral 
 health workforce shortage.
 Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 6701. Strengthening mental health supports for BIPOC communities.
Sec. 6702. STRONG support for children.
Sec. 6703. Improving access to mental health.
Sec. 6704. Program to establish public-private contributions to 
 increase the available workforce of school-
 based mental health service providers.
Sec. 6705. School social workers improving student success.
Sec. 6706. Opioid grants to support caregivers, kinship care families, 
 and kinship caregivers.
Sec. 6707. Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration and 
 subagencies.
 TITLE VII--ADDRESSING HIGH-IMPACT MINORITY DISEASES

 Subtitle A--Cancer

Sec. 7001. Lung cancer mortality reduction.
Sec. 7002. Expansion of prostate cancer research, outreach, screening, 
 testing, access, and treatment 
 effectiveness.
Sec. 7003. Prostate research, imaging, and men's education.
Sec. 7004. Prostate cancer detection research and education.
Sec. 7005. National Prostate Cancer Council.
Sec. 7006. Improved Medicaid coverage for certain breast and cervical 
 cancer patients in the territories.
Sec. 7007. Cancer prevention and treatment demonstration for ethnic and 
 racial minorities.
Sec. 7008. Reducing cancer disparities within Medicare.
 Subtitle B--Viral Hepatitis and Liver Cancer Control and Prevention

Sec. 7101. Biennial assessment of HHS hepatitis B and hepatitis C 
 prevention, education, research, and 
 medical management plan.
Sec. 7102. Liver cancer and disease prevention, awareness, and patient 
 tracking grants.
 Subtitle C--Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Diseases

Sec. 7201. Acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
Subtitle D--Cardiovascular Disease, Chronic Disease, Obesity, and Other 
 Disease Issues

Sec. 7301. Guidelines for disease screening for minority patients.
Sec. 7302. CDC Wisewoman Screening Program.
Sec. 7303. Report on cardiovascular care for women and minorities.
Sec. 7304. GAO report on structural and systemic factors that 
 perpetuate cardiovascular disparities.
Sec. 7305. Coverage of comprehensive tobacco cessation services in 
 Medicaid, CHIP, and private health 
 insurance.
Sec. 7306. Clinical research funding for oral health.
Sec. 7307. Guide on evidence-based strategies for public health 
 department obesity prevention programs.
Sec. 7308. Stephanie Tubbs Jones Uterine Fibroid Research and Education 
 Act.
 Subtitle E--HIV/AIDS

Sec. 7401. Statement of policy.
Sec. 7402. Additional funding for AIDS drug assistance program 
 treatments.
Sec. 7403. Enhancing the national HIV surveillance system.
Sec. 7404. Evidence-based strategies for improving linkage to, and 
 retention in, appropriate care.
Sec. 7405. Improving entry into, and retention in, care and 
 antiretroviral adherence for persons with 
 HIV.
Sec. 7406. Services to reduce HIV/AIDS in racial and ethnic minority 
 communities.
Sec. 7407. Minority AIDS initiative.
Sec. 7408. Health care professionals treating individuals with HIV.
Sec. 7409. HIV/AIDS provider loan repayment program.
Sec. 7410. Dental education loan repayment program.
Sec. 7411. Reducing new HIV infections among injecting drug users.
Sec. 7412. Report on impact of HIV/AIDS in vulnerable populations.
Sec. 7413. National HIV/AIDS observance days.
Sec. 7414. Review of all Federal and State laws, policies, and 
 regulations regarding the criminal 
 prosecution of individuals for HIV-related 
 offenses.
Sec. 7415. Expanding support for condoms in prisons.
Sec. 7416. Automatic reinstatement or enrollment in Medicaid for people 
 who test positive for HIV before reentering 
 communities.
Sec. 7417. Stop HIV in prison.
Sec. 7418. Transfer of funds for implementation of Ending the HIV 
 Epidemic: A Plan for America.
Sec. 7419. PrEP access and coverage.
 Subtitle F--Diabetes

Sec. 7501. Research, treatment, and education.
Sec. 7502. Research, education, and other activities.
Sec. 7503. Programs to educate health providers on the causes and 
 effects of diabetes in minority 
 populations.
Sec. 7504. Research, education, and other activities regarding diabetes 
 in American Indian populations.
Sec. 7505. Updated report on health disparities.
 Subtitle G--Lung Disease

Sec. 7601. Asthma-related activities of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention.
Sec. 7602. Influenza and pneumonia vaccination campaign.
Sec. 7603. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
 Subtitle H--Tuberculosis

Sec. 7701. United States Government assistance to combat tuberculosis.
 Subtitle I--Osteoarthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases

Sec. 7801. Osteoarthritis and other musculoskeletal health-related 
 activities of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention.
Sec. 7802. Grants for comprehensive osteoarthritis and musculoskeletal 
 disease health education within health 
 professions schools.
 Subtitle J--Sleep and Circadian Rhythm Disorders

Sec. 7901. Sleep and circadian rhythm disorders research activities of 
 the National Institutes of Health.
Sec. 7902. Sleep and circadian rhythm health disparities-related 
 activities of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention.
Sec. 7903. Grants for comprehensive sleep and circadian health 
 education within health professions 
 schools.
Sec. 7904. Report on impact of sleep and circadian health disorders in 
 vulnerable and racial/ethnic populations.
 Subtitle K--Kidney Disease Research, Surveillance, Prevention, and 
 Treatment

Sec. 7901A. Kidney disease research in minority populations.
Sec. 7901A-1. Kidney disease action plan.
Sec. 7901A-2. Providing for staff-assisted home dialysis for certain 
 hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis 
 patients.
Sec. 7901A-3. Increasing kidney transplants in minority populations.
Sec. 7901A-4. Environmental and occupational health programs.
Sec. 7901A-5. Understanding the treatment patterns associated with 
 providing care and treatment of kidney 
 failure in minority populations.
Sec. 7901A-6. Encouraging kidney care workforce in underserved areas.
Sec. 7901A-7. The Jack Reynolds Memorial Medigap Expansion Act; Medigap 
 coverage for beneficiaries with end-stage 
 renal disease.
 Subtitle L--Diversity in Clinical Trials

Sec. 7901B. FDA review of clinical trial best practices.
Sec. 7901B-1. Diversifying Investigations Via Equitable Research 
 Studies for Everyone Trials Act.
Sec. 7901B-2. Clinical trial diversity.
Sec. 7901B-3. Patient experience data.
 Subtitle M--Additional Provisions Addressing High-Impact Minority 
 Diseases

Sec. 7901C. Medicare coverage of multi-cancer early detection screening 
 tests.
Sec. 7901C-1. Amputation Reduction and Compassion Act.
Sec. 7901C-2. Eliminating the coinsurance requirement for certain 
 colorectal cancer screening tests furnished 
 under the Medicare program.
Sec. 7901C-3. Expanding the availability of medical nutrition therapy 
 services under the Medicare program.
Sec. 7901C-4. Encouraging the development and use of DISARM 
 antimicrobial drugs.
Sec. 7901C-5. Treat and Reduce Obesity Act.
Sec. 7901C-6. Incentives, improvements, and outreach to increase 
 diversity in Alzheimer's disease research.
 TITLE VIII--HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Sec. 8001. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Reducing Health Disparities Through Health IT

Sec. 8101. HRSA assistance to health centers for promotion of Health 
 IT.
Sec. 8102. Assessment of impact of Health IT on racial and ethnic 
 minority communities; outreach and adoption 
 of Health IT in such communities.
Sec. 8103. Nondiscrimination and health equity in health information 
 technology.
Sec. 8104. Language access in health information technology.
 Subtitle B--Modifications To Achieve Parity in Existing Programs

Sec. 8201. Extending funding to strengthen the Health IT infrastructure 
 in racial and ethnic minority communities.
Sec. 8202. Extending competitive grants for the development of loan 
 programs to facilitate adoption of 
 certified EHR technology by providers 
 serving racial and ethnic minority groups.
Sec. 8203. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle C--Additional Research and Studies

Sec. 8301. Data collection and assessments conducted in coordination 
 with minority-serving institutions.
Sec. 8302. Study of health information technology in medically 
 underserved communities.
Sec. 8303. Assessment of use and misuse of de-identified health data.
 Subtitle D--Closing Gaps in Funding To Adopt Certified EHRs

Sec. 8401. Extending Medicaid EHR incentive payments to rehabilitation 
 facilities, long-term care facilities, and 
 home health agencies.
Sec. 8402. Extending physician assistant eligibility for Medicaid 
 electronic health record incentive 
 payments.
 Subtitle E--Expanding Access to Telehealth Services

Sec. 8501. Removing geographic requirements for telehealth services.
Sec. 8502. Expanding originating sites.
 TITLE IX--ACCOUNTABILITY AND EVALUATION

Sec. 9001. Prohibition on discrimination in Federal assisted health 
 care services and research on the basis of 
 sex (including sexual orientation, gender 
 identity, and pregnancy, including 
 termination of pregnancy), race, color, 
 national origin, marital status, familial 
 status, or disability status.
Sec. 9002. Treatment of Medicare payments under title VI of the Civil 
 Rights Act of 1964.
Sec. 9003. Accountability and transparency within the Department of 
 Health and Human Services.
Sec. 9004. United States Commission on Civil Rights.
Sec. 9005. Sense of Congress concerning full funding of activities to 
 eliminate racial and ethnic health 
 disparities.
Sec. 9006. GAO and NIH reports.
Sec. 9007. Investigative and enforcement actions.
Sec. 9008. Federal Health Equity Commission.
 TITLE X--ADDRESSING SOCIAL DETERMINANTS AND IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL 
 JUSTICE

 Subtitle A--In General

Sec. 10001. Definitions.
Sec. 10002. Health impact assessments.
Sec. 10003. Grant program to conduct environmental health improvement 
 activities and to improve social 
 determinants of health.
Sec. 10004. Additional research on the relationship between the built 
 environment and the health of community 
 residents.
Sec. 10005. Environment and public health restoration.
Sec. 10006. GAO report on health effects of Deepwater Horizon oil rig 
 explosion in the Gulf Coast.
Sec. 10007. Establish an interagency council and grant programs on 
 social determinants of health.
Sec. 10008. Correcting Hurtful and Alienating Names in Government 
 Expression (CHANGE).
Sec. 10009. Andrew Kearse Accountability for Denial of Medical Care.
Sec. 10010. Investing in community healing.
Sec. 10011. Environmental justice mapping and data collection.
Sec. 10012. Antiracism in public health.
Sec. 10013. LGBTQ essential data.
Sec. 10014. Social determinants accelerator.
Sec. 10015. Improving social determinants of health.
Sec. 10016. Notification regarding SNAP for students receiving Federal 
 work-study assistance.
 Subtitle B--Gun Violence

Sec. 10101. Reaffirming research authority of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention.
Sec. 10102. National Violent Death Reporting System.
Sec. 10103. Report on effects of gun violence on public health.
Sec. 10104. Report on effects of gun violence on mental health in 
 minority communities.
 Subtitle C--Nutrition for Women, Children, Families

 Chapter 1--Senior Hunger Prevention

Sec. 10201. Short title.
Sec. 10202. Improving SNAP efficacy.
Sec. 10203. Streamlining nutrition access for older adults and adults 
 with disabilities.
Sec. 10204. Enrollment and outreach pilot program for older adults, 
 kinship families, and adults with 
 disabilities.
Sec. 10205. Food delivery under supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program.
Sec. 10206. Commodity supplemental food program.
Sec. 10207. Seniors farmers' market nutrition program.
Sec. 10208. Infrastructure funding for farmers' markets; local 
 procurement pilot program.
 Chapter 2--Closing the Meal Gap

Sec. 10211. Elimination of time limit.
Sec. 10212. Inclusion of Puerto Rico in supplemental nutritional 
 assistance program.
 Subtitle D--Universal School Meals

Sec. 10301. Short title.
Sec. 10302. Effective date.
 Chapter 1--School Breakfast Program

Sec. 10311. Free school breakfast program.
 Chapter 2--School Lunch Program

Sec. 10321. Apportionment to States.
Sec. 10322. Nutritional and other program requirements.
Sec. 10323. Special assistance program.
Sec. 10324. Price for paid lunch.
Sec. 10325. Summer food service program for children.
Sec. 10326. Summer electronic benefit transfer for children program.
Sec. 10327. Child and adult care food program.
Sec. 10328. Meals and supplements for children in afterschool care.
Sec. 10329. Pilot projects.
Sec. 10330. Fresh fruit and vegetable program.
Sec. 10331. Training, technical assistance, and Food Service Management 
 Institute.
Sec. 10332. Reimbursement of school meal delinquent debt program.
Sec. 10333. Conforming amendments.
 Chapter 3--Elementary and Secondary Education Data

Sec. 10341. Measure of poverty.
 Chapter 4--Amendments to Other Programs and Laws

Sec. 10351. Supplemental nutrition assistance program.
Sec. 10352. Higher Education Act of 1965.
Sec. 10353. Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Sec. 10354. America COMPETES Act.
Sec. 10355. Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act.
Sec. 10356. National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 2002.
Sec. 10357. Child care and development block grant.
Sec. 10358. Children's Health Act of 2000.
Sec. 10359. Juvenile justice and delinquency prevention.

 TITLE I--DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING

SEC. 1001. STRENGTHENING DATA COLLECTION, IMPROVING DATA ANALYSIS, AND 
 EXPANDING DATA REPORTING.

 (a) Amendments to the Public Health Service Act.--
 (1) Purpose.--The purpose of the amendments made by this 
 subsection is to promote culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate data collection, analysis, and reporting by race, 
 ethnicity, sex, primary language, sexual orientation, 
 disability status, gender identity, age, and socioeconomic 
 status in federally supported health programs.
 (2) AHRQ general authorities.--Section 902(a) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (8), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (9), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) cultural and linguistic competence of health care 
 services and of data collection activities described under 
 section 3101.''.
 (3) Definition of racial and ethnic minority group.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1707(g)(1) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)(1)) is amended 
 to read as follows:
 ``(1)(A) The term `racial and ethnic minority group' means 
 a group of individuals who are any of the following:
 ``(i) American Indian or Alaska Native.
 ``(ii) Asian.
 ``(iii) Black or African American.
 ``(iv) Hispanic or Latino.
 ``(v) Middle Eastern or North African.
 ``(vi) Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander.
 ``(B) The terms listed in clauses (i) through (vi) of 
 subparagraph (A) shall have the meanings given such terms for 
 purposes of the Revisions to OMB's Statistical Policy Directive 
 No. 15: Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting 
 Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity (89 Fed. Reg. 22182; March 
 29, 2024).''.
 (B) References.--Except as otherwise specified, any 
 reference to the term ``racial and ethnic minority 
 group'' in any Federal regulation, guidance, order, or 
 document for establishment or implementation of any 
 federally conducted or supported health care or public 
 health program, activity, or survey shall be treated as 
 having the definition given to such term in section 
 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)).
 (C) Similar terminology.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services shall--
 (i) identify all regulations, guidance, 
 orders, and documents of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services for establishment or 
 implementation of a health care or public 
 health program, activity, or survey that use, 
 without a definition, terminology that is 
 similar to the term ``racial and ethnic 
 minority group''; and
 (ii) take such actions as may be necessary 
 to clarify whether the definition of the term 
 ``racial and ethnic minority group'' in section 
 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)(1)), as amended by 
 subparagraph (A), applies to such terminology.
 (4) Office of minority health duties.--Section 1707(b)(6) 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(b)(6)) is 
 amended by inserting ``and, to the extent practicable, 
 subgroups of racial and ethnic minority groups'' after ``the 
 health status of each minority group''.
 (5) Office of the national coordinator for health 
 information technology.--Section 3001 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-11) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (10), by striking ``and'' 
 at the end;
 (ii) in paragraph (11), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) ensures the interoperability of health information 
 systems among federally conducted or supported health care or 
 public health programs, State health agencies, and social 
 service agencies.''; and
 (B) by amending clause (vii) in subsection 
 (c)(3)(A) to read as follows:
 ``(vii) Strategies to enhance the use of 
 health information technology in improving the 
 quality of health care; reducing medical 
 errors; reducing health disparities and 
 ensuring the provision of equitable health 
 services; improving public health; increasing 
 prevention and coordination with community 
 resources; ensuring interoperability among 
 federally conducted or supported health care or 
 public health programs, State health agencies, 
 and social service agencies; and improving the 
 continuity of care among health care 
 settings.''.
 (6) Data collection, analysis, and quality.--Section 3101 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300kk) is amended--
 (A) in subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C), (a)(2)(B), 
 and (a)(2)(E), by striking ``and disability status'' 
 and inserting ``sexual orientation, gender identity, 
 age, disability status, and socioeconomic status'';
 (B) in subsection (a)(1), by amending subparagraph 
 (D) to read as follows:
 ``(D) data for additional population groups if such 
 groups can be aggregated into the data collection 
 standards described under paragraph (2).'';
 (C) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (C)--
 (I) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (II) in clause (ii)--
 (aa) by striking ``is a 
 minor or legally 
 incapacitated'' and inserting 
 ``is a minor, requires 
 assistance with communication 
 in speech or writing, or is 
 legally incapacitated''; and
 (bb) by striking the 
 semicolon at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (III) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(iii) collects data in a manner that is 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate and 
 does not include questions unrelated to, or 
 that could potentially deter, care, such as 
 questions related to immigration status;'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)(iii), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (iii) in subparagraph (E), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(F) use, where practicable, the standards 
 developed by the Health and Medicine Division of the 
 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
 Medicine (formerly known as the `Institute of 
 Medicine') in the 2009 publication titled `Race, 
 Ethnicity, and Language Data: Standardization for 
 Health Care Quality Improvement'.''; and
 (D) in subsection (a)(3), by amending subparagraph 
 (B) to read as follows:
 ``(B) develop interoperability and security systems 
 for data management among federally conducted or 
 supported health care or public health programs, State 
 health agencies, and social service agencies.''.
 (b) Corollary Provisions.--
 (1) Recommendations by the data council.--The Data Council 
 of the Department of Health and Human Services, in consultation 
 with the Director of the National Center for Health Statistics, 
 the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, the Deputy 
 Assistant Secretary for Women's Health, the Administrator of 
 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid, the National Coordinator 
 for Health Information Technology, and other appropriate public 
 and private entities and officials, shall make recommendations 
 to the Secretary of Health and Human Services concerning how 
 to--
 (A) implement the amendments made by this section, 
 while minimizing the cost and administrative burdens of 
 data collection and reporting on all parties, including 
 patients and providers;
 (B) expand awareness among Federal agencies, 
 States, territories, Indian Tribes, counties, 
 municipalities, health providers, health plans, and the 
 general public that data collection, analysis, and 
 reporting by race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, 
 sexual orientation, gender identity, age, socioeconomic 
 status, and disability status is legal and necessary to 
 ensure equity and nondiscrimination in the quality of 
 health care services;
 (C) ensure that future patient record systems 
 follow Federal standards promulgated under the HITECH 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 201 note) for the collection and 
 meaningful use of electronic health data on race, 
 ethnicity, sex, primary language, sexual orientation, 
 gender identity, age, socioeconomic status, and 
 disability status;
 (D) improve health and health care data collection 
 and analysis for more population groups if such groups 
 can be aggregated into minimum race and ethnicity 
 categories, including exploring the feasibility of 
 enhancing collection efforts in States, counties, and 
 municipalities for racial and ethnic groups that 
 comprise a significant proportion of the population of 
 the State, county, or municipality;
 (E) provide researchers with greater access to 
 racial, ethnic, primary language, sex, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, age, socioeconomic 
 status, and disability status data, subject to all 
 applicable privacy and confidentiality requirements, 
 including HIPAA privacy and security law as defined in 
 section 3009(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300jj-19(a));
 (F) ensure the cultural and linguistic competence 
 of entities that receive Federal support to collect and 
 report data pursuant to the amendments made by 
 subsection (a); and
 (G) safeguard and prevent the misuse of data 
 collected under section 3101 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300kk), as amended by subsection 
 (a)(6).
 (2) Rules of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed to--
 (A) permit the use of information collected under 
 this section or any provision amended by this section 
 in a manner that would adversely affect any individual 
 providing any such information; or
 (B) diminish any requirements on health care 
 providers to collect data, including such requirements 
 in effect on or after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (3) Technical assistance for the analysis of health 
 disparity data.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 acting through the Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality, and in coordination with the Assistant 
 Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, the Administrator of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Director of the 
 National Center for Health Statistics, the Director of the 
 National Institutes of Health, and the National Coordinator for 
 Health Information Technology, shall provide technical 
 assistance to agencies of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services in meeting Federal standards for health disparity data 
 collection and for analysis of racial, ethnic, and other 
 disparities in health and health care in programs conducted or 
 supported by such agencies by--
 (A) identifying appropriate quality assurance 
 mechanisms to monitor for health disparities;
 (B) specifying the clinical, diagnostic, or 
 therapeutic measures which should be monitored;
 (C) developing new quality measures relating to 
 racial and ethnic disparities and their overlap with 
 other disparity factors in health and health care;
 (D) identifying the level at which data analysis 
 should be conducted;
 (E) sharing data with external organizations for 
 research and quality improvement purposes; and
 (F) identifying and addressing issues relating to 
 the interoperability of Federal- and State-level health 
 information systems which undermine the ability of 
 health-related programs collecting data under this 
 section to achieve the purpose described in subsection 
 (a)(1).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, subsection (a), and the amendments made by 
 subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated such 
 sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2025 through 
 2029.
 (c) Additional Amendments to the Public Health Service Act.--Title 
XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, as added by titles II and III 
of this Act, is further amended by inserting after subtitle B the 
following:

 ``Subtitle C--Strengthening Data Collection, Improving Data Analysis, 
 and Expanding Data Reporting

``SEC. 3431. ESTABLISHING GRANTS FOR DATA COLLECTION IMPROVEMENT 
 ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and in consultation with 
the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, the Director of the 
National Institutes of Health, the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation, the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, 
and the Director of the National Center for Health Statistics, shall 
establish a technical assistance program under which the Secretary 
provides grants to eligible entities to assist such entities in 
complying with section 3101.
 ``(b) Types of Assistance.--A grant provided under this section may 
be used to--
 ``(1) enhance or upgrade computer technology that will 
 facilitate collection, analysis, and reporting of racial, 
 ethnic, primary language, sexual orientation, sex, gender 
 identity, socioeconomic status, and disability status data;
 ``(2) improve methods for health data collection and 
 analysis, including additional population groups if such groups 
 can be aggregated into the race and ethnicity categories 
 outlined by standards developed under section 3101;
 ``(3) develop mechanisms for submitting collected data 
 subject to any applicable privacy and confidentiality 
 regulations;
 ``(4) develop educational programs to inform health plans, 
 health providers, health-related agencies, and the general 
 public that data collection and reporting by race, ethnicity, 
 primary language, sexual orientation, sex, gender identity, 
 disability status, and socioeconomic status are legal and 
 essential for eliminating health and health care disparities; 
 and
 ``(5) develop educational programs to train health 
 providers, health care organizations, health plans, health-
 related agencies, and frontline health care workers on how to 
 collect and report disaggregated data in a culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate manner.
 ``(c) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible for grants under this 
section, an entity shall be a State, territory, Indian Tribe, 
municipality, county, health provider, health care organization, or 
health plan making a demonstrated effort to bring data collections into 
compliance with section 3101.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3432. OVERSAMPLING OF UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS IN FEDERAL HEALTH 
 SURVEYS.

 ``(a) National Strategy.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the National Center for Health Statistics, and 
 other officials within the Department of Health and Human 
 Services as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall develop 
 and implement a sustainable national strategy for oversampling 
 underrepresented populations within the categories of race, 
 ethnicity, sex, primary language, sexual orientation, 
 disability status, gender identity, and socioeconomic status as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary in Federal health 
 surveys and program data collections. Such national strategy 
 shall include a strategy for oversampling of Middle Easterners 
 and North Africans, Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and 
 Pacific Islanders.
 ``(2) Consultation.--In developing and implementing a 
 national strategy, as described in paragraph (1), not later 
 than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section, 
 the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) consult with representatives of community 
 groups, nonprofit organizations, nongovernmental 
 organizations, and government agencies working with 
 underrepresented populations;
 ``(B) solicit the participation of representatives 
 from other Federal departments and agencies, including 
 subagencies of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services; and
 ``(C) consult on, and use as models, the 2014 
 National Health Interview Survey oversample of Native 
 Hawaiian and Pacific Islander populations, the 2016 
 Behavioral Risk Factor Survey of Health Risk Behaviors 
 Among Arab Adults Within the State of Michigan, and the 
 2017 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
 oversample of American Indian and Alaska Native 
 communities.
 ``(b) Progress Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a 
progress report, which shall include the national strategy required by 
subsection (a)(1).
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (d) Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
submit a report to Congress on the implementation of this section, 
including the amendments made by this section.

SEC. 1002. ELIMINATION OF PREREQUISITE OF DIRECT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 
 DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS.

 Section 3101 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300kk), as 
amended by section 1001(a), is further amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (h); and
 (2) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (h).

SEC. 1003. COLLECTION OF DATA FOR THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.

 Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``collection of data for the medicare program

 ``Sec. 1150D. 
 ``(a) Requirement.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Commissioner of Social Security (in 
 this section referred to as the `Commissioner'), in 
 consultation with the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare 
 & Medicaid Services (in this section referred to as the 
 `Administrator'), shall collect data on the race, ethnicity, 
 sex, primary language, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
 socioeconomic status, and disability status of all applicants 
 for social security benefits under title II or Medicare 
 benefits under title XVIII.
 ``(2) Data collection standards.--
 ``(A) In general.--In collecting data under 
 paragraph (1), the Commissioner shall at least use the 
 standards for data collection developed under section 
 3101 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300kk) 
 or the standards developed by the Office of Management 
 and Budget, whichever is more disaggregated.
 ``(B) No standards available.--In the event there 
 are no standards for the demographic groups listed 
 under paragraph (1), the Commissioner shall consult 
 with stakeholder groups representing the various 
 identities as well as with the Office of Minority 
 Health within the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services to develop appropriate standards.
 ``(3) Data for additional population groups.--Where 
 practicable, the data collected by the Commissioner under 
 paragraph (1) shall include data for additional population 
 groups if such groups can be aggregated into the race and 
 ethnicity categories outlined by the data collection standards 
 described in paragraph (2)(A).
 ``(4) Collection of data for minors and legally 
 incapacitated individuals.--With respect to the collection of 
 the data described in paragraph (1) of applicants who are under 
 18 years of age or otherwise legally incapacitated, the 
 Commissioner shall require that--
 ``(A) such data be collected from the parent or 
 legal guardian of such an applicant; and
 ``(B) the primary language of the parent or legal 
 guardian of such an applicant or recipient be used in 
 collecting the data.
 ``(5) Quality of data.--The Commissioner shall periodically 
 review the quality and completeness of the data collected under 
 paragraph (1) and make adjustments as necessary to improve 
 both.
 ``(6) Transmission of data.--Upon enrollment for Medicare 
 benefits under title XVIII, the Commissioner shall transmit the 
 demographic data of an individual as collected under paragraph 
 (1) to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 ``(7) Analysis and reporting of data.--With respect to the 
 data transmitted under paragraph (6), the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Commissioner, shall--
 ``(A) require that such data be uniformly analyzed 
 and that such analysis be reported at least annually to 
 Congress;
 ``(B) incorporate such data in other analysis and 
 reporting on health disparities and the provision of 
 inequitable health care services by a health care 
 provider, as appropriate;
 ``(C) make such data available to researchers, 
 under the protections outlined in paragraph (8);
 ``(D) provide opportunities to individuals enrolled 
 for Medicare benefits under title XVIII to submit 
 updated data; and
 ``(E) ensure that the provision of assistance or 
 benefits to an applicant is not denied or otherwise 
 adversely affected because of the failure of the 
 applicant to provide any of the data collected under 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(8) Protection of data.--The Commissioner shall ensure 
 (through the promulgation of regulations or otherwise) that all 
 data collected pursuant to paragraph (1) is protected--
 ``(A) under the same privacy protections as the 
 Secretary applies to health data under the regulations 
 promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
 Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
 (relating to the privacy of individually identifiable 
 health information and other protections); and
 ``(B) from all inappropriate internal use by any 
 entity that collects, stores, or receives the data, 
 including use of such data in determinations of 
 eligibility (or continued eligibility) in health plans, 
 and from other inappropriate uses, as defined by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to permit the use of information collected under this section 
in a manner that would adversely affect any individual providing any 
such information.
 ``(c) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may, either directly or 
by grant or contract, provide technical assistance to enable any entity 
to comply with the requirements of this section or with regulations 
implementing this section.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $500,000,000 for fiscal year 
2025 and $100,000,000 for each fiscal year thereafter.''.

SEC. 1004. REVISION OF HIPAA CLAIMS STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall revise 
the regulations promulgated under part C of title XI of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.) (relating to the collection of 
data on demographics in a health-related transaction) to require--
 (1) the use, at a minimum, of standards for data collection 
 on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, sexual orientation, 
 gender identity, age, disability status, and socioeconomic 
 status developed under section 3101 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300kk), as amended by section 
 1001(a)(6); and
 (2) in consultation with the Office of the National 
 Coordinator for Health Information Technology, the designation 
 of the appropriate racial, ethnic, primary language, 
 disability, sex, and other code sets as required for claims and 
 enrollment data.
 (b) Dissemination.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall disseminate the new standards developed under subsection (a) to 
all entities that are subject to the regulations described in such 
subsection and provide technical assistance with respect to the 
collection of the data involved.
 (c) Compliance.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
require that entities comply with the new standards developed under 
subsection (a) not later than 2 years after the final promulgation of 
such standards.

SEC. 1005. NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS.

 Section 306(n) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 242k(n)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``2003'' and inserting 
 ``2025'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``2003'' and inserting ``2025''; and
 (3) in paragraph (3), by striking ``2002'' and inserting 
 ``2025''.

SEC. 1006. DISPARITIES DATA COLLECTED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.

 (a) Repository of Government Data.--The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services, in coordination with the officials referenced in 
subsection (b), shall establish a centralized electronic repository of 
Federal Government data on factors related to the health and well-being 
of the population of the United States.
 (b) Collection; Submission.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of enactment of this Act, and January 31 of each year thereafter, each 
department, agency, and office of the Federal Government that has 
collected data on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, age, disability status, or socioeconomic 
status during the preceding calendar year shall submit such data to the 
repository of Federal Government data established under subsection (a).
 (c) Analysis; Public Availability; Reporting.--Not later than April 
30, 2024, and April 30 of each year thereafter, the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services, acting through the Assistant Secretary for Planning 
and Evaluation, the Assistant Secretary for Health, the Director of the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the Director of the 
National Center for Health Statistics, the Administrator of the Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Director of the National 
Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, and the Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall--
 (1) prepare and make available datasets for public use that 
 relate to disparities in health status, health care access, 
 health care quality, health outcomes, public health, the 
 provision of equitable health services, and other areas of 
 health and well-being by factors that include race, ethnicity, 
 sex, primary language, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
 disability status, age, and socioeconomic status;
 (2) ensure that these datasets are publicly identified on 
 the repository established under subsection (a) as 
 ``disparities'' data; and
 (3) submit a report to the Congress on the availability and 
 use of such data by public stakeholders.

SEC. 1007. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS GRANTS TO MINORITY-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Authority.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and 
Health Disparities and the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
Health, shall award grants to eligible entities to access and analyze 
racial and ethnic data on disparities in health and health care, and 
where possible other data on disparities in health and health care, to 
monitor and report on progress to reduce and eliminate disparities in 
health and health care.
 (b) Eligible Entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' 
means an entity that has an accredited public health, health policy, or 
health services research program and is any of the following:
 (1) A part B institution, as defined in section 322 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061).
 (2) A Hispanic-serving institution, as defined in section 
 502 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1101a).
 (3) A Tribal College or University, as defined in section 
 316 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059c).
 (4) An Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-
 serving institution, as defined in section 371(c) of such Act 
 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(c)).
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 1008. SAFETY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF DRUGS WITH RESPECT TO RACIAL AND 
 ETHNIC BACKGROUND.

 (a) In General.--Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 351 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 505G 
(21 U.S.C. 355h) the following:

``SEC. 505H. SAFETY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF DRUGS WITH RESPECT TO RACIAL 
 AND ETHNIC BACKGROUND.

 ``(a) Preapproval Studies.--If there is evidence of a racial or 
ethnic disparity in safety or effectiveness with respect to a drug or 
biological product, then--
 ``(1)(A) in the case of a drug, the investigations required 
 under section 505(b)(1)(A) shall include adequate and well-
 controlled investigations of the disparity; or
 ``(B) in the case of a biological product, the evidence 
 required under section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act 
 for approval of a biologics license application for the 
 biological product shall include adequate and well-controlled 
 investigations of the disparity; and
 ``(2) if the investigations described in subparagraph (A) 
 or (B) of paragraph (1) confirm that there is such a disparity, 
 the labeling of the drug or biological product shall include 
 appropriate information about the disparity.
 ``(b) Postmarket Studies.--
 ``(1) In general.--If there is evidence of a racial or 
 ethnic disparity in safety or effectiveness with respect to a 
 drug for which there is an approved application under section 
 505 of this Act or of a biological product for which there is 
 an approved license under section 351 of the Public Health 
 Service Act, the Secretary may by order require the holder of 
 the approved application or license to conduct, by a date 
 specified by the Secretary, postmarket studies to investigate 
 the disparity.
 ``(2) Labeling.--If the Secretary determines that the 
 postmarket studies confirm that there is a disparity described 
 in paragraph (1), the labeling of the drug or biological 
 product shall include appropriate information about the 
 disparity.
 ``(3) Study design.--The Secretary may, in an order under 
 paragraph (1), specify all aspects of the design of the 
 postmarket studies required under such paragraph for a drug or 
 biological product, including the number of studies and study 
 participants, and the other demographic characteristics of the 
 study participants.
 ``(4) Modifications of study design.--The Secretary may, by 
 order and as necessary, modify any aspect of the design of a 
 postmarket study required in an order under paragraph (1) after 
 issuing such order.
 ``(5) Study results.--The results from a study required 
 under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary as a 
 supplement to the drug application or biologics license 
 application.
 ``(c) Applications Under Section 505(j).--
 ``(1) In general.--A drug for which an application has been 
 submitted or approved under section 505(j) shall not be 
 considered ineligible for approval under that section or 
 misbranded under section 502 on the basis that the labeling of 
 the drug omits information relating to a disparity on the basis 
 of racial or ethnic background as to the safety or 
 effectiveness of the drug, whether derived from investigations 
 or studies required under this section or derived from other 
 sources, when the omitted information is protected by patent or 
 by exclusivity under section 505(j)(5)(F).
 ``(2) Labeling.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary may require that the labeling of a drug approved 
 under section 505(j) that omits information relating to a 
 disparity on the basis of racial or ethnic background as to the 
 safety or effectiveness of the drug include a statement of any 
 appropriate contraindications, warnings, or precautions related 
 to the disparity that the Secretary considers necessary.
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `evidence of a racial 
or ethnic disparity in safety or effectiveness', with respect to a drug 
or biological product, includes--
 ``(1) evidence that there is a disparity on the basis of 
 racial or ethnic background as to safety or effectiveness of a 
 drug or biological product in the same chemical class as the 
 drug or biological product;
 ``(2) evidence that there is a disparity on the basis of 
 racial or ethnic background in the way the drug or biological 
 product is metabolized; and
 ``(3) other evidence as the Secretary may determine 
 appropriate.''.
 (b) Enforcement.--Section 502 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 352) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(hh) If it is a drug and the holder of the approved application 
under section 505 or license under section 351 of the Public Health 
Service Act for the drug has failed to complete the investigations or 
studies required under section 505H, or comply with any other 
requirement of such section 505H.''.
 (c) Drug Fees.--Section 736(a)(1)(A)(ii) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 379h(a)(1)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting 
after ``are not required'' the following: ``, including postmarket 
studies required under section 505H,''.

SEC. 1009. IMPROVING HEALTH DATA REGARDING NATIVE HAWAIIANS AND PACIFIC 
 ISLANDERS.

 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 317V (42 U.S.C. 247b-24) 
the following:

``SEC. 317W. NATIVE HAWAIIAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER HEALTH DATA.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Insular area.--The term `insular area' means Guam, 
 the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American 
 Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Federated States 
 of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, or the Republic of the 
 Marshall Islands.
 ``(2) Native hawaiians and pacific islanders (nhpi).--The 
 term `Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders' or `NHPI' means 
 people having origins in any of the original peoples of 
 American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, Hawaii, the 
 Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Republic of Palau, or any 
 other Pacific Island.
 ``(3) NHPI stakeholder groups.--The term `NHPI stakeholder 
 group' includes each of the following:
 ``(A) Community group.--A group of NHPI who are 
 organized at the community level, and may include a 
 church group, social service group, national advocacy 
 organization, or cultural group.
 ``(B) Nonprofit, nongovernmental organization.--A 
 group of NHPI with a demonstrated history of addressing 
 NHPI issues, including a NHPI coalition.
 ``(C) Designated organization.--An entity 
 established to represent NHPI populations and which has 
 statutory responsibilities to provide, or has community 
 support for providing, health care.
 ``(D) Government representatives of nhpi 
 populations.--Representatives from Hawaii, American 
 Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the 
 Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall 
 Islands.
 ``(b) Preliminary Health Survey.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the National Center for Health Statistics of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (referred to in this 
 section as `NCHS'), shall conduct a preliminary health survey 
 in order to identify the major areas and regions in the 
 continental United States, Hawaii, American Samoa, the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated 
 States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of Palau, and the 
 Republic of the Marshall Islands in which NHPI people reside.
 ``(2) Contents.--The health survey described in paragraph 
 (1) shall include health data and any other data the Secretary 
 determines to be--
 ``(A) useful in determining health status and 
 health care needs of NHPI populations; or
 ``(B) required for developing or implementing the 
 national strategy under subsection (c).
 ``(3) Methodology.--Methodology for the health survey 
 described in paragraph (1), including plans for designing 
 questions, implementation, sampling, and analysis, shall be 
 developed in consultation with NHPI stakeholder groups.
 ``(4) Timeframe.--The survey required under this subsection 
 shall be completed not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024.
 ``(c) National Strategy.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the NCHS and other agencies within the Department 
 of Health and Human Services as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate, shall develop and implement a sustainable national 
 strategy for identifying and evaluating the health status and 
 health care needs of NHPI populations living in the continental 
 United States, Hawaii, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, 
 Guam, the Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall 
 Islands.
 ``(2) Consultation.--In developing and implementing a 
 national strategy, as described in paragraph (1), not later 
 than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Health Equity 
 and Accountability Act of 2024, the Secretary--
 ``(A) shall consult with representatives of NHPI 
 stakeholder groups; and
 ``(B) may solicit the participation of 
 representatives from other Federal agencies.
 ``(d) Progress Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a progress report, which shall 
include the national strategy described in subsection (c)(1).
 ``(e) Study and Report by the Health and Medicine Division.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into 
 an agreement with the Health and Medicine Division of the 
 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to 
 conduct a study, with input from stakeholders in insular areas, 
 on each of the following:
 ``(A) The standards and definitions of health care 
 applied to health care systems in insular areas and the 
 appropriateness of such standards and definitions.
 ``(B) The status and performance of health care 
 systems in insular areas, evaluated based upon 
 standards and definitions, as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(C) The effectiveness of donor aid in addressing 
 health care needs and priorities in insular areas.
 ``(D) The progress toward implementation of 
 recommendations of the Committee on Health Care 
 Services in the United States--Associated Pacific Basin 
 that are set forth in the 1998 report entitled `Pacific 
 Partnerships for Health: Charting a New Course'.
 ``(2) Report.--An agreement described in paragraph (1) 
 shall require the Health and Medicine Division to submit to the 
 Secretary and to Congress, not later than 2 years after the 
 date of the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability 
 Act of 2024, a report containing a description of the results 
 of the study conducted under paragraph (1), including the 
 conclusions and recommendations of the Health and Medicine 
 Division for each of the items described in subparagraphs (A) 
 through (D) of such paragraph.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 1010. CLARIFICATION OF SIMPLIFIED ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTING 
 REQUIREMENT.

 Section 11(a) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 
2020(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Simplified administrative reporting requirement.--
 With respect to any obligation of a State agency to comply with 
 the notification requirement under paragraph (2) of section 
 421(e) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
 Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1631(e)), notwithstanding 
 the requirement to include in that notification the names of 
 the sponsor and the sponsored alien involved, the State agency 
 shall be considered to have complied with the notification 
 requirement if the State agency submits to the Attorney General 
 a report that includes the aggregate number of exceptions 
 granted by the State agency under paragraph (1) of that 
 section.''.

SEC. 1011. DATA COLLECTION REGARDING PANDEMIC PREPAREDNESS, TESTING, 
 INFECTIONS, AND DEATHS.

 (a) Skilled Nursing Facilities Quality Reporting.--Section 1819 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Requirements Relating to Reporting During Public Health 
Emergencies.--During a public health emergency declared by the 
Secretary pursuant to section 319 of the Public Health Service Act, a 
skilled nursing facility shall, not later than 1 year after the first 
day of such declaration, and monthly thereafter during the application 
of such declaration, submit to the Secretary the following information, 
with respect to such facility and the residents of such facility:
 ``(1) Information described in section 483.80(g)(1) of 
 title 42, Code of Federal Regulations.
 ``(2) The age, race, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, 
 gender identity, socioeconomic status, disability status, and 
 preferred language of the residents of such skilled nursing 
 facility.''.
 (b) Transparency of Demographic Information in Certain Settings.--
 (1) Demographic information.--The Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services shall post the following information with 
 respect to skilled nursing facilities (as defined in section 
 1819(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(a))), 
 congregate care settings (including skilled nursing facilities, 
 assisted living facilities, prisons and jails, residential 
 behavioral health care and psychiatric facilities, and 
 facilities providing services for aging adults and people with 
 disabilities), and nursing facilities (as defined in section 
 1919(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a))) on the Nursing Home 
 Compare website (as described in section 1819(i) of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(i))), or a successor website, aggregated by 
 State:
 (A) The age, race, ethnicity, sex, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, socioeconomic status, 
 disability status, and preferred language of the 
 residents of such skilled nursing facilities, 
 congregate care settings (including skilled nursing 
 facilities, assisted living facilities, prisons and 
 jails, residential behavioral health care and 
 psychiatric facilities, and facilities providing 
 services for aging adults and people with 
 disabilities), and nursing facilities with suspected or 
 confirmed infections, including residents previously 
 treated for COVID-19.
 (B) The age, race, ethnicity, sex, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, socioeconomic status, 
 disability status, and preferred language relating to 
 total deaths and public health emergency-related deaths 
 among residents of such skilled nursing facilities, 
 congregate settings (including skilled nursing 
 facilities, assisted living facilities, prisons and 
 jails, residential behavioral health care and 
 psychiatric facilities, and facilities providing 
 services for aging adults and people with 
 disabilities), and nursing facilities.
 (2) Confidentiality.--Any information reported under this 
 subsection that is made available to the public shall be made 
 so available in a manner that protects the identity of 
 residents of skilled nursing facilities, congregate care 
 settings (including skilled nursing facilities, assisted living 
 facilities, prisons and jails, residential behavioral health 
 care and psychiatric facilities, and facilities providing 
 services for aging adults and people with disabilities), and 
 nursing facilities.
 (3) Implementation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may implement 
 the provisions of this subsection by program instruction or 
 otherwise.
 (c) Equitable Data Collection and Disclosure Regarding Pandemics.--
Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.) 
as amended by section 1003, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 1150E. EQUITABLE DATA COLLECTION AND DISCLOSURE REGARDING 
 PANDEMICS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 60 days after the Secretary 
submits to Congress written notification of the determination that a 
disease or disorder presents a public health emergency or that a public 
health emergency otherwise exists, subject to subsections (b) and (c), 
the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention and the Administrator of the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services and in consultation with the Director of 
the Indian Health Service, shall collect and make publicly available on 
the website of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and update every day during a 
pandemic, data collected across all surveillance systems relating to a 
public health emergency declared under section 319 of the Public Health 
Service Act that is caused by a disease (as determined by the 
Secretary), disaggregated by race, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, age, preferred language, socioeconomic status, 
disability status, and county. Such data shall include the following:
 ``(1) Data relating to all testing for the pathogen or 
 pathogens causing the pandemic, including the number of 
 individuals tested and the number of tests that were positive.
 ``(2) Data relating to treatment for the pathogen causing 
 the pandemic, including hospitalizations and intensive care 
 unit admissions.
 ``(3) Data relating to pandemic outcomes, including total 
 fatalities and case fatality rates (expressed as the proportion 
 of individuals who were infected with the pathogen causing the 
 pandemic and died from the pathogen).
 ``(4) In the case a vaccine is developed in response to a 
 pandemic, data relating to such vaccination, including--
 ``(A) the number of vaccines administered;
 ``(B) the number of vaccinations offered, accepted, 
 and refused;
 ``(C) the most common reasons for refusal; and
 ``(D) the percentage of vaccine doses allocated and 
 administered to each priority group.
 ``(b) Application of Certain Standards With Respect to Data 
Collection.--To the extent practicable, data collected under subsection 
(a) shall follow standards developed by the Department of Health and 
Human Services Office of Minority Health and be collected, analyzed, 
and reported in accordance with the standards promulgated by the 
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation under title XXXI of the 
Public Health Service Act.
 ``(c) Privacy.--In publishing data pursuant to subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall take all necessary steps to protect the privacy of 
individuals whose information is included in such data, including--
 ``(1) complying with privacy protections provided under the 
 regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
 Insurance and Accountability Act of 1996; and
 ``(2) protections from all inappropriate internal use by an 
 entity that collects, stores, or receives the data, including 
 use of such data in determinations of eligibility (or continued 
 eligibility) in health plans, and from inappropriate uses.''.
 (d) Report Requirements Following Public Health Emergencies.--
 (1) Publicly available summary.--Not later than 60 days 
 after the date on which the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services certifies that a public health emergency declared 
 under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act has ended, 
 the Secretary shall make publicly available on the website of 
 the Department of Health and Human Services a summary of the 
 final statistics related to such emergency.
 (2) Report to congress.--Not later than 60 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 certifies that a public health emergency declared under section 
 319 of the Public Health Service Act has ended, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions and the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Ways and 
 Means of the House of Representatives a report--
 (A) describing the testing, hospitalization, 
 mortality rates, vaccination rates, and preferred 
 language of patients associated with the pandemic by 
 race and ethnicity, rural and urban areas (as defined 
 in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(2)(D))), and congregate care settings 
 (including skilled nursing facilities, assisted living 
 facilities, prisons and jails, residential behavioral 
 health care and psychiatric facilities, and facilities 
 providing services for aging adults and people with 
 disabilities) and noncongregate care settings (as such 
 terms are defined by the Secretary); and
 (B) proposing evidenced-based response strategies 
 to safeguard the health of these communities in future 
 pandemics.

SEC. 1012. COMMISSION ON ENSURING DATA FOR HEALTH EQUITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in 
this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a commission, to be 
known as the ``Commission on Ensuring Data for Health Equity'' 
(referred to in this section as the ``Commission'') to provide clear 
and robust guidance to improve the collection, analysis, and use of 
demographic data in responding to future public health emergencies.
 (b) Membership and Chairperson.--
 (1) Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of--
 (A) the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and 
 Response;
 (B) the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention;
 (C) the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health;
 (D) the Commissioner of Food and Drugs;
 (E) the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency;
 (F) the Director of the National Institute on 
 Minority Health and Health Disparities;
 (G) the Director of the Indian Health Service;
 (H) the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services;
 (I) the Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality;
 (J) the Surgeon General;
 (K) the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration;
 (L) the Director of the Office of Minority Health;
 (M) the Director of the Office on Women's Health;
 (N) the Chairperson of the National Council on 
 Disability;
 (O) at least 4 State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal public health officials representing departments 
 of public health, or an Urban Indian health 
 representative, who shall represent jurisdictions from 
 different regions of the United States with relatively 
 high concentrations of historically marginalized 
 populations and rural populations, to be appointed by 
 the Secretary;
 (P) the National Coordinator for Health Information 
 Technology;
 (Q) at least 3 independent individuals with 
 expertise on racially and ethnically diverse 
 representation with knowledge or field experience with 
 community-based participatory research on racial and 
 ethnic disparities in public health, to be appointed by 
 the Secretary; and
 (R) at least 4 individuals with expertise on health 
 equity and demographic data disparities with knowledge 
 of, or field experience in, language, disability 
 status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or 
 socioeconomic status.
 (2) Chairperson.--The Assistant Secretary for Preparedness 
 and Response shall serve as the Chairperson of the Commission.
 (c) Duties.--The Commission shall--
 (1) examine barriers to collecting, analyzing, and using 
 demographic data in public health;
 (2) determine how to best use such data to promote health 
 equity across the United States and reduce racial, Tribal, and 
 other demographic disparities in health outcomes;
 (3)(A) gather available data related to treatment of 
 individuals with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic and 
 other public health emergencies, including access to 
 vaccinations, denial of treatment for preexisting conditions, 
 removal or denial of disability related equipment (including 
 ventilators and continuous positive airway pressure (commonly 
 referred to as ``CPAP'') machines), and data on completion of 
 do-not-resuscitate orders; and
 (B) identify barriers to obtaining accurate and timely data 
 related to treatment of such individuals;
 (4) solicit input from public health officials, community-
 connected organizations, health care providers, State and local 
 agency officials, Tribal officials, and other experts on 
 barriers to, and best practices for, collecting demographic 
 data; and
 (5) recommend policy changes that the data indicates are 
 necessary to reduce demographic disparities in health outcomes.
 (d) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Commission shall submit to Congress, and publish on 
the website of the Department of Health and Human Services, a report 
containing--
 (1) the findings of the Commission pursuant to subsection 
 (c);
 (2) to the extent possible, an analysis of--
 (A) racial and other demographic disparities in 
 COVID-19 mortality, including an analysis of 
 comorbidities and case fatality rates;
 (B) sex, sexual orientation, and gender identity 
 disparities in COVID-19 treatment and mortality; and
 (C) Federal Government policies that disparately 
 exacerbate the COVID-19 impact, and recommendations to 
 improve racial and other demographic disparities in 
 health outcomes;
 (3) an analysis of COVID-19 treatment of individuals with 
 disabilities, including equity of access to treatment and 
 equipment and intersections of disability status with other 
 demographic factors, including race;
 (4) an analysis of what demographic data is currently being 
 collected, the accuracy of that data and any gaps, how this 
 data is currently being used to inform efforts to combat COVID-
 19, and what resources are needed to supplement existing public 
 health data collection; and
 (5) the Commission's recommendations with respect to--
 (A) how to enhance State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal capacity to conduct public health research on 
 COVID-19 and in future public health emergencies, with 
 a focus on expanded capacity to analyze data on 
 disparities correlated with race, ethnicity, income, 
 sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, 
 disability status, specific geographic areas, and other 
 relevant demographic characteristics;
 (B) how to collect, process, and disclose to the 
 public the data described in subparagraph (A) in a way 
 that maintains individual privacy while helping direct 
 the State, local, and Tribal response to public health 
 emergencies;
 (C) how to improve demographic data collection 
 related to COVID-19 and other public health emergencies 
 in the short-term and long-term, including how to 
 continue to grow and value the Tribal sovereignty of 
 data and information concerning urban and rural Tribal 
 communities;
 (D) how to improve transparency and equity of 
 treatment for individuals with disabilities during the 
 COVID-19 public health emergency and future public 
 health emergencies; and
 (E) how to support State, local, and Tribal 
 capacity to eliminate barriers to vaccinations, 
 testing, and treatment during the COVID-19 public 
 health emergency and future public health emergencies.
 (e) Staff of Commission.--
 (1) Additional staff.--The Chairperson of the Commission 
 may appoint and fix the pay of additional staff to the 
 Commission as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
 (2) Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The staff 
 of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the 
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid 
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter 
 III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and 
 General Schedule pay rates.
 (3) Detailees.--Any Federal Government employee may be 
 detailed to the Commission without reimbursement from the 
 Commission, and the detailee shall retain the rights, status, 
 and privileges of his or her regular employment without 
 interruption.
 (f) Coordination With Other Efforts.--The Secretary shall, in 
establishing the Commission under this section, take such steps as may 
be necessary to ensure that the work of the Commission does not overlap 
with, or otherwise duplicate, other Federal Government efforts with 
respect to ensuring health equity in data collection in public health 
emergencies.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 1013. TASK FORCE ON PREVENTING BIAS IN AI AND ALGORITHMS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in 
this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a Task Force to be 
known as the ``Task Force on Preventing AI and Algorithmic Bias in 
Health Care'' (referred to in this section as the ``Task Force'') to 
provide clear and robust guidance on how to ensure that the development 
and integration of artificial intelligence and algorithmic technologies 
within the health care service delivery process does not exacerbate 
health disparities and inequities, expands access to health care 
services, and improves health care delivery.
 (b) Membership and Chairperson.--
 (1) Membership.--The Task Force shall be composed of--
 (A) the Chief Information Officer of the Department 
 of Health and Human Services;
 (B) the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention;
 (C) the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health;
 (D) the Commissioner of Food and Drugs;
 (E) the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency;
 (F) the Director of the National Institute on 
 Minority Health and Health Disparities;
 (G) the Director of the Indian Health Service;
 (H) the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services;
 (I) the Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality;
 (J) the Surgeon General;
 (K) the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration;
 (L) the Director of the Office of Minority Health;
 (M) the Director of the Office on Women's Health;
 (N) the Chairperson of the National Council on 
 Disability;
 (O) the National Coordinator for Health Information 
 Technology;
 (P) at least 4 State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal public health officials representing departments 
 of public health, or an Urban Indian health 
 representative, who shall represent jurisdictions from 
 different regions of the United States with relatively 
 high concentrations of historically marginalized 
 populations, to be appointed by the Secretary;
 (Q) at least 3 independent individuals with 
 expertise on racially and ethnically diverse 
 representation with knowledge or field experience with 
 community-based participatory research on racial and 
 ethnic disparities in public health, to be appointed by 
 the Secretary; and
 (R) at least 4 individuals with expertise on health 
 equity and demographic data disparities with knowledge 
 of, or field experience in, language, disability 
 status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or 
 socioeconomic status.
 (2) Chairperson.--The Chief Information Officer of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services (or the Chief 
 Information Officer's designee) shall serve as the Chairperson 
 of the Task Force.
 (c) Duties.--The Task Force shall--
 (1) examine artificial intelligence and algorithms in the 
 health care service sector, including the health care delivery 
 process relative to the use of autonomous human decision 
 makers;
 (2) identify the risks of health care system utilization of 
 artificial intelligence and algorithms in terms of civil 
 rights, civil liberties, and discriminatory bias in health care 
 access, quality, and outcomes; and
 (3) prepare and submit the report under subsection (d).
 (d) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Task Force shall--
 (1) submit a written report of the findings of the 
 examination under subsection (c)(1) and recommendations to 
 Congress with respect to implementation of artificial 
 intelligence and algorithms in health care delivery and 
 mitigation of the risks associated with that implementation; 
 and
 (2) publish such report on the website of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services.
 (e) Public Comment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall publish in the Federal 
Register a notice providing for a public comment period on the duties 
and activities of the Task Force of not less than 90 days, beginning on 
the date of that publication.
 (f) Staff of Commission.--
 (1) Additional staff.--The Chairperson of the Task Force 
 may appoint and fix the pay of additional staff to the Task 
 Force as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
 (2) Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The staff 
 of the Task Force may be appointed without regard to the 
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid 
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter 
 III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and 
 General Schedule pay rates.
 (3) Detailees.--Any Federal Government employee may be 
 detailed to the Task Force without reimbursement from the Task 
 Force, and the detailee shall retain the rights, status, and 
 privileges of his or her regular employment without 
 interruption.

SEC. 1014. REPORT ON THE HEALTH OF THE MIDDLE EASTERN AND NORTH AFRICAN 
 POPULATION.

 (a) Study Required.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct or 
support a comprehensive study regarding the unique health patterns and 
outcomes of Middle Eastern and North African (referred to in this 
section as ``MENA'') populations.
 (b) Requirements for Study.--The comprehensive study under 
subsection (a) shall include an enumeration of MENA populations across 
the United States, disaggregated by subpopulation, and with respect to 
each such population and subpopulation--
 (1) the rates of--
 (A) obesity, diabetes, sickle cell anemia, stroke, 
 asthma, pneumonia, lung cancer, HIV/AIDS, HPV, high 
 cholesterol, high blood pressure, and chronic heart, 
 lung, and kidney disease;
 (B) morbidity and mortality, including the rates of 
 morbidity and mortality associated with the health 
 conditions listed in subparagraph (A);
 (C) mental health and substance use disorders; and
 (D) domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, and stalking;
 (2) analysis of--
 (A) the rates described in paragraph (1);
 (B) the leading causes of pregnancy-associated 
 morbidity and mortality; and
 (C) access to health care facilities and the 
 associated outcomes of care;
 (3) analysis, enumeration, or quantification of any other 
 health or health-related parameters the Secretary may determine 
 necessary; and
 (4) analysis of the relationship between the health 
 factors, outcomes, and conditions described in paragraphs (1) 
 through (3) and the implementation of Federal health programs.
 (c) Consultation.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) carry out this section in consultation, as appropriate, 
 with the Director of the Census Bureau, the Director of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the 
 National Institutes of Health, the Assistant Secretary for 
 Mental Health and Substance Use, and other stakeholders 
 (including community-based organizations); and
 (2) determine through such consultation the subpopulations 
 to be used for purposes of disaggregation of data pursuant to 
 subsection (b).
 (d) Online Portal.--Upon conclusion of the comprehensive study 
under this section, the Secretary shall establish a public online 
portal to catalogue the results of the study, its underlying data, and 
information in the report submitted pursuant to subsection (e).
 (e) Reporting.--
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to 
 Congress a report outlining the challenges associated with, and 
 progress towards implementing health data collection for MENA 
 populations as a distinct category and the plan for completing 
 a comprehensive study regarding the unique health patterns and 
 outcomes of MENA populations.
 (2) Final report.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 conclusion of the comprehensive study under this section, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress a report describing--
 (A) the results of the study conducted under this 
 section; and
 (B) the rulemakings and other actions the agencies 
 described in subsection (c)(1) can undertake to more 
 equitably include MENA individuals in their programs.
 (f) Privacy.--The Secretary shall not include any personally 
identifiable information on the online portal under subsection (d) or 
in a report under subsection (e).
 (g) Definition of Middle Eastern and North African; MENA.--In this 
section, the terms ``Middle Eastern and North African'' or ``MENA'', 
with respect to individuals or populations, includes individuals and 
populations who identify with or belong to one or more nationalities or 
ethnic groups originating in a country (or portion thereof) in the 
Middle Eastern and North African region (such as Lebanese, Iranians, 
Egyptians, Moroccans, Yemenis, Chaldeans, Imazighen, Kurds, 
Palestinians, and Yazidis).

 TITLE II--CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE HEALTH AND HEALTH 
 CARE

SEC. 2001. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title, the definitions in section 3400 of the Public 
Health Service Act, as added by section 2004, shall apply.

SEC. 2002. IMPROVING ACCESS TO SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED 
 ENGLISH PROFICIENCY.

 (a) Purpose.--Consistent with the goals provided in Executive Order 
13166 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 note; relating to improving access to services 
for persons with limited English proficiency), it is the purpose of 
this section--
 (1) to improve Federal agency performance regarding access 
 to federally conducted and federally assisted programs and 
 activities for individuals with limited English proficiency;
 (2) to require each Federal agency to examine the services 
 it provides and develop and implement a system by which 
 individuals with limited English proficiency can obtain 
 culturally competent services and meaningful access to those 
 services consistent with, and without substantially burdening, 
 the fundamental mission of the agency;
 (3) to require each Federal agency to translate any English 
 language written material prepared for the general public into 
 the top 15 non-English languages in the United States 
 (according to the most recent data from the American Community 
 Survey or its replacement) within established timelines 
 described in subsection (b)(2)(C)(v);
 (4) to require each Federal agency to ensure that 
 recipients of Federal financial assistance provide culturally 
 competent services and meaningful access to applicants and 
 beneficiaries who are individuals with limited English 
 proficiency;
 (5) to ensure that recipients of Federal financial 
 assistance take reasonable steps, consistent with the 
 guidelines set forth in the ``Guidance to Federal Financial 
 Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against 
 National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English 
 Proficient Persons'' (67 Fed. Reg. 41455 (June 18, 2002)), to 
 ensure culturally and linguistically appropriate access to 
 their programs and activities by individuals with limited 
 English proficiency; and
 (6) to ensure compliance with title VI of the Civil Rights 
 Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.) and section 1557 of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18116) 
 (prohibiting health care providers and organizations from 
 discriminating in the provision of services).
 (b) Federally Conducted Programs and Activities.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, each Federal agency providing financial 
 assistance to, or administering, a health program or activity 
 described in section 2003(a) shall prepare a plan or update a 
 plan to improve culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 access to such program or activity with respect to individuals 
 with limited English proficiency. Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, each such Federal agency 
 shall ensure that such plan is fully implemented.
 (2) Plan requirement.--Each plan under paragraph (1) shall 
 include--
 (A) the steps the agency will take to ensure that 
 individuals with limited English proficiency have 
 access to each health program or activity supported or 
 administered by the agency;
 (B) the policies and procedures for identifying, 
 assessing, and meeting the culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate language needs of its 
 beneficiaries that are individuals with limited English 
 proficiency served by such program or activity;
 (C) the steps the agency will take for such program 
 or activity to be culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate by--
 (i) providing a range of language 
 assistance options;
 (ii) giving notice to individuals with 
 limited English proficiency of the right to 
 competent language services;
 (iii) training staff (at least annually);
 (iv) monitoring and assessing the quality 
 of the language services (at least annually); 
 and
 (v) translating any English language 
 written material prepared for the general 
 public into the top 15 non-English languages in 
 the United States (according to the most recent 
 data from the American Community Survey or its 
 replacement) within established timelines that 
 ensure that high-quality, culturally competent 
 translated material is provided promptly within 
 not more than 15 calendar days in general and 
 within not more than 7 calendar days in the 
 case of any national emergency or State 
 disaster declaration;
 (D) the steps the agency will take for such program 
 or activity to provide reasonable accommodations 
 necessary for individuals with limited English 
 proficiency, including those individuals with a 
 communication disability, to understand communications 
 from the agency;
 (E) the steps the agency will take to ensure that 
 applications, forms, and other significant documents 
 for such program or activity are competently translated 
 into the primary language of a client that is an 
 individual with limited English proficiency where such 
 materials are needed to improve access of such client 
 to such program or activity;
 (F) the resources the agency will provide to 
 improve cultural and linguistic appropriateness to 
 assist recipients of Federal funds to improve access to 
 health care-related programs and activities for 
 individuals with limited English proficiency;
 (G) the resources the agency will provide to ensure 
 that competent language assistance is provided to 
 patients that are individuals with limited English 
 proficiency by interpreters or trained bilingual staff;
 (H) the resources the agency will provide to ensure 
 that family, particularly minor children, and friends 
 are not used to provide interpretation services, except 
 as permitted under section 1557 of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18116); 
 and
 (I) the steps the agency will take and resources 
 the agency will provide to ensure that individuals know 
 their rights, including the ability to file a 
 complaint.
 (3) Submission of plan to doj.--Each agency that is 
 required to prepare a plan under paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) consult with populations who are directly 
 impacted by policies in the plan and their 
 representatives in the development of the plan; and
 (B) when the plan is finalized, send a copy of such 
 plan to the Attorney General, to serve as the central 
 repository of all such plans.

SEC. 2003. ENSURING STANDARDS FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY 
 APPROPRIATE SERVICES IN HEALTH CARE.

 (a) Applicability.--This section shall apply to any health program 
or activity--
 (1) of which any part is receiving Federal financial 
 assistance, including credits, subsidies, or contracts of 
 insurance; or
 (2) that is carried out (including indirectly through 
 contracts, subcontracts, or other support) by an executive 
 agency or any entity established under title I of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18001 et seq.) 
 (or amendments made thereby).
 (b) Standards.--Each program or activity described in subsection 
(a)--
 (1) shall implement strategies to recruit, retain, and 
 promote individuals at all levels to maintain a diverse staff 
 and leadership that can provide culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate health care to patient populations of the service 
 area of the program or activity;
 (2) shall educate and train governance, leadership, and 
 workforce at all levels and across all disciplines of the 
 program or activity in culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate policies and practices on an ongoing basis at least 
 yearly;
 (3) shall offer and provide language assistance, including 
 trained and competent bilingual staff and interpreter services, 
 to individuals with limited English proficiency or who have 
 other communication needs, at no cost to the individual at all 
 points of contact, and during all hours of operation, to 
 facilitate timely access to health care services and health 
 care-related services;
 (4) shall for each language group consisting of individuals 
 with limited English proficiency that constitutes 5 percent or 
 500 individuals, whichever is less, of the population of 
 persons eligible to be served or likely to be affected or 
 encountered in the service area of the program or activity, 
 make available at a fifth grade reading level--
 (A) easily understood patient-related materials, 
 including print and multimedia materials, in the 
 language of such language group;
 (B) information or notices about termination of 
 benefits in such language;
 (C) signage; and
 (D) any other documents or types of documents 
 designated by the Secretary;
 (5) shall develop and implement clear goals, policies, 
 operational plans, and management, accountability, and 
 oversight mechanisms to provide culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate services and infuse them throughout the planning 
 and operations of the program or activity;
 (6) shall conduct initial and ongoing, at least annually, 
 organizational assessments of culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate services-related activities and integrate valid 
 linguistic, competence-related National Standards for 
 Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) 
 measures into the internal audits, performance improvement 
 programs, patient satisfaction assessments, continuous quality 
 improvement activities, and outcomes-based evaluations of the 
 program or activity and develop ways to standardize 
 assessments;
 (7) shall ensure that, consistent with the privacy 
 protections provided for under the regulations promulgated 
 under section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note; Public Law 
 104-191), data on an individual required to be collected 
 pursuant to section 3101 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300kk), including the individual's alternative format 
 preferences and policy modification needs, are--
 (A) collected in health records;
 (B) integrated into the management information 
 systems of the program or activity;
 (C) reported in such a way as to be interoperable 
 with health information systems at the Federal and 
 State levels; and
 (D) periodically updated;
 (8) shall maintain a current demographic, cultural, and 
 epidemiological profile of the community, conduct regular 
 assessments of community health assets and needs, and use the 
 results of such assessments to accurately plan for and 
 implement services that respond to the cultural and linguistic 
 characteristics of the service area of the program or activity;
 (9) shall develop participatory, collaborative partnerships 
 with community-based organizations and utilize a variety of 
 formal and informal mechanisms to facilitate community and 
 patient involvement in designing, implementing, and evaluating 
 policies and practices to ensure culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate service-related activities;
 (10) shall ensure that conflict and grievance resolution 
 processes are culturally and linguistically appropriate and 
 capable of identifying, preventing, and resolving cross-
 cultural conflicts or complaints by patients;
 (11) shall annually--
 (A) make available to the public--
 (i) information about the progress and 
 successful innovations of the program or 
 activity in implementing the standards under 
 this section; and
 (ii) translated materials of such 
 information that is culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate to the communities 
 served under this section; and
 (B) provide public notice in such communities about 
 the availability of such information; and
 (12) shall, if requested, regularly make available to the 
 head of each Federal entity from which Federal funds are 
 provided, information about the progress and successful 
 innovations of the program or activity in implementing the 
 standards under this section as required by the head of such 
 entity.
 (c) Comments Accepted Through Notice and Comment Rulemaking.--An 
executive agency carrying out a program or activity described in 
subsection (a)--
 (1) shall ensure that comments with respect to such program 
 or activity that are accepted through notice and comment 
 rulemaking are accepted in all languages;
 (2) may not require such comments to be submitted only in 
 English; and
 (3) shall ensure that any such comments that are not 
 submitted in English are considered, during the agency's review 
 of such comments, equally as such comments that are submitted 
 in English.

SEC. 2004. CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE HEALTH CARE IN THE 
 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:

 ``TITLE XXXIV--CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE HEALTH CARE

``SEC. 3400. DEFINITIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--In this title:
 ``(1) Bilingual.--The term `bilingual', with respect to an 
 individual, means an individual who has a sufficient degree of 
 proficiency in 2 languages.
 ``(2) Community health worker.--The term `community health 
 worker' means a frontline health worker who is a trusted member 
 of the community in which the worker serves or who has an 
 unusually close understanding of the community served that 
 enables the worker to build trusted relationships, serve as a 
 liaison between health and social services and the community, 
 facilitate access to services, and improve the quality and 
 cultural competence of service delivery.
 ``(3) Cultural.--The term `cultural' means relating to 
 integrated patterns of human behavior that include the 
 language, thoughts, communications, actions, customs, beliefs, 
 values, age, and institutions of racial, ethnic, religious, or 
 social groups, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
 queer, and questioning individuals, and individuals with 
 physical and mental disabilities.
 ``(4) Culturally and linguistically appropriate.--The term 
 `culturally and linguistically appropriate' means being 
 respectful of and responsive to the cultural and linguistic 
 needs of all individuals.
 ``(5) Effective communication.--The term `effective 
 communication' means an exchange of information between the 
 provider of health care or health care-related services and the 
 recipient of such services who is limited in English 
 proficiency, or has a communication impairment such as a 
 hearing, vision, speaking, or cognitive disability, that 
 enables access to, understanding of, and benefit from health 
 care or health care-related services, and full participation in 
 the development of the treatment plan of the recipient.
 ``(6) Grievance resolution process.--The term `grievance 
 resolution process' means all aspects of dispute resolution 
 including filing complaints, grievance and appeal procedures, 
 and court action.
 ``(7) Health care group.--The term `health care group' 
 means a group of physicians organized, at least in part, for 
 the purposes of providing physician services under the Medicaid 
 program under title XIX of the Social Security Act, the State 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI of such 
 Act, or the Medicare program under title XVIII of such Act, 
 including a provider of services under part B of such title 
 XVIII, and may include a hospital, a hospice provider, a 
 palliative care provider, and any other individual or entity 
 furnishing services covered under any such program that is 
 affiliated with the health care group.
 ``(8) Health care.--The term `health care' includes all 
 health care needed throughout the life cycle and the end of 
 life.
 ``(9) Health care services.--The term `health care 
 services' means services that address physical and mental 
 health conditions, as well as conditions impacted by social 
 determinants of health, in all care settings throughout the 
 life cycle and the end of life.
 ``(10) Health care-related services.--The term `health 
 care-related services' means human or social services programs 
 or activities that provide access, referrals, or links to 
 health care services.
 ``(11) Health educator.--The term `health educator' 
 includes a professional with a baccalaureate degree who is 
 responsible for designing, implementing, and evaluating 
 individual and population health promotion, health education 
 (including education on end-of-life care options), end-of-life 
 care, or chronic disease prevention programs.
 ``(12) Indian; indian tribe.--The terms `Indian' and 
 `Indian Tribe' have the meanings given such terms in section 4 
 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
 ``(13) Individual with a disability.--The term `individual 
 with a disability' means any individual who has a disability as 
 defined for the purpose of section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
 Act of 1973.
 ``(14) Individual with limited english proficiency.--The 
 term `individual with limited English proficiency' means an 
 individual who self-identifies on the Census as speaking 
 English less than `very well'.
 ``(15) Integrated health care delivery system.--The term 
 `integrated health care delivery system' means an 
 interdisciplinary system that brings together providers from 
 the primary health, mental health, substance use disorder, 
 hospice and palliative care, and related disciplines to improve 
 the health outcomes of an individual and the community. Such 
 providers may include hospitals, health, mental health, or 
 substance use prevention and treatment clinics and providers, 
 home health agencies, home- and community-based services 
 providers, congregate settings (including any skilled nursing 
 facilities, assisted living facilities, prisons and jails, 
 residential behavioral health care and psychiatric facilities, 
 and facilities providing services for aging adults and 
 individuals with disabilities), ambulatory surgery centers, 
 rehabilitation centers, employed, independent, or contracted 
 physicians, and oral health care providers.
 ``(16) Interpreting; interpretation.--The terms 
 `interpreting' and `interpretation' mean the transmission of a 
 spoken, written, or signed message from one language or format 
 into another, faithfully, accurately, and objectively.
 ``(17) Language access.--The term `language access' means 
 the provision of language services to an individual with 
 limited English proficiency or an individual with communication 
 disabilities designed to enhance that individual's access to, 
 understanding of, or benefit from health care services or 
 health care-related services.
 ``(18) Language assistance services.--The term `language 
 assistance services' includes--
 ``(A) oral language assistance, including 
 interpretation in non-English languages provided in 
 person or remotely by a qualified interpreter for an 
 individual with limited English proficiency, and the 
 use of qualified bilingual or multilingual staff to 
 communicate directly with individuals with limited 
 English proficiency;
 ``(B) written translation, performed by a qualified 
 translator, of written content in paper or electronic 
 form into languages other than English; and
 ``(C) taglines.
 ``(19) Minority populations.--The term `minority 
 populations' means individuals of racial and ethnic minority 
 groups, individuals of sexual and gender minority groups, and 
 individuals with a disability.
 ``(20) Onsite interpretation.--The term `onsite 
 interpretation' means a method of interpreting or 
 interpretation for which the interpreter is in the physical 
 presence of the provider of health care services or health 
 care-related services and the recipient of such services who is 
 limited in English proficiency or has a communication 
 impairment such as an impairment in hearing, vision, or 
 learning.
 ``(21) Qualified individual with a disability.--The term 
 `qualified individual with a disability' means, with respect to 
 a health program or activity, an individual with a disability 
 who, with or without reasonable modifications to policies, 
 practices, or procedures, the removal of architectural, 
 communication, or transportation barriers, or the provision of 
 auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility 
 requirements for the receipt of aids, benefits, or services 
 offered or provided by the health program or activity.
 ``(22) Qualified interpreter for an individual with a 
 disability.--The term `qualified interpreter for an individual 
 with a disability', with respect to an individual with a 
 disability--
 ``(A) means an interpreter for such individual who 
 by means of a remote interpreting service or an onsite 
 appearance--
 ``(i) adheres to generally accepted 
 interpreter ethics principles, including client 
 confidentiality; and
 ``(ii) is able to interpret effectively, 
 accurately, and impartially, both receptively 
 and expressively, using any necessary 
 specialized vocabulary, terminology, and 
 phraseology; and
 ``(B) may include--
 ``(i) sign language interpreters;
 ``(ii) oral transliterators, which are 
 individuals who represent or spell in the 
 characters of another alphabet; and
 ``(iii) cued language transliterators, 
 which are individuals who represent or spell by 
 using a small number of handshapes.
 ``(23) Qualified interpreter for an individual with limited 
 english proficiency.--The term `qualified interpreter for an 
 individual with limited English proficiency' means an 
 interpreter who by means of a remote interpreting service or an 
 onsite appearance--
 ``(A) adheres to generally accepted interpreter 
 ethics principles, including client confidentiality;
 ``(B) has demonstrated proficiency in speaking and 
 understanding both spoken English and one or more other 
 spoken languages; and
 ``(C) is able to interpret effectively, accurately, 
 and impartially, both receptively and expressly, to and 
 from such languages and English, using any necessary 
 specialized vocabulary, terminology, and phraseology.
 ``(24) Qualified translator.--The term `qualified 
 translator' means a translator who--
 ``(A) adheres to generally accepted translator 
 ethics principles, including client confidentiality;
 ``(B) has demonstrated proficiency in writing and 
 understanding both written English and one or more 
 other written non-English languages; and
 ``(C) is able to translate effectively, accurately, 
 and impartially to and from such languages and English, 
 using any necessary specialized vocabulary, 
 terminology, and phraseology.
 ``(25) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term `racial 
 and ethnic minority group' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g).
 ``(26) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of 
 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
 ``(27) Sexual and gender minority group.--The term `sexual 
 and gender minority group' includes lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
 transgender populations, as well as those whose sexual 
 orientation, gender identity and expression, or reproductive 
 development varies from traditional, societal, cultural, or 
 physiological norms.
 ``(28) Sight translation.--The term `sight translation' 
 means the transmission of a written message in one language 
 into a spoken or signed message in another language, or an 
 alternative format in English or another language.
 ``(29) State.--Notwithstanding section 2, the term `State' 
 means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, 
 Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands.
 ``(30) Telephonic interpretation.--The term `telephonic 
 interpretation' (also known as `over the phone interpretation' 
 or `OPI') means, with respect to interpretation for an 
 individual with limited English proficiency, a method of 
 interpretation in which the interpreter is not in the physical 
 presence of the provider of health care services or health 
 care-related services and such individual receiving such 
 services, but the interpreter is connected via telephone.
 ``(31) Translation.--The term `translation' means the 
 transmission of a written message in one language into a 
 written or signed message in another language, and includes 
 translation into another language or alternative format, such 
 as large print font, Braille, audio recording, or CD.
 ``(32) Underserved communities.--The term `underserved 
 communities' means populations sharing particular 
 characteristics, or geographic communities, who have been 
 systematically denied a full opportunity to participate in 
 aspects of economic, social, and civic life, such as--
 ``(A) Black, Latino, Indigenous, and Native 
 American persons, Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians and 
 Pacific Islanders, Middle Easterners and North 
 Africans, and other persons of color;
 ``(B) members of religious minorities;
 ``(C) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and 
 queer persons;
 ``(D) individuals with a disability;
 ``(E) persons who live in rural areas; and
 ``(F) persons otherwise adversely affected by 
 persistent poverty or inequality.
 ``(33) Video remote interpreting services.--The term `video 
 remote interpreting services' means the provision, in health 
 care services or health care-related services, through a 
 qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English 
 proficiency, of video remote interpreting services that are--
 ``(A) in real-time, full-motion video, and audio 
 over a dedicated high-speed, wide-bandwidth video 
 connection or wireless connection that delivers high-
 quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, 
 blurry, or grainy images, or irregular pauses in 
 communication; and
 ``(B) in a sharply delineated image that is large 
 enough to display.
 ``(34) Vital document.--The term `vital document' includes 
 applications for government programs that provide health care 
 services, medical or financial consent forms, financial 
 assistance documents, letters containing important information 
 regarding patient instructions (such as prescriptions, 
 referrals to other providers, and discharge plans) and 
 participation in a program (such as a Medicaid managed care 
 program), notices pertaining to the reduction, denial, or 
 termination of services or benefits, notices of the right to 
 appeal such actions, and notices advising individuals with 
 limited English proficiency with communication disabilities of 
 the availability of free language services, alternative 
 formats, and other outreach materials.
 ``(b) Reference.--In any reference in this title to a regulatory 
provision applicable to a `handicapped individual', the term 
`handicapped individual' in such provision shall have the same meaning 
as the term `individual with a disability' as defined in subsection 
(a).

 ``Subtitle A--Resources and Innovation for Culturally and 
 Linguistically Appropriate Health Care

``SEC. 3401. ROBERT T. MATSUI CENTER FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY 
 APPROPRIATE HEALTH CARE.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and support a 
center to be known as the `Robert T. Matsui Center for Culturally and 
Linguistically Appropriate Health Care' (referred to in this section as 
the `Center') to carry out each of the following activities:
 ``(1) Interpretation services.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Center shall provide 
 resources via the internet to identify and link health 
 care providers to competent and qualified interpreter 
 and translation services.
 ``(B) Training.--For purposes of providing the 
 services described in subparagraph (A), the Center 
 shall adopt a language access plan that includes 
 training requirements for Center staff to provide such 
 services.
 ``(2) Translation of written material.--
 ``(A) Vital documents.--The Center shall provide, 
 directly or through contract, to providers of health 
 care services and health care-related services, at no 
 cost to such providers and in a timely and reasonable 
 manner, vital documents--
 ``(i) which may be submitted by an entity 
 described in subparagraph (C) for translation 
 into non-English languages, or alternative 
 formats, at a fifth-grade reading level; and
 ``(ii) from competent translation services, 
 the quality of which shall be monitored and 
 reported publicly.
 ``(B) Forms.--For each form developed or revised by 
 the Secretary that will be used by individuals with 
 limited English proficiency in health care or health 
 care-related settings, the Center shall, not later than 
 45 calendar days of the Secretary receiving final 
 approval of the form from the Office of Management and 
 Budget--
 ``(i) translate the form, at a minimum, 
 into the top 15 non-English languages in the 
 United States according to the most recent data 
 from the American Community Survey or its 
 replacement; and
 ``(ii) post all translated forms on the 
 Center's website.
 ``(C) Entities.--
 ``(i) In general.--An entity described in 
 this subparagraph is--
 ``(I) an entity that operates a 
 health program or activity, any part of 
 which receives Federal financial 
 assistance;
 ``(II) an entity established under 
 title I of the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act that administers a 
 health program or activity; or
 ``(III) the Department of Health 
 and Human Services.
 ``(ii) Health program or activity.--For 
 purposes of clause (i), the term `health 
 program or activity' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 92.4 of title 45, Code of 
 Federal Regulations, as in effect on July 5, 
 2024.
 ``(3) Toll-free customer service telephone number.--The 
 Center shall provide, through a toll-free number, a customer 
 service line for individuals with limited English proficiency 
 that is linked to the toll-free telephone number 1-800-MEDICARE 
 and a toll-free telephone hotline provided for pursuant to 
 section 1311(d)(4)(B) of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
 Care Act by an Exchange established under title I of such Act--
 ``(A) to obtain information about federally 
 conducted or funded health programs, including the 
 Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act, the Medicaid program under title XIX of 
 such Act, and the State Children's Health Insurance 
 Program under title XXI of such Act, and coverage 
 available through an Exchange established under title I 
 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and 
 other sources of free or reduced care including 
 federally qualified health centers, entities receiving 
 assistance under title X, and public health 
 departments;
 ``(B) to obtain assistance with applying for or 
 accessing these programs and understanding Federal 
 notices written in English; and
 ``(C) to learn how to access language services.
 ``(4) Health information clearinghouse.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Center shall develop and 
 maintain, and make available on the internet and in 
 print, an information clearinghouse that includes the 
 information described in subparagraphs (B) through 
 (G)--
 ``(i) to facilitate the provision of 
 language services by providers of health care 
 services and health care-related services to 
 reduce medical errors;
 ``(ii) to improve medical outcomes, improve 
 cultural competence, reduce health care costs 
 caused by miscommunication with individuals 
 with limited English proficiency; and
 ``(iii) to reduce or eliminate the 
 duplication of efforts to translate materials.
 ``(B) Document templates.--The Center shall collect 
 and evaluate for accuracy, develop, and make available 
 templates for standard documents that are necessary for 
 patients and consumers to access and make educated 
 decisions about their health care, including templates 
 for each of the following:
 ``(i) Administrative and legal documents, 
 including--
 ``(I) intake forms;
 ``(II) forms related to the 
 Medicare program under title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act, the Medicaid 
 program under title XIX of such Act, 
 and the State Children's Health 
 Insurance Program under title XXI of 
 such Act, including eligibility 
 information for such programs;
 ``(III) forms informing patients of 
 the compliance and consent requirements 
 pursuant to the regulations under 
 section 264(c) of the Health Insurance 
 Portability and Accountability Act of 
 1996; and
 ``(IV) documents concerning 
 informed consent, advanced directives, 
 and waivers of rights.
 ``(ii) Clinical information, such as how to 
 take medications, how to prevent transmission 
 of a contagious disease, and other prevention 
 and treatment instructions.
 ``(iii) Public health, patient education, 
 and outreach materials, such as immunization 
 notices, health warnings, or screening notices.
 ``(iv) Additional health or health care-
 related materials as determined appropriate by 
 the Director of the Center.
 ``(C) Structure of forms.--In operating the 
 clearinghouse, the Center shall--
 ``(i) ensure that the documents posted in 
 English and non-English languages are 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate;
 ``(ii) allow public review of the documents 
 before dissemination in order to ensure that 
 the documents are understandable and culturally 
 and linguistically appropriate for the target 
 populations;
 ``(iii) allow health care providers to 
 customize the documents for their use;
 ``(iv) facilitate access to such documents;
 ``(v) provide technical assistance with 
 respect to the access and use of such 
 information; and
 ``(vi) carry out any other activities the 
 Secretary determines to be useful to fulfill 
 the purposes of the clearinghouse.
 ``(D) Language assistance programs.--The Center 
 shall provide for the collection and dissemination of 
 information on current examples of language assistance 
 programs and strategies to improve language services 
 for individuals with limited English proficiency, 
 including case studies using de-identified patient 
 information, program summaries, and program 
 evaluations.
 ``(E) Culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 materials.--The Center shall provide, at no cost, to 
 all health care providers and all providers of health 
 care-related services, information relating to 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate health care 
 for minority populations residing in the United States, 
 including--
 ``(i) tenets of culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate care;
 ``(ii) culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate self-assessment tools;
 ``(iii) culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate training tools;
 ``(iv) strategic plans to increase cultural 
 and linguistic appropriateness in different 
 types of providers of health care services and 
 health care-related services, including 
 regional collaborations among health care 
 organizations for health care services and 
 health care-related services; and
 ``(v) culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate information for educators, 
 practitioners, students, and researchers.
 ``(F) Translation glossaries.--The Center shall--
 ``(i) develop and publish on its website 
 translation glossaries that provide 
 standardized translations of commonly used 
 terms and phrases utilized in documents 
 translated by the Center; and
 ``(ii) make such glossaries available--
 ``(I) free of charge;
 ``(II) in each language in which 
 the Center translates forms under 
 paragraph (2)(B);
 ``(III) in alternative formats in 
 accordance with the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 12101 et seq.); and
 ``(IV) in paper format upon 
 request.
 ``(G) Information about progress.--The Center 
 shall--
 ``(i) regularly collect and make publicly 
 available information about the progress of 
 entities receiving grants under section 3402 
 regarding successful innovations in 
 implementing the requirements of this 
 subsection; and
 ``(ii) provide public notice in the 
 entities' communities about the availability of 
 such information.
 ``(b) Director.--The Center shall be headed by a Director who shall 
be appointed by, and who shall report to, the Director of the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality.
 ``(c) Availability of Language Access.--The Director of the Center 
shall collaborate with the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
Health, the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services, and the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration to notify health care providers and health care 
organizations about the availability of language access services by the 
Center.
 ``(d) Education.--The Secretary, directly or through contract, 
shall undertake a national education campaign to inform providers, 
individuals with limited English proficiency, individuals with hearing 
or vision impairments, health professionals, graduate schools, 
community health centers, social service providers, and community-based 
organizations about--
 ``(1) Federal and State laws and guidelines governing 
 access to language services;
 ``(2) the value of using trained and competent interpreters 
 and the risks associated with using family members, friends, 
 minors, and untrained bilingual staff;
 ``(3) funding sources for developing and implementing 
 language services; and
 ``(4) promising practices to effectively provide language 
 services.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3402. INNOVATIONS IN CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE 
 HEALTH CARE GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
 entities to enable such entities to design, implement, and 
 evaluate innovative, cost-effective programs to improve 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate access to health care 
 services for individuals with limited English proficiency and 
 communication disabilities.
 ``(2) Coordination.--In making grants under this section, 
 and in the design and implementation of the program established 
 under this section, the Secretary shall coordinate with, and 
 ensure the participation of, other agencies including the 
 Health Resources and Services Administration, the National 
 Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities at the 
 National Institutes of Health, and the Office of Minority 
 Health.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall be--
 ``(1) a city, county, Indian Tribe, State, or subdivision 
 thereof;
 ``(2) an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 
 501(a) of such Code;
 ``(3) a community health, mental health, or substance use 
 disorder center or clinic;
 ``(4) a solo or group physician practice;
 ``(5) an integrated health care delivery system;
 ``(6) a public hospital;
 ``(7) a health care group, university, or college; or
 ``(8) any other entity designated by the Secretary.
 ``(c) Application.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under this 
section shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application, at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such additional information 
as the Secretary may reasonably require.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--An entity shall use funds received through a 
grant under this section to--
 ``(1) develop, implement, and evaluate models of providing 
 competent interpretation services through onsite 
 interpretation, telephonic interpretation, or video remote 
 interpreting services;
 ``(2) implement strategies to recruit, retain, and promote 
 individuals at all levels of the organization to maintain a 
 diverse staff and leadership that can promote and provide 
 language services to patient populations of the service area of 
 the entity;
 ``(3) develop and maintain a needs assessment that 
 identifies the current demographic, cultural, and 
 epidemiological profile of the community to accurately plan for 
 and implement language services needed in the service area of 
 the entity;
 ``(4) develop a strategic plan to implement language 
 services;
 ``(5) develop participatory, collaborative partnerships 
 with communities encompassing the patient populations of 
 individuals with limited English proficiency served by the 
 grant to gain input in designing and implementing language 
 services;
 ``(6) develop and implement grievance resolution processes 
 that are culturally and linguistically appropriate and capable 
 of identifying, preventing, and resolving complaints by 
 individuals with limited English proficiency;
 ``(7) develop short-term medical and mental health 
 interpretation training courses and incentives for bilingual 
 health care staff who are asked to provide interpretation 
 services in the workplace;
 ``(8) develop formal training programs, including continued 
 professional development and education programs as well as 
 supervision, for individuals interested in becoming dedicated 
 health care interpreters and culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate providers;
 ``(9) provide staff language training instruction, which 
 shall include information on the practical limitations of such 
 instruction for nonnative speakers;
 ``(10) develop policies that address compensation in salary 
 for staff who receive training to become either a staff 
 interpreter or bilingual provider;
 ``(11) develop other language assistance services as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary;
 ``(12) develop, implement, and evaluate models of improving 
 cultural competence, including cultural competence programs for 
 community health workers;
 ``(13) ensure that, consistent with the privacy protections 
 provided for under the regulations promulgated under section 
 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
 Act of 1996 and any applicable State privacy laws, data on the 
 individual patient or recipient's race, ethnicity, and primary 
 language are collected (and periodically updated) in health 
 records and integrated into the organization's information 
 management systems or any similar system used to store and 
 retrieve data; and
 ``(14) ensure that culturally competent care and language 
 assistance are available to individuals with limited English 
 proficiency.
 ``(e) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to entities that primarily engage in 
providing direct care and that have developed partnerships with 
community organizations or with agencies with experience in improving 
language access.
 ``(f) Evaluation.--
 ``(1) By grantees.--An entity that receives a grant under 
 this section shall submit to the Secretary an evaluation that 
 describes, in the manner and to the extent required by the 
 Secretary, the activities carried out with funds received under 
 the grant, and how such activities improved access to health 
 care services and health care-related services and the quality 
 of health care for individuals with limited English 
 proficiency. Such evaluation shall be collected and 
 disseminated through the Robert T. Matsui Center for Culturally 
 and Linguistically Appropriate Health Care established under 
 section 3401. The Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality shall notify grantees of the availability 
 of technical assistance for the evaluation and provide such 
 assistance upon request.
 ``(2) By secretary.--The Director of the Agency for 
 Healthcare Research and Quality shall evaluate or arrange with 
 other individuals or organizations to evaluate projects funded 
 under this section.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3403. RESEARCH ON CULTURAL AND LANGUAGE COMPETENCE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall expand research concerning 
language access in the provision of health care services.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--The Secretary may conduct the research 
described in subsection (a) or enter into contracts with other 
individuals or organizations to conduct such research.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Research conducted under this section shall be 
designed to do one or more of the following:
 ``(1) To identify the barriers to mental and behavioral 
 services that are faced by individuals with limited English 
 proficiency.
 ``(2) To identify health care providers' and health 
 administrators' knowledge and awareness of the barriers to 
 quality health care services that are faced by individuals with 
 limited English proficiency and communication disabilities.
 ``(3) To identify optimal approaches for delivering 
 language access.
 ``(4) To identify best practices for data collection, 
 including--
 ``(A) the collection by providers of health care 
 services and health care-related services of data on 
 the race, ethnicity, and primary language of recipients 
 of such services, taking into account existing research 
 conducted by the Government or private sector;
 ``(B) the development and implementation of data 
 collection and reporting systems; and
 ``(C) effective privacy safeguards for collected 
 data.
 ``(5) To develop a minimum data collection set for primary 
 language.
 ``(6) To evaluate the most effective ways in which the 
 Secretary can create or coordinate, and subsidize or otherwise 
 fund, telephonic interpretation services for health care 
 providers, taking into consideration, among other factors, the 
 flexibility necessary for such a system to accommodate 
 variations in--
 ``(A) provider type;
 ``(B) languages needed and their frequency of use;
 ``(C) type of encounter;
 ``(D) time of encounter, including whether the 
 encounter occurs during regular business hours and 
 after hours; and
 ``(E) location of encounter.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 2005. PILOT PROGRAM FOR IMPROVEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF STATE 
 MEDICAL INTERPRETING SERVICES.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall award 1 grant 
in accordance with this section to each of 3 States (to be selected by 
the Secretary) to assist each such State in designing, implementing, 
and evaluating a statewide program to provide onsite interpreter 
services under the State Medicaid plan.
 (b) Grant Period.--A grant awarded under this section is authorized 
for the period of 3 fiscal years beginning on October 1, 2024, and 
ending on September 30, 2027.
 (c) Preference.--In awarding a grant under this section, the 
Secretary shall give preference to a State--
 (1) that has a high proportion of qualified LEP enrollees, 
 as determined by the Secretary;
 (2) that has a large number of qualified LEP enrollees, as 
 determined by the Secretary;
 (3) that has a high growth rate of the population of 
 individuals with limited English proficiency, as determined by 
 the Secretary; and
 (4) that has a population of qualified LEP enrollees that 
 is linguistically diverse, requiring interpreter services in at 
 least 200 non-English languages.
 (d) Use of Funds.--A State receiving a grant under this section 
shall use the grant funds to--
 (1) ensure that all health care providers in the State 
 participating in the State Medicaid plan have access to onsite 
 interpreter services, for the purpose of enabling effective 
 communication between such providers and qualified LEP 
 enrollees during the furnishing of items and services and 
 administrative interactions;
 (2) establish, expand, procure, or contract for--
 (A) a statewide health care information technology 
 system that is designed to achieve efficiencies and 
 economies of scale with respect to onsite interpreter 
 services provided to health care providers in the State 
 participating in the State Medicaid plan; and
 (B) an entity to administer such system, the duties 
 of which shall include--
 (i) procuring and scheduling interpreter 
 services for qualified LEP enrollees;
 (ii) procuring and scheduling interpreter 
 services for individuals with limited English 
 proficiency seeking to enroll in the State 
 Medicaid plan;
 (iii) ensuring that interpreters receive 
 payment for interpreter services rendered under 
 the system; and
 (iv) consulting regularly with 
 organizations representing LEP consumers, 
 interpreters, and health care providers; and
 (3) develop mechanisms to establish, improve, and 
 strengthen the competency of the medical interpretation 
 workforce that serves qualified LEP enrollees in the State, 
 including a national certification process that is valid, 
 credible, and vendor-neutral.
 (e) Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a State 
shall submit an application at such time and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require, which shall include the 
following:
 (1) A description of the language access needs of 
 individuals in the State enrolled in the State Medicaid plan.
 (2) A description of the extent to which the program will--
 (A) use the grant funds for the purposes described 
 in subsection (d);
 (B) meet the health care needs of rural populations 
 of the State; and
 (C) collect information that accurately tracks the 
 language services requested by consumers as compared to 
 the language services provided by health care providers 
 in the State participating in the State Medicaid plan.
 (3) A description of how the program will be evaluated, 
 including a proposal for collaboration with organizations 
 representing interpreters, consumers, and individuals with 
 limited English proficiency.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Qualified lep enrollee.--The term ``qualified LEP 
 enrollee'' means an individual--
 (A) who is limited English proficient; and
 (B) who is enrolled in a State Medicaid plan.
 (2) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 1101(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1301(a)(1)), for purposes of title XIX of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 (3) State medicaid plan.--The term ``State Medicaid plan'' 
 means a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) or a waiver of such a plan.
 (4) United states.--The term ``United States'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 1101(a)(2) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301(a)(2)), for purposes of title XIX 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 (g) Continuation Past Demonstration.--Any State receiving a grant 
under this section must agree to directly pay for language services in 
Medicaid for all Medicaid providers by the end of the grant period.
 (h) Funding.--
 (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated $5,000,000 to carry out this section.
 (2) Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant 
 to the authorization in paragraph (1) are authorized to remain 
 available without fiscal year limitation.
 (3) Increased federal financial participation.--Section 
 1903(a)(2)(E) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396b(a)(2)(E)) is amended by inserting ``(or, in the case of a 
 State that was awarded a grant under section 2005 of the Health 
 Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, 100 percent for each 
 quarter occurring during the grant period specified in 
 subsection (b) of such section)'' after ``75 percent''.
 (i) Limitation.--No Federal funds awarded under this section may be 
used to provide interpreter services from a location outside the United 
States.

SEC. 2006. TRAINING TOMORROW'S DOCTORS FOR CULTURALLY AND 
 LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE CARE: GRADUATE MEDICAL 
 EDUCATION.

 (a) Direct Graduate Medical Education.--Section 1886(h)(4) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)(4)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(L) Treatment of culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate training.--In determining a hospital's 
 number of full-time equivalent residents for purposes 
 of this subsection, all the time that is spent by an 
 intern or resident in an approved medical residency 
 training program for education and training in 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate service 
 delivery, which shall include all medically underserved 
 populations (as defined in section 330(b)(3) of the 
 Public Health Service Act), shall be counted toward the 
 determination of full-time equivalency.''.
 (b) Indirect Medical Education.--Section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new clause:
 ``(xiv) The provisions of subparagraph (L) of subsection 
 (h)(4) shall apply under this subparagraph in the same manner 
 as they apply under such subsection.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall apply with respect to payments made to hospitals on or after the 
date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 2007. FEDERAL REIMBURSEMENT FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY 
 APPROPRIATE SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND 
 STATE CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Language Access Grants for Medicare Providers.--
 (1) Establishment.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services (in this subsection referred 
 to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Centers 
 for Medicare & Medicaid Services and in consultation 
 with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation 
 (as referred to in section 1115A of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1315a)), shall establish a demonstration 
 program under which the Secretary shall award grants to 
 eligible Medicare service providers to provide 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate services to 
 Medicare beneficiaries who are limited English 
 proficient, including beneficiaries who live in diverse 
 and underserved communities.
 (B) Application of innovation rules.--The 
 demonstration project under subparagraph (A) shall be 
 conducted in a manner that is consistent with the 
 applicable provisions of subsections (b), (c), and (d) 
 of section 1115A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1315a).
 (C) Number of grants.--To the extent practicable, 
 the Secretary shall award not less than 24 grants under 
 this subsection.
 (D) Grant period.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2)(D), each grant awarded under this subsection shall 
 be for a 3-year period.
 (2) Eligibility requirements.--To be eligible for a grant 
 under this subsection, an entity must meet the following 
 requirements:
 (A) Medicare provider.--The entity must be--
 (i) a provider of services under part A of 
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395c et seq.);
 (ii) a provider of services under part B of 
 such title (42 U.S.C. 1395j et seq.);
 (iii) a Medicare Advantage organization 
 offering a Medicare Advantage plan under part C 
 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21 et seq.); or
 (iv) a PDP sponsor offering a prescription 
 drug plan under part D of such title (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-101 et seq.).
 (B) Underserved communities.--The entity must serve 
 a community that, with respect to necessary language 
 services for improving access and utilization of health 
 care among individuals who are limited English 
 proficient, is disproportionally underserved.
 (C) Application.--The entity must prepare and 
 submit to the Secretary an application, at such time, 
 in such manner, and accompanied by such additional 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 (D) Reporting.--In the case of a grantee that 
 received a grant under this subsection in a previous 
 year, such grantee is only eligible for continued 
 payments under a grant under this subsection if the 
 grantee met the reporting requirements under paragraph 
 (9) for such year. If a grantee fails to meet the 
 requirements of such paragraph for the first year of a 
 grant, the Secretary may terminate the grant and 
 solicit applications from new grantees to participate 
 in the demonstration program.
 (3) Distribution.--To the extent feasible, the Secretary 
 shall award--
 (A) at least 10 grants to providers of services 
 described in paragraph (2)(A)(i);
 (B) at least 10 grants to service providers 
 described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii);
 (C) at least 10 grants to organizations described 
 in paragraph (2)(A)(iii); and
 (D) at least 10 grants to sponsors described in 
 paragraph (2)(A)(iv).
 (4) Considerations in awarding grants.--
 (A) Variation among grantees.--In awarding grants 
 under this subsection, the Secretary shall select 
 grantees to ensure the following:
 (i) The grantees provide many different 
 types of language services.
 (ii) The grantees serve Medicare 
 beneficiaries who speak different languages, 
 and who, as a population, have differing needs 
 for language services.
 (iii) The grantees serve Medicare 
 beneficiaries in both urban and rural settings.
 (iv) The grantees represent each Centers 
 for Medicare & Medicaid Services region, as 
 defined by the Secretary.
 (v) The grantees serve Medicare 
 beneficiaries in at least 2 large metropolitan 
 statistical areas with diverse populations, 
 including diversity in race, ethnicity, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, disability 
 status, and socioeconomic status.
 (B) Priority for partnerships with community 
 organizations and agencies.--In awarding grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to 
 eligible entities that have a partnership with 1 or 
 more of the following entities that have experience in 
 providing language services:
 (i) A community organization.
 (ii) A consortium of community 
 organizations, State agencies, and local 
 agencies.
 (5) Use of funds for competent language services.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (E), a 
 grantee may only use grant funds received under this 
 subsection to pay for the provision of competent 
 language services to Medicare beneficiaries who are 
 individuals who are limited English proficient to 
 supplement existing Medicare requirements.
 (B) Competent language services defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term ``competent 
 language services'' means--
 (i) interpreter and translation services 
 that--
 (I) subject to the exceptions under 
 subparagraph (C)--
 (aa) if the grantee 
 operates in a State that has 
 statewide health care 
 interpreter standards, meet the 
 State standards currently in 
 effect; or
 (bb) if the grantee 
 operates in a State that does 
 not have statewide health care 
 interpreter standards, utilize 
 competent interpreters who 
 follow the National Council on 
 Interpreting in Health Care's 
 Code of Ethics and Standards of 
 Practice and comply with the 
 requirements of section 1557 of 
 the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 
 18116) as published in the 
 Federal Register on May 18, 
 2016, 81 Fed. Reg. 31375; and
 (II) in the case of interpreter 
 services, are provided through--
 (aa) onsite interpretation;
 (bb) telephonic 
 interpretation; or
 (cc) video interpretation; 
 and
 (ii) the direct provision of health care or 
 health care-related services by a competent 
 bilingual health care provider.
 (C) Exceptions.--
 (i) In general.--The requirements of 
 subparagraph (B)(i)(I) do not apply, with 
 respect to interpreter and translation services 
 and a grantee--
 (I) in the case of a Medicare 
 beneficiary who is limited English 
 proficient, if--
 (aa) such beneficiary has 
 been informed, in the 
 beneficiary's primary language, 
 of the availability of free 
 interpreter and translation 
 services and the beneficiary 
 instead requests that a family 
 member, friend, or other person 
 provide such services; and
 (bb) the grantee documents 
 such request in the 
 beneficiary's medical record; 
 or
 (II) subject to clause (ii), in the 
 case of a medical emergency where the 
 delay directly associated with 
 obtaining a competent interpreter or 
 translation services would jeopardize 
 the health of the patient.
 (ii) Clarification.--Clause (i)(II) shall 
 not be construed to exempt emergency rooms or 
 similar entities that regularly provide health 
 care services in medical emergencies to 
 patients who are individuals who are limited 
 English proficient from any applicable legal or 
 regulatory requirements related to providing 
 competent interpreter and translation services 
 without undue delay.
 (D) Medicare advantage organizations and pdp 
 sponsors.--A grantee that is a Medicare Advantage 
 organization or a prescription drug plan sponsor must 
 provide at least 50 percent of the grant funds that the 
 grantee receives under this subsection directly to the 
 entity's network providers (including all health 
 providers and pharmacists) for the purpose of providing 
 support for such providers to provide competent 
 language services to Medicare beneficiaries who are 
 individuals who are limited English proficient.
 (E) Administrative and reporting costs.--A grantee 
 may use up to 10 percent of the grant funds to pay for 
 administrative costs associated with the provision of 
 competent language services and for reporting required 
 under paragraph (9).
 (6) Determination of amount of grant payments.--
 (A) In general.--Payments to grantees under this 
 subsection shall be calculated based on the estimated 
 numbers of Medicare beneficiaries who are limited 
 English proficient in a grantee's service area 
 utilizing--
 (i) data on the numbers of English learners 
 who speak English less than ``very well'' from 
 the most recently available data from the 
 Bureau of the Census or other State-based study 
 the Secretary determines is likely to yield 
 accurate data regarding the number of such 
 individuals in such service area; or
 (ii) data provided by the grantee, if the 
 grantee routinely collects data on the primary 
 language of the Medicare beneficiaries that the 
 grantee serves and the Secretary determines 
 that the data is accurate and shows a greater 
 number of individuals who are limited English 
 proficient than would be estimated using the 
 data under clause (i).
 (B) Discretion of secretary.--Subject to 
 subparagraph (C), the amount of payment made to a 
 grantee under this subsection may be modified annually 
 at the discretion of the Secretary, based on changes in 
 the data under subparagraph (A) with respect to the 
 service area of a grantee for the year.
 (C) Limitation on amount.--The amount of a grant 
 made under this subsection to a grantee may not exceed 
 $500,000 for the period under paragraph (1)(D).
 (7) Assurances.--Grantees under this subsection shall, as a 
 condition of receiving a grant under this subsection--
 (A) ensure that clinical and support staff receive 
 appropriate ongoing education and training in 
 linguistically appropriate service delivery;
 (B) ensure the linguistic competence of bilingual 
 providers;
 (C) offer and provide appropriate language services 
 at no additional charge to each patient who is limited 
 English proficient for all points of contact between 
 the patient and the grantee, in a timely manner during 
 all hours of operation;
 (D) notify Medicare beneficiaries of their right to 
 receive language services in their primary language at 
 least annually;
 (E) post signage in the primary languages commonly 
 used by the patient population in the service area of 
 the organization; and
 (F) ensure that--
 (i) primary language data are collected for 
 recipients of language services and such data 
 are consistent with standards developed under 
 title XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, 
 as added by section 2002 of this Act, to the 
 extent such standards are available upon the 
 initiation of the demonstration program; and
 (ii) consistent with the privacy 
 protections provided under the regulations 
 promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
 Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note), if the 
 recipient of language services is a minor or is 
 incapacitated, primary language data must also 
 be collected on the parent or legal guardian of 
 such recipient.
 (8) No cost sharing.--Medicare beneficiaries who are 
 limited English proficient shall not have to pay cost sharing 
 or co-payments for competent language services provided under 
 this demonstration program.
 (9) Reporting requirements for grantees.--Not later than 
 the end of each calendar year, a grantee that receives funds 
 under this subsection in such year shall submit to the 
 Secretary a report that includes the following information:
 (A) The number of Medicare beneficiaries to whom 
 competent language services are provided, disaggregated 
 by age and entitlement basis (on the basis of age, 
 disability, or determination of end stage renal 
 disease).
 (B) The primary languages of those Medicare 
 beneficiaries.
 (C) The types of language services provided to such 
 beneficiaries.
 (D) Whether such language services were provided by 
 employees of the grantee or through a contract with 
 external contractors or agencies.
 (E) The types of interpretation services provided 
 to such beneficiaries, and the approximate length of 
 time such service is provided to such beneficiaries.
 (F) The costs of providing competent language 
 services.
 (G) An account of the training or accreditation of 
 bilingual staff, interpreters, and translators 
 providing services funded by the grant under this 
 subsection.
 (10) Evaluation and report to congress.--Not later than 1 
 year after the completion of a 3-year grant under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the 
 demonstration program under this subsection and shall submit to 
 the Congress a report that includes the following:
 (A) An analysis of the patient outcomes and the 
 costs of furnishing care to the Medicare beneficiaries 
 who are individuals who are limited English proficient 
 participating in the project as compared to such 
 outcomes and costs for such Medicare beneficiaries not 
 participating, based on the data provided under 
 paragraph (9) and any other information available to 
 the Secretary.
 (B) The effect of delivering language services on--
 (i) Medicare beneficiary access to care and 
 utilization of services;
 (ii) the efficiency and cost-effectiveness 
 of health care delivery;
 (iii) patient satisfaction with respect to 
 both health service delivery and language 
 assistance;
 (iv) health outcomes; and
 (v) the provision of culturally appropriate 
 services provided to such beneficiaries.
 (C) The extent to which bilingual staff, 
 interpreters, and translators providing services under 
 such demonstration were trained or accredited and the 
 nature of accreditation or training needed by type of 
 provider, service, or other category as determined by 
 the Secretary to ensure the provision of high-quality 
 interpretation, translation, or other language services 
 to Medicare beneficiaries if such services are expanded 
 pursuant to section 1115A(c) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1315a(c)).
 (D) Recommendations, if any, regarding the 
 extension of such project to the entire Medicare 
 Program, subject to the provisions of such section 
 1115A(c).
 (11) Appropriations.--There is appropriated to carry out 
 this subsection, in equal parts from the Federal Hospital 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395t), $16,000,000 for each fiscal year of the demonstration 
 program.
 (12) Limited english proficient defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``limited English proficient'' means 
 individuals who self-identify on the Census as speaking English 
 less than ``very well''.
 (b) Language Assistance Services Under the Medicare Program.--
 (1) Inclusion as rural health clinic services.--Section 
 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (aa)(1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (D), by inserting 
 ``and'' after the comma at the end; and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (D) 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) language assistance services as defined in subsection 
 (nnn),''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:

 ``Language Assistance Services and Related Terms

 ``(nnn) The term `language assistance services' means `language 
access' or `language assistance services' (as those terms are defined 
in section 3400 of the Public Health Service Act) furnished by a 
`qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English 
proficiency' or a `qualified translator' (as those terms are defined in 
such section 3400) to an `individual with limited English proficiency' 
(as defined in such section 3400).''.
 (2) Coverage.--Section 1832(a)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395k(a)(2)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(K) language assistance services (as defined in 
 section 1861(nnn)).''.
 (3) Payment.--Section 1833(a) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (9), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (10) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(11) in the case of language assistance services (as 
 defined in section 1861(nnn)), 100 percent of the reasonable 
 charges for such services, as determined in consultation with 
 the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.''.
 (4) Waiver of budget neutrality.--For the 3-year period 
 beginning on the date of enactment of this section, the budget 
 neutrality provision of section 1848(c)(2)(B)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(2)(B)(ii)) shall not apply 
 with respect to language assistance services (as defined in 
 section 1861(nnn) of such Act).
 (c) Medicare Parts C and D; Medicare Advantage Plans and 
Prescription Drug Plans Reporting Requirement.--Section 1857(e) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27(e)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Reporting requirements relating to effective language 
 services.--A contract under this part shall require a Medicare 
 Advantage organization (and, through application of section 
 1860D-12(b)(3)(D), a contract under section 1860D-12 shall 
 require a PDP sponsor) to annually submit (for each year of the 
 contract) a report that contains information on the internal 
 policies and procedures of the organization (or sponsor) 
 related to recruitment and retention efforts directed to 
 workforce diversity and linguistically and culturally 
 appropriate provision of services in each of the following 
 contexts:
 ``(A) The collection of data in a manner that meets 
 the requirements of title I of the Health Equity and 
 Accountability Act of 2024, regarding the enrollee 
 population.
 ``(B) Education of staff and contractors who have 
 routine contact with enrollees regarding the various 
 needs of the diverse enrollee population.
 ``(C) Evaluation of the language services programs 
 and services offered by the organization (or sponsor) 
 with respect to the enrollee population, such as 
 through analysis of complaints or satisfaction survey 
 results.
 ``(D) Methods by which the plan provides to the 
 Secretary information regarding the ethnic diversity of 
 the enrollee population.
 ``(E) The periodic provision of educational 
 information to plan enrollees on the language services 
 and programs offered by the organization (or 
 sponsor).''.
 (d) Improving Language Services in Medicaid and CHIP.--
 (1) Payments to states.--Section 1903(a)(2)(E) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(2)(E)), as amended by 
 section 2005(h)(3), is further amended by--
 (A) striking ``75'' and inserting ``95'';
 (B) striking ``translation or interpretation 
 services'' and inserting ``language assistance 
 services''; and
 (C) striking ``children of families'' and inserting 
 ``individuals''.
 (2) State plan requirements.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)) is amended by 
 striking ``and (30)'' and inserting ``(30), and (32)''.
 (3) Definition of medical assistance.--Section 1905(a) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (31), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (32) as paragraph 
 (33); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (31) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(32) language assistance services, as such term is 
 defined in section 1861(nnn), provided in a timely manner to 
 individuals with limited English proficiency as defined in 
 section 3400 of the Public Health Service Act; and''.
 (4) Use of deductions and cost sharing.--Subsections (a)(2) 
 and (b)(2) of section 1916 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396o) are each amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting ``, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(K) language assistance services described in 
 section 1905(a)(32); and''.
 (5) CHIP coverage requirements.--Section 2103 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), in the matter before 
 paragraph (1), by striking ``(5), (6), (7) and (8)'' 
 and inserting ``(5) through (13)'';
 (B) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(13) Language assistance services.--The child health 
 assistance provided to a targeted low-income child shall 
 include coverage of language assistance services, as such term 
 is defined in section 1861(nnn), provided in a timely manner to 
 individuals with limited English proficiency (as defined in 
 section 3400 of the Public Health Service Act).''; and
 (C) in subsection (e)(2)--
 (i) in the heading, by striking 
 ``preventive'' and inserting ``certain''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``language assistance 
 services described in subsection (c)(12),'' 
 before ``or for pregnancy-related assistance''.
 (6) Definition of child health assistance.--Section 
 2110(a)(27) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397jj(a)(27)) is amended by striking ``transportation, 
 translation, and outreach services'' and inserting 
 ``transportation services, language assistance services as 
 described in section 2103(c)(13), and outreach services''.
 (7) State data collection.--Pursuant to the reporting 
 requirement described in section 2107(b)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(b)(1)), the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services shall require that States collect data on--
 (A) the primary language of individuals receiving 
 child health assistance under title XXI of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.); and
 (B) in the case of such individuals who are minors 
 or incapacitated, the primary language of the 
 individual's parent or guardian.
 (8) CHIP payments to states.--Section 2105 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``75'' and inserting ``95''; 
 and
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)(iv), by striking 
 ``translation or interpretation services'' and 
 inserting ``language assistance services''; and
 (B) in subsection (c)(2)(A), by inserting before 
 the period at the end the following: ``, except that 
 expenditures pursuant to clause (iv) of subparagraph 
 (D) of such paragraph shall not count towards this 
 total''.
 (e) Funding Language Assistance Services Furnished by Providers of 
Health Care and Health Care-Related Services That Serve High Rates of 
Uninsured LEP Individuals.--
 (1) Payment of costs.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in 
 this subsection as the ``Secretary'') shall make 
 payments (on a quarterly basis) directly to eligible 
 entities to support the provision of language 
 assistance services to individuals with limited English 
 proficiency in an amount equal to an eligible entity's 
 eligible costs for providing such services for the 
 quarter.
 (B) Funding.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the 
 Secretary such sums as may be necessary for each of 
 fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (C) Relation to medicaid dsh.--Payments under this 
 subsection shall not offset or reduce payments under 
 section 1923 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396r-4), nor shall payments under such section be 
 considered when determining uncompensated costs 
 associated with the provision of language assistance 
 services for the purposes of this subsection.
 (2) Methodology for payment of claims.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 methodology to determine the average per person cost of 
 language assistance services.
 (B) Different entities.--In establishing such 
 methodology, the Secretary may establish different 
 methodologies for different types of eligible entities.
 (C) No individual claims.--The Secretary may not 
 require eligible entities to submit individual claims 
 for language assistance services for individual 
 patients as a requirement for payment under this 
 subsection.
 (3) Data collection instrument.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall create a standard data 
 collection instrument that is consistent with any existing 
 reporting requirements by the Secretary or relevant accrediting 
 organizations regarding the number of individuals to whom 
 language access is provided.
 (4) Guidelines.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish and 
 distribute guidelines concerning the implementation of this 
 subsection.
 (5) Reporting requirements.--
 (A) Report to secretary.--Entities receiving 
 payment under this subsection shall provide the 
 Secretary with a quarterly report on how the entity 
 used such funds. Such report shall contain aggregate 
 (and may not contain individualized) data collected 
 using the instrument under paragraph (3) and shall 
 otherwise be in a form and manner determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (B) Report to congress.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 2 
 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report 
 to Congress concerning the implementation of this 
 subsection.
 (6) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Eligible costs.--The term ``eligible costs'' 
 means, with respect to an eligible entity that provides 
 language assistance services to limited English 
 proficient individuals, the product of--
 (i) the average per person cost of language 
 assistance services, determined according to 
 the methodology devised under paragraph (2); 
 and
 (ii) the number of individuals with limited 
 English proficiency who are provided language 
 assistance services by the entity and for whom 
 no reimbursement is available for such services 
 under the amendments made by subsection (a), 
 (b), (c), or (d), or by private health 
 insurance.
 (B) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' 
 means an entity that--
 (i) is a Medicaid provider that is--
 (I) a physician;
 (II) a hospital with a low-income 
 utilization rate (as defined in section 
 1923(b)(3) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(b)(3))) of greater 
 than 25 percent;
 (III) a Federally qualified health 
 center (as defined in section 
 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(l)(2)(B)));
 (IV) a hospice provider; or
 (V) a palliative care provider;
 (ii) not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, provides language 
 assistance services to not less than 8 percent 
 of the entity's total number of patients; and
 (iii) prepares and submits an application 
 to the Secretary, at such time, in such manner, 
 and accompanied by such information as the 
 Secretary may require, to ascertain the 
 entity's eligibility for funding under this 
 subsection.
 (C) Language assistance services.--The term 
 ``language assistance services'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1861(nnn) of the Social Security 
 Act, as added by subsection (b).
 (f) Application of Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 1557 of the 
Affordable Care Act, and Other Laws.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit otherwise existing obligations of recipients of 
Federal financial assistance under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act 
(42 U.S.C. 18116), or other laws that protect the civil rights of 
individuals.
 (g) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided and subject 
 to paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall 
 take effect on January 1, 2025.
 (2) Exception if state legislation required.--In the case 
 of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) or a State plan 
 for child health assistance under title XXI of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) which the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services determines requires State legislation (other than 
 legislation appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet 
 the additional requirement imposed by the amendments made by 
 this section, such State plan shall not be regarded as failing 
 to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the 
 basis of its failure to meet this additional requirement before 
 the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the 
 close of the first regular session of the State legislature 
 that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act. For 
 purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that 
 has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session 
 shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State 
 legislature.

SEC. 2008. INCREASING UNDERSTANDING OF AND IMPROVING HEALTH LITERACY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Director 
of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities and 
the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall award grants 
to eligible entities to improve health care for patient populations 
that have low health literacy.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 (1) be a hospital, health center or clinic, health plan, or 
 other health entity (including a nonprofit minority health 
 organization or association); and
 (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may reasonably require.
 (c) Use of Funds.--
 (1) Agency for healthcare research and quality.--A grant 
 under subsection (a) that is awarded through the Director of 
 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality shall be used--
 (A) to define and increase the understanding of 
 health literacy across all areas of health care, 
 including end of life care;
 (B) to investigate the correlation between low 
 health literacy and health and health care;
 (C) to clarify which aspects of health literacy 
 have an effect on health outcomes; and
 (D) for any other activity determined appropriate 
 by the Director.
 (2) Health resources and services administration.--A grant 
 under subsection (a) that is awarded through the Administrator 
 of the Health Resources and Services Administration shall be 
 used to conduct demonstration projects for interventions for 
 patients with low health literacy that may include--
 (A) the development of new disease management and 
 end of life care programs for patients with low health 
 literacy;
 (B) the tailoring of disease management programs 
 and end of life care addressing mental, physical, oral, 
 and behavioral health conditions for patients with low 
 health literacy;
 (C) the translation of written health materials for 
 patients with low health literacy;
 (D) the identification, implementation, and testing 
 of low health literacy screening tools;
 (E) the conduct of educational campaigns for 
 patients and providers about low health literacy;
 (F) the conduct of educational campaigns concerning 
 health directed specifically at patients with mental 
 disabilities, including those with cognitive and 
 intellectual disabilities, designed to reduce the 
 incidence of low health literacy among these 
 populations, which shall have instructional materials 
 in the plain language standards promulgated under the 
 Plain Writing Act of 2010 (5 U.S.C. 301 note) for 
 Federal agencies; and
 (G) other activities determined appropriate by the 
 Administrator.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Low health literacy.--The term ``low health literacy'' 
 means the inability of an individual to obtain, process, and 
 understand basic health information and services needed to make 
 appropriate health decisions.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services--
 (A) acting through the Director of the Agency for 
 Healthcare Research and Quality, with respect to grants 
 under subsection (c)(1); and
 (B) acting through the Administrator of the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration with respect to 
 grants under subsection (c)(2).
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 2009. REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING 
 FEDERAL FUNDS.

 (a) Covered Entity; Health Program or Activity.--In this section:
 (1) Covered entity.--The term ``covered entity'' means an 
 entity described in clause (i) of section 3401(a)(2)(C) of the 
 Public Health Service Act, as added by section 2004.
 (2) Health program or activity.--The term ``health program 
 or activity'' has the meaning given such term in clause (ii) of 
 such section 3401(a)(2)(C).
 (b) Requirements.--A covered entity, in order to ensure the right 
of individuals with limited English proficiency to receive access to 
high-quality health care through the health program or activity, 
shall--
 (1) ensure that appropriate clinical and support staff 
 receive ongoing education and training in culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate service delivery at least annually;
 (2) offer and provide appropriate language assistance 
 services at no additional charge to each patient that is an 
 individual with limited English proficiency at all points of 
 contact, in a timely manner during all hours of operation;
 (3) notify patients of their right to receive language 
 services in their primary language; and
 (4) utilize only qualified interpreters for an individual 
 with limited English proficiency or qualified translators, 
 except as provided in subsection (c).
 (c) Exemptions.--The requirements of subsection (b)(4) shall not 
apply as follows:
 (1) When a patient requests the use of family, friends, or 
 other persons untrained in interpretation or translation if 
 each of the following conditions are met:
 (A) The interpreter requested by the patient is 
 over the age of 18.
 (B) The covered entity informs the patient in the 
 primary language of the patient that he or she has the 
 option of having the entity provide to the patient an 
 interpreter and translation services without charge.
 (C) The covered entity informs the patient that the 
 entity may not require an individual with a limited 
 English proficiency to use a family member or friend as 
 an interpreter.
 (D) The covered entity evaluates whether the person 
 the patient wishes to use as an interpreter is 
 competent. If the covered entity has reason to believe 
 that such person is not competent as an interpreter, 
 the entity provides its own interpreter to protect the 
 covered entity from liability if the patient's 
 interpreter is later found not competent.
 (E) If the covered entity has reason to believe 
 that there is a conflict of interest between the 
 interpreter and patient, the covered entity may not use 
 the patient's interpreter.
 (F) The covered entity has the patient sign a 
 waiver, witnessed by at least 1 individual not related 
 to the patient, that includes the information stated in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (E) and is translated into 
 the patient's primary language.
 (2) When a medical emergency exists and the delay directly 
 associated with obtaining competent interpreter or translation 
 services would jeopardize the health of the patient, but only 
 until a competent interpreter or translation service is 
 available.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--Subsection (c)(2) shall not be construed 
to mean that emergency rooms or similar entities that regularly provide 
health care services in medical emergencies are exempt from legal or 
regulatory requirements related to competent interpreter services.

SEC. 2010. REPORT ON FEDERAL EFFORTS TO PROVIDE CULTURALLY AND 
 LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall seek to enter into a contract with the National Academy 
of Medicine for the preparation and publication of a report that 
describes Federal efforts to ensure that all individuals with limited 
English proficiency have meaningful access to health care services and 
health care-related services that are culturally and linguistically 
appropriate. Such report shall include--
 (1) a description and evaluation of the activities carried 
 out under this Act;
 (2) a description and analysis of best practices, model 
 programs, guidelines, and other effective strategies for 
 providing access to culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 health care services;
 (3) recommendations on the development and implementation 
 of policies and practices by providers of health care services 
 and health care-related services for individuals with limited 
 English proficiency, including people with cognitive, hearing, 
 vision, or print impairments;
 (4) recommend guidelines or standards for health literacy 
 and plain language, informed consent, discharge instructions, 
 and written communications, and for improvement of health care 
 access;
 (5) a description of the effect of providing language 
 services on quality of health care and access to care; and
 (6) a description of the costs associated with or savings 
 related to the provision of language services.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 2011. ENGLISH INSTRUCTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH 
 PROFICIENCY.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Education is authorized to 
provide grants to eligible entities for the provision of English as a 
second language (in this section referred to as ``ESL'') instruction to 
individuals with limited English proficiency, including health care-
related English instruction, and shall determine, after consultation 
with appropriate stakeholders, the mechanism for administering and 
distributing such grants.
 (b) Eligible Entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' 
means--
 (1) a State; or
 (2) a community-based organization that predominantly 
 employs and serves racial and ethnic minority groups (as 
 defined in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)).
 (c) Application.--An eligible entity that desires to receive a 
grant under this section shall apply by submitting to the Secretary of 
Education an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
 (d) Use of Grant.--An eligible entity shall use grant funds 
provided under this section to--
 (1) develop and implement a plan for assuring the 
 availability of ESL instruction, free of charge, to the 
 community served by the eligible entity, that effectively 
 integrates information about the nature of the United States 
 health care system, how to access care, and any special 
 language skills that may be required for individuals with 
 limited English proficiency to access and regularly negotiate 
 the health care system effectively;
 (2) develop a plan for making ESL instruction available 
 free to charge to individuals with limited English proficiency 
 in the community served by the eligible entity who are seeking 
 instruction, including, where appropriate, through the use of 
 public-private partnerships; and
 (3) provide ESL instruction to individuals with limited 
 English proficiency in the community served by the eligible 
 entity.
 (e) Supplement, Not Supplant.--An eligible entity awarded a grant 
under this section shall use funds made available under this section to 
supplement, and not supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds 
that would otherwise be expended to carry out activities under this 
section.
 (f) Duties of the Secretary.--The Secretary of Education shall--
 (1) collect and make publicly available annual data on how 
 much Federal, State, and local governments spend annually on 
 ESL instruction;
 (2) collect data from eligible entities awarded a grant 
 under this section to identify the unmet needs of individuals 
 with limited English proficiency for appropriate ESL 
 instruction, including--
 (A) the preferred written and spoken language of 
 such individuals;
 (B) the availability of enrollment in ESL 
 instruction programs in the communities served by each 
 eligible entity awarded a grant under this section, 
 including the extent of waiting lists for ESL 
 instruction, how many programs maintain waiting lists, 
 and, for programs that do not have waiting lists, the 
 reasons why such a list is unnecessary or otherwise not 
 maintained;
 (C) the availability of programs to geographically 
 isolated communities;
 (D) the impact of course enrollment policies, 
 including open enrollment, on the availability of ESL 
 instruction;
 (E) the number of individuals with limited English 
 proficiency and the number of individuals enrolled in 
 ESL instruction programs in the communities served by 
 each eligible entity awarded a grant under this 
 section;
 (F) the effectiveness of the ESL instruction 
 provided through grants awarded under this section in 
 meeting the needs of individuals receiving such 
 instruction; and
 (G) an assessment of the need for programs that 
 integrate job training and ESL instruction, to assist 
 individuals with limited English proficiency in 
 obtaining better jobs;
 (3) determine the cost and most appropriate methods of 
 making ESL instruction available to all individuals with 
 limited English proficiency in the United States who are 
 seeking instruction; and
 (4) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, issue a report to Congress that--
 (A) assesses the information collected in 
 paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) and makes recommendations 
 on steps that should be taken to realize the goal of 
 making ESL instruction available to all individuals 
 with limited English proficiency in the United States 
 who are seeking instruction; and
 (B) evaluates the impact of the grant program 
 authorized under this section on the accessibility of, 
 and ability to effectively negotiate, the health care 
 system for individuals with limited English proficiency 
 who have received ESL instruction funded by a grant 
 under this section.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of Education $250,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2025 through 2029 to carry out this section.

SEC. 2012. IMPLEMENTATION.

 (a) General Provisions.--
 (1) Immunity.--A person injured by a violation of this 
 title (including an amendment made by this title) by a State 
 may bring a civil action in the appropriate Federal court for 
 such injury in accordance with this section.
 (2) Remedies.--In a civil action under this section for a 
 violation of this title, such remedies shall be available as 
 would be available in a civil action for such violation against 
 any party other than a State.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this title may be construed 
to limit otherwise existing obligations of recipients of Federal 
financial assistance under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
U.S.C. 2000d et seq.) or any other Federal statute.

SEC. 2013. LANGUAGE ACCESS SERVICES.

 (a) Essential Benefits.--Section 1302(b)(1) of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18022(b)(1)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(K) Language access services, including oral 
 interpretation and written translations.''.
 (b) Employer-Sponsored Minimum Essential Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--Section 36B(c)(2)(C) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating clauses (iii) 
 and (iv) as clauses (iv) and (v), respectively, and by 
 inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause:
 ``(iii) Coverage must include language 
 access and services.--Except as provided in 
 clause (iv), an employee shall not be treated 
 as eligible for minimum essential coverage if 
 such coverage consists of an eligible employer-
 sponsored plan (as defined in section 
 5000A(f)(2)) and the plan does not provide 
 coverage for language access services, 
 including oral interpretation and written 
 translations.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 36B(c)(2)(C) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``clause (iii)'' each place it appears in 
 clauses (i) and (ii) and inserting ``clause (iv)''.
 (B) Section 36B(c)(2)(C)(iv) of such Code, as 
 redesignated by this subsection, is amended by striking 
 ``(i) and (ii)'' and inserting ``(i), (ii), and 
 (iii)''.
 (c) Quality Reporting.--Section 2717(a)(1) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-17(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) reduce health disparities through the 
 provision of language access services, including oral 
 interpretation and written translations.''.
 (d) Regulations Regarding Internal Claims and Appeals and External 
Review Processes for Health Plans and Health Insurance Issuers.--The 
Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services shall amend the regulations in section 
54.9815-2719(e) of title 26, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor 
regulations), section 2590.715-2719(e) of title 29, Code of Federal 
Regulations (or successor regulations), and section 147.136(e) of title 
45, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations), 
respectively, to require group health plans and health insurance 
issuers offering group or individual health insurance coverage to which 
such sections apply--
 (1) to provide oral interpretation services without any 
 threshold requirements;
 (2) to provide in the English versions of all notices a 
 statement prominently displayed in not less than 15 non-English 
 languages clearly indicating how to access the language 
 services provided by the plan or issuer; and
 (3) with respect to the requirements for providing relevant 
 notices in a culturally and linguistically appropriate manner 
 in the applicable non-English languages, to apply a threshold 
 that 5 percent of the population, or not less than 500 
 individuals, in the county is literate only in the same non-
 English language in order for the language to be considered an 
 applicable non-English language.
 (e) Data Collection and Reporting.--The Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall--
 (1) amend the single streamlined application form developed 
 pursuant to section 1413 of the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18083) to collect the preferred 
 spoken and written language for each household member applying 
 for coverage under a qualified health plan through an Exchange 
 under title I of such Act (42 U.S.C. 18001 et seq.);
 (2) require navigators, certified application counselors, 
 and other individuals assisting with enrollment to collect and 
 report requests for language assistance; and
 (3) require the toll-free telephone hotlines established 
 pursuant to section 1311(d)(4)(B) of the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(d)(4)(B)) to submit an 
 annual report documenting the number of language assistance 
 requests, the types of languages requested, the range and 
 average wait time for a consumer to speak with an interpreter, 
 the number of complaints and any steps the hotline, and any 
 entity contracting with the Secretary to provide language 
 services, have taken to actively address some of the consumer 
 complaints.
 (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall not 
apply to plans beginning prior to the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 2014. MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS.

 Section 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b(b)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3) Medically underserved population.--The term 
 `medically underserved population' means--
 ``(A) the population of an urban or rural area 
 designated by the Secretary as--
 ``(i) an area with a shortage of personal 
 health services; or
 ``(ii) a population group having a shortage 
 of such services; or
 ``(B) a population of individuals, not confined to 
 a particular urban or rural area, who are designated by 
 the Secretary as having a shortage of personal health 
 services due to a specific demographic trait.''.

 TITLE III--HEALTH WORKFORCE DIVERSITY

SEC. 3001. AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 Title XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 
2004, is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subtitle B--Diversifying the Health Care Workplace

``SEC. 3411. NATIONAL WORKING GROUP ON WORKFORCE DIVERSITY.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Bureau of 
Health Workforce of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall award a grant to an entity determined appropriate by the 
Secretary for the establishment of a national working group on 
workforce diversity.
 ``(b) Representation.--In establishing the national working group 
under subsection (a):
 ``(1) The grantee shall ensure that the group has 
 representatives of each of the following:
 ``(A) The Health Resources and Services 
 Administration.
 ``(B) The Department of Health and Human Services 
 Data Council.
 ``(C) The Office of Minority Health of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services.
 ``(D) The Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
 Services Administration.
 ``(E) The Bureau of Labor Statistics of the 
 Department of Labor.
 ``(F) The National Institute on Minority Health and 
 Health Disparities.
 ``(G) The Agency for Healthcare Research and 
 Quality.
 ``(H) The National Academy of Medicine.
 ``(I) The Indian Health Service.
 ``(J) The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 ``(K) The Department of Education.
 ``(L) Institutions described in section 371(a) of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(M) Consumer organizations.
 ``(N) Health professional associations, including 
 those that represent underrepresented minority 
 populations.
 ``(O) Researchers in the area of health workforce.
 ``(P) Health workforce accreditation entities.
 ``(Q) Private (including nonprofit) foundations 
 that have sponsored workforce diversity initiatives.
 ``(R) Local and State health departments.
 ``(S) Representatives of community members to be 
 included on admissions committees for health profession 
 schools pursuant to subsection (c)(9).
 ``(T) National community-based organizations that 
 serve as a national intermediary to their rural or 
 urban affiliate members and have demonstrated capacity 
 to train health care professionals.
 ``(U) The Veterans Health Administration.
 ``(V) Other entities determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) The grantee shall ensure that, in addition to the 
 representatives under paragraph (1), the working group has not 
 less than 5 health professions students representing various 
 health profession fields and levels of training.
 ``(c) Activities.--The working group established under subsection 
(a) shall convene at least twice each year to complete the following 
activities:
 ``(1) Review public and private health workforce diversity 
 initiatives.
 ``(2) Identify successful health workforce diversity 
 programs and practices.
 ``(3) Examine challenges relating to the development and 
 implementation of health workforce diversity initiatives.
 ``(4) Draft a national strategic work plan for health 
 workforce diversity, including recommendations for public and 
 private sector initiatives.
 ``(5) Develop a framework and methods for the evaluation of 
 current and future health workforce diversity initiatives.
 ``(6) Develop recommended standards for workforce diversity 
 that could be applicable to all health professions programs and 
 programs funded under this Act.
 ``(7) Develop guidelines to train health professionals to 
 care for a diverse population.
 ``(8) Develop a workforce data collection or tracking 
 system to identify where health professionals of racial and 
 ethnic minority groups practice.
 ``(9) Develop a strategy for the inclusion of community 
 members on admissions committees for health profession schools.
 ``(10) Help with monitoring of standards for diversity, 
 equity, and inclusion.
 ``(11) Other activities determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(d) Annual Report.--Not later than 1 year after the establishment 
of the working group under subsection (a), and annually thereafter, the 
working group shall prepare and make available to the general public 
for comment, an annual report on the activities of the working group. 
Such report shall include the recommendations of the working group for 
improving health workforce diversity.
 ``(e) Coordination With Other Efforts.--In providing for the 
establishment of the working group under subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that the work of 
the working group does not overlap with, or otherwise duplicate, other 
Federal Government efforts with respect to ensuring health equity in 
data collection in public health emergencies.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3412. TECHNICAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR HEALTH WORKFORCE DIVERSITY.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, and in collaboration with the 
Bureau of Health Workforce within the Health Resources and Services 
Administration and the National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities, shall establish a technical clearinghouse on health 
workforce diversity within the Office of Minority Health and coordinate 
current and future clearinghouses related to health workforce 
diversity.
 ``(b) Information and Services.--The clearinghouse established 
under subsection (a) shall offer the following information and 
services:
 ``(1) Information on the importance of health workforce 
 diversity.
 ``(2) Statistical information relating to representation of 
 underrepresented minority populations in health and allied 
 health professions and occupations.
 ``(3) Model health workforce diversity practices and 
 programs, including integrated models of care.
 ``(4) Admissions policies that promote health workforce 
 diversity and are in compliance with Federal and State laws.
 ``(5) Retainment policies that promote completion of health 
 profession degrees for underserved populations.
 ``(6) Lists of scholarship, loan repayment, and loan 
 cancellation grants as well as fellowship information for 
 underserved populations for health professions schools.
 ``(7) Foundation and other large organizational initiatives 
 relating to health workforce diversity.
 ``(c) Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall consult with non-Federal entities which may include health 
professional associations representing minority populations and 
sections of major health professional associations representing 
minority populations to ensure the adequacy and accuracy of 
information.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3413. SUPPORT FOR INSTITUTIONS COMMITTED TO WORKFORCE DIVERSITY, 
 EQUITY, AND INCLUSION.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration and the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall award grants to 
eligible entities that demonstrate a commitment to health workforce 
diversity.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be an educational institution or entity that 
 historically produces or trains meaningful numbers of 
 underrepresented health professionals of minority populations, 
 including--
 ``(A) part B institutions, as defined in section 
 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965;
 ``(B) historically Black professional or graduate 
 institutions eligible for grants under section 326 of 
 such Act;
 ``(C) Hispanic-serving health professions schools;
 ``(D) Hispanic-serving institutions, as defined in 
 section 502 of such Act;
 ``(E) Tribal Colleges or Universities, as defined 
 in section 316 of such Act;
 ``(F) Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institutions, as defined in section 
 371(c) of such Act;
 ``(G) institutions that have programs to recruit 
 and retain underrepresented health professionals of 
 minority populations, in which a significant number of 
 the enrolled participants are from minority 
 populations;
 ``(H) health professional associations, which may 
 include health professional associations representing 
 underrepresented minority populations; and
 ``(I) institutions, including national and regional 
 community-based organizations with demonstrated 
 commitment to a diversified workforce--
 ``(i) located in communities with 
 predominantly underrepresented minority 
 populations;
 ``(ii) with whom partnerships have been 
 formed for the purpose of increasing workforce 
 diversity; and
 ``(iii) in which at least 20 percent of the 
 enrolled participants are from underrepresented 
 minority populations; and
 ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received under a grant under 
subsection (a) shall be used to expand existing workforce diversity 
programs, implement new workforce diversity programs, or evaluate 
existing or new workforce diversity programs, including with respect to 
mental health care professions. Such programs shall enhance diversity 
by considering status as a member of a minority population as part of 
an individualized consideration of qualifications. Possible activities 
may include--
 ``(1) educational outreach programs relating to 
 opportunities in the health professions;
 ``(2) scholarship, fellowship, grant, loan repayment, and 
 loan cancellation programs;
 ``(3) postbaccalaureate programs;
 ``(4) academic enrichment programs, particularly targeting 
 those who would not be competitive for health professions 
 schools;
 ``(5) supporting workforce diversity in kindergarten 
 through 12th grade and other health pipeline programs;
 ``(6) mentoring programs;
 ``(7) internship or rotation programs involving hospitals, 
 health systems, health plans, and other health entities;
 ``(8) community partnership development for purposes 
 relating to workforce diversity; or
 ``(9) leadership training.
 ``(d) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after receiving a grant under 
this section, and annually for the term of the grant, a grantee shall 
submit to the Secretary a report that summarizes and evaluates all 
activities conducted under the grant.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3414. CAREER DEVELOPMENT FOR SCIENTISTS AND RESEARCHERS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the National Institutes of Health, the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, the 
Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall award grants that expand existing opportunities for scientists 
and researchers and promote the inclusion of underrepresented minority 
populations in the health professions.
 ``(b) Research Funding.--The head of each agency listed in 
subsection (a) shall establish or expand existing programs to provide 
research funding to scientists and researchers in training. Under such 
programs, the head of each such entity shall give priority in 
allocating research funding to support health research in traditionally 
underserved communities, including underrepresented minority 
populations, and research classified as community or participatory.
 ``(c) Data Collection.--The head of each agency listed in 
subsection (a) shall collect data on the number (expressed as an 
absolute number and a percentage) of underrepresented applicants from 
minority populations, and applicants from populations that are not 
minority populations, who receive and are denied agency funding at 
every stage of review. Such data shall be reported annually to the 
Secretary and the appropriate committees of Congress.
 ``(d) Student Loan Reimbursement.--The Secretary shall establish a 
student loan reimbursement program to provide student loan 
reimbursement assistance to researchers who focus on racial and ethnic 
disparities in health. The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
define the scope and procedures for the program under this subsection.
 ``(e) Student Loan Cancellation.--The Secretary shall establish a 
student loan cancellation program to provide student loan cancellation 
assistance to researchers who focus on racial and ethnic disparities in 
health. Students participating in the program shall make a minimum 5-
year commitment to work at an accredited health professions school. The 
Secretary shall promulgate additional regulations to define the scope 
and procedures for the program under this subsection.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3415. CAREER SUPPORT FOR NONRESEARCH HEALTH PROFESSIONALS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Assistant Secretary 
for Mental Health and Substance Use, the Administrator of the Health 
Resources and Services Administration, and the Administrator of the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall establish a program to 
award grants to universities and other institutions to enter into 
agreements with eligible individuals under which--
 ``(1) the university or institution supports the eligible 
 individual's career in a nonresearch-related health and 
 wellness profession; and
 ``(2) the eligible individual commits to performing a 
 period of obligated service in such a career to serve, or to 
 work on health issues affecting, underserved communities, such 
 as communities of racial and ethnic minority groups.
 ``(b) Eligible Individuals.--To be an eligible individual for 
purposes of subsection (a), an individual shall be a student in a 
health professions school, a graduate of such a school who is working 
in a health profession, an individual working in a health or wellness 
profession (including mental and behavioral health), or a faculty 
member of such a school.
 ``(c) Application.--To seek a grant under this section, a 
university or other institution shall submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--A university or other institution receiving a 
grant under this section shall use the grant for agreements described 
in subsection (a). Such agreements may--
 ``(1) support an eligible individual's health activities or 
 projects that involve underserved communities, including 
 communities of racial and ethnic minority groups;
 ``(2) support an eligible individual's health-related 
 career advancement activities;
 ``(3) pay, or reimburse for payment of, student loans or 
 training or credentialing costs for eligible individuals who 
 are health professionals and are focused on health issues 
 affecting underserved communities, including communities of 
 racial and ethnic minority groups; and
 ``(4) establish and promote leadership training programs 
 for eligible individuals to decrease health disparities and to 
 increase cultural competence with the goal of increasing 
 diversity in leadership positions.
 ``(e) Definition.--In this section, the term `career in a 
nonresearch-related health and wellness profession' means employment or 
intended employment in the field of public health, health policy, 
health management, health administration, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, 
psychology, social work, psychiatry, other mental and behavioral 
health, allied health, community health, social work, or other fields 
determined appropriate by the Secretary, other than in a position that 
involves research.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3416. RESEARCH ON THE EFFECT OF WORKFORCE DIVERSITY ON QUALITY.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (in this section referred to as the `Director'), 
in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
Health and the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health 
and Health Disparities, shall award grants to eligible entities to 
expand research on the link between health workforce diversity and 
quality health care.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a clinical, public health, or health services 
 research entity or other entity determined appropriate by the 
 Director; and
 ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under 
subsection (a) shall be used to support research that investigates the 
effect of health workforce diversity on--
 ``(1) language access;
 ``(2) cultural competence;
 ``(3) patient satisfaction;
 ``(4) timeliness of care;
 ``(5) safety of care;
 ``(6) effectiveness of care;
 ``(7) efficiency of care;
 ``(8) patient outcomes;
 ``(9) community engagement;
 ``(10) resource allocation;
 ``(11) organizational structure;
 ``(12) compliance of care; or
 ``(13) other topics determined appropriate by the Director.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Director shall give individualized consideration to all relevant 
aspects of the applicant's background. Consideration of prior research 
experience involving the health of underserved communities shall be 
such a relevant aspect.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3417. HEALTH DISPARITIES EDUCATION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Office of 
Minority Health, in collaboration with the National Institute on 
Minority Health and Health Disparities, the Office for Civil Rights, 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, and other appropriate public and private entities, 
shall establish and coordinate a health and health care disparities 
education program to support, develop, and implement educational 
initiatives and outreach strategies that inform health care 
professionals and the public about the existence of and methods to 
reduce racial and ethnic disparities in health and health care.
 ``(b) Activities.--The Secretary, through the education program 
established under subsection (a), shall, through the use of public 
awareness and outreach campaigns targeting the general public and the 
medical community at large--
 ``(1) disseminate scientific evidence for the existence and 
 extent of racial and ethnic disparities in health care, 
 including disparities that are not otherwise attributable to 
 known factors such as access to care, patient preferences, or 
 appropriateness of intervention, as described in the 2002 
 report of the National Academy of Medicine (formerly the 
 `Institute of Medicine') entitled `Unequal Treatment: 
 Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care', as 
 well as the impact of disparities related to age, disability 
 status, socioeconomic status, sex, gender identity, and sexual 
 orientation on racial and ethnic minority groups;
 ``(2) disseminate new research findings to health care 
 providers and patients to assist them in understanding, 
 reducing, and eliminating health and health care disparities;
 ``(3) disseminate information about the impact of 
 linguistic and cultural barriers on health care quality and the 
 obligation of health providers who receive Federal financial 
 assistance to ensure that individuals with limited English 
 proficiency have access to language access services;
 ``(4) disseminate information about the importance and 
 legality of racial, ethnic, disability status, socioeconomic 
 status, sex, gender identity, and sexual orientation, and 
 primary language data collection, analysis, and reporting;
 ``(5) design and implement specific educational initiatives 
 to health care providers relating to health and health care 
 disparities;
 ``(6) assess the impact of the programs established under 
 this section in raising awareness of health and health care 
 disparities and providing information on available resources; 
 and
 ``(7) design and implement specific educational initiatives 
 to educate the health care workforce relating to unconscious 
 bias.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 3002. HISPANIC-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES 
 AND UNIVERSITIES, HISTORICALLY BLACK PROFESSIONAL OR 
 GRADUATE INSTITUTIONS, ASIAN AMERICAN AND NATIVE AMERICAN 
 PACIFIC ISLANDER-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, TRIBAL COLLEGES, 
 REGIONAL COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS, AND NATIONAL 
 MINORITY MEDICAL ASSOCIATIONS.

 Part B of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 742. HISPANIC-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES 
 AND UNIVERSITIES, HISTORICALLY BLACK PROFESSIONAL OR 
 GRADUATE INSTITUTIONS, ASIAN AMERICAN AND NATIVE AMERICAN 
 PACIFIC ISLANDER-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, AND TRIBAL 
 COLLEGES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration and in consultation 
with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants to Hispanic-serving 
institutions, historically Black colleges and universities, 
historically Black professional or graduate institutions eligible for 
grants under section 326 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, Asian 
American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving institutions, 
Tribal Colleges or Universities, regional community-based 
organizations, and national minority medical associations, for 
counseling, mentoring, and providing information on financial 
assistance to prepare underrepresented minority individuals to enroll 
in and graduate from health professional schools and to increase 
services for underrepresented minority students including--
 ``(1) mentoring with underrepresented health professionals;
 ``(2) providing financial assistance information for 
 continued education and applications to health professional 
 schools; and
 ``(3) retaining existing enrolled underrepresented minority 
 students in a health professions school.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Asian american and native american pacific islander-
 serving institution.--The term `Asian American and Native 
 American Pacific Islander-serving institution' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 320(b) of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965.
 ``(2) Hispanic-serving institution.--The term `Hispanic-
 serving institution' means an entity that--
 ``(A) is a school or program for which there is a 
 definition under section 799B;
 ``(B) has an enrollment of full-time equivalent 
 students that is made up of at least 9 percent Hispanic 
 students;
 ``(C) has been effective in carrying out programs 
 to recruit Hispanic individuals to enroll in and 
 graduate from the school;
 ``(D) has been effective in recruiting and 
 retaining Hispanic faculty members;
 ``(E) has a significant number of graduates who are 
 providing health services to medically underserved 
 populations or to individuals in health professional 
 shortage areas; and
 ``(F) is a Hispanic Center of Excellence in Health 
 Professions Education designated under section 
 736(d)(2).
 ``(3) Historically black college and university.--The term 
 `historically Black college and university' has the meaning 
 given the term `part B institution' as defined in section 322 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(4) Tribal college or university.--The term `Tribal 
 College or University' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 316(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(c) Certain Loan Repayment Programs.--In carrying out the 
National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established under 
subpart III of part D of title III and the loan repayment program under 
section 317F, the Secretary shall ensure, notwithstanding such subpart 
or section, that loan repayments of not less than $50,000 per year per 
person are awarded for repayment of loans incurred for enrollment or 
participation of underrepresented minority individuals in health 
professional schools and other health programs described in this 
section.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 3003. LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
 PREVENTION.

 Section 317F(c)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
247b-7(c)(1)) is amended by striking ``$500,000 for fiscal year 1994, 
and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 
through 2002'' and inserting ``such sums as may be necessary for each 
of fiscal years 2025 through 2029''.

SEC. 3004. COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS FOR ONLINE DEGREE PROGRAMS AT SCHOOLS 
 OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SCHOOLS OF ALLIED HEALTH.

 Part D of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 755 of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 294e) the following:

``SEC. 755A. COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS FOR ONLINE DEGREE PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, in 
consultation with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, and the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall 
enter into cooperative agreements with schools of public health and 
schools of allied health to design and implement online degree 
programs.
 ``(b) Priority.--In entering into cooperative agreements under this 
section, the Secretary shall give priority to any school of public 
health or school of allied health that has an established track record 
of serving medically underserved communities.
 ``(c) Requirements.--As a condition of entering into a cooperative 
agreement with the Secretary under this section, a school of public 
health or school of allied health shall agree to design and implement 
an online degree program that meets the following restrictions:
 ``(1) Enrollment of individuals who have obtained a 
 secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent.
 ``(2) Maintaining a significant enrollment of 
 underrepresented minority or disadvantaged students.
 ``(3) Achieving a high completion rate of enrolled 
 underrepresented minority or disadvantaged students.
 ``(d) Period of Cooperative Agreements.--The period during which 
payments are made through a cooperative agreement entered into under 
this section may not exceed 3 years.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 3005. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE COMMISSION.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
National Health Care Workforce Commission established by section 5101 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 294q) 
should, in carrying out its assigned duties under that section, give 
attention to the needs of racial and ethnic minority groups, 
individuals with lower socioeconomic status, individuals with mental, 
developmental, and physical disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, and questioning populations, and individuals who 
are members of multiple minority or special population groups.
 (b) Reauthorization.--Section 5101(h)(2) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 294q(h)(2)) is amended by striking 
``such sums as may be necessary'' and inserting ``$3,000,000 for each 
of fiscal years 2025 through 2027''.

SEC. 3006. SCHOLARSHIP AND FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMS.

 Subtitle B of title XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 3001, is further amended by inserting after section 
3417 the following:

``SEC. 3418. DAVID SATCHER PUBLIC HEALTH AND HEALTH SERVICES CORPS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, in collaboration with the Administrator of the Health 
Resources and Services Administration and the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health, shall award grants to eligible entities 
to increase awareness among secondary and postsecondary students of 
career opportunities in the health professions.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a clinical, public health, or health services 
 organization, community-based or nonprofit entity, or other 
 entity determined appropriate by the Director of the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention;
 ``(2) serve a health professional shortage area, as 
 determined by the Secretary;
 ``(3) work with students, including those from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups, that have expressed an interest in the 
 health professions; and
 ``(4) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Grant awards under subsection (a) shall be 
used to support internships that will increase awareness among students 
of non-research-based, career opportunities in the following health 
professions:
 ``(1) Medicine.
 ``(2) Nursing.
 ``(3) Public health.
 ``(4) Pharmacy.
 ``(5) Health administration and management.
 ``(6) Health policy.
 ``(7) Psychology.
 ``(8) Dentistry.
 ``(9) International health.
 ``(10) Social work.
 ``(11) Allied health.
 ``(12) Psychiatry.
 ``(13) Hospice care.
 ``(14) Community health, patient navigation, and peer 
 support.
 ``(15) Other professions determined appropriate by the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall give 
priority to those entities that--
 ``(1) serve a high proportion of individuals from 
 disadvantaged backgrounds;
 ``(2) have experience in health disparity elimination 
 programs;
 ``(3) facilitate the entry of disadvantaged individuals 
 into institutions of higher education; and
 ``(4) provide counseling or other services designed to 
 assist disadvantaged individuals in successfully completing 
 their education at the postsecondary level.
 ``(e) Stipends.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an entity 
 receiving a grant under this section may use the funds made 
 available through such grant to award stipends for educational 
 and living expenses to students participating in the internship 
 supported by the grant.
 ``(2) Limitations.--A stipend awarded under paragraph (1) 
 to an individual--
 ``(A) may not be provided for a period that exceeds 
 6 months; and
 ``(B) may not exceed $20 per day for an individual 
 (notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding 
 the amount of a stipend).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3419. LOUIS STOKES PUBLIC HEALTH SCHOLARS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
for Minority Health, shall award scholarships to eligible individuals 
under subsection (b) who seek a career in public health.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a scholarship under 
subsection (a), an individual shall--
 ``(1) have interest, knowledge, or skill in public health 
 research or public health practice, or other health professions 
 as determined appropriate by the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention;
 ``(2) reside in a health professional shortage area as 
 determined by the Secretary;
 ``(3) demonstrate promise for becoming a leader in public 
 health;
 ``(4) secure admission to a 4-year institution of higher 
 education; and
 ``(5) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received under an award under 
subsection (a) shall be used to support opportunities for students to 
become public health professionals.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Director shall give priority to those students that--
 ``(1) are from disadvantaged backgrounds;
 ``(2) have secured admissions to an institution described 
 in section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(3) have identified a health professional as a mentor at 
 their institution described in subsection (b)(4) and an 
 academic advisor to assist in the completion of their 
 baccalaureate degree.
 ``(e) Scholarships.--The Secretary may approve payment of 
scholarships under this section for such individuals for any period of 
education in student undergraduate tenure, except that such a 
scholarship may not be provided to an individual for more than 4 years, 
and such a scholarship may not exceed $10,000 per academic year for an 
individual (notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the 
amount of a scholarship).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3420. PATSY MINK HEALTH AND GENDER RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
for Minority Health, the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and 
Substance Use, and the Director of the Indian Health Service, shall 
award research fellowships to eligible individuals under subsection (b) 
to conduct research that will examine gender and health disparities and 
to pursue a career in the health professions.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a fellowship under 
subsection (a), an individual shall--
 ``(1) have experience in health research or public health 
 practice;
 ``(2) reside in a health professional shortage area 
 designated by the Secretary under section 332;
 ``(3) have expressed an interest in the health professions;
 ``(4) demonstrate promise for becoming a leader in the 
 field of women's sexual and reproductive health, including 
 family planning;
 ``(5) secure admission to a health professions school or 
 graduate program with an emphasis in gender studies; and
 ``(6) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--A fellowship awarded under subsection (a) to 
an eligible individual under subsection (b) shall be used to support an 
opportunity for the individual to become a researcher and advance the 
research base on the intersection between gender and health.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding fellowships under subsection (a), the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall give 
priority to those applicants that--
 ``(1) are from disadvantaged backgrounds; and
 ``(2) have identified a mentor and academic advisor who 
 will assist in the completion of their graduate or professional 
 degree and have secured a research assistant position with a 
 researcher working in the area of gender and health.
 ``(e) Fellowships.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention may approve fellowships for individuals under this 
section for any period of education in the student's graduate or health 
profession tenure, except that such a fellowship may not be provided to 
an individual for more than 3 years, and such a fellowship may not 
exceed $18,000 per academic year for an individual (notwithstanding any 
other provision of law regarding the amount of a fellowship).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3421. PAUL DAVID WELLSTONE INTERNATIONAL HEALTH FELLOWSHIP 
 PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health, shall award research fellowships to 
eligible individuals under subsection (b) to advance their 
understanding of international health.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a fellowship under 
subsection (a), an individual shall--
 ``(1) have educational experience in the field of 
 international health;
 ``(2) reside in a health professional shortage area as 
 determined by the Secretary;
 ``(3) demonstrate promise for becoming a leader in the 
 field of international health;
 ``(4) be in the fourth year of a 4-year institution of 
 higher education or a recent graduate of a 4-year institution 
 of higher education; and
 ``(5) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--A fellowship awarded under subsection (a) to 
an eligible individual under subsection (b) shall be used to support an 
opportunity for the individual to become a health professional and to 
advance the knowledge of the individual about international issues 
relating to health care access and quality.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding fellowships under subsection (a), the 
Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality shall give 
priority to eligible individuals under subsection (b) that--
 ``(1) are from a disadvantaged background; and
 ``(2) have identified a mentor at a health professions 
 school or institution, an academic advisor to assist in the 
 completion of their graduate or professional degree, and an 
 advisor from an international health non-governmental 
 organization, private volunteer organization, or other 
 international institution or program that focuses on increasing 
 health care access and quality for residents in developing 
 countries.
 ``(e) Fellowships.--A fellowship awarded under this section may 
not--
 ``(1) be provided to an eligible individual for more than a 
 period of 6 months;
 ``(2) be awarded to a graduate of a 4-year institution of 
 higher education that has not been enrolled in such institution 
 for more than 1 year; or
 ``(3) exceed $4,000 per academic year (notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law regarding the amount of a fellowship).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3422. EDWARD R. ROYBAL HEALTH SCHOLAR PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services, and the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
Services Administration, in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health, shall award grants to eligible entities 
under subsection (b) to expose entering graduate students to the health 
professions.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a clinical, public health, or health services 
 organization, community-based, academic, or nonprofit entity, 
 or other entity determined appropriate by the Director of the 
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality;
 ``(2) serve in a health professional shortage area 
 designated by the Secretary under section 332;
 ``(3) work with students obtaining a degree in the health 
 professions; and
 ``(4) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under 
subsection (a) shall be used to support opportunities that expose 
students to non-research-based health professions, including--
 ``(1) public health policy;
 ``(2) health care and pharmaceutical policy;
 ``(3) health care administration and management;
 ``(4) health economics; and
 ``(5) other professions determined appropriate by the 
 Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the 
 Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
 or the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the 
Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, in 
collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, 
shall give priority to entities that--
 ``(1) have experience with health disparity elimination 
 programs;
 ``(2) facilitate training in the fields described in 
 subsection (c); and
 ``(3) provide counseling or other services designed to 
 assist students in successfully completing their education at 
 the postsecondary level.
 ``(e) Stipends.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an entity 
 receiving a grant under this section may use the funds made 
 available through such grant to award stipends for educational 
 and living expenses to students participating in the 
 opportunities supported by the grant.
 ``(2) Limitations.--A stipend awarded under paragraph (1) 
 to an individual--
 ``(A) may not be provided for a period that exceeds 
 2 months; and
 ``(B) may not exceed $100 per day (notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law regarding the amount of a 
 stipend).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3423. LEADERSHIP FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to national 
minority medical or health professional associations to develop 
leadership fellowship programs for underrepresented health 
professionals in order to--
 ``(1) assist such professionals in becoming future leaders 
 in public health and health care delivery institutions; and
 ``(2) increase diversity in decision-making positions that 
 can improve the health of underserved communities.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--A leadership fellowship program supported 
under this section shall--
 ``(1) focus on training mid-career physicians and health 
 care executives who have documented leadership experience and a 
 commitment to public health services in underserved 
 communities; and
 ``(2) support Federal public health policy and budget 
 programs, and priorities that impact health equity, through 
 activities such as didactic lectures and leader site visits.
 ``(c) Period of Grants.--The period during which payments are made 
under a grant awarded under subsection (a) may not exceed 3 years.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 3007. MCNAIR POSTBACCALAUREATE ACHIEVEMENT PROGRAM.

 Section 402E of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
15) is amended by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following:
 ``(g) Collaboration in Health Profession Diversity Training 
Programs.--The Secretary shall coordinate with the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services to ensure that there is collaboration between the 
goals of the program under this section and programs of the Health 
Resources and Services Administration that promote health workforce 
diversity. The Secretary of Education shall take such measures as may 
be necessary to encourage students participating in projects assisted 
under this section to consider health profession careers.
 ``(h) Funding.--From amounts appropriated pursuant to the authority 
of section 402A(g), the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, 
allocate funds for projects authorized by this section in an amount 
that is not less than $31,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2025 
through 2029.''.

SEC. 3008. RULES FOR DETERMINATION OF FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT RESIDENTS 
 FOR COST-REPORTING PERIODS.

 (a) DGME Determinations.--Section 1886(h)(4) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)(4)), as amended by section 2006(a), is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``Subject to 
 subparagraphs (J) and (K), such rules'' and inserting ``Subject 
 to subparagraphs (J), (K), and (M), such rules'';
 (2) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``Such rules'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (M), such rules'';
 (3) in subparagraph (K), by striking ``In determining'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (M), in determining''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(M) Treatment of certain residents and interns.--
 For purposes of cost-reporting periods beginning on or 
 after October 1, 2025, in determining the hospital's 
 number of full-time equivalent residents for purposes 
 of this paragraph, all time spent by an intern or 
 resident in an approved medical residency training 
 program shall be counted toward the determination of 
 full-time equivalency if the hospital--
 ``(i) is recognized as a subsection (d) 
 hospital;
 ``(ii) is recognized as a subsection (d) 
 Puerto Rico hospital;
 ``(iii) is reimbursed under a reimbursement 
 system authorized under section 1814(b)(3); or
 ``(iv) is a provider-based hospital 
 outpatient department.''.
 (b) IME Determinations.--Section 1886(d)(5)(B)(xi) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)(xi)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (II), by striking ``In determining'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to subclause (IV), in determining'';
 (2) in subclause (III), by striking ``In determining'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to subclause (IV), in determining''; and
 (3) by inserting after subclause (III) the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(IV) For purposes of cost-reporting periods 
 beginning on or after October 1, 2025, the provisions 
 of subparagraph (M) of subsection (h)(4) shall apply 
 under this subparagraph in the same manner as they 
 apply under such subsection.''.

SEC. 3009. DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING STRATEGIES FOR LOCAL HEALTH 
 EQUITY.

 (a) Grants.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
jointly with the Secretary of Education and the Secretary of Labor, 
shall make grants to eligible institutions of higher educations for the 
purposes of--
 (1) in accordance with subsection (b), developing 
 capacity--
 (A) to build an evidence base for successful 
 strategies for increasing local health equity; and
 (B) to serve as national models of driving local 
 health equity; and
 (2) in accordance with subsection (c), developing a 
 strategic partnership with the community in which the 
 institution is located.
 (b) Developing Capacity for Increasing Local Health Equity.--As a 
condition of receipt of a grant under subsection (a), an institution of 
higher education shall agree to use such grant to build an evidence 
base for successful strategies for increasing local health equity, and 
to serve as a national model of driving local health equity, by 
supporting--
 (1) resources to strengthen institutional metrics and 
 capacity to execute institution-wide health workforce goals 
 that can serve as models for increasing health equity in 
 communities across the United States;
 (2) collaborations among a cohort of institutions in 
 implementing systemic change, partnership development, and 
 programmatic efforts supportive of health equity goals across 
 disciplines and populations; and
 (3) enhanced or newly developed data systems and research 
 infrastructure capable of informing current and future 
 workforce efforts and building a foundation for a broader 
 research agenda targeting urban health disparities.
 (c) Strategic Partnerships.--As a condition of receipt of a grant 
under subsection (a), an institution of higher education shall agree to 
use the grant to develop a strategic partnership with the community in 
which such institution is located for the purposes of--
 (1) strengthening connections between such institution and 
 the community--
 (A) to improve evaluation of, and address, the 
 health and health workforce needs of such community; 
 and
 (B) to engage such community in health workforce 
 development;
 (2) developing, enhancing, or accelerating innovative 
 undergraduate and graduate programs in the biomedical sciences 
 and health professions; and
 (3) strengthening pipeline programs in the biomedical 
 sciences and health professions, including by developing 
 partnerships between institutions of higher education and 
 elementary schools and secondary schools to recruit the next 
 generation of health professionals earlier in the pipeline to a 
 health care career.
 (d) Definition of Eligible Institution of Higher Education.--For 
purposes of this section, the term ``eligible institution of higher 
education'' includes--
 (1) a program authorized under section 317(a) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059d(a)); and
 (2) a professional or graduate institution described in 
 section 326 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1063b).
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 3010. HEALTH PROFESSIONS WORKFORCE FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Health Resources 
and Services Administration of the Department of Health and Human 
Services a Health Professions Workforce Fund to provide for expanded 
and sustained national investment in the health professions and nursing 
workforce development programs under titles VII and title VIII of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 296 et 
seq.).
 (b) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated, 
 and there is appropriated, out of any monies in the Treasury 
 not otherwise appropriated, to the Health Professions Workforce 
 Fund--
 (A) $392,000,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 (B) $412,000,000 for fiscal year 2026;
 (C) $432,000,000 for fiscal year 2027;
 (D) $454,000,000 for fiscal year 2028;
 (E) $476,000,000 for fiscal year 2029;
 (F) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2030;
 (G) $525,000,000 for fiscal year 2031; and
 (H) $552,000,000 for fiscal year 2032.
 (2) Health professions education programs.--For the purpose 
 of carrying out health professions education programs 
 authorized under title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 292 et seq.), in addition to any other amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated for such purpose, there is 
 authorized to be appropriated out of any monies in the Health 
 Professions Workforce Fund, the following:
 (A) $265,000,000 for fiscal year 2025.
 (B) $278,000,000 for fiscal year 2026.
 (C) $292,000,000 for fiscal year 2027.
 (D) $307,000,000 for fiscal year 2028.
 (E) $322,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.
 (F) $338,000,000 for fiscal year 2030.
 (G) $355,000,000 for fiscal year 2031.
 (H) $373,000,000 for fiscal year 2032.
 (3) Nursing workforce development programs.--For the 
 purpose of carrying out nursing workforce development programs 
 authorized under title VIII of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 296 et seq.), in addition to any other amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated for such purpose, there is 
 authorized to be appropriated out of any monies in the Health 
 Professions Workforce Fund, the following:
 (A) $127,000,000 for fiscal year 2025.
 (B) $134,000,000 for fiscal year 2026.
 (C) $140,000,000 for fiscal year 2027.
 (D) $147,000,000 for fiscal year 2028.
 (E) $154,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.
 (F) $162,000,000 for fiscal year 2030.
 (G) $170,000,000 for fiscal year 2031.
 (H) $179,000,000 for fiscal year 2032.

SEC. 3011. FUTURE ADVANCEMENT OF ACADEMIC NURSING.

 (a) Support for Nursing Education and the Future Nursing 
Workforce.--Part D of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 296p et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 832. NURSING EDUCATION ENHANCEMENT AND MODERNIZATION GRANTS IN 
 UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may award grants 
to schools of nursing for--
 ``(1) increasing the number of faculty and students at such 
 schools in order to enhance the preparedness of the United 
 States for, and the ability of the United States to address and 
 quickly respond to, public health emergencies declared under 
 section 319 and pandemics; or
 ``(2) the enhancement and modernization of nursing 
 education programs.
 ``(b) Priority.--In selecting grant recipients under this section, 
the Secretary shall give priority to schools of nursing that--
 ``(1) are located in a medically underserved community;
 ``(2) are located in a health professional shortage area as 
 defined under section 332(a); or
 ``(3) are institutions of higher education listed under 
 section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(c) Consideration.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary, to the extent practicable, may ensure equitable distribution 
of awards among the geographic regions of the United States.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--A school of nursing that receives a grant 
under this section may use the funds awarded through such grant for 
activities that include--
 ``(1) enhancing enrollment and retention of students at 
 such school, with a priority for students from disadvantaged 
 backgrounds (including racial or ethnic groups underrepresented 
 in the nursing workforce), individuals from rural and 
 underserved areas, low-income individuals, and first generation 
 college students (as defined in section 402A(h)(3) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965);
 ``(2) creating, supporting, or modernizing educational 
 programs and curriculum at such school;
 ``(3) retaining current faculty, and hiring new faculty, 
 with an emphasis on faculty from racial or ethnic groups who 
 are underrepresented in the nursing workforce;
 ``(4) modernizing infrastructure at such school, including 
 audiovisual or other equipment, personal protective equipment, 
 simulation and augmented reality resources, telehealth 
 technologies, and virtual and physical laboratories;
 ``(5) partnering with a health care facility, nurse-managed 
 health clinic, community health center, or other facility that 
 provides health care in order to provide educational 
 opportunities for the purpose of establishing or expanding 
 clinical education;
 ``(6) enhancing and expanding nursing programs that prepare 
 nurse researchers and scientists;
 ``(7) establishing nurse-led intradisciplinary and 
 interprofessional educational partnerships; and
 ``(8) other activities that the Secretary determines 
 further the development, improvement, and expansion of schools 
 of nursing.
 ``(e) Reports From Entities.--Each school of nursing awarded a 
grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the Secretary 
on the activities conducted under such grant, and other information as 
the Secretary may require.
 ``(f) Report to Congress.--Not later than 5 years after the date of 
the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a 
report that provides a summary of the activities and outcomes 
associated with grants made under this section. Such report shall 
include--
 ``(1) a list of schools of nursing receiving grants under 
 this section, including the primary geographic location of any 
 school of nursing that was improved or expanded through such a 
 grant;
 ``(2) the total number of students who are enrolled at or 
 who have graduated from any school of nursing that was improved 
 or expanded through a grant under this section, which such 
 statistic shall--
 ``(A) to the extent such information is available, 
 be deidentified and disaggregated by race, ethnicity, 
 age, sex, geographic region, disability status, and 
 other relevant factors; and
 ``(B) include an indication of the number of such 
 students who are from racial or ethnic groups 
 underrepresented in the nursing workforce, such 
 students who are from rural or underserved areas, such 
 students who are low-income students, and such students 
 who are first generation college students (as defined 
 in section 402A(h)(3) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965);
 ``(3) to the extent such information is available, the 
 effects of the grants awarded under this section on retaining 
 and hiring of faculty, including any increase in diverse 
 faculty, the number of clinical education partnerships, the 
 modernization of nursing education infrastructure, and other 
 ways this section helps address and quickly respond to public 
 health emergencies and pandemics;
 ``(4) recommendations for improving the grants awarded 
 under this section; and
 ``(5) any other considerations as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000,000, to remain 
available until expended.''.
 (b) Strengthening Nurse Education.--The heading of part D of title 
VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 296p et seq.) is 
amended by striking ``basic''.

SEC. 3012. SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION.

 It is the sense of Congress that eliminating the limit of the 
number of residency positions that receive some level of Medicare 
support under section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(h)), also referred to as the Medical graduate medical education 
cap, is critical to--
 (1) ensuring an appropriate supply of physicians to meet 
 the health care needs in the United States;
 (2) facilitating equitable access for all who seek health 
 care;
 (3) increasing the racial and ethnic diversity of 
 physicians in the United States; and
 (4) mitigating disparities in health and health care.

SEC. 3013. CAREER SUPPORT FOR SKILLED, INTERNATIONALLY EDUCATED HEALTH 
 PROFESSIONALS.

 (a) Grants to Eligible Entities.--
 (1) Authority to provide grants.--The Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary''), acting through the Bureau of Health Workforce 
 within the Health Resources and Services Administration, the 
 National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, 
 or the Office of Minority Health, may award grants to eligible 
 entities under paragraph (2) to carry out activities described 
 in subsection (b).
 (2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this section, an entity shall--
 (A) be a clinical, public health, or health 
 services organization, a community-based or nonprofit 
 entity, an academic institution, a faith-based 
 organization, a State, county, or local government, an 
 area health education center, or another entity 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary; and
 (B) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
 time, in such manner, and containing such information 
 as the Secretary may require.
 (b) Authorized Activities.--A grant awarded under this section 
shall be used--
 (1) to provide services to assist unemployed and 
 underemployed skilled immigrants, residing in the United 
 States, who have legal, permanent work authorization and who 
 are internationally educated health professionals, enter into 
 the health workforce of the United States with employment 
 matching their health professional skills and education, and 
 advance in employment to positions that better match their 
 health professional education and expertise;
 (2) to provide training opportunities to reduce barriers to 
 entry and advancement in the health workforce for skilled, 
 internationally educated immigrants;
 (3) to educate employers regarding the abilities and 
 capacities of internationally educated health professionals;
 (4) to assist in the evaluation of foreign credentials;
 (5) to support preceptorships for international medical 
 graduates in hospital primary care training; and
 (6) to facilitate access to contextualized and accelerated 
 courses on English as a second language.

SEC. 3014. STUDY AND REPORT ON STRATEGIES FOR INCREASING DIVERSITY.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on strategies for increasing the diversity of the 
health professional workforce. Such study shall include an analysis of 
strategies for increasing the number of health professionals from 
rural, lower income, and underrepresented minority communities, 
including which strategies are most effective for achieving such goal.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on 
the study conducted under subsection (a), together with recommendations 
for such legislation and administrative action as the Comptroller 
General determines appropriate.

SEC. 3015. CONRAD STATE 30 PROGRAM; PHYSICIAN RETENTION.

 (a) Conrad State 30 Program Extension.--
 (1) In general.--Section 220(c) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Technical Corrections Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-
 416; 8 U.S.C. 1182 note) is amended by striking ``September 30, 
 2015'' and inserting ``the date that is 3 years after the date 
 of the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 
 2024''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect as if enacted on September 30, 2018.
 (b) Retaining Physicians Who Have Practiced in Medically 
Underserved Communities.--Section 201(b)(1) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(F)(i) Alien physicians who have completed service 
 requirements of a waiver requested under section 
 203(b)(2)(B)(ii), including--
 ``(I) alien physicians who completed such service 
 before the date of the enactment of the Health Equity 
 and Accountability Act of 2024; and
 ``(II) the spouse or children of an alien physician 
 described in subclause (I).
 ``(ii) Nothing in this subparagraph may be construed--
 ``(I) to prevent the filing of a petition with the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security for classification under 
 section 204(a) or the filing of an application for 
 adjustment of status under section 245 by an alien 
 physician described in clause (i)(I) before the date on 
 which such alien physician completed the service 
 described in section 214(l) or worked full-time as a 
 physician for an aggregate of 5 years at the location 
 identified in the section 214(l) waiver or in an area 
 or areas designated by the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services as having a shortage of health care 
 professionals; or
 ``(II) to permit the Secretary of Homeland Security 
 to grant a petition or application described in 
 subclause (I) until the alien has satisfied all of the 
 requirements of the waiver received under section 
 214(l).''.
 (c) Employment Protections for Physicians.--
 (1) Exceptions to 2-year foreign residency requirement.--
 Section 214(l)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 
 U.S.C. 1184(l)(1)) is amended--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``Attorney General'' and inserting ``Secretary 
 of Homeland Security'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``Director of 
 the United States Information Agency'' and inserting 
 ``Secretary of State'';
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, except as 
 provided in paragraphs (7) and (8)'' before the 
 semicolon at the end;
 (D) in subparagraph (C), by amending clauses (i) 
 and (ii) to read as follows:
 ``(i) the alien demonstrates a bona fide 
 offer of full-time employment at a health 
 facility or health care organization, which 
 employment has been determined by the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security to be in the public 
 interest; and
 ``(ii) the alien--
 ``(I) has accepted employment with 
 the health facility or health care 
 organization in a geographic area or 
 areas which are designated by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 as having a shortage of health care 
 professionals;
 ``(II) begins employment by the 
 later of the date that is--
 ``(aa) 120 days after 
 receiving such waiver;
 ``(bb) 120 days after 
 completing graduate medical 
 education or training under a 
 program approved pursuant to 
 section 212(j)(1); or
 ``(cc) 120 days after 
 receiving nonimmigrant status 
 or employment authorization, if 
 the alien or the alien's 
 employer petitions for such 
 nonimmigrant status or 
 employment authorization not 
 later than 120 days after the 
 date on which the alien 
 completes his or her graduate 
 medical education or training 
 under a program approved 
 pursuant to section 212(j)(1); 
 and
 ``(III) agrees to continue to work 
 for a total of not less than 3 years in 
 the status authorized for such 
 employment under this subsection, 
 except as provided in paragraph (8); 
 and''; and
 (E) in subparagraph (D), in the matter preceding 
 clause (i), by inserting ``except as provided in 
 paragraph (8),'' before ``in the case''.
 (2) Allowable visa status for physicians fulfilling waiver 
 requirements in medically underserved areas.--Section 
 214(l)(2)(A) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(l)(2)(A)) is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(A) Upon the request of an interested Federal 
 agency or an interested State agency for recommendation 
 of a waiver under this section by a physician who is 
 maintaining valid nonimmigrant status under section 
 101(a)(15)(J) and received a favorable recommendation 
 by the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security may adjust the status of such physician to any 
 status authorized for employment under this Act. The 
 numerical limitations set forth in subsection (g)(1)(A) 
 shall not apply to any alien whose status is adjusted 
 pursuant to this subparagraph.''.
 (3) Violation of agreements.--Section 214(l)(3)(A) of such 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(l)(3)(A)) is amended by inserting 
 ``substantial requirement of an'' before ``agreement entered 
 into''.
 (4) Physician employment in underserved areas.--Section 
 214(l) of such Act, as amended by this subsection, is further 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4)(A) If an interested State agency denies an 
 application for a waiver under paragraph (1)(B) from a 
 physician pursuing graduate medical education or training 
 pursuant to section 101(a)(15)(J) because the State has 
 requested the maximum number of waivers permitted for that 
 fiscal year, the physician's nonimmigrant status shall be 
 extended for up to 6 months if the physician agrees to seek a 
 waiver under this subsection (except for paragraph (1)(D)(ii)) 
 to work for an employer described in paragraph (1)(C) in a 
 State that has not yet requested the maximum number of waivers.
 ``(B) Such physician shall be authorized to work only for 
 the employer referred to in subparagraph (A) during the period 
 beginning on the date on which a new waiver application is 
 filed with such State and ending on the earlier of--
 ``(i) the date on which the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security denies such waiver; or
 ``(ii) the date on which the Secretary approves an 
 application for adjustment of status under paragraph 
 (2)(A) pursuant to the approval of such waiver.''.
 (5) Contract requirements.--Section 214(l) of such Act, as 
 amended by this subsection, is further amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(5) An alien granted a waiver under paragraph (1)(C) 
 shall enter into an employment agreement with the contracting 
 health facility or health care organization that--
 ``(A) specifies--
 ``(i) the maximum number of on-call hours 
 per week (which may be a monthly average) that 
 the alien will be expected to be available; and
 ``(ii) the compensation the alien will 
 receive for on-call time;
 ``(B) specifies--
 ``(i) whether the contracting facility or 
 organization--
 ``(I) has secured medical 
 malpractice liability protection for 
 the alien under section 224(g) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 233(g); or
 ``(II) will pay the alien's 
 malpractice insurance premiums; and
 ``(ii) the amount of such liability 
 protection that will be provided;
 ``(C) describes all of the work locations that the 
 alien will work and includes a statement that the 
 contracting facility or organization will not add 
 additional work locations without the approval of the 
 Federal agency or State agency that requested the 
 waiver; and
 ``(D) does not include a non-compete provision.
 ``(6) An alien granted a waiver under this subsection whose 
 employment relationship with a health facility or health care 
 organization terminates under paragraph (1)(C)(ii) during the 
 3-year service period required under paragraph (1) shall be 
 considered to be maintaining lawful status in an authorized 
 period of stay during the 120-day period referred to in items 
 (aa) and (bb) of subclause (III) of paragraph (1)(C)(ii) or the 
 45-day period referred to in subclause (III)(cc) of such 
 paragraph.''.
 (6) Recapturing waiver slots lost to other states.--Section 
 214(l) of such Act, as amended by this subsection, is further 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) If a recipient of a waiver under this subsection 
 terminates the recipient's employment with a health facility or 
 health care organization pursuant to paragraph (1)(C)(ii), 
 including termination of employment because of circumstances 
 described in paragraph (1)(C)(ii)(III), and accepts new 
 employment with such a facility or organization in a different 
 State, the State from which the alien is departing may be 
 granted an additional waiver by the Secretary of State for use 
 in the fiscal year in which the alien's employment was 
 terminated.''.
 (7) Exception to 3-year work requirement.--Section 214(l) 
 of such Act, as amended by this subsection, is further amended 
 by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) The 3-year work requirement set forth in 
 subparagraphs (C) and (D) of paragraph (1) shall not apply if--
 ``(A)(i) the Secretary of Homeland Security 
 determines the existence of extenuating circumstances, 
 including violations by the employer of the employment 
 agreement with the alien or of labor and employment 
 laws, which justify a lesser period of employment at 
 such facility or organization; and
 ``(ii) the alien demonstrates, not later than 120 
 days after the employment termination date (unless the 
 Secretary determines that extenuating circumstances 
 would justify an extension), another bona fide offer of 
 employment at a health facility or health care 
 organization in a geographic area or areas designated 
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services as having 
 a shortage of health care professionals, for the 
 remainder of such 3-year period;
 ``(B)(i) the interested State agency that requested 
 the waiver attests to the existence of extenuating 
 circumstances, including violations by the employer of 
 the employment agreement with the alien or of labor and 
 employment laws, which justify a lesser period of 
 employment at such facility or organization; and
 ``(ii) the alien demonstrates, not later than 120 
 days after the employment termination date (unless the 
 Secretary determines that extenuating circumstances 
 would justify an extension), another bona fide offer of 
 employment at a health facility or health care 
 organization in a geographic area or areas designated 
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services as having 
 a shortage of health care professionals, for the 
 remainder of such 3-year period; or
 ``(C) the alien--
 ``(i) elects not to pursue a determination 
 of extenuating circumstances pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) or (B);
 ``(ii) terminates the alien's employment 
 relationship with the health facility or health 
 care organization at which the alien was 
 employed;
 ``(iii) demonstrates, not later than 45 
 days after the employment termination date, 
 another bona fide offer of employment at a 
 health facility or health care organization in 
 a geographic area or areas, in the State that 
 requested the alien's waiver, which are 
 designated by the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services as having a shortage of health care 
 professionals; and
 ``(iv) agrees to be employed for the 
 remainder of such 3-year period, and 1 
 additional year for each termination under 
 clause (ii).''.
 (d) Allotment of Conrad State 30 Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--Section 214(l) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(l)), as amended by subsection 
 (c), is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9)(A)(i) All States shall be allotted a total of 35 waivers 
under paragraph (1)(B) for a fiscal year if 90 percent of the waivers 
available to the States receiving at least 5 waivers were used in the 
previous fiscal year.
 ``(ii) When an allotment occurs under clause (i), all States shall 
be allotted an additional 5 waivers under paragraph (1)(B) for each 
subsequent fiscal year if 90 percent of the waivers available to the 
States receiving at least 5 waivers were used in the previous fiscal 
year. If the States are allotted 45 or more waivers for a fiscal year, 
the States will only receive an additional increase of 5 waivers the 
following fiscal year if 95 percent of the waivers available to the 
States receiving at least 1 waiver were used in the previous fiscal 
year.
 ``(B) Any increase in allotments under subparagraph (A) shall be 
maintained indefinitely, unless in a fiscal year the total number of 
such waivers granted is 5 percent lower than in the last year in which 
there was an increase in the number of waivers allotted pursuant to 
this paragraph, in which case--
 ``(i) the number of waivers allotted shall be decreased by 
 5 for all States beginning in the next fiscal year; and
 ``(ii) each additional 5 percent decrease in such waivers 
 granted from the last year in which there was an increase in 
 the allotment, shall result in an additional decrease of 5 
 waivers allotted for all States, provided that the number of 
 waivers allotted for all States shall not drop below 30.''.
 (2) Academic medical centers.--Section 214(l)(1)(D) of such 
 Act, as amended by subsection (c)(1)(E), is further amended--
 (A) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (B) in clause (iii), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv) in the case of a request by an interested 
 State agency--
 ``(I) the head of such agency determines 
 that the alien is to practice medicine in, or 
 be on the faculty of a residency program at, an 
 academic medical center (as defined in section 
 411.355(e)(2) of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, or a similar successor 
 regulation), without regard to whether such 
 facility is located within an area designated 
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 as having a shortage of health care 
 professionals; and
 ``(II) the head of such agency determines 
 that--
 ``(aa) the alien physician's work 
 is in the public interest; and
 ``(bb) the grant of such waiver 
 would not cause the number of the 
 waivers granted on behalf of aliens for 
 such State for a fiscal year to exceed 
 3 (within the limitation in 
 subparagraph (B) and subject to 
 paragraph (6)), in accordance with the 
 conditions of this clause.''.
 (e) Amendments to the Procedures, Definitions, and Other Provisions 
Related to Physician Immigration.--
 (1) Dual intent for physicians seeking graduate medical 
 training.--Section 214(b) of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(b)) is amended by striking ``and other than 
 a nonimmigrant described in any provision of section 
 101(a)(15)(H)(i) except subclause (b1) of such section)'' and 
 inserting ``a nonimmigrant described in any provision of 
 section 101(a)(15)(H)(i) (except subclause (b1) of such 
 section), and an alien coming to the United States to receive 
 graduate medical education or training as described in section 
 212(j) or to take examinations required to receive graduate 
 medical education or training as described in section 
 212(j))''.
 (2) Physician national interest waiver clarifications.--
 (A) Practice and geographic area.--Section 
 203(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I) of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I)) is amended by 
 striking items (aa) and (bb) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(aa) the alien physician agrees to work 
 on a full-time basis practicing primary care, 
 specialty medicine, or a combination thereof, 
 in an area or areas designated by the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services as having a 
 shortage of health care professionals, or at a 
 health care facility under the jurisdiction of 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; or
 ``(bb) the alien physician is pursuing such 
 waiver based upon service at a facility or 
 facilities that serve patients who reside in a 
 geographic area or areas designated by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services as 
 having a shortage of health care professionals 
 (without regard to whether such facility or 
 facilities are located within such an area) and 
 a Federal agency, or a local, county, regional, 
 or State department of public health determines 
 the alien physician's work was or will be in 
 the public interest.''.
 (B) Five-year service requirement.--Section 
 203(b)(2)(B)(ii) of such Act, as amended by 
 subparagraph (A), is further amended--
 (i) by moving subclauses (II), (III), and 
 (IV) 4 ems to the left; and
 (ii) in subclause (II)--
 (I) by inserting ``(aa)'' after 
 ``(II)''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(bb) The 5-year service requirement 
 described in item (aa) shall begin on the date 
 on which the alien physician begins work in the 
 shortage area in any legal status and not on 
 the date on which an immigrant visa petition is 
 filed or approved. Such service shall be 
 aggregated without regard to when such service 
 began and without regard to whether such 
 service began during or in conjunction with a 
 course of graduate medical education.
 ``(cc) An alien physician shall not be 
 required to submit an employment contract with 
 a term exceeding the balance of the 5-year 
 commitment yet to be served or an employment 
 contract dated within a minimum time period 
 before filing a visa petition under this 
 subsection.
 ``(dd) An alien physician shall not be 
 required to file additional immigrant visa 
 petitions upon a change of work location from 
 the location approved in the original national 
 interest immigrant petition.''.
 (3) Technical clarification regarding advanced degree for 
 physicians.--Section 203(b)(2)(A) of such Act is amended by 
 adding at the end the following: ``An alien physician holding a 
 foreign medical degree that has been deemed sufficient for 
 acceptance by an accredited United States medical residency or 
 fellowship program is a member of the professions holding an 
 advanced degree or its equivalent.''.
 (4) Short-term work authorization for physicians completing 
 their residencies.--
 (A) In general.--A physician completing graduate 
 medical education or training described in section 
 212(j) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1182(j)) as a nonimmigrant described in section 
 101(a)(15)(H)(i) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(a)(15)(H)(i))--
 (i) shall have such nonimmigrant status 
 automatically extended until October 1 of the 
 fiscal year for which a petition for a 
 continuation of such nonimmigrant status has 
 been submitted in a timely manner and the 
 employment start date for the beneficiary of 
 such petition is October 1 of that fiscal year; 
 and
 (ii) shall be authorized to be employed 
 incident to status during the period between 
 the filing of such petition and October 1 of 
 such fiscal year.
 (B) Termination.--The physician's status and 
 employment authorization shall terminate on the date 
 that is 30 days after the date on which a petition 
 described in clause (i)(I) is rejected, denied, or 
 revoked.
 (C) Automatic extension.--A physician's status and 
 employment authorization will automatically extend to 
 October 1 of the next fiscal year if all of the visas 
 described in section 101(a)(15)(H)(i) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(a)(15)(H)(i)) that were authorized to be issued 
 for the fiscal year have been issued.
 (5) Applicability of section 212(e) to spouses and children 
 of j-1 exchange visitors.--A spouse or child of an exchange 
 visitor described in section 101(a)(15)(J) of the Immigration 
 and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(J)) shall not be 
 subject to the requirements under section 212(e) of such Act (8 
 U.S.C. 1182(e)).
 (f) Annual Conrad State 30 J-1 Visa Waiver Program Statistical 
Report.--The Director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service shall 
submit an annual report to Congress and to the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services that identifies the number of aliens admitted during the 
most recently concluded fiscal year as a result of the Conrad State 30 
J-1 Visa Waiver Program established under sections 212(e) and 214(l) of 
the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(e) and 1184(l)), 
broken down by State.

SEC. 3016. GRANTS FOR SCHOOLS OF MEDICINE AND SCHOOLS OF OSTEOPATHIC 
 MEDICINE IN UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 Subpart II of part C of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 293m et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 749C. GRANTS FOR SCHOOLS OF MEDICINE AND SCHOOLS OF OSTEOPATHIC 
 MEDICINE IN UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants to institutions 
of higher education (including consortiums of such institutions) for 
the establishment, improvement, or expansion of a school of medicine or 
osteopathic medicine, or a branch campus of a school of medicine or 
osteopathic medicine.
 ``(b) Priority.--In selecting grant recipients under this section, 
the Secretary shall give priority to any institution of higher 
education (or consortium of such institutions) that--
 ``(1) proposes to use the grant for the establishment of a 
 school of medicine or osteopathic medicine, or a branch campus 
 of a school of medicine or osteopathic medicine, in an area--
 ``(A) in which--
 ``(i) no other such school is based; or
 ``(ii) in the case in which the school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine proposed to be 
 established would be a minority-serving 
 institution, no other minority-serving 
 institution that includes a school of medicine 
 or osteopathic medicine is based; and
 ``(B) that is a medically underserved community or 
 a health professional shortage area; or
 ``(2) is a minority-serving institution described in 
 section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 or an 
 institution or program described in section 326(e) of such Act.
 ``(c) Considerations.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary, to the extent practicable, may ensure equitable distribution 
of awards among the geographical regions of the United States.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--An institution of higher education (or a 
consortium of such institutions)--
 ``(1) shall use grant amounts received under this section 
 to--
 ``(A) recruit, enroll, and retain medical students 
 who are pursuing a degree of doctor of medicine or 
 doctor of osteopathy, including individuals who are 
 from disadvantaged backgrounds (including racial and 
 ethnic groups underrepresented among medical students 
 and health professions), individuals from rural and 
 underserved areas, low-income individuals, and first 
 generation college students, at a school of medicine or 
 osteopathic medicine or a branch campus of a school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine; and
 ``(B) develop, implement, and expand curriculum 
 that emphasizes care for rural and underserved 
 populations, including accessible and culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate care and services, at such 
 school or branch campus; and
 ``(2) may use grant amounts received under this section 
 to--
 ``(A) plan and construct--
 ``(i) a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine, or a branch campus of a school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine, in an area in 
 which no other such school is based; or
 ``(ii) a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine, or a branch campus of a school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine, that will be 
 a minority-serving institution, in an area in 
 which no other such school that is a minority-
 serving institution is based;
 ``(B) plan, develop, and meet criteria for 
 accreditation for a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine or a branch campus of a school of medicine or 
 osteopathic medicine;
 ``(C) hire faculty, including faculty from racial 
 and ethnic groups who are underrepresented among the 
 medical and other health professions, and other staff 
 to serve at such a school or branch campus;
 ``(D) support educational programs at such a school 
 or branch campus;
 ``(E) modernize and expand infrastructure at such a 
 school or branch campus; and
 ``(F) support other activities that the Secretary 
 determines further the establishment, improvement, or 
 expansion of a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine or a branch campus of a school of medicine or 
 osteopathic medicine.
 ``(e) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an institution of higher education (or a consortium of 
such institutions), shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require, including a description of the institution's or 
consortium's planned activities described in subsection (d).
 ``(f) Reporting.--
 ``(1) Reports from entities.--Each institution of higher 
 education, or consortium of such institutions, awarded a grant 
 under this section shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary on the activities conducted under such grant, and 
 other information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 date of enactment of this section and every 5 years thereafter, 
 the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
 on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report 
 that provides a summary of the activities and outcomes 
 associated with grants made under this section. Such reports 
 shall include--
 ``(A) a list of awardees, including their primary 
 geographic location, and location of any school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine, or a branch campus of 
 a school of medicine or osteopathic medicine that was 
 established, improved, or expanded under this program;
 ``(B) the total number of students (including the 
 number of students from racial and ethnic groups 
 underrepresented among medical students and health 
 professions, low-income students, and first generation 
 college students) who--
 ``(i) are enrolled at or who have graduated 
 from any school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine, or a branch campus of a school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine, that was 
 established, improved, or expanded under this 
 program, deidentified and disaggregated by 
 race, ethnicity, age, sex, geographic region, 
 disability status, and other relevant factors, 
 to the extent such information is available; 
 and
 ``(ii) who subsequently participate in an 
 accredited internship or medical residency 
 program upon graduation from any school of 
 medicine or osteopathic medicine, or a branch 
 campus of a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine, that was established, improved, or 
 expanded under this program, deidentified and 
 disaggregated by race, ethnicity, age, sex, 
 geographic region, disability status, medical 
 specialty pursued, and other relevant factors, 
 to the extent such information is available;
 ``(C) the effects of such program on the health 
 care provider workforce, including any impact on 
 demographic representation disaggregated by race, 
 ethnicity, and sex, and the fields or specialties 
 pursued by students who have graduated from any school 
 of medicine or osteopathic medicine, or a branch campus 
 of a school of medicine or osteopathic medicine, that 
 was established, improved, or expanded under this 
 program;
 ``(D) the effects of such program on health care 
 access in underserved areas, including medically 
 underserved communities and health professional 
 shortage areas; and
 ``(E) recommendations for improving the program 
 described in this section, and any other considerations 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(3) Public availability.--The Secretary shall make 
 reports submitted under paragraph (2) publicly available on the 
 website of the Department of Health and Human Services.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Branch campus.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `branch campus', with 
 respect to a school of medicine or osteopathic 
 medicine, means an additional location of such school 
 that is geographically apart and independent of the 
 main campus, at which the school offers at least 50 
 percent of the program leading to a degree of doctor of 
 medicine or doctor of osteopathy that is offered at the 
 main campus.
 ``(B) Independence from main campus.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A), the location of a school described 
 in such subparagraph shall be considered to be 
 independent of the main campus described in such 
 subparagraph if the location--
 ``(i) is permanent in nature;
 ``(ii) offers courses in educational 
 programs leading to a degree, certificate, or 
 other recognized educational credential;
 ``(iii) has its own faculty and 
 administrative or supervisory organization; and
 ``(iv) has its own budgetary and hiring 
 authority.
 ``(2) First generation college student.--The term `first 
 generation college student' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 402A(h)(3) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(3) Health professional shortage area.--The term `health 
 professional shortage area' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 332(a).
 ``(4) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(5) Medically underserved community.--The term `medically 
 underserved community' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 799B(6).
 ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section.''.

 TITLE IV--IMPROVING HEALTH CARE ACCESS AND QUALITY

SEC. 4000. DEFINITION.

 In this title and the amendments made by this title, the term 
``health care'' includes all health care needed throughout the life 
cycle and the end of life.

 Subtitle A--Reducing Barriers to Accessing Care

SEC. 4001. PROTECTING PROTECTED AREAS.

 Section 287 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1357) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``the Service'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``the Department of Homeland Security'';
 (2) by striking ``Attorney General'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``Secretary of Homeland Security'';
 (3) in subsection (f)(1), by striking ``Commissioner'' and 
 inserting ``Director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
 Services'';
 (4) in subsection (h)--
 (A) by striking ``of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act''; and
 (B) by striking ``of such Act''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i)(1) In this subsection:
 ``(A) The term `appropriate congressional committees' 
 means--
 ``(i) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
 ``(ii) the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate;
 ``(iii) the Committee on Homeland Security of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 ``(iv) the Committee on the Judiciary of the House 
 of Representatives.
 ``(B) The term `enforcement action'--
 ``(i) means an apprehension, arrest, inspection 
 interview, request for identification, search, seizure, 
 service of charging documents or subpoenas, or 
 surveillance for the purposes of immigration 
 enforcement; and
 ``(ii) includes an enforcement action at, or 
 focused on, a protected area that is part of a joint 
 case led by another law enforcement agency.
 ``(C) The term `exigent circumstances' means a situation 
 involving--
 ``(i) the imminent risk of death, violence, or 
 physical harm to any person or property, including a 
 situation implicating terrorism or the national 
 security of the United States;
 ``(ii) the immediate arrest or pursuit of a 
 dangerous felon, terrorist suspect, or other individual 
 presenting an imminent danger; or
 ``(iii) the imminent risk of destruction of 
 evidence that is material to an ongoing criminal case.
 ``(D) The term `prior approval' means--
 ``(i) in the case of officers and agents of U.S. 
 Immigration and Customs Enforcement, prior written 
 approval to carry out an enforcement action involving a 
 specific individual or individuals authorized by--
 ``(I) the Assistant Director of Operations, 
 Homeland Security Investigations;
 ``(II) the Executive Associate Director, 
 Homeland Security Investigations;
 ``(III) the Assistant Director for Field 
 Operations, Enforcement and Removal Operations; 
 or
 ``(IV) the Executive Associate Director for 
 Field Operations, Enforcement and Removal 
 Operations;
 ``(ii) in the case of officers and agents of U.S. 
 Customs and Border Protection, prior written approval 
 to carry out an enforcement action involving a specific 
 individual or individuals authorized by--
 ``(I) a Chief Patrol Agent;
 ``(II) the Director of Field Operations;
 ``(III) the Director of Air and Marine 
 Operations; or
 ``(IV) the Internal Affairs Special Agent 
 in Charge; and
 ``(iii) in the case of other Federal, State, or 
 local law enforcement officers, to carry out an 
 enforcement action involving a specific individual or 
 individuals authorized by--
 ``(I) the head of the Federal agency 
 carrying out the enforcement action; or
 ``(II) the head of the State or local law 
 enforcement agency carrying out the enforcement 
 action.
 ``(E) The term `protected area' includes all of the 
 physical space located within 1,000 feet of--
 ``(i) any medical treatment or mental health care 
 facility, including any hospital, doctor's office, 
 health clinic, alcohol or drug prevention, counseling, 
 or treatment facilities, syringe exchange services, 
 vaccination, treatment, or testing sites, emergent or 
 urgent care facility, sites that serve pregnant 
 individuals, or community health centers;
 ``(ii) any public or private school, including any 
 known and licensed day care facility, preschool, sites 
 of early childhood programs, primary school, secondary 
 school, postsecondary school (including colleges and 
 universities), or other institution of learning 
 (including vocational or trade schools);
 ``(iii) any scholastic or education-related 
 activity or event or before or after school program, 
 including field trips and interscholastic events;
 ``(iv) any school bus or school bus stop;
 ``(v) any place where children gather, such as a 
 playground, a recreation center, a library, a foster 
 care facility, or a group home for children;
 ``(vi) any physical structure of an organization or 
 subdivision of government that--
 ``(I) assists children, pregnant women, 
 victims of crime or abuse, or individuals with 
 significant mental or physical disabilities;
 ``(II) provides social services and 
 assistance, including homeless shelters, 
 community-based organizations, facilities that 
 serve disabled persons, drug or alcohol 
 counseling and treatment facilities, food banks 
 or food pantries, and other places providing 
 emergency and disaster services or assistance 
 with food and nutrition, housing affordability 
 and income or other services funded by State or 
 local government, charitable giving, the 
 Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
 Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), 
 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
 (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
 (TANF), Social Security, or the United States 
 Housing Act; or
 ``(III) provides hospice, palliative, or 
 other available end-of-life care services to 
 terminally ill persons;
 ``(vii) any church, synagogue, mosque, or other 
 place of worship or religious study, including 
 buildings rented for the purpose of religious services, 
 retreats, counseling, workshops, instruction, and 
 education;
 ``(viii) any Federal, State, or local courthouse, 
 including the office of an individual's legal counsel 
 or representative, and a probation, parole, or 
 supervised release office;
 ``(ix) the site of a funeral, grave-side ceremony, 
 rosary, wedding, or other religious ceremony or 
 observance;
 ``(x) any public demonstration, such as a march, a 
 rally, or a parade;
 ``(xi) any domestic violence shelter, rape crisis 
 center, child advocacy center, supervised visitation 
 center, family justice center, or victim services 
 provider;
 ``(xii) any congressional district office;
 ``(xiii) indoor and outdoor premises of a State 
 department of motor vehicles;
 ``(xiv) a place where disaster or emergency 
 response and relief is provided, including evacuation 
 routes, places where shelter or emergency supplies, 
 food, or water are distributed, or places where 
 registration for disaster-relief assistance or family 
 reunification is underway; or
 ``(xv) any other location specified by the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security for purposes of this 
 subsection.
 ``(2)(A) An enforcement action may not take place at, or be focused 
on, a protected area unless--
 ``(i) the action involves exigent circumstances; and
 ``(ii) prior approval for the enforcement action was 
 obtained.
 ``(B) If an enforcement action is initiated pursuant to 
subparagraph (A) and the exigent circumstances permitting the 
enforcement action cease, the enforcement action shall be discontinued 
until such exigent circumstances reemerge.
 ``(C) If an enforcement action is carried out in violation of this 
subsection--
 ``(i) no information resulting from the enforcement action 
 may be entered into the record or received into evidence in a 
 removal proceeding resulting from the enforcement action; and
 ``(ii) the noncitizen who is the subject of such removal 
 proceeding may file a motion for the immediate termination of 
 the removal proceeding.
 ``(3)(A) This subsection shall apply to any enforcement action by 
officers or agents of the Department of Homeland Security, including--
 ``(i) officers or agents of U.S. Immigration and Customs 
 Enforcement;
 ``(ii) officers or agents of U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection; and
 ``(iii) any individual designated to perform immigration 
 enforcement functions pursuant to subsection (g).
 ``(B) While carrying out an enforcement action within a protected 
area, officers and agents referred to in subparagraph (A) shall make 
every effort--
 ``(i) to limit the time spent in the protected area;
 ``(ii) to limit the enforcement action in the protected 
 area to the person or persons for whom prior approval was 
 obtained; and
 ``(iii) to conduct themselves discreetly.
 ``(C) If, while carrying out an enforcement action that is not 
initiated in or focused on a protected area, officers or agents are led 
into a protected area, and no exigent circumstance and prior approval 
with respect to the protected area, such officers or agents shall--
 ``(i) cease before taking any further enforcement action;
 ``(ii) conduct themselves in a discreet manner;
 ``(iii) maintain surveillance on an individual; and
 ``(iv) immediately consult their supervisor in order to 
 determine whether such enforcement action should be 
 discontinued.
 ``(D) The limitations under this paragraph shall not apply to the 
transportation of an individual apprehended at or near a land or sea 
border to a hospital or health care provider for the purpose of 
providing medical care to such individual.
 ``(4)(A) Each official specified in subparagraph (B) shall ensure 
that the employees under his or her supervision receive annual training 
regarding compliance with--
 ``(i) the requirements under this subsection with respect 
 to enforcement actions at or focused on protected areas and 
 enforcement actions that lead officers or agents to a protected 
 area; and
 ``(ii) the requirements under section 239 of this Act and 
 section 384 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
 Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1367).
 ``(B) The officials specified in this subparagraph are--
 ``(i) the Chief Counsel of each Field Office of U.S. 
 Immigration and Customs Enforcement;
 ``(ii) each Field Office Director of U.S. Immigration and 
 Customs Enforcement;
 ``(iii) each Special Agent in Charge of U.S. Immigration 
 and Customs Enforcement;
 ``(iv) each Chief Patrol Agent of U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection;
 ``(v) the Director of Field Operations of U.S. Customs and 
 Border Protection;
 ``(vi) the Director of Air and Marine Operations of U.S. 
 Customs and Border Protection;
 ``(vii) the Internal Affairs Special Agent in Charge of 
 U.S. Customs and Border Protection; and
 ``(viii) the chief law enforcement officer of each State or 
 local law enforcement agency that enters into a written 
 agreement with the Department of Homeland Security pursuant to 
 subsection (g).
 ``(5) Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, the Secretary of 
Homeland Security shall modify the Notice to Appear form (Form I-862)--
 ``(A) to provide the subject of an enforcement action with 
 information, written in plain language, summarizing the 
 restrictions against enforcement actions at protected areas (as 
 described in this subsection) and the remedies available to the 
 individual if such action violates such restrictions;
 ``(B) to ensure that the information provided pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) is accessible to an individual with limited 
 English proficiency; and
 ``(C) to ensure that the subject of an enforcement action 
 is not permitted to verify that the officers or agents that 
 carried out such action complied with the restrictions set 
 forth in this subsection.
 ``(6)(A) The Director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
and the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall each 
submit an annual report to the appropriate congressional committees 
that includes the information set forth in subparagraph (B) with 
respect to the respective agency.
 ``(B) Each report submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall 
include, with respect to the submitting agency during the reporting 
period--
 ``(i) the number of enforcement actions that were carried 
 out at, or focused on, a protected area;
 ``(ii) the number of enforcement actions in which officers 
 or agents were subsequently led to a protected area; and
 ``(iii) for each enforcement action described in clause (i) 
 or (ii)--
 ``(I) the date on which such action occurred;
 ``(II) the specific site, city, county, and State 
 in which such action occurred;
 ``(III) if the site of the enforcement action was 
 in a protected area--
 ``(aa) the identification of the protected 
 area;
 ``(bb) the reasons such action was taken in 
 such area;
 ``(cc) if such action was taken without 
 prior approval, certification that notification 
 to headquarters of a submitting agency was 
 provided after such action took place; and
 ``(dd) a report describing what occurred 
 during and immediately after such action;
 ``(IV) the components of the agency involved in the 
 enforcement action;
 ``(V) a description of the enforcement action, 
 including the nature of the criminal activity of its 
 intended target;
 ``(VI) the number of individuals, if any, arrested 
 or taken into custody;
 ``(VII) the number of collateral arrests, if any, 
 and the reasons for each such arrest;
 ``(VIII) a certification whether the location 
 administrator of a protected area was contacted before, 
 during, or after the enforcement action; and
 ``(IX) the percentage of all of the staff members 
 and supervisors reporting to the officials listed in 
 paragraph (4)(B) who completed the training required 
 under paragraph (4)(A).
 ``(7) Nothing in the subsection may be construed--
 ``(A) to affect the authority of Federal, State, or local 
 law enforcement agencies--
 ``(i) to enforce generally applicable Federal or 
 State criminal laws unrelated to immigration; or
 ``(ii) to protect residents from imminent threats 
 to public safety; or
 ``(B) to limit or override the protections provided in--
 ``(i) section 239; or
 ``(ii) section 384 of the Illegal Immigration 
 Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 
 U.S.C. 1367).''.

SEC. 4002. REPEAL OF REQUIREMENT FOR DOCUMENTATION EVIDENCING 
 CITIZENSHIP OR NATIONALITY UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.

 (a) Repeal.--Subsections (i)(22) and (x) of section 1903 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) are each repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) State payments for medical assistance.--Section 1902 of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
 (A) by amending paragraph (46) of subsection (a) to 
 read as follows:
 ``(46) provide that information is requested and exchanged 
 for purposes of income and eligibility verification in 
 accordance with a State system which meets the requirements of 
 section 1137 of this Act;'';
 (B) in subsection (e)(13)(A)(i)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subclause (I), 
 by striking ``sections 1902(a)(46)(B) and 
 1137(d)'' and inserting ``section 1137(d)''; 
 and
 (ii) in subclause (IV), by striking 
 ``1902(a)(46)(B) or''; and
 (C) by striking subsection (ee).
 (2) Repeal.--Subsection (c) of section 6036 of the Deficit 
 Reduction Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396b note) is repealed.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4003. LIFT THE BAR ACT.

 (a) Elimination of Arbitrary Eligibility Restrictions.--
 (1) In general.--Sections 402, 403, 411, 412, 421, and 422 
 of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
 Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1612, 1613, 1621, 1622, 
 1631, and 1632) are repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Title IV of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
 (8 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) is amended--
 (A) in section 401(b)(5) (8 U.S.C. 1611(b)(5)), by 
 striking ``the program defined in section 402(a)(3)(A) 
 (relating to the supplemental security income 
 program)'' and inserting ``the Supplemental Security 
 Income Program under title XVI of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1381 et seq.)'';
 (B) in section 404(a) (8 U.S.C. 1614(a)), by 
 striking ``, 402, or 403'';
 (C) in section 413 (8 U.S.C. 1625)--
 (i) by striking ``A State'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(a) State or Local Public Benefit Defined.--In this section, the 
term `State or local public benefit'--
 ``(1) except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), means--
 ``(A) any grant, contract, loan, professional 
 license, or commercial license provided by an agency of 
 a State or local government or by appropriated funds of 
 a State or local government; and
 ``(B) any retirement, welfare, health, disability, 
 public or assisted housing, postsecondary education, 
 food assistance, unemployment benefit, or any other 
 similar benefit for which payments or assistance are 
 provided to an individual, household, or family 
 eligibility unit by an agency of a State or local 
 government or by appropriated funds of a State or local 
 government;
 ``(2) does not apply--
 ``(A) to any contract, professional license, or 
 commercial license for a nonimmigrant whose visa for 
 entry is related to such employment in the United 
 States, or to a citizen of a freely associated state, 
 if section 141 of the applicable compact of free 
 association approved in Public Law 99-239 or 99-658 (or 
 a successor provision) is in effect;
 ``(B) with respect to benefits for an alien who as 
 a work authorized nonimmigrant or as an alien lawfully 
 admitted for permanent residence under the Immigration 
 and Nationality Act qualified for such benefits and for 
 whom the United States under reciprocal treaty 
 agreements is required to pay benefits, as determined 
 by the Secretary of State, after consultation with the 
 Attorney General; or
 ``(C) to the issuance of a professional license to, 
 or the renewal of a professional license by, a foreign 
 national not physically present in the United States; 
 and
 ``(3) does not include any Federal public benefit.
 ``(b) Proof of Eligibility Requirement.--A State''; and
 (ii) in subsection (b), as redesignated, by 
 striking ``(as defined in section 411(c))'';
 (D) in section 432(d) (8 U.S.C. 1642(d)), by 
 striking ``(as defined in section 411(c))'' and 
 inserting ``(as defined in section 413(a))'';
 (E) in section 435 (8 U.S.C. 1645), by striking 
 ``(as provided under section 403)''; and
 (F) in section 436 (8 U.S.C. 1646)--
 (i) by striking ``the food stamp program 
 (as defined in section 402(a)(3)(B))'' and 
 inserting ``the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program established under the Food 
 and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et 
 seq.)''; and
 (ii) by striking ``the supplemental 
 security income program (as defined in section 
 402(a)(3)(A))'' and inserting ``the 
 Supplemental Security Income Program under 
 title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1381 et seq.)''.
 (b) Qualified Noncitizens.--Title IV of the Personal Responsibility 
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) 
is amended--
 (1) in the title header, by striking ``ALIENS'' and 
 inserting ``NONCITIZENS'';
 (2) in the header of section 401 (8 U.S.C. 1611), by 
 striking ``aliens who are not qualified aliens'' and inserting 
 ``noncitizens who are not qualified noncitizens'';
 (3) by striking ``qualified alien'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``qualified noncitizen'';
 (4) by striking ``qualified aliens'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``qualified noncitizens'';
 (5) by striking ``qualified alien's'' each place such term 
 appears and inserting ``qualified noncitizen's'';
 (6) by striking ``an alien'' each place such term appears 
 and inserting ``a noncitizen'';
 (7) by striking ``alien'' each place such term appears and 
 inserting ``noncitizen'';
 (8) by striking ``aliens'' each place such term appears and 
 inserting ``noncitizens''; and
 (9) by striking ``alien's'' each place such term appears 
 and inserting ``noncitizen's''.
 (c) Access to Basic Services for Lawfully Residing Noncitizens.--
Section 431 of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1641) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
 ``(b) Qualified Noncitizen.--For purposes of this title, the term 
`qualified noncitizen' means a noncitizen who, at the time the 
noncitizen applies for, receives, or attempts to receive a Federal 
public benefit, is lawfully present in the United States.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the header, by striking ``Qualified Aliens'' 
 and inserting ``Qualified Noncitizens'';
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (C) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following:
 ``(5) a noncitizen--
 ``(A) in a category that was treated as lawfully 
 present for purposes of section 1101 of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (42 U.S.C. 
 18001);
 ``(B) who met the requirements of section 
 402(a)(2)(D) of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
 Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 
 1612(a)(2)(D)) on or before January 1, 2021;
 ``(C) who is granted special immigrant juvenile 
 status as described by section 101(a)(27)(J) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(a)(27)(J));
 ``(D) who has a pending, bona fide application for 
 nonimmigrant status under section 101(a)(15)(U) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(1)(15)(U));
 ``(E) who was granted relief under the Deferred 
 Action for Childhood Arrivals program; or
 ``(F) who is not described in subparagraphs (A) 
 through (E), is not a citizen of the United States, 
 resides in a State or territory of the United States, 
 and is authorized by Federal law to be present in the 
 United States.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Noncitizen.--In this title, the term `noncitizen' means any 
individual who is not a citizen of the United States.''.
 (d) Child Nutrition Programs.--Section 742 of the Personal 
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 
U.S.C. 1615) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the header by striking ``School Lunch and 
 Breakfast Programs'' and inserting ``Child Nutrition 
 Programs'';
 (B) by striking ``the school lunch program'' and 
 inserting ``any program''; and
 (C) by striking ``the school breakfast program 
 under section 4 of the'' and inserting ``any program 
 under''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by amending paragraph (1) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) In general.--A State may not deny benefits under 
 programs established under the provisions of law described in 
 paragraph (2) on the basis of an individual's citizenship or 
 immigration status.''.
 (e) Exclusion of Medical Assistance Expenditures for Citizens of 
Freely Associated States.--Section 1108(h) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1308(h)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Expenditures'' and inserting:
 ``(1) In general.--Expenditures''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Exception.--With respect to eligibility for benefits 
 under a State plan approved under title XIX (other than medical 
 assistance described in section 401(b)(1)(A) of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
 (8 U.S.C. 1611(b)(1)(A))), paragraph (1) shall not apply to any 
 individual who lawfully resides in 1 of the 50 States or in the 
 District of Columbia in accordance with the Compacts of Free 
 Association between the Government of the United States and the 
 Governments of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic 
 of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau and shall 
 not apply, at the option of the Governor of Puerto Rico, the 
 Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, or American 
 Samoa as communicated to the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services in writing, to any individual who lawfully resides in 
 the respective territory in accordance with such Compacts.''.
 (f) Children's Health Insurance Program.--Effective January 1, 
2025, section 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397gg(e)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (P); and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (Q), (R), (S), (T), and 
 (U) as subparagraphs (P), (Q), (R), (S), and (T), respectively.
 (g) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Supplemental food assistance program.--The Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) is amended--
 (A) in section 5 (7 U.S.C. 2014)--
 (i) in subsection (d)(10), by striking 
 ``(k)'' and inserting ``(j)'';
 (ii) by striking subsection (i); and
 (iii) by redesignating subsections (j), 
 (k), (l), (m), and (n) as subsections (i), (j), 
 (k), (l), and (m), respectively;
 (B) in section 6 (7 U.S.C. 2015)--
 (i) in subsection (f), by striking ``an 
 alien lawfully admitted for permanent'' and all 
 that follows through the end of the subsection 
 and inserting ``a noncitizen who is lawfully 
 present in the United States.''; and
 (ii) in subsection (s)(2), by striking 
 ``(i), (k), (l), (m), and (n)'' and inserting 
 ``(j), (k), (l), and (m)''; and
 (C) in section 11(e)(2)(B)(v)(II) (7 U.S.C. 
 2020(e)(2)(B)(v)(II)) by striking ``aliens'' and 
 inserting ``noncitizens''.
 (2) Medicaid.--Section 1903(v) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396b(v)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``admitted for'' 
 and all that follows and inserting ``present in the 
 United States.''; and
 (B) by striking paragraph (4).
 (3) Housing assistance.--Section 214(a) of the Housing and 
 Community Development Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 1436a(a)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as 
 paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
 ``(6) a qualified noncitizen (as defined in section 431 of 
 the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation 
 Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1641));''.
 (4) Assistance not treated as debt absent fraud.--Section 
 213A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1183a) is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``(as 
 provided under section 403 of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
 Reconciliation Act of 1996)''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), in the 
 undesignated matter following clause (ii), by 
 striking ``(as provided under section 403 of 
 the Personal Responsibility and Work 
 Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996)''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(1)(A) is amended by striking 
 ``benefit,'' and inserting ``benefit by fraud,''.
 (h) Federal Agency Guidance.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, each Federal agency affected by any 
of the amendments made by this section shall issue guidance with 
respect to the implementation of such amendments.
 (i) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, 
the amendments made by this section--
 (1) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act; and
 (2) shall apply to services furnished on or after the date 
 that is 180 days after the date on which any guidance is issued 
 pursuant to subsection (h).

SEC. 4004. IMPROVE AFFORDABILITY AND REDUCE PREMIUM COSTS OF HEALTH 
 INSURANCE FOR CONSUMERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 36B(b)(3)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) Applicable percentage.--The applicable 
 percentage for any taxable year shall be the percentage 
 such that the applicable percentage for any taxpayer 
 whose household income is within an income tier 
 specified in the following table shall increase, on a 
 sliding scale in a linear manner, from the initial 
 premium percentage to the final premium percentage 
 specified in such table for such income tier:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The initial The final
 ``In the case of household income (expressed premium premium
 as a percent of poverty line) within the percentage percentage
 following income tier: is-- is--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 150 percent............................. 0.0 0.0
150 percent up to 200 percent................. 0.0 3.0
200 percent up to 250 percent................. 3.0 4.0
250 percent up to 300 percent................. 4.0 6.0
300 percent up to 400 percent................. 6.0 8.5
400 percent and higher........................ 8.5 8.5.''.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 36B(c)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``but does not exceed 400 percent'' in 
 subparagraph (A), and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (E).
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2023.

SEC. 4005. REMOVING CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION BARRIERS TO ACCESS TO 
 AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE UNDER THE ACA.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Premium tax credits.--Section 36B of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (c)(1), by amending subparagraph 
 (B) to read as follows:
 ``(B) Special rule for certain individuals 
 ineligible for medicaid due to status.--If--
 ``(i) a taxpayer has a household income 
 which is not greater than 100 percent of an 
 amount equal to the poverty line for a family 
 of the size involved,
 ``(ii) the taxpayer is a noncitizen who is 
 not eligible for the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act by reason 
 of the individual's immigration status,
 ``(iii) the taxpayer is ineligible for 
 minimum essential coverage under section 
 5000A(f)(1)(A)(ii), and
 ``(iv) under the Medicaid eligibility 
 criteria for noncitizens in effect on December 
 26, 2020, the taxpayer would be ineligible for 
 such minimum essential coverage by reason of 
 the taxpayer's immigration status,
 the taxpayer shall, for purposes of the credit under 
 this section, be treated as an applicable taxpayer with 
 a household income which is equal to 100 percent of the 
 poverty line for a family of the size involved.''.
 (B) by striking subsection (e).
 (2) Cost-sharing reductions.--Section 1402 of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18071) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (e); and
 (B) by redesignating subsections (f) and (g) as 
 subsections (e) and (f), respectively.
 (3) Basic health program eligibility.--Section 
 1331(e)(1)(B) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 18051(e)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``lawfully 
 present in the United States,''.
 (4) Restrictions on federal payments.--Section 1412 of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18082) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (d); and
 (B) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection 
 (d).
 (5) Requirement to maintain minimum essential coverage.--
 Section 5000A(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
 (3).
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Establishment of program.--Section 1411(a) of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18081(a)) 
 is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1); and
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) 
 as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively.
 (2) Qualified individuals.--Section 1312(f) of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18032(f)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``; Access Limited 
 to Citizens and Lawful Residents''; and
 (B) by striking paragraph (3).
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to years, plan years, and taxable years, as applicable, beginning 
after December 31, 2024.

SEC. 4006. HEAL FOR IMMIGRANT FAMILIES ACT.

 (a) Consistency in Health Insurance Coverage for Individuals With 
Federally Authorized Presence, Including Deferred Action.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of eligibility under any of 
 the provisions described in paragraph (2), all individuals 
 granted federally authorized presence in the United States 
 shall be considered to be lawfully present in the United 
 States.
 (2) Provisions described.--The provisions described in this 
 paragraph are the following:
 (A) Exchange eligibility.--Section 1411 of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 
 18031).
 (B) Reduced cost-sharing eligibility.--Section 1402 
 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 
 U.S.C. 18071).
 (C) Premium subsidy eligibility.--Section 36B of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 36B).
 (D) Medicaid and chip eligibility.--Titles XIX and 
 XXI of the Social Security Act, including under section 
 1903(v) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(v)).
 (3) Effective date.--
 (A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall take effect on 
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (B) Transition through special enrollment period.--
 In the case of an individual described in paragraph (1) 
 who, before the first day of the first annual open 
 enrollment period under subparagraph (B) of section 
 1311(c)(6) of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
 Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(c)(6)) beginning after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, is granted federally 
 authorized presence in the United States and who, as a 
 result of such subsection, qualifies for a subsidy 
 under a provision described in subparagraph (B) or (C) 
 of paragraph (2), the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall establish a special enrollment period 
 under subparagraph (C) of such section 1311(c)(6) 
 during which such individual may enroll in qualified 
 health plans through Exchanges under title I of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and qualify 
 for such a subsidy. For such an individual who has been 
 granted federally authorized presence in the United 
 States as of the date of enactment of this Act, such 
 special enrollment period shall begin not later than 90 
 days after such date of enactment. Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall be construed as affecting the authority 
 of the Secretary to establish additional special 
 enrollment periods under such subparagraph (C).
 (b) State Option To Expand Medicaid and CHIP to Individuals Without 
Lawful Presence.--
 (1) Medicaid.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is 
 amended--
 (i) in subclause (XXII), by striking ``or'' 
 at the end;
 (ii) in subclause (XXIII), by striking the 
 semicolon and inserting ``; or''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subclause:
 ``(XXIV) who would be eligible 
 under the State plan (or waiver of such 
 plan) under this title if they were 
 citizens of the United States;''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 1905(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended, in 
 the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the matter designated as clause 
 (xvi), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (ii) in the matter designated as clause 
 (xvii), by adding ``or'' at the end; and
 (iii) by inserting after the matter 
 designated as clause (xvii) the following:
 ``(xviii) individuals described in section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXIV),''.
 (2) CHIP.--Title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 2112 the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 2112A. STATE OPTION TO PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT 
 LAWFUL PRESENCE.

 ``A State may elect through an amendment to its State child health 
plan under section 2102 to treat an individual as a targeted low-income 
child or a targeted low-income pregnant woman for purposes of this 
title if such individual would otherwise be included as such a child or 
such a pregnant woman (as applicable) under such plan if the individual 
were a citizen of the United States.''.
 (3) Nonapplication of eligibility prohibition.--Section 
 401(a) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
 Reconciliation Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1611(a)) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The preceding 
 sentence shall not apply with respect to a noncitizen's 
 eligibility under a State plan (or waiver of such plan) under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act or under a State child 
 health plan (or waiver of such plan) under title XXI of such 
 Act to the extent that such State has elected to make such 
 individual so eligible pursuant to section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXIV) or 2112A of such Act, respectively.''.
 (c) Preserving Access to Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this section, including the 
 amendments made by this section, shall prevent lawfully present 
 noncitizens who are ineligible for full benefits under the 
 Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act 
 from securing a credit for which such lawfully present 
 noncitizens would be eligible under section 36B(c)(1)(B) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and under the Medicaid provisions 
 for lawfully present noncitizens, as in effect on the date 
 prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Definition.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term 
 ``full benefits'' means, with respect to an individual and 
 State, medical assistance for all services covered under the 
 State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act that is 
 not less in amount, duration, or scope, or is determined by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to be substantially 
 equivalent to the medical assistance available for an 
 individual described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)).

SEC. 4007. STUDY ON THE UNINSURED.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall--
 (1) conduct a study, in accordance with the standards under 
 section 3101 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300kk), on the demographic characteristics of the population of 
 individuals who do not have health insurance or oral health 
 coverage; and
 (2) predict, based on such study, the demographic 
 characteristics of the population of individuals who would 
 remain without health insurance after the end of any annual 
 open enrollment or any special enrollment period or upon 
 enactment and implementation of any legislative changes to the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-148) 
 that affect the number of persons eligible for health 
 insurance.
 (b) Reporting Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Congress the results of the study under subsection (a)(1) and 
 the prediction made under subsection (a)(2).
 (2) Reporting of demographic characteristics.--The 
 Secretary shall--
 (A) report the demographic characteristics under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) on the basis 
 of racial and ethnic minority group (as defined in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act), 
 and stratify the reporting on each racial and ethnic 
 minority group by other demographic characteristics 
 that can impact access to health insurance, such as 
 sexual orientation, gender identity, primary language, 
 disability status, sex, socioeconomic status, age 
 group, citizenship, and immigration status, in a manner 
 consistent with title I of this Act, including the 
 amendments made by such title; and
 (B) not use such report, or any information 
 gathered in preparing such report--
 (i) to engage in or anticipate any 
 deportation or immigration related enforcement 
 action by any entity, including the Department 
 of Homeland Security; or
 (ii) for the exploitation of, or 
 discrimination against, communities of color or 
 the LGBTQ+ population.

SEC. 4008. MEDICAID FALLBACK COVERAGE PROGRAM FOR LOW-INCOME ADULTS IN 
 NON-EXPANSION STATES.

 (a) In General.--As soon as possible after the date of enactment of 
this Act the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section 
referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall--
 (1) directly or by contract, establish a program that 
 offers eligible individuals the opportunity to enroll in health 
 benefits coverage that meets the requirements described in 
 subsection (c) and any requirements applicable to such coverage 
 pursuant to subsection (d); and
 (2) ensure that such program is administered consistent 
 with the requirements of section 431.10(c)(2) of title 42, Code 
 of Federal Regulations.
 (b) Definition of Eligible Individual.--In this section, the term 
``eligible individual'' means an individual who--
 (1) is described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII));
 (2) resides in a State that--
 (A) does not expend amounts for medical assistance 
 under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396 et seq.) for all individuals described in such 
 section; and
 (B) did not expend amounts for medical assistance 
 under such title for all such individuals as of the 
 date of enactment of this Act; and
 (3) would not be eligible for medical assistance under such 
 State's plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), or a waiver of 
 such plan, as such plan or waiver was in effect on such date.
 (c) Health Benefits Coverage Requirements.--The requirements 
described in this subsection with respect to health benefits coverage 
are the following:
 (1) Essential health benefits.--At a minimum, the coverage 
 meets the minimum standards required under paragraph (5) of 
 section 1937(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
 7(b)) for benchmark coverage described in paragraph (1) of such 
 section or benchmark equivalent coverage described in paragraph 
 (2) of such section.
 (2) Premiums and cost-sharing.--No premiums are imposed for 
 the coverage, and deductibles, cost-sharing, or similar charges 
 may only be imposed in accordance with the requirements imposed 
 on State Medicaid plans under section 1916 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o).
 (d) Application of Requirements and Provisions of Title XIX of the 
Social Security Act.--The Secretary shall specify that--
 (1) any requirement applicable to the furnishing of medical 
 assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) by States that have elected to make 
 medical assistance available to individuals described in 
 section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of such title (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII)) that does not conflict with the 
 requirements specified in subsection (c) applies to the program 
 established under this section; and
 (2) other provisions of such title apply to such program.
 (e) No State Mandate.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
as requiring a State to make expenditures related to the program 
established under this section and the Secretary shall not impose any 
such requirement.
 (f) Funding.--There are appropriated to the Secretary for each 
fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2025 from any funds in the 
Treasury not otherwise appropriated, such sums as are necessary to 
carry out this section.

SEC. 4009. INCREASE AND EXTENSION OF TEMPORARY ENHANCED FMAP FOR STATES 
 WHICH BEGIN TO EXPEND AMOUNTS FOR CERTAIN MANDATORY 
 INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1905(ii)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d(ii)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``8-quarter period'' and inserting ``40-
 quarter period''; and
 (2) by striking ``5 percentage points'' and inserting ``10 
 percentage points''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect as if included in the enactment of section 9814 of the American 
Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).

 Subtitle B--Improvement of Coverage

SEC. 4101. MEDICAID IN THE TERRITORIES.

 (a) Elimination of General Medicaid Funding Limitations (``CAP'') 
for Territories.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1108 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1308) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (f), in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1), by striking ``subsections (g) and (h)'' 
 and inserting ``subsections (g), (h), and (j)'';
 (B) in subsection (g)(2), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by inserting ``subsection (j) and'' 
 after ``subject to'';
 (C) in subsection (i), by striking paragraph (4); 
 and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(j) Sunset of Medicaid Funding Limitations for Puerto Rico, the 
Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and American 
Samoa.--Subsections (f) and (g) shall not apply to Puerto Rico, the 
Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa 
beginning with fiscal year 2025.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 1902(j) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(j)) is amended by striking ``, the 
 limitation in section 1108(f),,''.
 (B) Section 1903(u) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396b(u)) is amended by striking paragraph (4).
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply beginning with fiscal year 2025.
 (b) Elimination of Specific Federal Medical Assistance Percentage 
(FMAP) Limitation for Puerto Rico.--Section 1905 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``for fiscal years before fiscal year 2026'' after ``American 
 Samoa''; and
 (2) in subsection (ff)(2), by striking ``2027'' and 
 inserting ``2025''.
 (c) Permitting Medicaid DSH Allotments for Territories.--Section 
1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6), by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Territories.--
 ``(i) Fiscal year 2025.--For fiscal year 
 2025, the DSH allotment for Puerto Rico, the 
 Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, and American Samoa shall bear the same 
 ratio to $300,000,000 as the ratio of the 
 number of individuals who are low-income or 
 uninsured and residing in such respective 
 territory (as estimated from time to time by 
 the Secretary) bears to the sums of the number 
 of such individuals residing in all of the 
 territories.
 ``(ii) Subsequent fiscal year.--For each 
 subsequent fiscal year, the DSH allotment for 
 each such territory is subject to an increase 
 in accordance with paragraph (3).''; and
 (2) in paragraph (9), by inserting before the period at the 
 end the following: ``, and includes, beginning with fiscal year 
 2025, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, and American Samoa''.

SEC. 4102. EXTENSION OF THE SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME PROGRAM TO 
 PUERTO RICO, THE UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS, GUAM, AND 
 AMERICAN SAMOA.

 (a) In General.--Section 303 of the Social Security Amendments of 
1972 (86 Stat. 1484) is amended by striking subsection (b).
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Definition of state.--Section 1101(a)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301(a)(1)) is amended by striking the 
 5th sentence and inserting the following: ``Such term when used 
 in title XVI includes Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.''.
 (2) Elimination of limit on total payments to the 
 territories.--Section 1108 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1308) is 
 amended--
 (A) in the section heading, by striking ``; 
 limitation on total payments'';
 (B) by striking subsection (a); and
 (C) in subsection (c), by striking paragraphs (2) 
 and (4) and redesignating paragraphs (3) and (5) as 
 paragraphs (2) and (4), respectively.
 (3) United states nationals treated the same as citizens.--
 Section 1614(a)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1382c(a)(1)(B)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in clause (i)(I), by inserting ``or national,'' 
 after ``citizen'';
 (B) in clause (i)(II), by adding ``; or'' at the 
 end; and
 (C) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or national'' 
 after ``citizen''.
 (4) Territories included in geographic meaning of united 
 states.--Section 1614(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1382c(e)) is 
 amended by striking ``and the District of Columbia'' and 
 inserting ``, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United 
 States Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa''.
 (c) Waiver Authority.--The Commissioner of Social Security may 
waive or modify any statutory requirement relating to the provision of 
benefits under the Supplemental Security Income Program under title XVI 
of the Social Security Act in Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
Islands, Guam, or American Samoa, to the extent that the Commissioner 
deems it necessary in order to adapt the program to the needs of the 
territory involved.
 (d) Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall take effect on the 1st day of the 1st Federal fiscal year 
that begins 1 year or more after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4103. EXTENSION OF MEDICARE SECONDARY PAYER.

 (a) In General.--Section 1862(b)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in the last sentence, by inserting ``, and before 
 January 1, 2025'' after ``prior to such date)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new sentence: 
 ``Effective for items and services furnished on or after 
 January 1, 2025 (with respect to periods beginning on or after 
 the date that is 42 months prior to such date), clauses (i) and 
 (ii) shall be applied by substituting `42-month' for `12-month' 
 each place it appears.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of enactment of this Act. For purposes of 
determining an individual's status under section 1862(b)(1)(C) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(C)), as amended by 
subsection (a), an individual who is within the coordinating period as 
of the date of enactment of this Act shall have that period extended to 
the full 42 months described in the last sentence of such section, as 
added by the amendment made by subsection (a)(2).

SEC. 4104. INDIAN DEFINED IN TITLE I OF THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND 
 AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.

 (a) Definition of Indian.--Section 1304 of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18024) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(f) Indian.--In this title:
 ``(1) In general.--The term `Indian' means--
 ``(A) an Indian, a California Indian, or an Urban 
 Indian (as those terms are defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)); 
 or
 ``(B) an individual who is of Indian descent and a 
 member of an Indian community served by a local 
 facility or program of the Indian Health Service.
 ``(2) Inclusions.--The term `Indian' includes the following 
 individuals:
 ``(A) A member of a federally recognized Indian 
 Tribe.
 ``(B) A resident of an urban center who meets 1 or 
 more of the following criteria:
 ``(i) A member of a Tribe, band, or other 
 organized group of Indians, including those 
 Tribes, bands, or groups terminated since 1940 
 and those recognized as of the date of 
 enactment of the Health Equity and 
 Accountability Act of 2024 or later by the 
 State in which they reside, or being a 
 descendant, in the first or second degree, of 
 any such member.
 ``(ii) An Eskimo or Aleut or other Alaska 
 Native.
 ``(iii) An individual who is determined to 
 be an Indian under regulations promulgated by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(C) An individual who is considered by the 
 Secretary of the Interior to be an Indian for any 
 purpose.
 ``(D) An individual who is considered by the 
 Secretary to be an Indian for purposes of eligibility 
 for services provided by the Indian Health Service, 
 including as a California Indian, Eskimo, Aleut, or 
 other Alaska Native.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Affordable choices of health benefit plans.--Section 
 1311(c)(6)(D) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 18031(c)(6)(D)) is amended by striking ``(as defined 
 in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act)''.
 (2) Reduced cost-sharing for individuals enrolling in 
 qualified health plans.--Section 1402(d) of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18071(d)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``(as defined in section 
 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(d)))''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``(as so defined)''.
 (3) Exemption from penalty for not maintaining minimum 
 essential coverage.--Section 5000A(e) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 is amended by striking paragraph (3) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(3) Indians.--Any applicable individual who is an Indian 
 (as defined in section 1304(f) of the Patient Protection and 
 Affordable Care Act).''.
 (c) Effective Date of IRC Amendment.--The amendment made by 
subsection (b)(3) shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4105. REMOVING MEDICARE BARRIER TO HEALTH CARE.

 (a) Part A.--Section 1818(a)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395i-2(a)(3)(B)) is amended by striking ``an alien'' and all 
that follows through ``under this section'' and inserting ``an 
individual who is lawfully present in the United States''.
 (b) Part B.--Section 1836(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395o(a)(2)(B)) is amended by striking ``an alien'' and all that 
follows through ``under this part'' and inserting ``an individual who 
is lawfully present in the United States''.

SEC. 4106. LOWERING MEDICARE PREMIUMS AND PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS.

 (a) Medicare Cost Assistance Program.--
 (1) In general.--Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 1899C. MEDICARE COST ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--Effective beginning January 1, 2025, in the case 
of a Medicare Cost Assistance Program eligible individual (as defined 
in subsection (b)(1)), the Secretary shall provide Medicare cost 
assistance for the following costs incurred with respect to the 
individual:
 ``(1) Premiums under section 1818.
 ``(2) Premiums under section 1839.
 ``(3) Coinsurance under this title (including coinsurance 
 described in section 1813).
 ``(4) Deductibles established under this title (including 
 those described in section 1813 and section 1833(b)).
 ``(5) The difference between the amount that is paid under 
 section 1833(a) and the amount that would be paid under such 
 section if any reference to a percent less than 100 percent 
 therein were deemed a reference to `100 percent'.
 ``(b) Determination of Eligibility.--
 ``(1) Medicare cost assistance program eligible individual 
 defined.--The term `Medicare Cost Assistance Program eligible 
 individual' means an individual who--
 ``(A) is eligible for, and is receiving, medical 
 assistance for the payment of medicare cost-sharing 
 under a State Medicaid program pursuant to clause (i), 
 (iii), or (iv) of section 1902(a)(10)(E) as of December 
 31, 2024; or
 ``(B)(i) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits 
 under part A (including an individual entitled to such 
 benefits pursuant to an enrollment under section 1818); 
 and
 ``(ii) has income at or below 200 percent of the 
 poverty line applicable to a family of the size 
 involved.
 ``(2) Joint determination by commissioner of social 
 security for lis and medicare cost assistance.--
 ``(A) In general.--The determination of whether an 
 individual is a Medicare Cost Assistance Program 
 eligible individual shall be determined by the 
 Commissioner of Social Security (referred to in this 
 section as the `Commissioner') jointly with the 
 determination of whether an individual is a subsidy 
 eligible individual described in section 1860D-
 14(a)(3). Such determination shall be made with respect 
 to eligibility for Medicare cost assistance under this 
 section and premium and cost-sharing subsidies under 
 section 1860D-14 upon application of an individual for 
 a determination with respect to eligibility for either 
 such assistance or such subsidies. There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to the Social Security 
 Administration such sums as may be necessary for the 
 determination of eligibility under this paragraph.
 ``(B) Effective period.--Determinations under this 
 paragraph with respect to eligibility for each of such 
 assistance or such subsidies shall be effective 
 beginning with the month in which the individual 
 applies for a determination described in subparagraph 
 (A) and shall remain in effect until such time as the 
 Secretary determines the individual is no longer 
 eligible as determined under subparagraph (C)(ii).
 ``(C) Redeterminations.--With respect to 
 eligibility determinations under this paragraph--
 ``(i) redeterminations shall be made at the 
 same time with respect to eligibility for 
 Medicare cost assistance under this section and 
 cost-sharing subsidies under section 1860D-14, 
 but not more frequently than once every 12 
 months;
 ``(ii) a redetermination shall 
 automatically determine that an individual 
 remains eligible for such assistance or 
 subsidies unless--
 ``(I) the Commissioner has 
 information indicating that the 
 individual's circumstances have changed 
 such that the individual is no longer 
 eligible for such assistance or 
 subsidies;
 ``(II) the Commissioner sends 
 notice to the individual regarding such 
 information that requests a response 
 either confirming or correcting such 
 information; and
 ``(III) the individual either 
 confirms such information or fails to 
 provide documentation indicating that 
 such circumstances have not changed 
 within 60 days of receiving the notice 
 described in subclause (II);
 ``(iii) the Commissioner shall establish 
 procedures for appeals of such determinations 
 that are similar to the procedures described in 
 the third sentence of section 1631(c)(1)(A); 
 and
 ``(iv) judicial review of the final 
 decision of the Commissioner made after a 
 hearing shall be available to the same extent, 
 and with the same limitations, as provided in 
 subsections (g) and (h) of section 205.
 ``(D) Treatment of medicaid beneficiaries.--The 
 Secretary shall provide that individuals who are full-
 benefit dual eligible individuals (as defined in 
 section 1935(c)(6)) or who are recipients of 
 supplemental security income benefits under title XVI 
 shall be treated as a Medicare Cost Assistance Program 
 eligible individual and, in the case of such individual 
 who is a part D eligible individual, a subsidy eligible 
 individual described in section 1860D-14(a)(3).
 ``(E) Simplified application form.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 develop and distribute a simplified application 
 form for use by individuals in applying for 
 Medicare cost assistance under this section and 
 premium and cost-sharing subsidies under 
 section 1860D-14. Such form shall be easily 
 readable based on culturally fluid language for 
 all demographics beyond just the various 
 languages offered. An audio version, digital 
 version, and photo-voice option should also be 
 provided for all learners. The Secretary shall 
 provide for the translation of such application 
 form into at least the 10 languages (other than 
 English) that are most often used by 
 individuals applying for hospital insurance 
 benefits under section 226 or 226A and shall 
 make the translated forms available to the 
 Commissioner of Social Security.
 ``(ii) Consultation.--In developing the 
 form under clause (i), the Secretary shall 
 consult with beneficiary groups.
 ``(3) Income determinations.--For purposes of applying this 
 section--
 ``(A) in the case of an individual who is not 
 treated as a Medicare Cost Assistance Program eligible 
 individual or a subsidy eligible individual under 
 paragraph (2)(D), income shall be determined in the 
 manner described under section 1612 for purposes of the 
 supplemental security income program, except that 
 support and maintenance furnished in kind shall not be 
 counted as income; and
 ``(B) the term `poverty line' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 673(2) of the Community Services 
 Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)), including any 
 revision required by such section.
 ``(c) Beneficiary Protections.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case in which the payment for 
 Medicare cost assistance for a Medicare Cost Assistance Program 
 eligible individual with respect to an item or service is 
 reduced or eliminated, the individual shall not have any legal 
 liability to make payment to a provider of services (as defined 
 in section 1861(u)), a supplier (as defined in section 
 1861(d)), or to an organization described in section 
 1903(m)(1)(A) for the service, and any lawful sanction that may 
 be imposed upon a provider of services, a supplier, or such an 
 organization for excess charges under this title or title XIX 
 shall apply to the imposition of any charge imposed upon the 
 individual in such case.
 ``(2) Clarification.--This paragraph shall not be construed 
 as preventing payment of any medicare cost assistance by a 
 medicare supplemental policy or an employer retiree health plan 
 on behalf of an individual.
 ``(d) Administration.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish procedures 
 for the administration of the program under this section.
 ``(2) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out this section, 
 the Secretary shall make payments from the Federal Hospital 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 and the Federal 
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841, 
 in such proportion as the Secretary determines appropriate, of 
 such amounts as the Secretary determines necessary to provide 
 Medicare cost assistance under this section.
 ``(e) References to Medicare Cost-Sharing.--Effective beginning 
January 1, 2025, any reference to medicare cost-sharing described in 
section 1905(p) shall be deemed a reference to Medicare cost assistance 
under this section.
 ``(f) Outreach Efforts.--For provisions relating to outreach 
efforts to increase awareness of the availability of Medicare cost 
assistance, see section 1144.''.
 (2) Special enrollment period.--
 (A) No premium penalty.--Section 1839(b) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395r(b)) is amended, in 
 the last sentence, by inserting the following before 
 the period: ``or, effective beginning January 1, 2025, 
 for individuals who are Medicare Cost Assistance 
 Program eligible individuals (as defined in section 
 1899C(b)(1)).''.
 (B) Special enrollment period.--Section 1837 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395p) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(p) Special Enrollment Period for Medicare Cost Assistance 
Program Eligible Individual.--
 ``(1) In general.--Effective beginning January 1, 2025, the 
 Secretary shall establish special enrollment periods for 
 Medicare Cost Assistance Program eligible individuals (as 
 defined in section 1899C(b)(1)).
 ``(2) Coverage period.--In the case of an individual who 
 enrolls during the special enrollment period provided under 
 paragraph (1), the coverage period under this part shall--
 ``(A) begin on the first day of the first month in 
 which the individual applies for a determination under 
 section 1899C(b)(2)(A); and
 ``(B) remain in effect until such time as the 
 Secretary determines the individual is no longer 
 eligible as determined under section 
 1899C(b)(2)(C)(ii).''.
 (C) Conforming sunset of state agreements relating 
 to enrollment of qualified medicare beneficiaries.--
 (i) Part a.--Section 1818(g) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-2(g)) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Sunset.--This subsection shall not apply on or after January 
1, 2025.''.
 (ii) Part b.--Section 1843(h) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395v(h)) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Sunset With Respect to Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries.--
This subsection shall not apply with respect to qualified medicare 
beneficiaries on or after January 1, 2025.''.
 (3) Public awareness campaign.--Section 1144 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-14) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Public Awareness Campaign.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Commissioner shall conduct a public 
 awareness campaign to educate Medicare beneficiaries on the 
 availability of Medicare cost assistance for low-income 
 individuals under section 1899C.
 ``(2) Coordination.--In carrying out the public awareness 
 campaign under paragraph (1), the Commissioner shall coordinate 
 with State health insurance assistance programs described in 
 subsection (a)(1)(A) of section 119 of the Medicare 
 Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. 
 1395b-3 note), the Administrator of the Administration for 
 Community Living, and the Administrator of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 ``(3) Funding.--There is appropriated to the Commissioner, 
 out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
 $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029, to 
 provide grants to State health insurance assistance programs to 
 carry out outreach and education activities under the public 
 awareness campaign pursuant to this subsection.''.
 (b) Moving Medicare Cost-Sharing Benefits From Medicaid to 
Medicare.--
 (1) Ending most medicare cost-sharing benefits under 
 medicaid.--Section 1902(a)(10) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``for calendar quarters beginning 
 before January 1, 2025,'' before ``for making'' each 
 place it appears in clauses (i), (iii), and (iv) of 
 subparagraph (E); and
 (B) in the matter following subparagraph (G)--
 (i) by inserting ``furnished during 
 calendar quarters beginning before January 1, 
 2025'' after ``(described in section 
 1905(p)(3))'';
 (ii) by striking ``(XV)'' and inserting ``, 
 (XV)'';
 (iii) by striking ``and (XVIII)'' and 
 inserting ``, (XVIII)'';
 (iv) by striking ``and (XIX)'' and 
 inserting ``(XIX)''; and
 (v) by inserting ``, and (XX) no medical 
 assistance for medicare cost-sharing, other 
 than medical assistance for medicare cost-
 sharing for qualified disabled and working 
 individuals described in section 1905(s), shall 
 be made available after January 1, 2025'' 
 before the semicolon at the end.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Title xix.--
 (i) Section 1903(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396b(i)), as amended by section 4002, is 
 amended--
 (I) in paragraph (26), by striking 
 ``or'' at the end;
 (II) in paragraph (27), by striking 
 the period at the end and inserting ``; 
 or''; and
 (III) by inserting after paragraph 
 (27) the following new paragraph:
 ``(28) with respect to any amount expended for medical 
 assistance for medicare cost-sharing (other than medical 
 assistance for medicare cost-sharing for qualified disabled and 
 working individuals described in section 1905(s)) furnished 
 during calendar quarters beginning on or after January 1, 
 2025.''.
 (ii) Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396d(a)) is amended, in the first sentence, by 
 inserting ``furnished during calendar quarters 
 beginning before January 1, 2025'' after 
 ``medicare cost-sharing''.
 (iii) Section 1933(g) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396u-3(g)) is amended--
 (I) in paragraph (2)(Q), by 
 striking ``paragraph (4), for each 
 subsequent year'' and inserting 
 ``paragraphs (4) and (5), for each 
 subsequent year before 2025''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(5) Sunset.--No individual shall be selected to be a 
 qualifying individual for any calendar year or period under 
 this section beginning on or after January 1, 2025, and no 
 State allocation shall be made for any fiscal year or period 
 under this section beginning on or after January 1, 2025.''.
 (iv) Section 1935(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396u-5(a)) is amended--
 (I) in paragraph (2)(A), by 
 striking ``make determinations'' and 
 inserting ``prior to January 1, 2025, 
 make determinations''; and
 (II) in paragraph (3), by inserting 
 ``prior to January 1, 2025,'' before 
 ``the State shall''.
 (c) Enhancing Prescription Drug Affordability by Expanding Access 
to Assistance With Out-of-Pocket Costs Under Medicare Part D for Low-
Income Seniors and Individuals With Disabilities.--
 (1) Expanding access.--Section 1860D-14 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), in the matter 
 preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking ``150 percent'' and 
 inserting ``200 percent''; and
 (II) by striking ``and who meets 
 the resources requirement described in 
 paragraph (3)(D) (or, with respect to a 
 plan year beginning on or after January 
 1, 2025, paragraph (3)(E)) or who is 
 covered under this paragraph under 
 paragraph (3)(B)(i)'';
 (ii) by striking paragraph (2);
 (iii) in paragraph (3)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) in clause (i), by 
 adding ``and'' at the end;
 (bb) in clause (ii)--

 (AA) by striking 
 ``150 percent'' and 
 inserting ``200 
 percent''; and

 (BB) by striking 
 ``; and'' at the end 
 and inserting a period; 
 and

 (cc) by striking clause 
 (iii);
 (II) by striking subparagraphs (B) 
 and (C) and inserting the following:
 ``(B) Determinations.--For provisions relating to 
 joint determinations with respect to eligibility for 
 Medicare cost assistance under section 1899C and 
 premium and cost-sharing subsidies under this section, 
 see section 1899C(b)(2).
 ``(C) Income determinations.--For purposes of 
 applying this section--
 ``(i) in the case of an individual who is 
 not treated as a Medicare cost-sharing 
 assistance eligible individual and a subsidy 
 eligible individual under section 
 1899C(b)(2)(D), income shall be determined in 
 the manner described under section 1612 for 
 purposes of the supplemental security income 
 program, except that support and maintenance 
 furnished in kind shall not be counted as 
 income; and
 ``(ii) the term `poverty line' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 673(2) of 
 the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 
 U.S.C. 9902(2)), including any revision 
 required by such section.''; and
 (III) by striking subparagraphs 
 (D), (E), and (G); and
 (iv) in paragraph (4)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) by striking ``(A) 
 Copayment for lowest income 
 dual eligible individuals.--'';
 (bb) by redesignating 
 clauses (i) and (ii) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), 
 respectively and indenting 
 appropriately; and
 (cc) by moving the flush 
 text at the end 2 ems to the 
 left; and
 (II) by striking subparagraph (B); 
 and
 (B) in subsection (c)(1), in the second sentence, 
 by striking ``subsections (a)(1)(D) and (a)(2)(E)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(D)''.
 (2) Treatment of reduction of cost-sharing for individuals 
 receiving home and community-based services.--Section 1860D-
 14(a)(1)(D)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 114(a)(1)(D)(i)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``who would be such an 
 institutionalized individual or couple, if the full-
 benefit dual eligible individual were not''; and
 (B) by striking ``or subsection (c) or (d) of 
 section 1915 or under a State plan amendment under 
 subsection (i) of such section'' and inserting ``, 
 section 1115A, section 1915, or under a State plan 
 amendment''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to plan year 2025 and subsequent plan years.

SEC. 4107. REDUCING COST-SHARING, ALIGNING INCOME AND RESOURCE 
 ELIGIBILITY TESTS, SIMPLIFYING ENROLLMENT, AND OTHER 
 PROGRAM IMPROVEMENTS FOR LOW-INCOME BENEFICIARIES.

 (a) Increase in Income Eligibility to 135 Percent of FPL for 
Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1905(p)(2)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(p)(2)(A)) is amended by striking 
 ``shall be at least the percent provided under subparagraph (B) 
 (but not more than 100 percent) of the official poverty line'' 
 and all that follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting the following: ``shall be--
 ``(i) before January 1, 2025, at least the 
 percent provided under subparagraph (B) (but 
 not more than 100 percent) of the official 
 poverty line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in 
 accordance with section 673(2) of the Community 
 Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)) 
 applicable to a family of the size involved; 
 and
 ``(ii) on or after January 1, 2025, equal 
 to 135 percent of the official poverty line (as 
 so defined and revised) applicable to a family 
 of the size involved.''.
 (2) Not counting in-kind support and maintenance as 
 income.--Section 1905(p)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d(p)(2)(D)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new clause:
 ``(iii) In determining income under this subsection, 
 support and maintenance furnished in kind shall not be counted 
 as income.''.
 (b) Increase in Income Eligibility to 200 Percent of FPL for 
Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiaries.--
 (1) Eligibility of individuals with incomes below 150 
 percent of fpl.--Section 1902(a)(10)(E) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E)) is amended--
 (A) by adding ``and'' at the end of clause (ii);
 (B) in clause (iii)--
 (i) by striking ``and 120 percent in 1995 
 and years thereafter'' and inserting ``120 
 percent in 1995 and years thereafter before 
 2025, and 200 percent in 2025 and years 
 thereafter''; and
 (ii) by striking ``and'' at the end; and
 (C) by striking clause (iv).
 (2) References.--Section 1905(p)(1) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(p)(1)) is amended by adding at and below 
 subparagraph (C) the following flush sentence:
``The term `specified low-income medicare beneficiary' means an 
individual described in section 1902(a)(10)(E)(iii).''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) The first sentence of section 1905(b) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by striking ``and 
 section 1933(d)''.
 (B) Section 1933 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-3) is 
 repealed.
 (c) 100 Percent FMAP.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``and (ii)'' and 
 inserting ``(ii), and (kk)''; and
 (2) amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(kk) Increased FMAP for Expanded Medicare Cost-Sharing 
Populations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), with 
 respect to expenditures described in paragraph (2) the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage shall be equal to 100 percent.
 ``(2) Expenditures described.--The expenditures described 
 in this paragraph are expenditures made on or after January 1, 
 2025, for medical assistance for medicare cost-sharing provided 
 to any individual under clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 
 1902(a)(10)(E) who would not have been eligible for medicare 
 cost-sharing under any such clause under the income or resource 
 eligibility standards in effect on October 1, 2018.''.
 (d) Consolidation of Low-Income Subsidy Resource Eligibility 
Tests.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1860D-14(a)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(3)) is amended--
 (A) by striking subparagraph (D);
 (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (G) 
 as subparagraphs (D) through (F), respectively; and
 (C) in the heading of subparagraph (D), as so 
 redesignated, by striking ``Alternative resource'' and 
 inserting ``Resource''.
 (2) Clarification of certain rules relating to income and 
 resource determinations.--Section 1860D-14(a)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(3)), as amended by 
 paragraph (1), is amended by striking subparagraph (F) and 
 inserting the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(F) Resource exclusions.--In determining the 
 resources of an individual (and the eligible spouse of 
 the individual, if any) under section 1613 for purposes 
 of subparagraph (D)--
 ``(i) no part of the value of any life 
 insurance policy shall be taken into account;
 ``(ii) no part of the value of any vehicle 
 shall be taken into account;
 ``(iii) there shall be excluded an amount 
 equal to $1,500 each with respect to any 
 individual or eligible spouse of an individual 
 who attests that some of the resources of such 
 individual or spouse will be used to meet the 
 burial and related expenses of such individual 
 or spouse; and
 ``(iv) no balance in, or benefits received 
 under, an employee pension benefit plan (as 
 defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002)) 
 shall be taken into account.
 ``(G) Family size.--In determining the size of the 
 family of an individual for purposes of determining the 
 income eligibility of such individual under this 
 section, an individual's family shall consist of--
 ``(i) the individual;
 ``(ii) the individual's spouse who lives in 
 the same household as the individual (if any); 
 and
 ``(iii) any other individuals who--
 ``(I) are related to the individual 
 whose income eligibility is in question 
 or such individual's spouse who lives 
 in the same household;
 ``(II) are living in the same 
 household as such individual; and
 ``(III) are dependent on such 
 individual or such individual's spouse 
 who is living in the same household for 
 at least one-half of their financial 
 support.''.
 (3) Conforming amendments.--Section 1860D-14(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by inserting ``(as determined under 
 paragraph (3)(G))'' after ``family of the size 
 involved''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), as amended by paragraphs (1) 
 and (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by striking 
 ``subparagraph (F)'' and inserting 
 ``subparagraph (E)'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by inserting 
 ``(as determined under subparagraph (G))'' 
 after ``family of the size involved'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (A)(iii), by striking 
 ``or (E)'';
 (iv) in subparagraph (B)(v), in the matter 
 preceding subclause (I), by striking 
 ``subparagraph (F)'' and inserting 
 ``subparagraph (E)''; and
 (v) in subparagraph (D)(i), in the matter 
 preceding subclause (I), by striking ``subject 
 to the life insurance policy exclusion provided 
 under subparagraph (G)'' and inserting 
 ``subject to the resource exclusions provided 
 under subparagraph (F)''.
 (e) Alignment of Low-Income Subsidy and Medicare Savings Program 
Income and Resource Eligibility Tests.--
 (1) Application of medicaid spousal impoverishment resource 
 allowance to msp and lis resource eligibility.--Section 
 1905(p)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396d(p)(1)(C)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(C) whose resources (as determined under section 1613 for 
 purposes of the supplemental security income program subject to 
 the resource exclusions under subparagraph (F) of section 
 1860D-14(a)(3)) do not exceed--
 ``(i) in the case of an individual with a spouse, 
 an amount equal to the sum of the first amount 
 specified in subsection (f)(2)(A)(i) of section 1924 
 (as adjusted under subsection (g) of such section) and 
 the amount specified in subsection (f)(2)(A)(ii)(II) of 
 such section (as so adjusted); or
 ``(ii) in the case of an individual who does not 
 have a spouse, an amount equal to \1/2\ of the amount 
 described in clause (i).''.
 (2) Application to qdwis.--Section 1905(s)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(s)(3)) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(3) whose resources (as determined under section 1613 for 
 purposes of the supplemental security income program subject to 
 the resource exclusions under subparagraph (F) of section 
 1860D-14(a)(3)) do not exceed--
 ``(A) in the case of an individual with a spouse, 
 the amount in effect for the year under clause (i) of 
 subsection (p)(1)(C); and
 ``(B) in the case of an individual who does not 
 have a spouse, the amount in effect for the year under 
 clause (ii) of subsection (p)(1)(C); and''.
 (3) Application to lis.--Clause (i) of section 1860D-
 14(a)(3)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 114(a)(3)(D)), as redesignated and amended by subsection 
 (d)(1), is amended to read as follows:
 ``(i) In general.--The resources 
 requirement of this subparagraph is that an 
 individual's resources (as determined under 
 section 1613 for purposes of the supplemental 
 security income program subject to the resource 
 exclusions provided under subparagraph (F)) do 
 not exceed the amount in effect for the year 
 under section 1905(p)(1)(C)(ii).''.
 (f) Enrollment Simplifications.--
 (1) Application of 3-month retroactive eligibility to 
 qmbs.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1902(e)(8) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(8)) is amended by 
 striking ``after the end of the month in which the 
 determination first occurs'' and inserting ``in or 
 after the third month before the month in which the 
 individual makes application for assistance''.
 (B) Process for submitting claims during 
 retroactive eligibility period.--Section 1902(e)(8) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(8)) is 
 further amended by adding at the end the following: 
 ``The Secretary shall provide for a process under which 
 claims for medical assistance under the State plan may 
 be submitted for services furnished to such an 
 individual during such 3-month period before the month 
 in which the individual made application for 
 assistance.''.
 (C) Conforming amendment.--Section 1905(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended, in 
 the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``or, 
 in the case of medicare cost-sharing with respect to a 
 qualified medicare beneficiary described in subsection 
 (p)(1), if provided after the month in which the 
 individual becomes such a beneficiary''.
 (2) State option for 12-month continuous eligibility for 
 slmbs and qwdis.--Section 1902(e)(12) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(12)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as 
 clauses (i) and (ii), respectively;
 (B) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(12)''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) At the option of the State, the plan may provide that an 
individual who is determined to be eligible for benefits under a State 
plan approved under this title under any of the following eligibility 
categories, or who is redetermined to be eligible for such benefits 
under any of such categories, shall be considered to meet the 
eligibility requirements met on the date of application and shall 
remain eligible for those benefits until the end of the 12-month period 
following the date of the determination or redetermination of 
eligibility, except that a State may provide for such determinations 
more frequently, but not more frequently than once every 6 months for 
an individual:
 ``(i) A specified low-income medicare beneficiary described 
 in subsection (a)(10)(E)(iii) of this section who is determined 
 eligible for medicare cost-sharing described in section 
 1905(p)(3)(A)(ii).
 ``(ii) A qualified disabled and working individual 
 described in section 1905(s) who is determined eligible for 
 medicare cost-sharing described in section 1905(p)(3)(A)(i).''.
 (3) State option to use express lane eligibility for the 
 medicare savings program.--Section 1902(e)(13)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(13)(A)) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) State option to extend express lane 
 eligibility to other populations.--
 ``(I) In general.--At the option of the 
 State, the State may apply the provisions of 
 this paragraph with respect to determining 
 eligibility under this title for an eligible 
 individual (as defined in subclause (II)). In 
 applying this paragraph in the case of a State 
 making such an option, any reference in this 
 paragraph to a child with respect to this title 
 (other than a reference to child health 
 assistance) shall be deemed to be a reference 
 to an eligible individual.
 ``(II) Eligible individual defined.--In 
 this clause, the term `eligible individual' 
 means any of the following:
 ``(aa) A qualified medicare 
 beneficiary described in section 
 1905(p)(1) for purposes of determining 
 eligibility for medicare cost-sharing 
 (as defined in section 1905(p)(3)).
 ``(bb) A specified low-income 
 medicare beneficiary described in 
 subsection (a)(10)(E)(iii) of this 
 section for purposes of determining 
 eligibility for medicare cost-sharing 
 described in section 1905(p)(3)(A)(ii).
 ``(cc) A qualified disabled and 
 working individual described in section 
 1905(s) for purposes of determining 
 eligibility for medicare cost-sharing 
 described in section 
 1905(p)(3)(A)(i).''.
 (g) Medicaid Treatment of Certain Medicare Providers.--Section 
1902(n) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(n)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) A State plan shall not deny a claim from a provider or 
supplier with respect to medicare cost-sharing described in 
subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of section 1905(p)(3) for an item or 
service which is eligible for payment under title XVIII on the basis 
that the provider or supplier does not have a provider agreement in 
effect under this title or does not otherwise serve all individuals 
entitled to medical assistance under this title. The State shall create 
a mechanism through which providers or suppliers that do not otherwise 
have provider agreements with the State can bill the State for medicare 
cost-sharing for qualified medicare beneficiaries.''.
 (h) Eligibility for Other Programs.--Section 1905(p) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(p)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any medical 
assistance for some or all medicare cost-sharing under this title shall 
not be considered income or resources in determining eligibility for, 
or the amount of assistance or benefits provided under, any other 
public benefit provided under Federal law or the law of any State or 
political subdivision thereof.''.
 (i) Treatment of Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries, Specified Low-
Income Medicare Beneficiaries, and Other Dual Eligibles as Medicare 
Beneficiaries.--Section 1862 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395y) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(p) Treatment of Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries (QMBs), 
Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiaries (SLMBs), and Other Dual 
Eligibles.--Nothing in this title shall be construed as authorizing a 
provider of services or supplier to discriminate (through a private 
contractual arrangement or otherwise) against an individual who is 
otherwise entitled to services under this title on the basis that the 
individual is a qualified medicare beneficiary (as defined in section 
1905(p)(1)), a specified low-income medicare beneficiary, or is 
otherwise eligible for medical assistance for medicare cost-sharing or 
other benefits under title XIX.''.
 (j) Additional Funding for State Health Insurance Assistance 
Programs.--
 (1) Grants.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall use amounts made available under 
 subparagraph (B) to make grants to States for State 
 health insurance assistance programs receiving 
 assistance under section 4360 of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-4).
 (B) Funding.--For purposes of making grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for the 
 transfer, from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395i) and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund under section 1841 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t), in the same proportion as the Secretary 
 determines under section 1853(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395w-23(f)), of $50,000,000 to the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services Program Management Account 
 for each of the fiscal years 2025 through 2029, to 
 remain available until expended.
 (2) Amount of grants.--The amount of a grant to a State 
 under this subsection from the total amount made available 
 under paragraph (1) shall be equal to the sum of the amount 
 allocated to the State under paragraph (3)(A) and the amount 
 allocated to the State under subparagraph (3)(B).
 (3) Allocation to states.--
 (A) Allocation based on percentage of low-income 
 beneficiaries.--The amount allocated to a State under 
 this subparagraph from \2/3\ of the total amount made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be based on the 
 number of individuals who meet the requirement under 
 subsection (a)(3)(A)(ii) of section 1860D-14 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114) but who have 
 not enrolled to receive a subsidy under such section 
 1860D-14 relative to the total number of individuals 
 who meet the requirement under such subsection 
 (a)(3)(A)(ii) in each State, as estimated by the 
 Secretary.
 (B) Allocation based on percentage of rural 
 beneficiaries.--The amount allocated to a State under 
 this subparagraph from \1/3\ of the total amount made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be based on the 
 number of part D eligible individuals (as defined in 
 section 1860D-1(a)(3)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 101(a)(3)(A))) residing in a rural area relative to the 
 total number of such individuals in each State, as 
 estimated by the Secretary.
 (4) Portion of grant based on percentage of low-income 
 beneficiaries to be used to provide outreach to individuals who 
 may be subsidy eligible individuals or eligible for the 
 medicare savings program.--Each grant awarded under this 
 subsection with respect to amounts allocated under paragraph 
 (3)(A) shall be used to provide outreach to individuals who may 
 be subsidy eligible individuals (as defined in section 1860D-
 14(a)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 114(a)(3)(A))) or eligible for the program of medical 
 assistance for payment of the cost of medicare cost-sharing 
 under the Medicaid program pursuant to sections 1902(a)(10)(E) 
 and 1933 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E), 1396u-3).
 (k) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments and repeal made by this section take effect on 
 January 1, 2025, and, with respect to title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act, apply to calendar quarters beginning on or after 
 January 1, 2025.
 (2) Exception for state legislation.--In the case of a 
 State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 determines requires State legislation (other than legislation 
 appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet the 
 additional requirements imposed by the amendments and repeal 
 made by this section, the State plan shall not be regarded as 
 failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on 
 the basis of its failure to meet these additional requirements 
 before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning 
 after the close of the first regular session of the State 
 legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a 
 State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such 
 session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the 
 State legislature.

SEC. 4108. 100 PERCENT FMAP FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY URBAN 
 INDIAN ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The third sentence of section 1905(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by striking ``for 
the 8 fiscal year quarters beginning with the first fiscal year quarter 
beginning after the date of the enactment of the American Rescue Plan 
Act of 2021,'' and inserting ``and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to medical assistance provided on or after the date of enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 4109. 100 PERCENT FMAP FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO A NATIVE 
 HAWAIIAN THROUGH A FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTER OR A 
 NATIVE HAWAIIAN HEALTH CARE SYSTEM UNDER THE MEDICAID 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The third sentence of section 1905(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by striking ``, for 
such 8 fiscal year quarters''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to medical assistance provided on or after the date of enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 4110. REPEAL OF REQUIREMENT FOR ESTATE RECOVERY UNDER THE MEDICAID 
 PROGRAM.

 Section 1917 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396p) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) No lien may be imposed against the property of any 
 individual prior to his death on account of medical assistance 
 paid or to be paid on his behalf under the State plan, except 
 pursuant to the judgment of a court on account of benefits 
 incorrectly paid on behalf of such individual.'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (2);
 (C) in paragraph (3), by striking ``(1)(B)'' and 
 inserting ``(1)''; and
 (D) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (2); and
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Adjustment or Recovery of Medical Assistance Correctly Paid 
Under a State Plan.--No adjustment or recovery of any medical 
assistance correctly paid on behalf of an individual under the State 
plan may be made.''.

SEC. 4111. ALLOW FOR SUSPENSION OF MEDICARE BENEFITS AND PREMIUM 
 LIABILITY FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE INCARCERATED AND 
 PROVIDE A SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD AROUND THE DATE OF 
 RELEASE.

 (a) Special Enrollment Period for Individuals Incarcerated at Time 
of Medicare Eligibility.--Section 1837(i) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395p(i)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(5)(A) In the case of an individual who--
 ``(i) at the time the individual first satisfies 
 paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1836(a), is 
 incarcerated; or
 ``(ii) has elected not to enroll (or to be deemed 
 enrolled) under this section during the individual's 
 initial enrollment period;
 there shall be a special enrollment period described in 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) The special enrollment period referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) is the 6-month period beginning on the 
 first day after which the individual is no longer 
 incarcerated.''.
 (b) Premium Amount.--Section 1839(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395r(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``and (7),'' and inserting ``(7), and (8),''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) In the case of an individual whose coverage period includes 
months in which by reason of custody under penal authority coverage is 
excluded pursuant to section 1862(a)(3), the premium amount for such 
months such individual is in custody under penal authority shall be 
zero.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1818(d)(5) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-2(d)(5)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(D) In the case of an individual who is a person 
 who is excluded from coverage pursuant to section 
 1862(a)(3) by reason of custody under penal authority, 
 the amount of the monthly premium for such individual 
 shall be zero for any month in which such individual is 
 in custody under penal authority.''.

SEC. 4112. FEDERAL EMPLOYEE HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS.

 (a) Coverage of Pregnancy.--The Director of the Office of Personnel 
Management shall issue such regulations as are necessary to ensure that 
pregnancy is considered a change in family status and a qualifying life 
event for an individual who is eligible to enroll, but is not enrolled, 
in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5, United States 
Code.
 (b) Effective Date.--The requirement in paragraph (1) shall apply 
with respect to any contract entered into under section 8902 of title 
5, United States Code, on or after the date that is 1 year after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4113. CONTINUATION OF MEDICAID INCOME ELIGIBILITY STANDARD FOR 
 PREGNANT INDIVIDUALS AND INFANTS.

 Section 1902(l)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(l)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking ``and not more than 185 
 percent'';
 (2) in clause (ii)--
 (A) in subclause (I), by striking ``and'' after the 
 comma;
 (B) in subclause (II), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(III) January 1, 2025, is the 
 percentage provided under clause 
 (v).''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) The percentage provided under clause 
 (ii) for medical assistance provided on or 
 after January 1, 2025, with respect to 
 individuals described in subparagraph (A) or 
 (B) of paragraph (1) shall not be less than--
 ``(I) the percentage specified for 
 such individuals by the State in an 
 amendment to its State plan (whether 
 approved or not) as of January 1, 2014; 
 or
 ``(II) if no such percentage is 
 specified as of January 1, 2014, the 
 percentage established for such 
 individuals under the State's 
 authorizing legislation or provided for 
 under the State's appropriations as of 
 that date.''.

 Subtitle C--Expansion of Access

 PART 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 4201. AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 Title XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by titles 
I, II, and III of this Act, is further amended by inserting after 
subtitle C the following:

 ``Subtitle D--Reconstruction and Improvement Grants for Public Health 
 Care Facilities Serving Pacific Islanders and the Insular Areas

``SEC. 3441. GRANT SUPPORT FOR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT INITIATIVES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, the 
Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and the 
Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall 
award grants to eligible entities for the conduct of demonstration 
projects to improve the quality of and access to health care.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a health center, hospital, health plan, health 
 system, community clinic, hospice or palliative care provider, 
 or other health entity determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary--
 ``(A) that, by legal mandate or explicitly adopted 
 mission, provides patients with access to services 
 regardless of their ability to pay;
 ``(B) that provides care or treatment for a 
 substantial number of patients who are uninsured, are 
 receiving assistance under a State plan under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (or under a waiver of such 
 plan), or are members of vulnerable populations, as 
 determined by the Secretary; and
 ``(C)(i) with respect to which, not less than 50 
 percent of the entity's patient population is made up 
 of racial and ethnic minority groups; or
 ``(ii) that--
 ``(I) serves a disproportionate percentage 
 of local patients who are from a racial and 
 ethnic minority group, or has a patient 
 population at least 50 percent of which is 
 composed of individuals with limited English 
 proficiency; and
 ``(II) provides an assurance that amounts 
 received under the grant will be used only to 
 support quality improvement activities in the 
 racial and ethnic minority group served; and
 ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that--
 ``(1) demonstrate an intent to operate as part of a health 
 care partnership, network, collaborative, coalition, or 
 alliance where each member entity contributes to the design, 
 implementation, and evaluation of the proposed intervention; or
 ``(2) intend to use funds to carry out systemwide changes 
 with respect to health care quality improvement, including--
 ``(A) improved systems for data collection and 
 reporting;
 ``(B) innovative collaborative or similar 
 processes;
 ``(C) group programs with behavioral or self-
 management interventions;
 ``(D) case management services;
 ``(E) physician or patient reminder systems;
 ``(F) educational interventions;
 ``(G) comprehensive and patient-centric health 
 care;
 ``(H) creation and distribution of education 
 materials on available health care options; or
 ``(I) other activities determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--An entity shall use amounts received under a 
grant under subsection (a) to support the implementation and evaluation 
of health care quality improvement activities or minority health and 
health care disparity reduction activities that include--
 ``(1) with respect to health care systems, activities 
 relating to improving--
 ``(A) patient safety;
 ``(B) timeliness of care;
 ``(C) effectiveness of care;
 ``(D) efficiency of care;
 ``(E) patient centeredness;
 ``(F) health information technology;
 ``(G) accessibility and availability of information 
 on health care;
 ``(H) comprehensiveness of health care; and
 ``(I) patient involvement and choice in health 
 care; and
 ``(2) with respect to patients, activities relating to--
 ``(A) staying healthy;
 ``(B) getting well, mentally and physically;
 ``(C) living effectively with illness or 
 disability;
 ``(D) preparing for end of life and ensuring that 
 end-of-life care is accessible and available, as well 
 as coping with end-of-life issues; and
 ``(E) shared decision making.
 ``(e) Common Data Systems.--The Secretary shall provide financial 
and other technical assistance to grantees under this section for the 
development of common data systems.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2032.

``SEC. 3442. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall designate 
centers of excellence at public hospitals, and other health systems 
serving large numbers of patients from minority populations, that--
 ``(1) meet the requirements of section 3441(b)(1);
 ``(2) demonstrate excellence in providing care to minority 
 populations; and
 ``(3) demonstrate excellence in reducing disparities in 
 health and health care.
 ``(b) Requirements.--A hospital or health system that serves as a 
center of excellence under subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) design, implement, and evaluate programs and policies 
 relating to the delivery of care in racially, ethnically, and 
 linguistically diverse populations;
 ``(2) provide training and technical assistance to other 
 hospitals and health systems relating to the provision of high-
 quality health care to minority populations; and
 ``(3) develop activities for graduate or continuing medical 
 education that institutionalize a focus on cultural competence 
 training for health care providers.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2032.

``SEC. 3443. RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT GRANTS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH 
 CARE FACILITIES SERVING PACIFIC ISLANDERS AND THE INSULAR 
 AREAS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide direct financial 
assistance to designated health care providers and community health 
centers in American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and 
Hawaii for the purposes of reconstructing and improving health care 
facilities and services in a culturally competent and sustainable 
manner.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive direct financial 
assistance under subsection (a), an entity shall be a public health 
facility or community health center located in American Samoa, Guam, 
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States 
Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, or Hawaii that--
 ``(1) is owned or operated by--
 ``(A) the Government of American Samoa, Guam, the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the 
 United States Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, or Hawaii or 
 a unit of local government; or
 ``(B) a nonprofit organization; and
 ``(2)(A) provides care or treatment for a substantial 
 number of patients who are uninsured, are receiving assistance 
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or under a State 
 plan under title XIX of such Act (or under a waiver of such 
 plan), or are members of a vulnerable population, as determined 
 by the Secretary; or
 ``(B) serves a disproportionate percentage of local 
 patients that are from a racial and ethnic minority group.
 ``(c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment 
of this title and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to 
the Congress and the President a report that includes an assessment of 
health resources and facilities serving populations in American Samoa, 
Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United 
States Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and Hawaii. In preparing such 
report, the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) consult with and obtain information on all health 
 care facilities needs from the entities receiving direct 
 financial assistance under subsection (a);
 ``(2) include all amounts of Federal assistance received by 
 each such entity in the preceding fiscal year;
 ``(3) review the total unmet needs of health care 
 facilities serving American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, 
 Puerto Rico, and Hawaii, including needs for renovation and 
 expansion of existing facilities;
 ``(4) include a strategic plan for addressing the needs of 
 each such population identified in the report; and
 ``(5) evaluate the effectiveness of the care provided by 
 measuring patient outcomes and cost measures.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out this section.''.

SEC. 4202. BORDER HEALTH GRANTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Border area.--The term ``border area'' means the United 
 States-Mexico Border Area, as defined in section 8 of the 
 United States-Mexico Border Health Commission Act (22 U.S.C. 
 290n-6).
 (2) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means an 
 entity that is located in the border area and is any of the 
 following:
 (A) A State, local government, or Tribal 
 government.
 (B) A public institution of higher education.
 (C) A nonprofit health organization.
 (D) A community health center.
 (E) A community clinic that is a health center 
 receiving assistance under section 330 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b).
 (F) A nonprofit organization serving immigrants.
 (b) Authorization.--From funds appropriated pursuant to subsection 
(f), the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section 
referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the United States 
members of the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission, shall 
award grants to eligible entities to address priorities and 
recommendations to improve the health of border area residents that are 
established by--
 (1) the United States members of the United States-Mexico 
 Border Health Commission;
 (2) the State border health offices; and
 (3) the Secretary.
 (c) Application.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under 
subsection (b) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require and demonstrating the entity's capacity to provide 
culturally and linguistically appropriate services to border area 
residents.
 (d) Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under 
subsection (b) shall use the grant funds for--
 (1) programs relating to--
 (A) maternal and child health;
 (B) primary care and preventative health;
 (C) public health and public health infrastructure;
 (D) musculoskeletal health and obesity;
 (E) health education and promotion;
 (F) oral health;
 (G) mental and behavioral health;
 (H) substance use disorders;
 (I) health conditions that have a high prevalence 
 in the border area;
 (J) medical and health services research;
 (K) workforce training and development;
 (L) community health workers, patient navigators, 
 and promotores;
 (M) health care infrastructure problems in the 
 border area (including planning and construction 
 grants);
 (N) health disparities in the border area;
 (O) environmental health;
 (P) outreach and enrollment services with respect 
 to Federal programs (including programs authorized 
 under titles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.));
 (Q) end-of-life care; and
 (R) addressing social determinants of health; and
 (2) other programs determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (e) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Amounts provided to an eligible 
entity awarded a grant under subsection (b) shall be used to supplement 
and not supplant other funds available to the eligible entity to carry 
out the activities described in subsection (d).
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 
2025, and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal 
year.

SEC. 4203. CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.

 (a) Elimination of Isolation Test for Cost-Based Ambulance 
Reimbursement.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1834(l)(8) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(l)(8)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``owned and''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``(including when such 
 services are provided by the entity under an 
 arrangement with the hospital)'' after 
 ``hospital''; and
 (B) by striking the comma at the end of 
 subparagraph (B) and all that follows and inserting a 
 period.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2025.
 (b) Provision of a More Flexible Alternative to the CAH Designation 
25 Inpatient Bed Limit Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1820(c)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4(c)(2)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)(iii), by striking 
 ``provides not more than'' and inserting ``subject to 
 subparagraph (F), provides not more than''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) Alternative to 25 inpatient bed limit 
 requirement.--
 ``(i) In general.--A State may elect to 
 treat a facility, with respect to the 
 designation of the facility for a cost 
 reporting period, as satisfying the requirement 
 of subparagraph (B)(iii) relating to a maximum 
 number of acute care inpatient beds if the 
 facility elects, in accordance with a method 
 specified by the Secretary and before the 
 beginning of the cost reporting period, to meet 
 the requirement under clause (ii).
 ``(ii) Alternate requirement.--The 
 requirement under this clause, with respect to 
 a facility and a cost reporting period, is that 
 the total number of inpatient bed days 
 described in subparagraph (B)(iii) during such 
 period will not exceed 7,300. For purposes of 
 this subparagraph, an individual who is an 
 inpatient in a bed in the facility for a single 
 day shall be counted as one inpatient bed day.
 ``(iii) Withdrawal of election.--The option 
 described in clause (i) shall not apply to a 
 facility for a cost reporting period if the 
 facility (for any two consecutive cost 
 reporting periods during the previous 5 cost-
 reporting periods) was treated under such 
 option and had a total number of inpatient bed 
 days for each of such two cost reporting 
 periods that exceeded the number specified in 
 such clause.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4204. MEDICARE REMOTE MONITORING PILOT PROJECTS.

 (a) Pilot Projects.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 9 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') 
 shall conduct pilot projects under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) for the purpose of 
 providing incentives to home health agencies to utilize home 
 monitoring and communications technologies that--
 (A) enhance health and health care outcomes for 
 Medicare beneficiaries; and
 (B) reduce expenditures under such title.
 (2) Site requirements.--
 (A) Urban and rural.--The Secretary shall conduct 
 the pilot projects under this section in both urban and 
 rural areas.
 (B) Site in a small state.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct at least 3 of the pilot projects in a State 
 with a population of less than 1,000,000.
 (3) Definition of home health agency.--In this section, the 
 term ``home health agency'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 1861(o) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x(o)).
 (b) Medicare Beneficiaries Within the Scope of Projects.--The 
Secretary shall specify the criteria for identifying those Medicare 
beneficiaries who shall be considered within the scope of the pilot 
projects under this section for purposes of the application of 
subsection (c) and for the assessment of the effectiveness of the home 
health agency in achieving the objectives of this section. Such 
criteria may provide for the inclusion in the projects of Medicare 
beneficiaries who begin receiving home health services under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) after the 
date of the implementation of the projects.
 (c) Incentives.--
 (1) Performance targets.--The Secretary shall establish for 
 each home health agency participating in a pilot project under 
 this section a performance target using one of the following 
 methodologies, as determined appropriate by the Secretary:
 (A) Adjusted historical performance target.--The 
 Secretary shall establish for the agency--
 (i) a base expenditure amount equal to the 
 average total payments made to the agency under 
 parts A and B of title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) for 
 Medicare beneficiaries determined to be within 
 the scope of the pilot project in a base period 
 determined by the Secretary; and
 (ii) an annual per capita expenditure 
 target for such beneficiaries, reflecting the 
 base expenditure amount adjusted for risk and 
 adjusted growth rates.
 (B) Comparative performance target.--The Secretary 
 shall establish for the agency a comparative 
 performance target equal to the average total payments 
 under such parts A and B during the pilot project for 
 comparable individuals in the same geographic area that 
 are not determined to be within the scope of the pilot 
 project.
 (2) Incentive.--Subject to paragraph (3), the Secretary 
 shall pay to each participating home care agency an incentive 
 payment for each year under the pilot project equal to a 
 portion of the Medicare savings realized for such year relative 
 to the performance target under paragraph (1).
 (3) Limitation on expenditures.--The Secretary shall limit 
 incentive payments under this section in order to ensure that 
 the aggregate expenditures under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) (including incentive 
 payments under this subsection) do not exceed the amount that 
 the Secretary estimates would have been expended if the pilot 
 projects under this section had not been implemented.
 (d) Waiver Authority.--The Secretary may waive such provisions of 
titles XI and XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.; 
42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) as the Secretary determines to be appropriate 
for the conduct of the pilot projects under this section.
 (e) Report to Congress.--Not later than 5 years after the date that 
the first pilot project under this section is implemented, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the pilot projects. Such 
report shall contain a detailed description of issues related to the 
expansion of the projects under subsection (f) and recommendations for 
such legislation and administrative actions as the Secretary considers 
appropriate.
 (f) Expansion.--If the Secretary determines that any of the pilot 
projects under this section enhance health outcomes for Medicare 
beneficiaries and reduce expenditures under title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), the Secretary may initiate 
comparable projects in additional areas.
 (g) Incentive Payments Have No Effect on Other Medicare Payments to 
Agencies.--An incentive payment under this section--
 (1) shall be in addition to the payments that a home health 
 agency would otherwise receive under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act for the provision of home health services; and
 (2) shall have no effect on the amount of such payments.

SEC. 4205. COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER COLLABORATIVE ACCESS EXPANSION.

 Section 330(r)(4) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b(r)(4)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``primary health care 
 services'' each place it appears and inserting ``primary health 
 care and other mental, dental, and physical health services''; 
 and
 (2) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (B) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) in the case of a rural health 
 clinic described in such subparagraph--
 ``(I) that such clinic provides, to 
 the extent possible, enabling services, 
 such as transportation and language 
 assistance (including translation and 
 interpretation); and
 ``(II) that the primary health care 
 and other services described in such 
 subparagraph are subject to full 
 reimbursement according to the 
 prospective payment system for 
 Federally qualified health center 
 services under section 1834(o) of the 
 Social Security Act.''.

SEC. 4206. FACILITATING THE PROVISION OF TELEHEALTH SERVICES ACROSS 
 STATE LINES.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of expediting the provision of 
telehealth services, for which payment is made under the Medicare 
Program established under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395 et seq.). across State lines, the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall, in consultation with representatives of States, 
physicians, health care practitioners, and patient advocates, encourage 
and facilitate the adoption of provisions allowing for multistate 
practitioner practice across State lines.
 (b) Definitions.--In subsection (a):
 (1) Telehealth service.--The term ``telehealth service'' 
 has the meaning given that term in subparagraph (F) of section 
 1834(m)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)(4)).
 (2) Physician, practitioner.--The terms ``physician'' and 
 ``practitioner'' have the meaning given those terms in 
 subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively, of section 1834(m)(4) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)(4)).
 (3) Medicare program.--The term ``Medicare Program'' means 
 the program of health insurance administered by the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.).

SEC. 4207. SCORING OF PREVENTIVE HEALTH SAVINGS.

 Section 202 of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act 
of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 602) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Scoring of Preventive Health Savings.--
 ``(1) Determination by the director.--Upon a request by the 
 chairman or ranking minority member of the Committee on the 
 Budget of the Senate, or by the chairman or ranking minority 
 member of the Committee on the Budget of the House of 
 Representatives, the Director shall determine if a proposed 
 measure would result in reductions in budget outlays in 
 budgetary outyears through the use of preventive health and 
 preventive health services.
 ``(2) Projections.--If the Director determines that a 
 measure would result in substantial reductions in budget 
 outlays as described in paragraph (1), the Director--
 ``(A) shall include, in any projection prepared by 
 the Director, a description and estimate of the 
 reductions in budget outlays in the budgetary outyears 
 and a description of the basis for such conclusions; 
 and
 ``(B) may prepare a budget projection that includes 
 some or all of the budgetary outyears, notwithstanding 
 the time periods for projections described in 
 subsection (e) and sections 308, 402, and 424.
 ``(3) Definitions.--As used in this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `budgetary outyears' means the 2 
 consecutive 10-fiscal-year periods beginning with the 
 first fiscal year that is 10 years after the budget 
 year provided for in the most recently agreed to 
 concurrent resolution on the budget; and
 ``(B) the term `preventive health' means an action 
 that focuses on the health of the public, individuals, 
 and defined populations in order to protect, promote, 
 and maintain health, wellness, and functional ability, 
 and prevent disease, disability, and premature death 
 that is demonstrated by credible and publicly available 
 epidemiological projection models, incorporating 
 clinical trials or observational studies in humans, to 
 avoid future health care costs.''.

SEC. 4208. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PROVISIONS 
 REGARDING CHILDREN'S HEALTH.

 It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) the maintenance of effort provisions added to sections 
 1902 and 2105(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a; 
 42 U.S.C. 1397ee(d)) by sections 2001(b) and 2101(b) of the 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act were intended to 
 maintain the eligibility standards for the Medicaid program 
 under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et 
 seq.) and Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) to protect vulnerable 
 and disabled adults, children, and senior citizens, many of 
 whom are also members of communities of color;
 (2) the maintenance of effort provisions for children's 
 coverage have been extended by the Congress through September 
 30, 2029;
 (3) the maintenance of effort provisions ensure the 
 continued success of the Medicaid program and Children's Health 
 Insurance Program and were intended to specifically protect 
 vulnerable and disabled children, many of whom are also members 
 of communities of color; and
 (4) the maintenance of effort provisions must be strictly 
 enforced and proposals to weaken or waive the maintenance of 
 effort provisions must not be considered.

SEC. 4209. PROTECTION OF THE HHS OFFICES OF MINORITY HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--Pursuant to section 1707A of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6a), the Offices of Minority Health 
established within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
Health Resources and Services Administration, the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration, the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, the Food and Drug Administration, and the Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, are offices that, regardless of 
change in the structure of the Department of Health and Human Services, 
shall report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the 
Offices of Minority Health referred to in subsection (a) play a 
critical role in addressing health disparities and should be adequately 
funded and given a prominent role in evaluating and establishing health 
policies and programs.

SEC. 4210. OFFICE OF MINORITY HEALTH IN VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION 
 OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 (a) Establishment and Functions.--Subchapter I of chapter 73 of 
title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 
7308 the following new section:
``Sec. 7308A. Office of Minority Health
 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department within 
the Office of the Under Secretary for Health an office to be known as 
the `Office of Minority Health' (in this section referred to as the 
`Office').
 ``(b) Head.--The Director of the Office of Minority Health shall be 
the head of the Office. The Director of the Office of Minority Health 
shall be appointed by the Under Secretary for Health from among 
individuals qualified to perform the duties of the position.
 ``(c) Functions.--The functions of the Office are as follows:
 ``(1) To establish short-range and long-range goals and 
 objectives and coordinate all other activities within the 
 Veterans Health Administration that relate to disease 
 prevention, health promotion, health care services delivery, 
 health and health care education, health care quality, and 
 health care research concerning veterans who are members of a 
 racial or ethnic minority group.
 ``(2) To support research, demonstrations, and evaluations 
 to test new and innovative models for the discharge of 
 activities described in paragraph (1).
 ``(3) To increase knowledge and understanding of health 
 risk factors for veterans who are members of a racial or ethnic 
 minority group.
 ``(4) To develop mechanisms that support better health care 
 information dissemination, education, prevention, and services 
 delivery to veterans from disadvantaged backgrounds, including 
 veterans who are members of a racial or ethnic minority group.
 ``(5) To enter into contracts or agreements with 
 appropriate public and nonprofit private entities to develop 
 and carry out programs to provide bilingual or interpretive 
 services to assist veterans who are members of a racial or 
 ethnic minority group and who lack proficiency in speaking the 
 English language in accessing and receiving health care 
 services through the Veterans Health Administration.
 ``(6) To carry out programs to improve access to health 
 care services through the Veterans Health Administration for 
 veterans with limited proficiency in speaking the English 
 language, including the development and evaluation of 
 demonstration and pilot projects for that purpose.
 ``(7) To advise the Under Secretary for Health on matters 
 relating to the development, implementation, and evaluation of 
 health professions education in decreasing disparities in 
 health care outcomes between veterans who are members of a 
 racial or ethnic minority group and other veterans, including 
 cultural competency as a method of eliminating such health 
 disparities.
 ``(8) To perform such other functions and duties as the 
 Secretary or the Under Secretary for Health considers 
 appropriate.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `racial or ethnic minority group' means any 
 of the following:
 ``(A) American Indians (including Alaska Natives, 
 Eskimos, and Aleuts).
 ``(B) Asian Americans.
 ``(C) Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
 ``(D) Blacks.
 ``(E) Hispanics.
 ``(2) The term `Hispanic' means individuals whose origin is 
 from Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Central or South America, or 
 any other Spanish-speaking country.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 7308 the following new item:

``7308A. Office of Minority Health.''.

SEC. 4211. STUDY OF DSH PAYMENTS TO ENSURE HOSPITAL ACCESS FOR LOW-
 INCOME PATIENTS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 1, 2025, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall conduct a study on how amendments 
made by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-
148) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 
(Public Law 111-152) to titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) relating to 
disproportionate share hospital adjustment payments under Medicare and 
Medicaid (and subsequent amendments made with respect to such payments) 
affect the timely access to health care services for low-income 
patients. Such study shall--
 (1) evaluate and examine whether States electing to make 
 medical assistance available under section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII)) (including States making such an 
 election through a waiver of the State plan) to individuals 
 described in such section mitigate the need for payments to 
 disproportionate share hospitals under section 1886(d)(5)(F) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(F)) and section 
 1923 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4), including the impact of 
 such States electing to make medical assistance available to 
 such individuals on--
 (A) the number of individuals in the United States 
 who are without health insurance and the distribution 
 of such individuals in relation to areas primarily 
 served by disproportionate share hospitals; and
 (B) the low-income utilization rate of such 
 hospitals and the resulting fiscal sustainability of 
 such hospitals;
 (2) evaluate the appropriate level and distribution of such 
 payments among such disproportionate share hospitals for 
 purposes of--
 (A) sufficiently accounting for the level of 
 uncompensated care provided by such hospitals to low-
 income patients; and
 (B) providing timely access to health care services 
 for individuals in medically underserved areas; and
 (3) assess, with respect to such disproportionate share 
 hospitals--
 (A) the role played by such hospitals in providing 
 critical access to emergency, inpatient, and outpatient 
 health services, including end-of-life services, as 
 well as the location of such hospitals in relation to 
 medically underserved areas; and
 (B) the extent to which such hospitals satisfy the 
 requirements established for charitable hospital 
 organizations under section 501(r) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to community health 
 needs assessments, financial assistance policy 
 requirements, limitations on charges, and billing and 
 collection requirements.
 (b) Reports.--
 (1) Report to congress.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date on which the study under subsection (a) is completed, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a 
 report that contains--
 (A) the results of the study;
 (B) recommendations to Congress for any legislative 
 changes to the payments to disproportionate share 
 hospitals under section 1886(d)(5)(F) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(F)) and section 
 1923 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4) that are needed to 
 ensure access to health services for low-income 
 patients that--
 (i) are based on the number of individuals 
 without health insurance, the amount of 
 uncompensated care provided by such hospitals, 
 and the impact of reduced payment levels on 
 low-income communities; and
 (ii) takes into account any reports 
 submitted by the Secretary of the Treasury, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services, to congressional committees 
 regarding the costs incurred by charitable 
 hospital organizations for charity care, bad 
 debt, nonreimbursed expenses for services 
 provided to individuals under the Medicare 
 program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act and the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of such Act, and any community 
 benefit activities provided by such 
 organizations.
 (2) Report to the secretary of health and human services.--
 Not later than 180 days after the date on which the study under 
 subsection (a) is completed, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services a report that contains--
 (A) the results of the study; and
 (B) any recommendations for purposes of assisting 
 in the development of the methodology for the 
 adjustment of payments to disproportionate share 
 hospitals, as required under section 1886(r) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(r)) and the 
 reduction of such payments under section 1923(f)(7) of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(7)), taking into account 
 the reports referred to in paragraph (1)(B)(ii).

SEC. 4212. REAUTHORIZATION OF PROGRAMS UNDER THE NATIVE HAWAIIAN HEALTH 
 CARE IMPROVEMENT ACT.

 (a) Native Hawaiian Health Care Systems.--Section 6(h)(1) of the 
Native Hawaiian Health Care Improvement Act (42 U.S.C. 11705(h)(1)) is 
amended by striking ``may be necessary for fiscal years 1993 through 
2019'' and inserting ``are necessary''.
 (b) Administrative Grant for Papa Ola Lokahi.--Section 7(b) of the 
Native Hawaiian Health Care Improvement Act (42 U.S.C. 11706(b)) is 
amended by striking ``may be necessary for fiscal years 1993 through 
2019'' and inserting ``are necessary''.
 (c) Native Hawaiian Health Scholarships.--Section 10(c) of the 
Native Hawaiian Health Care Improvement Act (42 U.S.C. 11709(c)) is 
amended by striking ``may be necessary for fiscal years 1993 through 
2019'' and inserting ``are necessary''.

 PART 2--RURAL

SEC. 4221. ESTABLISHMENT OF RURAL COMMUNITY HOSPITAL (RCH) PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x), as amended by section 2007(b)(1), is amended by adding at the 
end of the following new subsection:

 ``Rural Community Hospital; Rural Community Hospital Services

 ``(ooo)(1) The term `rural community hospital' means a hospital (as 
defined in subsection (e)) that--
 ``(A) is located in a rural area (as defined in section 
 1886(d)(2)(D)) or treated as being so located pursuant to 
 section 1886(d)(8)(E);
 ``(B) subject to paragraph (2), has less than 51 acute care 
 inpatient beds, as reported in its most recent cost report;
 ``(C) makes available 24-hour emergency care services;
 ``(D) subject to paragraph (3), has a provider agreement in 
 effect with the Secretary and is open to the public as of 
 January 1, 2010; and
 ``(E) applies to the Secretary for such designation.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), beds in a psychiatric or 
rehabilitation unit of the hospital which is a distinct part of the 
hospital shall not be counted.
 ``(3) Paragraph (1)(D) shall not be construed to prohibit any of 
the following from qualifying as a rural community hospital:
 ``(A) A replacement facility (as defined by the Secretary 
 in regulations in effect on January 1, 2012) with the same 
 service area (as defined by the Secretary in regulations in 
 effect on such date).
 ``(B) A facility obtaining a new provider number pursuant 
 to a change of ownership.
 ``(C) A facility which has a binding written agreement with 
 an outside, unrelated party for the construction, 
 reconstruction, lease, rental, or financing of a building as of 
 January 1, 2012.
 ``(4) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting 
a critical access hospital from qualifying as a rural community 
hospital if the critical access hospital meets the conditions otherwise 
applicable to hospitals under subsection (e) and section 1866.
 ``(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting 
a rural community hospital participating in the demonstration program 
under section 410A of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and 
Modernization Act of 2003 (42 U.S.C. 1395ww note; Public Law 108-173) 
from qualifying as a rural community hospital if the rural community 
hospital meets the conditions otherwise applicable to hospitals under 
subsection (e) and section 1866.''.
 (b) Payment.--
 (1) Inpatient hospital services.--Section 1814 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following new subsection:

``Payment for Inpatient Services Furnished in Rural Community Hospitals

 ``(m) The amount of payment under this part for inpatient hospital 
services furnished in a rural community hospital, other than such 
services furnished in a psychiatric or rehabilitation unit of the 
hospital which is a distinct part, is, at the election of the hospital 
in the application referred to in section 1861(ooo)(1)(E)--
 ``(1) 101 percent of the reasonable costs of providing such 
 services, without regard to the amount of the customary or 
 other charge, or
 ``(2) the amount of payment provided for under the 
 prospective payment system for inpatient hospital services 
 under section 1886(d).''.
 (2) Outpatient services.--Section 1834 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subsection:
 ``(aa) Payment for Outpatient Services Furnished in Rural Community 
Hospitals.--The amount of payment under this part for outpatient 
services furnished in a rural community hospital is, at the election of 
the hospital in the application referred to in section 
1861(ooo)(1)(E)--
 ``(1) 101 percent of the reasonable costs of providing such 
 services, without regard to the amount of the customary or 
 other charge and any limitation under section 1861(v)(1)(U), or
 ``(2) the amount of payment provided for under the 
 prospective payment system for covered OPD services under 
 section 1833(t).''.
 (3) Exemption from 30-percent reduction in reimbursement 
 for bad debt.--Section 1861(v)(1)(T) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x(v)(1)(T)) is amended in the matter preceding 
 clause (i) by inserting ``(other than for a rural community 
 hospital)'' after ``In determining such reasonable costs for 
 hospitals''.
 (c) Beneficiary Cost-Sharing for Outpatient Services.--Section 
1834(aa) of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (b)(2)) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively;
 (2) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(aa)''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) The amounts of beneficiary cost-sharing for outpatient 
services furnished in a rural community hospital under this part shall 
be as follows:
 ``(A) For items and services that would have been paid 
 under section 1833(t) if furnished by a hospital, the amount of 
 cost-sharing determined under paragraph (8) of such section.
 ``(B) For items and services that would have been paid 
 under section 1833(h) if furnished by a provider of services or 
 supplier, no cost-sharing shall apply.
 ``(C) For all other items and services, the amount of cost-
 sharing that would apply to the item or service under the 
 methodology that would be used to determine payment for such 
 item or service if provided by a physician, provider of 
 services, or supplier, as the case may be.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Part a payment.--Section 1814(b) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(b)) is amended in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1) by inserting ``other than inpatient hospital 
 services furnished by a rural community hospital,'' after 
 ``critical access hospital services,''.
 (2) Part b payment.--Section 1833(a) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)), as amended by section 2207(b)(3), is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (10);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (11) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) in the case of outpatient services furnished by a 
 rural community hospital, the amounts described in section 
 1834(aa).''.
 (3) Technical amendments.--
 (A) Consultation with state agencies.--Section 1863 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended 
 by striking ``and (dd)(2)'' and inserting ``(dd)(2), 
 and (ooo)(1)''.
 (B) Provider agreements.--Section 1866(a)(2)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is 
 amended by inserting ``section 1834(aa)(2),'' after 
 ``section 1833(b),''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to items and services furnished on or after the date that is 30 
days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4222. RURAL HEALTH QUALITY ADVISORY COMMISSION AND DEMONSTRATION 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Rural Health Quality Advisory Commission.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall establish a commission to be known as the 
 ``Rural Health Quality Advisory Commission'' (in this section 
 referred to as the ``Commission'').
 (2) Duties of commission.--
 (A) National plan.--The Commission shall develop, 
 coordinate, and facilitate implementation of a national 
 plan for rural health quality improvement. The national 
 plan shall--
 (i) identify objectives for rural health 
 quality improvement;
 (ii) identify strategies to eliminate known 
 gaps in rural health system capacity and 
 improve rural health quality; and
 (iii) provide recommendations for Federal 
 programs to identify opportunities for 
 strengthening and aligning policies and 
 programs to improve rural health quality.
 (B) Demonstration projects.--The Commission shall 
 design demonstration projects to recommend to the 
 Secretary to test alternative models for rural health 
 quality improvement, including with respect to both 
 personal and population health.
 (C) Monitoring.--The Commission shall monitor 
 progress toward the objectives identified pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A)(i).
 (3) Membership.--
 (A) Number.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 
 members appointed by the Secretary.
 (B) Selection.--The Secretary shall select the 
 members of the Commission from among individuals with 
 significant rural health care and health care quality 
 expertise, including expertise in clinical health care, 
 health care quality research, end-of-life care, 
 population or public health, or purchaser 
 organizations.
 (4) Contracting authority.--Subject to the availability of 
 funds, the Commission may enter into contracts and make other 
 arrangements, as may be necessary to carry out the duties 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (5) Staff.--Upon the request of the Commission, the 
 Secretary may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the 
 personnel of the Office of Rural Health Policy of the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, the Agency for 
 Healthcare Research and Quality, or the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services to the Commission to assist in carrying out 
 this subsection.
 (6) Reports to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 establishment of the Commission, and annually thereafter, the 
 Commission shall submit a report to the Congress on rural 
 health quality. Each such report shall include the following:
 (A) An inventory of relevant programs and 
 recommendations for improved coordination and 
 integration of policy and programs.
 (B) An assessment of achievement of the objectives 
 identified in the national plan developed under 
 paragraph (2) and recommendations for realizing such 
 objectives.
 (C) Recommendations on Federal legislation, 
 regulations, or administrative policies to enhance 
 rural health quality and outcomes.
 (b) Rural Health Quality Demonstration Projects.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this section, the Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Rural Health Quality Advisory Commission, the Office 
 of Rural Health Policy of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
 and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall make 
 grants to eligible entities for a total of 5 demonstration 
 projects to implement and evaluate methods for improving the 
 quality of health care in rural communities. Each such 
 demonstration project shall include--
 (A) alternative community models that--
 (i) will achieve greater integration of 
 personal and population health services; and
 (ii) address safety, effectiveness, 
 patient- or community-centeredness, timeliness, 
 efficiency, and equity (the 6 aims identified 
 by the National Academy of Medicine (formerly 
 known as the ``Institute of Medicine'') in its 
 report entitled ``Crossing the Quality Chasm: A 
 New Health System for the 21st Century'' 
 released on March 1, 2001);
 (B) innovative approaches to the financing and 
 delivery of health care services to achieve rural 
 health quality and accessibility goals for patients; 
 and
 (C) development of quality improvement support 
 structures to assist rural health systems and 
 professionals in the provision of health care (such as 
 workforce support structures, quality monitoring and 
 reporting, clinical care protocols, and information 
 technology applications).
 (2) Eligible entities.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``eligible entity'' means a consortium that--
 (A) shall include--
 (i) at least one health care provider or 
 health care delivery system located in a rural 
 area; and
 (ii) at least one organization representing 
 multiple community stakeholders; and
 (B) may include other partners such as rural 
 research centers.
 (3) Consultation.--In developing the program for awarding 
 grants under this subsection, the Secretary shall consult with 
 the Administrator of the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
 Quality, rural health care providers, rural health care 
 researchers, and private and nonprofit groups (including 
 national associations) which are undertaking similar efforts.
 (4) Expedited waivers.--The Secretary shall expedite the 
 processing of any waiver that--
 (A) is authorized under title XVIII or XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 
 1396 et seq.); and
 (B) is necessary to carry out a demonstration 
 project under this subsection.
 (5) Demonstration project sites.--The Secretary shall 
 ensure that the 5 demonstration projects funded under this 
 subsection are conducted at a variety of sites representing the 
 diversity of rural communities in the United States.
 (6) Duration.--Each demonstration project under this 
 subsection shall be for a period of 4 years.
 (7) Independent evaluation.--The Secretary shall enter into 
 an arrangement with an entity that has experience working 
 directly with rural health systems for the conduct of an 
 independent evaluation of the program carried out under this 
 subsection.
 (8) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the conclusion of 
 all of the demonstration projects funded under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress on the 
 results of such projects. The report shall include--
 (A) an evaluation of patient access to care, 
 patient outcomes, and an analysis of the cost-
 effectiveness of each such project; and
 (B) recommendations on Federal legislation, 
 regulations, or administrative policies to enhance 
 rural health quality and outcomes.
 (c) Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--Out of funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary to carry 
 out this section $30,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 
 2025 through 2029.
 (2) Availability.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), funds appropriated under paragraph (1) shall 
 remain available for expenditure through fiscal year 
 2028.
 (B) Report.--For purposes of carrying out 
 subsection (b)(8), funds appropriated under paragraph 
 (1) shall remain available for expenditure through 
 fiscal year 2029.
 (3) Reservation.--Of the amount appropriated under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reserve--
 (A) $5,000,000 to carry out subsection (a); and
 (B) $25,000,000 to carry out subsection (b), of 
 which--
 (i) 2 percent shall be for the provision of 
 technical assistance to grant recipients; and
 (ii) 5 percent shall be for the independent 
 evaluation under subsection (b)(7).

SEC. 4223. RURAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

 Section 330A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 330A. RURAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES OUTREACH, RURAL HEALTH NETWORK 
 DEVELOPMENT, DELTA RURAL DISPARITIES AND HEALTH SYSTEMS 
 DEVELOPMENT, AND SMALL RURAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDER QUALITY 
 IMPROVEMENT GRANT PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide for 
grants--
 ``(1) under subsection (b), to promote rural health care 
 services outreach;
 ``(2) under subsection (c), to provide for the planning and 
 implementation of integrated health care networks in rural 
 areas;
 ``(3) under subsection (d), to assist rural communities in 
 the Delta Region to reduce health disparities and to promote 
 and enhance health system development; and
 ``(4) under subsection (e), to provide for the planning and 
 implementation of small rural health care provider quality 
 improvement activities.
 ``(b) Rural Health Care Services Outreach Grants.--
 ``(1) Grants.--The Director of the Office of Rural Health 
 Policy of the Health Resources and Services Administration 
 (referred to in this section as the `Director') may award 
 grants to eligible entities to promote rural health care 
 services outreach by expanding the delivery of health care 
 services to include new and enhanced services in rural areas. 
 The Director may award the grants for periods of not more than 
 3 years.
 ``(2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection for a project, an entity--
 ``(A) shall be a rural public or rural nonprofit 
 private entity, a facility that qualifies as a rural 
 health clinic under title XVIII of the Social Security 
 Act, a public or nonprofit entity existing exclusively 
 to provide services to migrant and seasonal farm 
 workers in rural areas, or a Tribal government whose 
 grant-funded activities will be conducted within 
 federally recognized Tribal areas;
 ``(B) shall represent a consortium composed of 
 members--
 ``(i) that include 3 or more independently 
 owned health care entities; and
 ``(ii) that may be nonprofit or for-profit 
 entities; and
 ``(C) shall not previously have received a grant 
 under this subsection for the same or a similar 
 project, unless the entity is proposing to expand the 
 scope of the project or the area that will be served 
 through the project.
 ``(3) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection, an eligible entity shall prepare and 
 submit to the Director an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Director may 
 require, including--
 ``(A) a description of the project that the 
 eligible entity will carry out using the funds provided 
 under the grant;
 ``(B) a description of the manner in which the 
 project funded under the grant will meet the health 
 care needs of rural populations in the local community 
 or region to be served;
 ``(C) a plan for quantifying how health care needs 
 will be met through identification of the target 
 population and benchmarks of service delivery or health 
 status, such as--
 ``(i) quantifiable measurements of health 
 and health care status improvement for projects 
 focusing on health promotion; or
 ``(ii) benchmarks of increased access to 
 primary and end-of-life care, including 
 tracking factors such as the number and type of 
 primary and end-of-life care visits, 
 identification of a medical home, or other 
 general measures of such access;
 ``(D) a description of how the local community or 
 region to be served will be involved in the development 
 and ongoing operations of the project;
 ``(E) a plan for sustaining the project after 
 Federal support for the project has ended;
 ``(F) a description of how the project will be 
 evaluated;
 ``(G) the administrative capacity to submit annual 
 performance data electronically as specified by the 
 Director; and
 ``(H) other such information as the Director 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(c) Rural Health Network Development Grants.--
 ``(1) Grants.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Director may award rural 
 health network development grants to eligible entities 
 to promote, through planning and implementation, the 
 development of integrated health care networks that 
 have combined the functions of the entities 
 participating in the networks in order to--
 ``(i) achieve efficiencies and economies of 
 scale;
 ``(ii) expand access to, coordinate, and 
 improve the quality of the health care delivery 
 system through development of organizational 
 efficiencies;
 ``(iii) implement health information 
 technology to achieve efficiencies, reduce 
 medical errors, and improve quality;
 ``(iv) coordinate care and manage chronic 
 and terminal illness; and
 ``(v) strengthen the rural health care 
 system as a whole and across all facets of the 
 health care delivery system, including end-of-
 life care, in such a manner as to show a 
 quantifiable return on investment to the 
 participants in the network.
 ``(B) Grant periods.--The Director may award such a 
 rural health network development grant--
 ``(i) for a period of 3 years for 
 implementation activities; or
 ``(ii) for a period of 1 year for planning 
 activities to assist in the initial development 
 of an integrated health care network, if the 
 proposed participants in the network do not 
 have a history of collaborative efforts and a 
 3-year grant would be inappropriate.
 ``(2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an entity--
 ``(A) shall be a rural public or rural nonprofit 
 private entity, a facility that qualifies as a rural 
 health clinic under title XVIII of the Social Security 
 Act, a public or nonprofit entity existing exclusively 
 to provide services to migrant and seasonal farm 
 workers in rural areas, or a Tribal government whose 
 grant-funded activities will be conducted within 
 federally recognized Tribal areas;
 ``(B) shall represent a network composed of 
 participants--
 ``(i) that include 3 or more independently 
 owned health care entities; and
 ``(ii) that may be nonprofit or for-profit 
 entities; and
 ``(C) shall not previously have received a grant 
 under this subsection (other than a 1-year grant for 
 planning activities) for the same or a similar project.
 ``(3) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection, an eligible entity, in consultation with 
 the appropriate State office of rural health or another 
 appropriate State entity, shall prepare and submit to the 
 Director an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Director may require, 
 including--
 ``(A) a description of the project that the 
 eligible entity will carry out using the funds provided 
 under the grant;
 ``(B) an explanation of the reasons why Federal 
 assistance is required to carry out the project;
 ``(C) a description of--
 ``(i) the history of collaborative 
 activities carried out by the participants in 
 the network;
 ``(ii) the degree to which the participants 
 are ready to integrate their functions; and
 ``(iii) how the local community or region 
 to be served will benefit from and be involved 
 in the activities carried out by the network;
 ``(D) a description of how the local community or 
 region to be served will experience increased access to 
 quality health care services across the continuum of 
 care as a result of the integration activities carried 
 out by the network, including a description of--
 ``(i) return on investment for the 
 community and the network members; and
 ``(ii) other quantifiable performance 
 measures that show the benefit of the network 
 activities;
 ``(E) a plan for sustaining the project after 
 Federal support for the project has ended;
 ``(F) a description of how the project will be 
 evaluated;
 ``(G) the administrative capacity to submit annual 
 performance data electronically as specified by the 
 Director; and
 ``(H) other such information as the Director 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(d) Delta Rural Disparities and Health Systems Development 
Grants.--
 ``(1) Grants.--The Director may award grants to eligible 
 entities to support reduction of health disparities, improve 
 access to health care, and enhance rural health system 
 development in the Delta Region.
 ``(2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an entity shall be a rural public or rural 
 nonprofit private entity, a facility that qualifies as a rural 
 health clinic under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, a 
 public or nonprofit entity existing exclusively to provide 
 services to migrant and seasonal farm workers in rural areas, 
 or a Tribal government whose grant-funded activities will be 
 conducted within federally recognized Tribal areas.
 ``(3) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection, an eligible entity shall prepare and 
 submit to the Director an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Director may 
 require, including--
 ``(A) a description of the project that the 
 eligible entity will carry out using the funds provided 
 under the grant;
 ``(B) an explanation of the reasons why Federal 
 assistance is required to carry out the project;
 ``(C) a description of the manner in which the 
 project funded under the grant will meet the health 
 care needs of the Delta Region;
 ``(D) a description of how the local community or 
 region to be served will experience increased access to 
 quality health care services as a result of the 
 activities carried out by the entity;
 ``(E) a description of how health disparities will 
 be reduced or the health system will be improved;
 ``(F) a plan for sustaining the project after 
 Federal support for the project has ended;
 ``(G) a description of how the project will be 
 evaluated including process and outcome measures 
 related to the quality of care provided or how the 
 health care system improves its performance;
 ``(H) a description of how the grantee will develop 
 an advisory group made up of representatives of the 
 communities to be served to provide guidance to the 
 grantee to best meet community need; and
 ``(I) other such information as the Director 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(e) Small Rural Health Care Provider Quality Improvement 
Grants.--
 ``(1) Grants.--The Director may award grants to provide for 
 the planning and implementation of small rural health care 
 provider quality improvement activities. The Director may award 
 the grants for periods of 1 to 3 years.
 ``(2) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under this 
 subsection, an entity--
 ``(A) shall be--
 ``(i) a rural public or rural nonprofit 
 private health care provider or provider of 
 health care services, such as a rural health 
 clinic; or
 ``(ii) another rural provider or network of 
 small rural providers identified by the 
 Director as a key source of local care; and
 ``(B) shall not previously have received a grant 
 under this subsection for the same or a similar 
 project.
 ``(3) Preference.--In awarding grants under this 
 subsection, the Director shall give preference to facilities 
 that qualify as rural health clinics under title XVIII of the 
 Social Security Act.
 ``(4) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection, an eligible entity shall prepare and 
 submit to the Director an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Director may 
 require, including--
 ``(A) a description of the project that the 
 eligible entity will carry out using the funds provided 
 under the grant;
 ``(B) an explanation of the reasons why Federal 
 assistance is required to carry out the project;
 ``(C) a description of the manner in which the 
 project funded under the grant will assure continuous 
 quality improvement in the provision of services by the 
 entity;
 ``(D) a description of how the local community or 
 region to be served will experience increased access to 
 quality health care services as a result of the 
 activities carried out by the entity;
 ``(E) a plan for sustaining the project after 
 Federal support for the project has ended;
 ``(F) a description of how the project will be 
 evaluated including process and outcome measures 
 related to the quality of care provided; and
 ``(G) other such information as the Director 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(f) General Requirements.--
 ``(1) Prohibited uses of funds.--An entity that receives a 
 grant under this section may not use funds provided through the 
 grant--
 ``(A) to build or acquire real property; or
 ``(B) for construction.
 ``(2) Coordination with other agencies.--The Director shall 
 coordinate activities carried out under grant programs 
 described in this section, to the extent practicable, with 
 Federal and State agencies and nonprofit organizations that are 
 operating similar grant programs, to maximize the effect of 
 public dollars in funding meritorious proposals.
 ``(g) Report.--Not later than September 30, 2025, the Secretary 
shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a 
report on the progress and accomplishments of the grant programs 
described in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e).
 ``(h) Definition of Delta Region.--In this section, the term `Delta 
Region' has the meaning given to the term `region' in section 382A of 
the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 U.S.C. 2009aa).
 ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.''.

 PART 3--INDIAN COMMUNITIES

SEC. 4231. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE.

 (a) References.--Any reference in a law, regulation, document, 
paper, or other record of the United States to the Director of the 
Indian Health Service shall be deemed to be a reference to the 
Assistant Secretary of the Indian Health Service.
 (b) Executive Schedule.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended, in the matter relating to the Assistant Secretaries 
of Health and Human Services, by striking ``(6)'' and inserting ``(7), 
1 of whom shall be the Assistant Secretary of the Indian Health 
Service''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 5316 of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended by striking ``Director, Indian Health Service, 
Department of Health and Human Services.''.

SEC. 4232. EXTENSION OF FULL FEDERAL MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PERCENTAGE TO 
 INDIAN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 Section 1905(a)(9) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(a)(9)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(9) clinic services furnished by or under the direction 
 of a physician, without regard to whether the clinic itself is 
 administered by a physician, including--
 ``(A) such services furnished outside the clinic by 
 clinic personnel to an eligible individual who does not 
 reside in a permanent dwelling or does not have a fixed 
 home or mailing address; and
 ``(B) such services furnished outside the clinic by 
 any Indian Health Service facility, a health program or 
 facility operated by a tribe or tribal organization 
 under the Indian Self-Determination Act (Public Law 93-
 638), or an urban Indian organization receiving funds 
 under title V of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
 Act;''.

SEC. 4233. CONFERRING WITH URBAN INDIAN ORGANIZATIONS.

 Section 514 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
1660d) is amended by striking subsection (b) and inserting the 
following:
 ``(b) Requirement.--The Secretary shall ensure that the Service and 
other agencies and offices of the Department and the Department of 
Veterans Affairs confer, to the maximum extent practicable, with urban 
Indian organizations in carrying out--
 ``(1) this Act; and
 ``(2) other provisions of law relating to Indian health 
 care.''.

 PART 4--PROVIDERS

SEC. 4241. AVAILABILITY OF NON-ENGLISH LANGUAGE SPEAKING PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1311(c)(1)(B) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(c)(1)(B)) is amended by 
inserting before the semicolon the following: ``and the ability of such 
provider to provide care in a language other than English either 
through the provider speaking such language or by the provider having a 
qualified interpreter for an individual with limited English 
proficiency (as defined in section 3400 of such Act) who speaks such 
language available during office hours''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not 
apply to any plan beginning on or prior to the date that is 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4242. ACCESS TO ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY PROVIDERS.

 (a) Essential Community Providers.--Section 1311(c)(1)(C) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(c)(1)(C)) 
is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(C)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(ii) not later than January 1, 2025, increase the 
 percentage of essential community providers as 
 described in clause (i) included in its network by 10 
 percent annually (based on the level in the plan for 
 2023) until 90 percent of all federally qualified 
 health centers and 75 percent of all other such 
 essential community providers in the contract service 
 area are in-network; and
 ``(iii) include at least one essential community 
 provider in each of the essential community provider 
 categories described in section 156.235(a)(2)(ii)(B) of 
 title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on 
 the date of enactment of the Health Equity and 
 Accountability Act of 2024), in each county in the 
 service area, where available;''.
 (b) Reporting Requirements.--Section 1311(e)(3) of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(e)(3)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) Data on essential community providers.--The 
 Secretary shall require qualified health plans to 
 submit annually to the Secretary data on the percentage 
 of essential community providers as described in clause 
 (ii) of subsection (c)(1)(C), by county, that contract 
 with each qualified health plan offered in that county 
 and the percentage of such essential community 
 providers, by category as described in clause (iii) of 
 such subsection, that contract with each qualified 
 health plan offered in that county. Such data shall be 
 made available to the general public.''.
 (c) Essential Community Provider Provisions Applied Under Medicare 
and Medicaid.--
 (1) Medicare.--Section 1852(d)(1) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-22(d)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (D);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (E) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) the plan meets the requirements of clauses 
 (ii) and (iii) of section 1311(c)(1)(C) of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (relating to 
 inclusion in networks of essential community 
 providers).''.
 (2) Medicaid.--Section 1932(b)(5) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(b)(5)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (A);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) meets the requirements of clauses (ii) and 
 (iii) of section 1311(c)(1)(C) of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (relating to 
 inclusion in networks of essential community providers) 
 with respect to services offered in the service area 
 involved.''.

SEC. 4243. PROVIDER NETWORK ADEQUACY IN COMMUNITIES OF COLOR.

 (a) In General.--Section 1311(c)(1)(B) of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18031(c)(1)(B)), as amended by 
section 4241(a), is further amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(B)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(ii) meet such network adequacy standards as the 
 Secretary may establish with regard to--
 ``(I) appointment wait time;
 ``(II) travel time and distance to health 
 care provider facilities and providers by 
 public and private transit;
 ``(III) hours of operation to accommodate 
 individuals who cannot come to provider 
 appointments during standard business hours;
 ``(IV) availability of health care options 
 for patients; and
 ``(V) other network adequacy standards to 
 ensure that care through these plans is 
 accessible to diverse communities, including 
 individuals with limited English proficiency as 
 defined in section 3400 of such Act; and
 ``(iii) provide coverage for services for enrollees 
 through out-of-network providers at no additional cost 
 to the enrollees in cases where in-network providers 
 are unable to comply with the standards established 
 under subclause (III) or (IV) of clause (ii) for such 
 services and the out-of-network providers can deliver 
 such services in compliance with such standards;''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
not apply to plans beginning on or prior to the date that is 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability 
Act of 2024.

 PART 5--DENTAL

SEC. 4251. IMPROVING ACCESS TO DENTAL CARE.

 (a) Reports to Congress.--
 (1) GAO reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to Congress--
 (A) a report on the Alaska Dental Health Aide 
 Therapists program and the Dental Therapist and 
 Advanced Dental Therapist programs in Minnesota, to 
 assess the effectiveness of dental therapists in--
 (i) improving access to timely dental care 
 among communities of color;
 (ii) providing high-quality care;
 (iii) providing culturally competent care; 
 and
 (iv) providing accessible care to people 
 with disabilities;
 (B) a report on State variations in the use of 
 dental hygienists and the effectiveness of expanding 
 the scope of practice for dental hygienists in--
 (i) improving access to timely dental care 
 among communities of color;
 (ii) providing high-quality care;
 (iii) providing culturally competent care; 
 and
 (iv) providing accessible care to people 
 with disabilities; and
 (C) a report on the use of telehealth services to 
 enhance services provided by dental hygienists and 
 therapists, including recommendations for any 
 modifications to the Medicare program under title XVIII 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) and 
 the Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) to better provide for telehealth 
 consultations in conjunction with therapists' and 
 hygienists' care.
 (2) HRSA report on dental shortage areas.--Not later than 1 
 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator 
 of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall 
 submit to Congress a report which details geographic dental 
 access shortages and the preparedness of dental providers to 
 offer culturally and linguistically appropriate, affordable, 
 accessible, and timely services.
 (b) Expansion of Dental Health Aid Therapists in Tribal and Urban 
Indian Communities.--Section 119 of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
Act (25 U.S.C. 1616l) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(2) Requirements; exclusion.--Subject to paragraphs (3) 
 and (4), in establishing a national program under paragraph 
 (1), the Secretary--
 ``(A) shall not reduce the amounts provided for the 
 Community Health Aide Program described in subsections 
 (a) and (b);
 ``(B) shall exclude dental health aide therapist 
 services from services covered under that Program; and
 ``(C) shall include urban Indian organizations.''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) in the paragraph heading, by striking 
 ``or tribal organization'' and inserting ``, 
 tribal organization, or urban indian 
 organization''; and
 (ii) in each of subparagraphs (A) and (B), 
 by striking ``or tribal organization'' and 
 inserting ``, tribal organization, or urban 
 Indian organization''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking ``or a tribal 
 organization'' and inserting ``a tribal organization, or an 
 urban Indian organization''.
 (c) Coverage of Dental Services Under the Medicare Program.--
 (1) Coverage.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (JJ), by inserting ``and'' at 
 the end; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(KK) dental and oral health services (as defined in 
 subsection (ppp));''.
 (2) Dental and oral health services defined.--Section 1861 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by 
 sections 2007(b) and 4221(a), is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subsection:

 ``Dental and Oral Health Services

 ``(ppp)(1) The term `dental and oral health services' means 
services (as defined by the Secretary) that are necessary to prevent 
disease and promote oral health, restore oral structures to health and 
function, and treat emergency conditions, including--
 ``(A) routine diagnostic and preventive care such as dental 
 cleanings, exams, and x-rays;
 ``(B) basic dental services such as fillings and 
 extractions;
 ``(C) major dental services such as root canals, crowns, 
 and dentures;
 ``(D) emergency dental care; and
 ``(E) other necessary services related to dental and oral 
 health (as defined by the Secretary).
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), such term shall include mobile 
and portable oral health services (as defined by the Secretary) that--
 ``(A) are provided for the purpose of overcoming mobility, 
 transportation, and access barriers for individuals; and
 ``(B) satisfy the standards and certification requirements 
 established under section 1902(a)(82) for the State in which 
 the services are provided.''.
 (3) Payment and coinsurance.--Section 1833(a)(1) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' before ``(HH)''; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
 the following: ``and (II) with respect to dental and 
 oral health services (as defined in section 1861(ppp)), 
 the amount paid shall be (i) in the case of such 
 services that are preventive, 100 percent of the lesser 
 of the actual charge for the services or the amount 
 determined under the payment basis determined under 
 section 1848, and (ii) in the case of all other such 
 services, 80 percent of the lesser of the actual charge 
 for the services or the amount determined under the 
 payment basis determined under section 1848''.
 (4) Payment under physician fee schedule.--Section 
 1848(j)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(j)(3)) 
 is amended by inserting ``, (2)(KK),'' after ``(including 
 administration of the health risk assessment)''.
 (5) Dentures.--Section 1861(s)(8) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(8)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``(other than dental)'' and 
 inserting ``(including dentures)''; and
 (B) by striking ``internal body''.
 (6) Repeal of ground for exclusion.--Section 1862(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y) is amended by striking 
 paragraph (12).
 (7) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2026.
 (d) Requiring Medicaid Coverage of Dental and Oral Health Services 
for Adults.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Mandatory coverage.--
 (i) In general.--
 (I) Requirement.--Section 
 1902(a)(10)(A) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)) is 
 amended by inserting ``(10),'' before 
 ``(13)(B),''.
 (II) Medically needy.--
 (aa) In general.--Section 
 1902(a)(10)(C)(iv) of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(C)(iv)) 
 is amended by inserting 
 ``(10),'' before ``(13)(B)''.
 (bb) Rule of 
 construction.--Nothing in this 
 section or the amendments made 
 by this section shall be 
 construed to limit the access 
 of an individual residing in an 
 institutional setting to dental 
 and oral health services (as 
 such term is defined in section 
 1905(ll) of the Social Security 
 Act, as added by paragraph 
 (2)(B)).
 (III) Effective date.--The 
 amendments made by clauses (i) and (ii) 
 shall apply with respect to 
 expenditures for medical assistance in 
 calendar quarters beginning on or after 
 January 1, 2026.
 (ii) Benchmark coverage.--Section 
 1937(b)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396u-7(b)(5)) is amended by striking 
 the period and inserting ``, and, beginning 
 January 1, 2026, coverage of dental and oral 
 health services (as such term is defined in 
 section 1905(ll)).''.
 (iii) Optional application to 
 territories.--Section 1902(j) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(j)) is amended--
 (I) by striking ``this title, the 
 Secretary'' and inserting ``this 
 title--
 ``(1) in the case of a State other than the 50 States and 
 the District of Columbia the requirement under subsection 
 (a)(10)(A) to provide the care and services listed in paragraph 
 (10) of section 1905(a) shall be optional; and
 ``(2) the Secretary''; and
 (II) by striking the second comma 
 after ``section 1108(f)''.
 (B) Definition of dental and oral health 
 services.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by section 4107(c), is 
 amended--
 (i) in subsection (a)(10), by inserting 
 ``and dental and oral health services (as 
 defined in subsection (ll))'' after ``dental 
 services''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(ll) Dental and Oral Health Services.--For purposes of subsection 
(a)(10), the term `dental and oral health services' means dentures and 
denture services, implants and implant services, and services necessary 
to prevent oral disease and promote oral health, restore oral 
structures to health and function, reduce oral pain, and treat 
emergency oral conditions, that are furnished by a provider who is 
legally authorized to furnish such items and services under State law 
(or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law).''.
 (C) Conforming amendment.--
 (i) In general.--Section 1905(a)(10) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)(10)), 
 as amended by paragraph (2), is amended by 
 striking ``dental services and''.
 (ii) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 subparagraph (A) shall take effect on January 
 1, 2026.
 (2) State option for additional dental and oral health 
 benefits.--Section 1905(a)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d(a)(13)) is amended by inserting the following new 
 subparagraph after subparagraph (C):
 ``(D) at State option, such items and services 
 related to dental and oral health services (as defined 
 in subsection (ll)) that are in addition to those 
 identified in such subsection (ll) as the State may 
 specify;''.
 (3) Increased fmap.--
 (A) Medicaid.--Section 1905 of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by paragraph (1), is 
 further amended--
 (i) in subsection (b), by striking ``and 
 (kk)'' and inserting ``(kk), and (mm)'';
 (ii) in subsection (ff), by striking ``and 
 (ii)'' and inserting ``, (ii), and (mm)''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(mm) Increased FMAP for Expenditures Related to Dental and Oral 
Health Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) 50 states and dc.--Notwithstanding subsection 
 (b), in the case of a State that is 1 of the 50 States 
 or the District of Columbia, during the 12-quarter 
 period that begins on January 1, 2026, the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage shall be equal to 100 
 percent with respect to amounts expended by the State 
 for medical assistance for dental and oral health 
 services authorized under paragraph (10) of subsection 
 (a). In no case may the application of this 
 subparagraph result in the Federal medical assistance 
 percentage determined for a State with respect to 
 expenditures described in this subparagraph exceeding 
 100 percent.
 ``(B) Territories.--
 ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 subsection (b), in the case of a State that is 
 Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, or American Samoa, 
 during a period described in clause (ii), the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage shall be 
 equal to 100 percent with respect to amounts 
 expended by the State for medical assistance 
 for any item or service that is included in 
 dental and oral health services authorized 
 under paragraph (10) of subsection (a). In no 
 case may the application of this clause result 
 in the Federal medical assistance percentage 
 determined for a State with respect to 
 expenditures described in this clause exceeding 
 100 percent.
 ``(ii) Period described.--A period 
 described in this clause is, with respect to an 
 item or service described in clause (i) and a 
 State described in such clause, the 12-quarter 
 period that begins with the first quarter 
 beginning on or after January 1, 2026, in which 
 such item or service is first covered under the 
 State plan or under a waiver of such plan.
 ``(2) Exclusions.--The Federal medical assistance 
 percentage specified in paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 amounts expended for medical assistance during any period for--
 ``(A) additional items and services authorized 
 under paragraph (13)(D) of subsection (a); or
 ``(B) items and services furnished to an individual 
 if, as of the date of enactment of this subsection, 
 medical assistance was available to such individual for 
 such items and services or medicare cost-sharing under 
 the State plan or a waiver of such plan.''.
 (B) Exclusion of amounts attributable to increased 
 fmap from territorial caps.--Section 1108 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308), as amended by section 
 4101, is amended--
 (i) in subsection (f), in the matter 
 preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``(h), and 
 (j)'' and inserting ``(h), (j), and (k)''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Exclusion From Caps of Amounts Attributable to Increased FMAP 
for Coverage of Dental and Oral Health Services.--Any additional amount 
paid to Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana 
Islands, and American Samoa for expenditures for medical assistance 
that is attributable to an increase in the Federal medical assistance 
percentage applicable to such expenditures under section 1905(mm) shall 
not be taken into account for purposes of applying payment limits under 
subsections (f) and (g).''.
 (e) Oral Health Services as an Essential Health Benefit.--Section 
1302(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 
18022(b)), as amended by section 2013(a), is further amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``oral and''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(L) Oral health services for children and 
 adults.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Oral health services.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)(L), the term `oral health services' means services (as 
 defined by the Secretary) that are necessary to prevent any 
 oral disease and promote oral health, restore oral structures 
 to health and function, and treat emergency oral conditions.''.
 (f) Demonstration Program on Training and Employment of Alternative 
Dental Health Care Providers for Dental Health Care Services for 
Veterans in Rural and Other Underserved Communities.--
 (1) Demonstration program authorized.--The Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs may carry out a demonstration program to 
 establish programs to train and employ alternative dental 
 health care providers in order to increase access to dental 
 health care services for veterans who are entitled to such 
 services from the Department of Veterans Affairs and reside in 
 rural and other underserved communities.
 (2) Telehealth.--For purposes of alternative dental health 
 care providers and other dental care providers who are licensed 
 to provide clinical care, dental services provided under the 
 demonstration program under this subsection may be administered 
 by such providers through telehealth-enabled collaboration and 
 supervision when appropriate and feasible.
 (3) Alternative dental health care providers defined.--In 
 this subsection, the term ``alternative dental health care 
 providers'' has the meaning given that term in section 340G-
 1(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256g-
 1(a)(2)).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the 
 demonstration program under this subsection.
 (g) Demonstration Program on Training and Employment of Alternative 
Dental Health Care Providers for Dental Health Care Services for 
Members of the Armed Forces and Dependents Lacking Ready Access to Such 
Services.--
 (1) Demonstration program authorized.--The Secretary of 
 Defense may carry out a demonstration program to establish 
 programs to train and employ alternative dental health care 
 providers in order to increase access to dental health care 
 services for members of the Armed Forces and their dependents 
 who lack ready access to such services, including the following 
 individuals:
 (A) Members and dependents who reside in rural 
 areas or areas otherwise underserved by dental health 
 care providers.
 (B) Members of a reserve component of the Armed 
 Forces in active status who are potentially deployable.
 (2) Telehealth.--For purposes of alternative dental health 
 care providers and other dental care providers who are licensed 
 to provide clinical care, dental services provided under the 
 demonstration program under this subsection may be administered 
 by such providers through telehealth-enabled collaboration and 
 supervision when appropriate and feasible.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Active status.--The term ``active status'' has 
 the meaning given that term in section 101(d) of title 
 10, United States Code.
 (B) Alternative dental health care providers.--The 
 term ``alternative dental health care providers'' has 
 the meaning given that term in section 340G-1(a)(2) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256g-1(a)(2)).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the 
 demonstration program under this subsection.
 (h) Demonstration Program on Training and Employment of Alternative 
Dental Health Care Providers for Dental Health Care Services for 
Prisoners Within the Custody of the Bureau of Prisons.--
 (1) Demonstration program authorized.--The Attorney 
 General, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, 
 may carry out a demonstration program to establish programs to 
 train and employ alternative dental health care providers in 
 order to increase access to dental health services for 
 prisoners within the custody of the Bureau of Prisons.
 (2) Telehealth.--For purposes of alternative dental health 
 care providers and other dental care providers who are licensed 
 to provide clinical care, dental services provided under the 
 demonstration program under this subsection may be administered 
 by such providers through telehealth-enabled collaboration and 
 supervision when appropriate and feasible.
 (3) Alternative dental health care providers defined.--In 
 this subsection, the term ``alternative dental health care 
 providers'' has the meaning given that term in section 340G-
 1(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256g-
 1(a)(2)).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the 
 demonstration program under this subsection.
 (i) Demonstration Program on Training and Employment of Alternative 
Dental Health Care Providers for Dental Health Care Services Under the 
Indian Health Service.--
 (1) Demonstration program authorized.--The Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, acting through the Indian Health 
 Service, may carry out a demonstration program to establish 
 programs to train and employ alternative dental health care 
 providers in order to help eliminate oral health disparities 
 and increase access to dental services through health programs 
 operated by the Indian Health Service, Indian tribes, tribal 
 organizations, and Urban Indian organizations.
 (2) Telehealth.--For purposes of alternative dental health 
 care providers and other dental care providers who are licensed 
 to provide clinical care, dental services provided under the 
 demonstration program under this subsection may be administered 
 by such providers through telehealth-enabled collaboration and 
 supervision when appropriate and feasible.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Alternative dental health care providers 
 defined.--The term ``alternative dental health care 
 providers'' has the meaning given that term in section 
 340G-1(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 256g-1(a)(2)).
 (B) Indian health care improvement act.--The terms 
 ``Indian tribe'', ``tribal organization'', and ``Urban 
 Indian organization'' have the meaning given the terms 
 in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act 
 (25 U.S.C. 1603).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the 
 demonstration program under this subsection.

SEC. 4252. ORAL HEALTH LITERACY AND AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.

 The Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 
340G-1 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 256g-1) the following:

``SEC. 340G-2. ORAL HEALTH LITERACY AND AWARENESS.

 ``(a) Campaign.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of 
the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall establish a 
public education campaign (referred to in this subsection as the 
`campaign') across all relevant programs of the Health Resources and 
Services Administration (including the health center program, oral 
health workforce programs, maternal and child health programs, the Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program, and rural health programs) to increase oral 
health literacy and awareness.
 ``(b) Strategies.--In carrying out the campaign, the Secretary 
shall identify oral health literacy and awareness strategies that are 
evidence based and focused on oral health care education, including 
education on prevention of oral disease such as early childhood and 
other caries, periodontal disease, and oral cancer.
 ``(c) Focus.--The Secretary shall design the campaign to 
communicate directly with specific populations, including children, 
pregnant women, parents, the elderly, individuals with disabilities, 
and ethnic and racial minority populations, including Indians, Alaska 
Natives, and Native Hawaiians, in a culturally and linguistically 
appropriate manner.
 ``(d) Outcomes.--In carrying out the campaign, the Secretary shall 
include a process for measuring outcomes and effectiveness.
 ``(e) Report to Congress.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a 
report on the outcomes and effectiveness of the campaign.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $750,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 4253. ENSURING KIDS HAVE ACCESS TO MEDICALLY NECESSARY DENTAL CARE 
 ACT.

 (a) Prohibition of Lifetime or Annual Limits on Dental Benefits 
Under the Children's Health Insurance Program.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2103(c)(6) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(6)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, subject 
 to subparagraph (D),'' after ``shall include'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``A State'' 
 and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (D), a State''; 
 and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) No lifetime or annual limits on dental 
 benefits.--A State shall not establish lifetime or 
 annual limits on the dollar value of benefits for 
 dental services provided under the State child health 
 plan to a targeted low-income child, and, in the case 
 that the State elects to provide pregnancy-related 
 assistance pursuant to section 2112, to a targeted low-
 income pregnant woman (as defined in section 2112(d)), 
 including benefits for such services that are provided 
 through dental coverage that is otherwise equivalent to 
 a benchmark dental package described in subparagraph 
 (C).''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the date that is 6 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Requiring Wraparound Coverage of Dental Services for Certain 
Children Under CHIP.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2110(b)(5) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(b)(5)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph header, by striking ``Option'' 
 and inserting ``Requirement'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``may waive'' 
 and inserting ``shall waive''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (C)--
 (i) in the subparagraph header, by striking 
 ``Conditions'' and inserting ``Requirements''; 
 and
 (ii) by striking ``may not offer dental-
 only supplemental coverage under this paragraph 
 unless the State satisfies the following 
 conditions'' and inserting ``shall offer 
 dental-only supplemental coverage under this 
 paragraph in accordance with the following 
 requirements''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the date that is 6 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act.

Subtitle D--Advancing Health Equity Through Payment and Delivery Reform

SEC. 4301. CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES REPORTING AND 
 VALUE-BASED PROGRAMS.

 (a) Advancing Health Equity in Reporting and Value-Based Payment 
Programs.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services (in this section referred to as 
 the ``Administrator'') shall require that a clinician or other 
 professional participating in any pay-for-reporting or value-
 based payment program stratify clinical quality measures by 
 disparity variables, including race, ethnicity, sex, primary 
 language, disability status, sexual orientation, gender 
 identity, and socioeconomic status. A clinician or other 
 professional may use existing demographic data collection 
 fields in certified electronic health record technology (as 
 defined in section 1848(o)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395w-4(o)(4))) to carry out such data stratification 
 under the preceding sentence. Such stratified data will assist 
 clinicians and other professionals in the identification of 
 disparities obscured in aggregated data and assist with the 
 provision of interventions that target reducing those 
 disparities.
 (2) Clinician.--In assessing performance in any value-based 
 payment program, the Administrator shall incorporate a 
 clinician or other professional's performance in reducing 
 disparities across race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, 
 disability status, sexual orientation, gender identity, and 
 socioeconomic status. Linking performance payments to the 
 reduction of health care disparities across such variables will 
 assist in holding clinicians and other professionals 
 accountable for providing quality care that can lead to 
 decreased health inequities.
 (3) Requirement of adoption of cert.--All entities, 
 clinicians, or other professionals participating in the Quality 
 Payment Program of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
 shall be required to adopt 2015 certified electronic health 
 record technology (as so defined) as a condition of 
 participating in such program.
 (b) Quality Improvement Activities.--The Administrator, upon yearly 
review of the Quality Payment Program, shall add quality improvement 
activities that implement the Culturally and Linguistically Accessible 
Standards (CLAS) as Improvement Activities under the Quality Payment 
Program.

SEC. 4302. DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING OF DISPARITY REDUCING DELIVERY AND 
 PAYMENT MODELS.

 (a) In General.--The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation 
established under section 1115A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1315a) (in this section referred to as the ``CMI'') shall establish a 
dedicated fund to identify, test, evaluate, and scale delivery and 
payment models under the applicable titles (as defined in subsection 
(a)(4)(B) of such section) that target health disparities among racial 
and ethnic minorities, including models that support high-value 
nonmedical services that address socially determined barriers to health 
in all stages of the life cycle through end-of-life, including English 
proficiency status, low health and health care literacy, lack of access 
to health care planning, including end-of-life care planning, case 
management, transportation, enrollment assistance needs, stable and 
affordable housing, utility assistance, employment and career 
development, and nutrition and food security which will help to reduce 
disparities and impact the overall cost of care.
 (b) Amendment to Social Security Act.--The second sentence of 
section 1115A(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315a(a)(1)) 
is amended by inserting ``and improve health equity'' after 
``expenditures''.
 (c) Pilot Programs.--The CMI shall prioritize the testing of models 
under such section 1115A that include partnerships with entities, 
including community-based organizations or other nonprofit entities, to 
help address socially determined barriers to health and health care.
 (d) Alternatives.--Any model tested by the CMI under such 1115A 
shall include measures to assess and track the impact of the model on 
health disparities, using existing measures such as the Healthcare 
Disparities and Cultural Competency Measures endorsed by the entity 
with a contract under section 1890(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395aaa(a)), and stratified by race, ethnicity, English 
proficiency, gender identity, sexual orientation, and disability 
status.

SEC. 4303. DIVERSITY IN CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID CONSULTATION.

 (a) In General.--In carrying out the duties under this subtitle, 
the CMI shall consult clinical and analytical experts with expertise in 
medicine and health care management, specifically such experts with 
expertise in--
 (1) the health care needs of minority, rural, and 
 underserved populations; and
 (2) the financial needs of safety net, community-based, 
 rural, and critical access providers, including federally 
 qualified health centers.
 (b) Open Door Forums.--The CMI shall use open door forums or other 
mechanisms to seek external feedback from interested parties and 
incorporate that feedback into the development of models.

SEC. 4304. SUPPORTING SAFETY NET AND COMMUNITY-BASED PROVIDERS TO 
 COMPETE IN VALUE-BASED PAYMENT SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--Any pay-for-performance or alternative payment 
model that is developed and tested by the Center for Medicare and 
Medicaid Innovation established under section 1115A of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315a), or any other agency of the Department 
of Health and Human Services with respect to the programs under titles 
XVIII, XIX, or XXI of such Act, shall be assessed for potential impact 
on safety net, community-based, and critical access providers, 
including Federally qualified health centers.
 (b) New Models.--The rollout of any such models shall include 
training and additional up front resources for community-based and 
safety net providers to enable those providers to participate in the 
model.

SEC. 4305. IMPROVING ACCESS TO CARE FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID 
 BENEFICIARIES.

 Section 1115A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315a) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the last sentence of paragraph (1), by 
 inserting ``advance health equity and'' before 
 ``improve the coordination''; and
 (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (3)--
 (i) by inserting ``(including the Office of 
 Minority Health of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services, the Office of Rural Health 
 Policy of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, and the Office on Women's 
 Health of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services)'' after ``relevant Federal 
 agencies''; and
 (ii) by striking ``experts with expertise 
 in medicine'' and inserting ``experts with 
 expertise in medicine, the causes of health 
 disparities and the social determinants of 
 health, and'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting the following 
 after the first sentence: ``Prior to 
 selecting a model under this paragraph, 
 the Secretary shall consult with the 
 Office of Minority Health of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services, the Office of Rural Health 
 Policy of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration, and the Office 
 on Women's Health of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services to ensure 
 that models under consideration address 
 health disparities and social 
 determinants of health as appropriate 
 for populations to be cared for under 
 the model.'';
 (II) by inserting ``and, for models 
 for which testing begins on or after 
 January 1, 2025, address health equity 
 as well as improving access to care 
 received by individuals receiving 
 benefits under such title'' after 
 ``applicable title''; and
 (III) by adding at the end the 
 following: ``The models selected under 
 this subparagraph shall include the 
 social determinants of health payment 
 model described in subsection (h), the 
 testing of which shall begin not later 
 than December 31, 2025.''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by adding at the 
 end the following new clauses:
 ``(ix) Whether the model will affect access 
 to care from providers and suppliers caring for 
 high risk patients or operating in underserved 
 areas.
 ``(x) Whether the model has the potential 
 to reduce health disparities, including 
 minority and rural health disparities.'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)(B)--
 (i) in clause (i), by inserting ``or health 
 equity'' after ``quality of care'';
 (ii) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or 
 increasing health inequities'' after ``quality 
 of care''; and
 (iii) in clause (iii), by inserting ``or 
 health equity'' after ``quality of care''; and
 (C) in paragraph (4)(A)--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) in clause (ii), by striking the period 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new clause:
 ``(iii) for models for which testing begins 
 on or after January 1, 2025, the extent to 
 which the model improves health equity.'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``or, 
 beginning on or after January 1, 2025, 
 increasing health inequities'' before the 
 semicolon; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting 
 ``or, beginning on or after January 1, 2025, 
 health equity'' after ``patient care''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or increase 
 health disparities experienced by beneficiaries, 
 including low-income, minority, or rural beneficiaries, 
 or that such expansion would improve health equity'' 
 before the period;
 (4) in subsection (g), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``For reports submitted after the date of enactment of the 
 Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, each such report 
 shall include information on the following:
 ``(1) The interventions that address social determinants of 
 health, health disparities, or health equity in payment models 
 selected by the CMI for testing under this section.
 ``(2) Estimated Federal savings achieved through reducing 
 disparities, including rural and minority health disparities, 
 improving health equity, or addressing social determinants of 
 health.
 ``(3) The effectiveness of interventions in mitigating 
 negative health outcomes and higher costs associated with 
 social determinants of health within models selected by the 
 Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation for testing.
 ``(4) Other areas determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Social Determinants of Health Payment Model.--
 ``(1) In general.--The social determinants of health 
 payment model described in this subsection is a payment model 
 that tests each of the payment and service delivery innovations 
 described in paragraph (2) in a region determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Payment and service delivery innovations described.--
 For purposes of paragraph (1), the payment and service delivery 
 innovations described in this clause are the following:
 ``(A) Payment and service delivery innovations for 
 behavioral health services, focusing on gathering 
 actionable data to address the higher costs associated 
 with beneficiaries with diagnosed behavioral 
 conditions.
 ``(B) Payment and service delivery innovations 
 targeting conditions or comorbidities of individuals 
 entitled or enrolled under the Medicare program under 
 title XVIII and enrolled under a State plan under the 
 Medicaid program under title XIX to increase capacity 
 in underserved areas.
 ``(C) Payment and service delivery innovations 
 targeting conditions or comorbidities of applicable 
 individuals to increase capacity in underserved areas.
 ``(D) Payment and service delivery innovations 
 targeted on Medicaid eligible pregnant and postpartum 
 women, up to one year after delivery.''.

 Subtitle E--Health Empowerment Zones

SEC. 4401. DESIGNATION OF HEALTH EMPOWERMENT ZONES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may, at the request of an eligible 
community partnership described in subsection (b)(1), designate an 
eligible area described in subsection (b)(2) as a health empowerment 
zone for the purpose of eligibility for a grant under section 4402.
 (b) Eligibility Criteria.--
 (1) Eligible community partnership.--A community 
 partnership is eligible to submit a request under this section 
 if the partnership--
 (A) demonstrates widespread public support from key 
 individuals and entities in the eligible area, 
 including members of the target community, State and 
 local governments, nonprofit organizations including 
 national and regional intermediaries with demonstrated 
 capacity to serve low-income urban communities, and 
 community and industry leaders, for designation of the 
 eligible area as a health empowerment zone; and
 (B) includes representatives of--
 (i) a broad cross-section of stakeholders 
 and residents from communities in the eligible 
 area experiencing disproportionate disparities 
 in health status and health care; and
 (ii) organizations, facilities, and 
 institutions that have a history of working 
 within and serving such communities.
 (2) Eligible area.--An area is eligible to be designated as 
 a health empowerment zone under this section if one or more 
 communities in the area experience disproportionate disparities 
 in health status and health care. In determining whether a 
 community experiences such disparities, the Secretary shall 
 consider data collected by the Department of Health and Human 
 Services focusing on the following areas:
 (A) Access to affordable, high-quality health care 
 services.
 (B) The prevalence of disproportionate rates of 
 certain illnesses or diseases including the following:
 (i) Arthritis, osteoporosis, chronic back 
 conditions, and other musculoskeletal diseases.
 (ii) Cancer.
 (iii) Chronic kidney disease.
 (iv) Diabetes.
 (v) Injury (intentional and unintentional).
 (vi) Violence (intimate and nonintimate).
 (vii) Maternal and paternal illnesses and 
 diseases.
 (viii) Infant mortality.
 (ix) Mental illness and other disabilities.
 (x) Substance use disorder treatment and 
 prevention, including underage drinking.
 (xi) Nutrition, obesity, and overweight 
 conditions.
 (xii) Heart disease.
 (xiii) Hypertension.
 (xiv) Cerebrovascular disease or stroke.
 (xv) Tuberculosis.
 (xvi) HIV/AIDS and other sexually 
 transmitted infections.
 (xvii) Viral hepatitis.
 (xviii) Asthma.
 (xix) Tooth decay and other oral health 
 issues.
 (C) Within the community, the historical and 
 persistent presence of conditions that have been found 
 to contribute to health disparities including any such 
 conditions respecting any of the following:
 (i) Poverty.
 (ii) Educational status and the quality of 
 community schools.
 (iii) Income.
 (iv) Access to high-quality affordable 
 health care.
 (v) Work and work environment.
 (vi) Environmental conditions in the 
 community, including with respect to clean 
 water, clean air, and the presence or absence 
 of pollutants.
 (vii) Language and English proficiency.
 (viii) Access to affordable healthy food.
 (ix) Access to ethnically and culturally 
 diverse health and human service providers and 
 practitioners.
 (x) Access to culturally and linguistically 
 competent health and human services and health 
 and human service providers.
 (xi) Health-supporting infrastructure.
 (xii) Health insurance that is adequate and 
 affordable.
 (xiii) Race, racism, and bigotry (conscious 
 and unconscious).
 (xiv) Sexual orientation.
 (xv) Health and health care literacy.
 (xvi) Place of residence (such as urban 
 areas, rural areas, and reservations of Indian 
 Tribes).
 (xvii) Stress.
 (c) Procedure.--
 (1) Request.--A request under subsection (a) shall--
 (A) describe the bounds of the area to be 
 designated as a health empowerment zone and the process 
 used to select those bounds;
 (B) demonstrate that the partnership submitting the 
 request is an eligible community partnership described 
 in subsection (b)(1);
 (C) demonstrate that the area is an eligible area 
 described in subsection (b)(2);
 (D) include a comprehensive assessment of 
 disparities in health status and health care experience 
 by one or more communities in the area;
 (E) set forth--
 (i) a vision and a set of values for the 
 area; and
 (ii) a comprehensive and holistic set of 
 goals to be achieved in the area through 
 designation as a health empowerment zone; and
 (F) include a strategic plan and an action plan for 
 achieving the goals described in subparagraph (E)(ii).
 (2) Approval.--Not later than 60 days after the receipt of 
 a request for designation of an area as a health empowerment 
 zone under this section, the Secretary shall approve or 
 disapprove the request.
 (d) Minimum Number.--The Secretary--
 (1) shall designate not more than 110 health empowerment 
 zones under this section; and
 (2) of such zones designated under paragraph (1), shall 
 designate at least one health empowerment zone in each of the 
 several States, the District of Columbia, and each territory or 
 possession of the United States.

SEC. 4402. ASSISTANCE TO THOSE SEEKING DESIGNATION.

 At the request of any organization or entity seeking to submit a 
request under section 4401(a), the Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance, and may award a grant, to assist such organization or 
entity--
 (1) to form an eligible community partnership described in 
 section 4401(b)(1);
 (2) to complete a health assessment, including an 
 assessment of health disparities under section 4401(c)(1)(D); 
 or
 (3) to prepare and submit a request, including a strategic 
 plan, in accordance with section 4401.

SEC. 4403. BENEFITS OF DESIGNATION.

 (a) Priority.--In awarding a grant under subsection (b), a Federal 
official shall give priority to any applicant that--
 (1) meets the eligibility criteria for the grant;
 (2) proposes to use the grant for activities in a health 
 empowerment zone; and
 (3) demonstrates that such activities will directly and 
 significantly further the goals of the strategic plan approved 
 for such zone under section 4401.
 (b) Grants for Initial Implementation of Strategic Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Upon designating an eligible area as a 
 health empowerment zone at the request of an eligible community 
 partnership, the Secretary shall, subject to the availability 
 of appropriations, make a grant to the community partnership 
 for implementation of the strategic plan for such zone.
 (2) Grant period.--A grant under paragraph (1) for a health 
 empowerment zone shall be for a period of 2 years and may be 
 renewed, except that the total period of grants under paragraph 
 (1) for such zone may not exceed 10 years.
 (3) Limitation.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall not give less priority to an applicant or 
 reduce the amount of a grant because the Secretary rendered 
 technical assistance or made a grant to the same applicant 
 under section 4401.
 (4) Reporting.--The Secretary shall establish metrics for 
 measuring the progress of grantees under this subsection and, 
 based on such metrics, require each such grantee to report to 
 the Secretary not less than every 6 months on the progress in 
 implementing the strategic plan for the health empowerment 
 zone.

SEC. 4404. DEFINITION OF SECRETARY.

 In this subtitle, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator of the 
Health Resources and Services Administration and the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health, and in cooperation with the Director of 
the Office of Community Services and the Director of the National 
Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities.

SEC. 4405. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 To carry out this subtitle, there is authorized to be appropriated 
$100,000,000 for fiscal year 2025.

 Subtitle F--Equitable Health Care for All

SEC. 4501. DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING.

 (a) Required Reporting.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, in consultation with the Director for Civil Rights 
 and Health Equity, the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health, the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services, the Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
 Minority Health, and the Director of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention, shall by regulation require all health 
 care providers and facilities that are required under other 
 provisions of law to report data on specific health outcomes to 
 the Department of Health and Human Services in aggregate form, 
 to disaggregate such data by demographic characteristics, 
 including by race, national origin, sex (including sexual 
 orientation and gender identity), disability, and age, as well 
 as any other factor that the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services determines would be useful for determining a pattern 
 of provision of inequitable health care.
 (2) Proposed regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services shall issue proposed regulations to carry out 
 paragraph (1).
 (b) Repository.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall--
 (1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, establish a repository of the disaggregated data 
 reported pursuant to subsection (a);
 (2) subject to paragraph (3), make the data in such 
 repository publicly available; and
 (3) ensure that such repository does not contain any data 
 that is individually identifiable.

SEC. 4502. REQUIRING EQUITABLE HEALTH CARE IN THE HOSPITAL VALUE-BASED 
 PURCHASING PROGRAM.

 (a) Equitable Health Care as Value Measurement.--Section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(viii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(b)(3)(B)(viii)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subclause:
 ``(XIII)(aa) Effective for payments beginning with fiscal year 
2025, in expanding the number of measures under subclause (III), the 
Secretary shall adopt measures that relate to equitable health care 
furnished by hospitals in inpatient settings.
 ``(bb) In carrying out this subclause, the Secretary shall solicit 
input and recommendations from individuals and groups representing 
communities of color and other protected classes and ensure measures 
adopted pursuant to this subclause account for social determinants of 
health, as defined in section 4505(e)(10) of the Health Equity and 
Accountability Act of 2024.
 ``(cc) For purposes of this subclause, the term `equitable health 
care' refers to the principle that high-quality care should be provided 
to all individuals and health care treatment and services should not 
vary on account of the real or perceived race, national origin, sex 
(including sexual orientation and gender identity), disability, or age 
of an individual, as well as any other factor that the Secretary 
determines would be useful for determining a pattern of provision of 
inequitable health care.''.
 (b) Inclusion of Equitable Health Care Measures.--Section 
1886(o)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(o)(2)(B)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) Inclusion of equitable health care 
 measures.--Beginning in fiscal year 2025, 
 measures selected under subparagraph (A) shall 
 include the equitable health care measures 
 described in subsection 
 (b)(3)(B)(viii)(XIII).''.

SEC. 4503. PROVISION OF INEQUITABLE HEALTH CARE AS A BASIS FOR 
 PERMISSIVE EXCLUSION FROM MEDICARE AND STATE HEALTH CARE 
 PROGRAMS.

 Section 1128(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(b)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(18) Provision of inequitable health care.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), any 
 health care provider that the Secretary determines has 
 engaged in a pattern of providing inequitable health 
 care (as defined in section 4505(e)(7) of the Health 
 Equity and Accountability Act of 2024) on the basis of 
 race, national origin, sex (including sexual 
 orientation and gender identity), disability, or age of 
 an individual.
 ``(B) Exception.--For purposes of carrying out 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall not exclude any 
 health care provider from participation in the Medicare 
 program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or 
 the Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act if the 
 exclusion of such health care provider would result in 
 increased difficulty in access to health care services 
 for underserved or low-income communities.''.

SEC. 4504. OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND HEALTH EQUITY OF THE DEPARTMENT 
 OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

 (a) Name of Office.--Beginning on the date of enactment of this 
Act, the Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human 
Services shall be known as the ``Office for Civil Rights and Health 
Equity'' of the Department of Health and Human Services. Any reference 
to the Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human 
Services in any law, regulation, map, document, record, or other paper 
of the United States shall be deemed to be a reference to the Office 
for Civil Rights and Health Equity.
 (b) Head of Office.--The head of the Office for Civil Rights and 
Health Equity shall be the Director for Civil Rights and Health Equity, 
to be appointed by the President. Any reference to the Director of the 
Office for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human Services 
in any law, regulation, map, document, record, or other paper of the 
United States shall be deemed to be a reference to the Director for 
Civil Rights and Health Equity.

SEC. 4505. PROHIBITING DISCRIMINATION IN HEALTH CARE.

 (a) Prohibiting Discrimination.--
 (1) In general.--No health care provider may, on the basis, 
 in whole or in part, of race, sex (including sexual orientation 
 and gender identity), disability, age, or religion, subject an 
 individual to the provision of inequitable health care.
 (2) Notice of patient rights.--The Secretary shall provide 
 to each patient a notice of a patient's rights under this 
 section.
 (b) Administrative Complaint and Conciliation Process.--
 (1) Complaints and answers.--
 (A) In general.--An aggrieved person may, not later 
 than 1 year after an alleged violation of subsection 
 (a) has occurred or concluded, file a complaint with 
 the Director alleging provision of inequitable health 
 care by a provider described in subsection (a).
 (B) Complaint.--A complaint submitted pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) shall be in writing and shall contain 
 such information and be in such form as the Director 
 requires.
 (C) Oath or affirmation.--The complaint and any 
 answer made under this subsection shall be made under 
 oath or affirmation, and may be reasonably and fairly 
 modified at any time.
 (2) Response to complaints.--
 (A) In general.--Upon the filing of a complaint 
 under this subsection, the following procedures shall 
 apply:
 (i) Complainant notice.--The Director shall 
 serve notice upon the complainant acknowledging 
 receipt of such filing and advising the 
 complainant of the time limits and procedures 
 provided under this section.
 (ii) Respondent notice.--The Director 
 shall, not later than 30 days after receipt of 
 such filing--
 (I) serve on the respondent a 
 notice of the complaint, together with 
 a copy of the original complaint; and
 (II) advise the respondent of the 
 procedural rights and obligations of 
 respondents under this section.
 (iii) Answer.--The respondent may file, not 
 later than 60 days after receipt of the notice 
 from the Director, an answer to such complaint.
 (iv) Investigative duties.--The Director 
 shall--
 (I) make an investigation of the 
 alleged provision of inequitable health 
 care; and
 (II) complete such investigation 
 within 180 days (unless it is 
 impracticable to complete such 
 investigation within 180 days) after 
 the filing of the complaint.
 (B) Investigations.--
 (i) Pattern or practice.--In the course of 
 investigating the complaint, the Director may 
 seek records of care provided to patients other 
 than the complainant if necessary to 
 demonstrate or disprove an allegation of 
 provision of inequitable health care or to 
 determine whether there is a pattern or 
 practice of such care.
 (ii) Accounting for social determinants of 
 health.--In investigating the complaint and 
 reaching a determination on the validity of the 
 complaint, the Director shall account for 
 social determinants of health and the effect of 
 such social determinants on health care 
 outcomes.
 (iii) Inability to complete 
 investigation.--If the Director is unable to 
 complete (or finds it is impracticable to 
 complete) the investigation within 180 days 
 after the filing of the complaint (or, if the 
 Secretary takes further action under paragraph 
 (6)(B) with respect to a complaint, within 180 
 days after the commencement of such further 
 action), the Director shall notify the 
 complainant and respondent in writing of the 
 reasons involved.
 (iv) Report to state licensing 
 authorities.--On concluding each investigation 
 under this subparagraph, the Director shall 
 provide to the appropriate State licensing 
 authorities information specifying the results 
 of the investigation.
 (C) Report.--
 (i) Final report.--On completing each 
 investigation under this paragraph, the 
 Director shall prepare a final investigative 
 report.
 (ii) Modification of report.--A final 
 report under this subparagraph may be modified 
 if additional evidence is later discovered.
 (3) Conciliation.--
 (A) In general.--During the period beginning on the 
 date on which a complaint is filed under this 
 subsection and ending on the date of final disposition 
 of such complaint (including during an investigation 
 under paragraph (2)(B)), the Director shall, to the 
 extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to 
 such complaint.
 (B) Conciliation agreement.--A conciliation 
 agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an 
 agreement between the respondent and the complainant, 
 and shall be subject to approval by the Director.
 (C) Rights protected.--The Director shall approve a 
 conciliation agreement only if the agreement protects 
 the rights of the complainant and other persons 
 similarly situated.
 (D) Publicly available agreement.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the Secretary shall make available to the 
 public a copy of a conciliation agreement 
 entered into pursuant to this subsection unless 
 the complainant and respondent otherwise agree, 
 and the Secretary determines, that disclosure 
 is not required to further the purposes of this 
 subsection.
 (ii) Limitation.--A conciliation agreement 
 that is made available to the public pursuant 
 to clause (i) may not disclose individually 
 identifiable health information.
 (4) Failure to comply with conciliation agreement.--
 Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that a 
 respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the Director 
 shall refer the matter to the Attorney General to consider 
 filing a civil action to enforce such agreement.
 (5) Written consent for disclosure of information.--Nothing 
 said or done in the course of conciliation under this 
 subsection may be made public, or used as evidence in a 
 subsequent proceeding under this subsection, without the 
 written consent of the parties to the conciliation.
 (6) Prompt judicial action.--
 (A) In general.--If the Director determines at any 
 time following the filing of a complaint under this 
 subsection that prompt judicial action is necessary to 
 carry out the purposes of this subsection, the Director 
 may recommend that the Attorney General promptly 
 commence a civil action under subsection (d).
 (B) Immediate suit.--If the Director determines at 
 any time following the filing of a complaint under this 
 subsection that the public interest would be served by 
 allowing the complainant to bring a civil action under 
 subsection (c) in a State or Federal court immediately, 
 the Director shall certify that the administrative 
 process has concluded and that the complainant may file 
 such a suit immediately.
 (7) Annual report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Director 
 shall make publicly available a report detailing the activities 
 of the Office for Civil Rights and Health Equity under this 
 subsection, including--
 (A) the number of complaints filed and the basis on 
 which the complaints were filed;
 (B) the number of investigations undertaken as a 
 result of such complaints; and
 (C) the disposition of all such investigations.
 (c) Enforcement by Private Persons.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Civil action.--
 (i) In suit.--A complainant under 
 subsection (b) may commence a civil action to 
 obtain appropriate relief with respect to an 
 alleged violation of subsection (a), or for 
 breach of a conciliation agreement under 
 subsection (b), in an appropriate district 
 court of the United States or State court--
 (I) not sooner than the earliest 
 of--
 (aa) the date a 
 conciliation agreement is 
 reached under subsection (b);
 (bb) the date of a final 
 disposition of a complaint 
 under subsection (b); or
 (cc) 180 days after the 
 first day of the alleged 
 violation; and
 (II) not later than 2 years after 
 the final day of the alleged violation.
 (ii) Statute of limitations.--The 
 computation of such 2-year period shall not 
 include any time during which an administrative 
 proceeding (including investigation or 
 conciliation) under subsection (b) was pending 
 with respect to a complaint under such 
 subsection.
 (B) Barring suit.--If the Director has obtained a 
 conciliation agreement under subsection (b) regarding 
 an alleged violation of subsection (a), no action may 
 be filed under this paragraph by the complainant 
 involved with respect to the alleged violation except 
 for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an 
 agreement.
 (2) Relief which may be granted.--
 (A) In general.--In a civil action under paragraph 
 (1), if the court finds that a violation of subsection 
 (a) or breach of a conciliation agreement has occurred, 
 the court may award to the plaintiff actual and 
 punitive damages, and may grant as relief, as the court 
 determines to be appropriate, any permanent or 
 temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or 
 other order (including an order enjoining the defendant 
 from engaging in a practice violating subsection (a) or 
 ordering such affirmative action as may be 
 appropriate).
 (B) Fees and costs.--In a civil action under 
 paragraph (1), the court, in its discretion, may allow 
 the prevailing party, other than the United States, a 
 reasonable attorney's fee and costs. The United States 
 shall be liable for such fees and costs to the same 
 extent as a private person.
 (3) Intervention by attorney general.--Upon timely 
 application, the Attorney General may intervene in a civil 
 action under paragraph (1), if the Attorney General certifies 
 that the case is of general public importance.
 (d) Enforcement by the Attorney General.--
 (1) Commencement of actions.--
 (A) Pattern or practice cases.--The Attorney 
 General may commence a civil action in any appropriate 
 district court of the United States if the Attorney 
 General has reasonable cause to believe that any health 
 care provider covered by subsection (a)--
 (i) is engaged in a pattern or practice 
 that violates such subsection; or
 (ii) is engaged in a violation of such 
 subsection that raises an issue of significant 
 public importance.
 (B) Cases by referral.--The Director may determine, 
 based on a pattern of complaints, a pattern of 
 violations, a review of data reported by a health care 
 provider covered by subsection (a), or any other means, 
 that there is reasonable cause to believe a health care 
 provider is engaged in a pattern or practice that 
 violates subsection (a). If the Director makes such a 
 determination, the Director shall refer the related 
 findings to the Attorney General. If the Attorney 
 General finds that such reasonable cause exists, the 
 Attorney General may commence a civil action in any 
 appropriate district court of the United States.
 (2) Enforcement of subpoenas.--The Attorney General, on 
 behalf of the Director, or another party at whose request a 
 subpoena is issued under this subsection, may enforce such 
 subpoena in appropriate proceedings in the district court of 
 the United States for the district in which the person to whom 
 the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts 
 business.
 (3) Relief which may be granted in civil actions.--
 (A) In general.--In a civil action under paragraph 
 (1), the court--
 (i) may award such preventive relief, 
 including a permanent or temporary injunction, 
 temporary restraining order, or other order 
 against the person responsible for a violation 
 of subsection (a) as is necessary to assure the 
 full enjoyment of the rights granted by this 
 subsection;
 (ii) may award such other relief as the 
 court determines to be appropriate, including 
 monetary damages, to aggrieved persons; and
 (iii) may, to vindicate the public 
 interest, assess punitive damages against the 
 respondent--
 (I) in an amount not exceeding 
 $500,000, for a first violation; and
 (II) in an amount not exceeding 
 $1,000,000, for any subsequent 
 violation.
 (B) Fees and costs.--In a civil action under this 
 subsection, the court, in its discretion, may allow the 
 prevailing party, other than the United States, a 
 reasonable attorney's fee and costs. The United States 
 shall be liable for such fees and costs to the extent 
 provided by section 2412 of title 28, United States 
 Code.
 (4) Intervention in civil actions.--Upon timely 
 application, any person may intervene in a civil action 
 commenced by the Attorney General under paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 if the action involves an alleged violation of subsection (a) 
 with respect to which such person is an aggrieved person 
 (including a person who is a complainant under subsection (b)) 
 or a conciliation agreement to which such person is a party.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Aggrieved person.--The term ``aggrieved person'' 
 means--
 (A) a person who believes that the person was or 
 will be injured in violation of subsection (a); or
 (B) the personal representative or estate of a 
 deceased person who was injured in violation of 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director for 
 Civil Rights and Health Equity of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (3) Disability.--The term ``disability'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102).
 (4) Conciliation.--The term ``conciliation'' means the 
 attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the 
 investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations 
 involving the complainant, the respondent, and the Secretary.
 (5) Conciliation agreement.--The term ``conciliation 
 agreement'' means a written agreement setting forth the 
 resolution of the issues in conciliation.
 (6) Individually identifiable health information.--The term 
 ``individually identifiable health information'' means any 
 information, including demographic information collected from 
 an individual--
 (A) that is created or received by a health care 
 provider covered by subsection (a), health plan, 
 employer, or health care clearinghouse;
 (B) that relates to the past, present, or future 
 physical or mental health or condition of, the 
 provision of health care to, or the past, present, or 
 future payment for the provision of health care to, the 
 individual; and
 (C)(i) that identifies the individual; or
 (ii) with respect to which there is a reasonable 
 basis to believe that the information can be used to 
 identify the individual.
 (7) Provision of inequitable health care.--The term 
 ``provision of inequitable health care'' means the provision of 
 any health care service, by a health care provider in a manner 
 that--
 (A) fails to meet a high-quality care standard, 
 meaning the health care provider fails to--
 (i) avoid harm to patients as a result of 
 the health services that are intended to help 
 the patient;
 (ii) provide health services based on 
 scientific knowledge to all and to all patients 
 who benefit;
 (iii) refrain from providing services to 
 patients not likely to benefit;
 (iv) provide care that is responsive to 
 patient preferences, needs, and values; and
 (v) avoids waits or delays in care; and
 (B) is discriminatory in intent or effect based at 
 least in part on a basis specified in subsection (a).
 (8) Respondent.--The term ``respondent'' means the person 
 or other entity accused in a complaint of a violation of 
 subsection (a).
 (9) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (10) Social determinants of health.--The term ``social 
 determinants of health'' means conditions in the environments 
 in which individuals live, work, attend school, and worship, 
 that affect a wide range of health, functioning, and quality-
 of-life outcomes and risks.
 (f) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as repealing or limiting the effect of title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), section 1557 of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18116), section 
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), or the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.).

SEC. 4506. FEDERAL HEALTH EQUITY COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment of Commission.--
 (1) In general.--There is established the Federal Health 
 Equity Commission (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Commission'').
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed 
 of--
 (i) 8 voting members appointed under 
 subparagraph (B); and
 (ii) the nonvoting, ex officio members 
 listed in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Voting members.--Not more than 4 of the members 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i) shall at any one time 
 be of the same political party. Such members shall have 
 recognized expertise in and personal experience with 
 racial and ethnic health inequities, health care needs 
 of vulnerable and marginalized populations, and health 
 equity as a vehicle for improving health status and 
 health outcomes. Such members shall be appointed to the 
 Commission as follows:
 (i) 4 members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the President.
 (ii) 2 members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the President pro tempore of the 
 Senate, upon the recommendations of the 
 majority leader and the minority leader of the 
 Senate. Each member appointed to the Commission 
 under this clause shall be appointed from a 
 different political party.
 (iii) 2 members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives upon the recommendations of the 
 majority leader and the minority leader of the 
 House of Representatives. Each member appointed 
 to the Commission under this clause shall be 
 appointed from a different political party.
 (C) Ex officio member.--The Commission shall have 
 the following nonvoting, ex officio members:
 (i) The Director for Civil Rights and 
 Health Equity of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (ii) The Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
 Minority Health of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (iii) The Director of the National 
 Institute on Minority Health and Health 
 Disparities.
 (iv) The Chairperson of the Advisory 
 Committee on Minority Health established under 
 section 1707(c) of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(c)).
 (3) Terms.--The term of office of each member appointed 
 under paragraph (2)(B) of the Commission shall be 6 years.
 (4) Chairperson; vice chairperson.--
 (A) Chairperson.--The President shall, with the 
 concurrence of a majority of the members of the 
 Commission appointed under paragraph (2)(B), designate 
 a Chairperson from among the members of the Commission 
 appointed under such paragraph.
 (B) Vice chairperson.--
 (i) Designation.--The Speaker of the House 
 of Representatives shall, in consultation with 
 the majority leaders and the minority leaders 
 of the Senate and the House of Representatives 
 and with the concurrence of a majority of the 
 members of the Commission appointed under 
 paragraph (2)(B), designate a Vice Chairperson 
 from among the members of the Commission 
 appointed under such paragraph. The Vice 
 Chairperson may not be a member of the same 
 political party as the Chairperson.
 (ii) Duty.--The Vice Chairperson shall act 
 in place of the Chairperson in the absence of 
 the Chairperson.
 (5) Removal of members.--The President may remove a member 
 of the Commission only for neglect of duty or malfeasance in 
 office.
 (6) Quorum.--A majority of members of the Commission 
 appointed under paragraph (2)(B) shall constitute a quorum of 
 the Commission, but a lesser number of members may hold 
 hearings.
 (b) Duties of the Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall--
 (A) monitor and report on the implementation of 
 this Act; and
 (B) investigate, monitor, and report on progress 
 towards health equity and the elimination of health 
 disparities.
 (2) Annual report.--The Commission shall--
 (A) submit to the President and Congress at least 
 one report annually on health equity and health 
 disparities; and
 (B) include in such report--
 (i) a description of actions taken by the 
 Department of Health and Human Services and any 
 other Federal agency related to health equity 
 or health disparities; and
 (ii) recommendations on ensuring equitable 
 health care and eliminating health disparities.
 (c) Powers.--
 (1) Hearings.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission or, at the 
 direction of the Commission, any subcommittee or member 
 of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out 
 this section, as the Commission or the subcommittee or 
 member considers advisable--
 (i) hold such hearings, meet and act at 
 such times and places, take such testimony, 
 receive such evidence, and administer such 
 oaths; and
 (ii) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the 
 attendance and testimony of such witnesses and 
 the production of such books, records, 
 correspondence, memoranda, papers, documents, 
 tapes, and materials.
 (B) Limitation on hearings.--The Commission may 
 hold a hearing under subparagraph (A)(i) only if the 
 hearing is approved--
 (i) by a majority of the members of the 
 Commission appointed under subsection 
 (a)(2)(B); or
 (ii) by a majority of such members present 
 at a meeting when a quorum is present.
 (2) Issuance and enforcement of subpoenas.--
 (A) Issuance.--A subpoena issued under paragraph 
 (1) shall--
 (i) bear the signature of the Chairperson 
 of the Commission; and
 (ii) be served by any person or class of 
 persons designated by the Chairperson for that 
 purpose.
 (B) Enforcement.--In the case of contumacy or 
 failure to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), 
 the United States district court for the district in 
 which the subpoenaed person resides, is served, or may 
 be found may issue an order requiring the person to 
 appear at any designated place to testify or to produce 
 documentary or other evidence.
 (C) Noncompliance.--Any failure to obey the order 
 of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt 
 of court.
 (3) Witness allowances and fees.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1821 of title 28, United 
 States Code, shall apply to a witness requested or 
 subpoenaed to appear at a hearing of the Commission.
 (B) Expenses.--The per diem and mileage allowances 
 for a witness shall be paid from funds available to pay 
 the expenses of the Commission.
 (4) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions 
 as other agencies of the Federal Government.
 (5) Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of 
 gifts or donations of services or property.
 (d) Administrative Provisions.--
 (1) Staff.--
 (A) Director.--There shall be a full-time staff 
 director for the Commission who shall--
 (i) serve as the administrative head of the 
 Commission; and
 (ii) be appointed by the Chairperson with 
 the concurrence of the Vice Chairperson.
 (B) Other personnel.--The Commission may--
 (i) appoint such other personnel as it 
 considers advisable, subject to the provisions 
 of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service, and 
 the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III 
 of chapter 53 of that title relating to 
 classification and General Schedule pay rates; 
 and
 (ii) may procure temporary and intermittent 
 services under section 3109(b) of title 5, 
 United States Code, at rates for individuals 
 not in excess of the daily equivalent paid for 
 positions at the maximum rate for GS-15 of the 
 General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Compensation of members.--
 (A) Non-federal employees.--Each member of the 
 Commission who is not an officer or employee of the 
 Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal 
 to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay 
 prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under 
 section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each 
 day (including travel time) during which the member is 
 engaged in the performance of the duties of the 
 Commission.
 (B) Federal employees.--Each member of the 
 Commission who is an officer or employee of the Federal 
 Government shall serve without compensation in addition 
 to the compensation received for the services of the 
 member as an office or employee of the Federal 
 Government.
 (C) Travel expenses.--A member of the Commission 
 shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in 
 lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an 
 employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 
 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the 
 home or regular place of business of the member in the 
 performance of the duties of the Commission.
 (3) Cooperation.--The Commission may secure directly from 
 any Federal department or agency such information as the 
 Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act. Upon 
 request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such 
 department or agency shall furnish such information to the 
 Commission.
 (e) Permanent Commission.--Section 1013 of title 5, United States 
Code, shall not apply to the Commission.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated for fiscal year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter such 
sums as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.

SEC. 4507. GRANTS FOR HOSPITALS TO PROMOTE EQUITABLE HEALTH CARE AND 
 OUTCOMES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall award grants to 
hospitals to promote equitable health care treatment and services, and 
reduce disparities in care and outcomes.
 (b) Consultation.--In establishing the criteria for grants under 
this section and evaluating applications for such grants, the Secretary 
shall consult with the Director for Civil Rights and Health Equity of 
the Department of Health and Human Services.
 (c) Use of Funds.--A hospital shall use funds received from a grant 
under this section to establish or expand programs to provide equitable 
health care to all patients and to ensure equitable health care 
outcomes. Such uses may include--
 (1) providing explicit and implicit bias training to 
 medical providers and staff;
 (2) providing translation or interpretation services for 
 patients;
 (3) recruiting and training a diverse workforce;
 (4) tracking data related to care and outcomes; and
 (5) training on cultural sensitivity.
 (d) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary 
shall give priority to hospitals that have received disproportionate 
share hospital payments under section 1886(r) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(r)) or section 1923 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
4) with respect to fiscal year 2023.
 (e) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Grants awarded under this section 
shall be used to supplement, not supplant, any nongovernment efforts, 
or other Federal, State, or local funds provided to a recipient.
 (f) Equitable Health Care Defined.--The term ``equitable health 
care'' has the meaning given such term in section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(viii)(XIII)(cc) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(b)(3)(B)(viii)(XIII)(cc)), as added by section 4502(a).
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

 Subtitle G--Investing in Equity

SEC. 4601. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Advisory council.--The term ``Advisory Council'' means 
 the Pay for Equity Council convened under section 4603.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (3) Strategy.--The term ``Strategy'' means the Pay for 
 Equity Strategy set forth under section 4602.

SEC. 4602. STRATEGY TO INCENTIVIZE HEALTH EQUITY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the heads of 
other appropriate Federal agencies, shall develop jointly with the 
Advisory Council and submit to the Committee on Finance of the Senate 
and the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Ways and 
Means of the House of Representatives, and make publicly available on 
the internet website of the Department of Health and Human Services, a 
Pay for Equity Strategy.
 (b) Contents.--The Strategy shall establish goals for Federal 
programs, including those authorized under titles XVIII and XIX of the 
Social Security Act, to incentivize health equity, which may include at 
least--
 (1) incorporating measures of equity into all payment 
 models by 2026;
 (2) tying a percentage of reimbursement in value-based 
 payment models to equity measure performance by 2029; and
 (3) increasing the number of safety net providers 
 participating in value-based payment by a set percentage by 
 2031.
 (c) Duties of the Secretary.--The Secretary, in carrying out 
subsection (a), shall oversee the following:
 (1) Collecting and making publicly available information 
 submitted by the Advisory Council.
 (2) Coordinating and assessing existing Federal Government 
 programs and activities to assess capacity to meet equity 
 goals.
 (3) Providing technical assistance, as appropriate, such as 
 disseminating identified best practices and information sharing 
 based on reports developed as a result of this subtitle.
 (d) Initial Strategy; Updates.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, develop, publish, and submit to the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
 and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of 
 Representatives the strategy outlined in subsection (a); and
 (2) biennially update, publish, and submit to Congress an 
 updated strategy to--
 (A) reflect new developments, challenges, 
 opportunities, and solutions; and
 (B) review progress and, based on the results of 
 such review, recommend priority actions for improving 
 the implementation of such recommendations, as 
 appropriate.
 (e) Process for Public Input.--The Secretary shall establish a 
process for public input to inform the development of, and updates to, 
the Strategy, including a process for the public to submit 
recommendations to the Advisory Council and an opportunity for public 
comment on the proposed Strategy.

SEC. 4603. PAY FOR EQUITY ADVISORY COUNCIL.

 (a) Convening.--The Secretary shall convene a Pay for Equity 
Advisory Council to advise and provide recommendations, including 
identified best practices, to the Secretary on the Pay for Equity 
Strategy.
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) In general.--The members of the Advisory Council shall 
 consist of--
 (A) the appointed members under paragraph (2); and
 (B) the Federal members under paragraph (3).
 (2) Appointed members.--In addition to the Federal members 
 under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall appoint not more than 
 15 voting members of the Advisory Council who are not 
 representatives of Federal departments or agencies and who 
 shall include at least 1 representative of each of the 
 following:
 (A) Beneficiaries of Medicare and Medicaid.
 (B) Safety net health care providers.
 (C) Value-based payment experts.
 (D) Other members with expertise and lived 
 experience the Secretary deems appropriate.
 (3) Federal members.--The Federal members of the Advisory 
 Council, who shall be nonvoting members, shall consist of the 
 following:
 (A) The Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services (or the Administrator's designee).
 (B) The Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration.
 (4) Diverse representation.--The Secretary shall ensure 
 that the membership of the Advisory Council reflects the 
 diversity of individuals impacted by Federal health payment 
 programs.
 (c) Meetings.--The Advisory Council shall meet quarterly during the 
1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and at 
least 3 times during each year thereafter. Meetings of the Advisory 
Council shall be open to the public.

 TITLE V--IMPROVING HEALTH OUTCOMES FOR WOMEN, GENDER-DIVERSE PEOPLE, 
 CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES

 Subtitle A--Underserved Communities

SEC. 5001. GRANTS TO PROMOTE HEALTH FOR UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

 Part Q of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280h et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399Z-3. GRANTS TO PROMOTE HEALTH FOR UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and 
other Federal officials determined appropriate by the Secretary, may 
award grants to eligible entities--
 ``(1) to promote health for medically underserved 
 communities, such as racial and ethnic minority women, racial 
 and ethnic minority children, adolescents, and lesbian, gay, 
 bisexual, transgender, queer, nonbinary, gender-nonconforming, 
 or questioning communities; and
 ``(2) to strengthen health outreach initiatives in 
 medically underserved communities, including linguistically 
 isolated populations.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--Grants awarded pursuant to subsection (a) may 
be used to support the activities of community health workers, 
including such activities--
 ``(1) to provide education and outreach regarding 
 enrollment in health insurance including the State Children's 
 Health Insurance Program under title XXI of the Social Security 
 Act, Medicare under title XVIII of such Act, and Medicaid under 
 title XIX of such Act;
 ``(2) to provide education and outreach in a community 
 setting regarding health problems prevalent among medically 
 underserved communities, and especially among racial and ethnic 
 minority women, racial and ethnic minority children, 
 adolescents, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, 
 nonbinary, gender-nonconforming, or questioning communities;
 ``(3) to provide education and experiential learning 
 opportunities and target risk factors and healthy behaviors 
 that impede or contribute to achieving positive health 
 outcomes, including--
 ``(A) healthy nutrition;
 ``(B) physical activity;
 ``(C) overweight or obesity;
 ``(D) tobacco use, including the use of e-
 cigarettes and vaping;
 ``(E) alcohol and substance use;
 ``(F) injury and violence;
 ``(G) sexual health;
 ``(H) mental health;
 ``(I) musculoskeletal health and arthritis;
 ``(J) prenatal and postnatal care;
 ``(K) dental and oral health;
 ``(L) understanding informed consent;
 ``(M) stigma; and
 ``(N) environmental hazards;
 ``(4) to promote community wellness and awareness; and
 ``(5) to provide education and refer target populations to 
 appropriate health care agencies and community-based programs 
 and organizations in order to increase access to quality health 
 care services, including preventive health services.
 ``(c) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible entity that desires to 
 receive a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
 accompanied by such additional information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(2) Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) describe the activities for which assistance 
 under this section is sought;
 ``(B) contain an assurance that, with respect to 
 each community health worker program receiving funds 
 under the grant awarded, such program provides in-
 language training and supervision to community health 
 workers to enable such workers to provide authorized 
 program activities in (at least) the most commonly used 
 languages within a particular geographic region;
 ``(C) contain an assurance that the applicant will 
 evaluate the effectiveness of community health worker 
 programs receiving funds under the grant;
 ``(D) contain an assurance that each community 
 health worker program receiving funds under the grant 
 will provide culturally competent services in the 
 linguistic context most appropriate for the individuals 
 served by the program;
 ``(E) contain a plan to document and disseminate 
 project descriptions and results to other States and 
 organizations as identified by the Secretary; and
 ``(F) describe plans to enhance the capacity of 
 individuals to utilize health services and health-
 related social services under Federal, State, and local 
 programs by--
 ``(i) assisting individuals in establishing 
 eligibility under the programs and in receiving 
 the services or other benefits of the programs; 
 and
 ``(ii) providing other services, as the 
 Secretary determines to be appropriate, which 
 may include transportation and translation 
 services.
 ``(d) Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall give priority to those applicants--
 ``(1) who propose to target geographic areas that--
 ``(A)(i) have a high percentage of residents who 
 are uninsured or underinsured (if the targeted 
 geographic area is located in a State that has elected 
 to make medical assistance available under section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the Social Security Act to 
 individuals described in such section);
 ``(ii) have a high percentage of underinsured 
 residents in a particular geographic area (if the 
 targeted geographic area is located in a State that has 
 not so elected); or
 ``(iii) have a high number of households 
 experiencing extreme poverty; and
 ``(B) have a high percentage of families for whom 
 English is not their primary language or including 
 smaller limited English-proficient communities within 
 the region that are not otherwise reached by 
 linguistically appropriate health services;
 ``(2) with experience in providing health or health-related 
 social services to individuals who are underserved with respect 
 to such services; and
 ``(3) with documented community activity and experience 
 with community health workers.
 ``(e) Collaboration With Academic Institutions.--The Secretary 
shall encourage community health worker programs receiving funds under 
this section to collaborate with academic institutions, including 
minority-serving institutions. Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to require such collaboration.
 ``(f) Quality Assurance and Cost-Effectiveness.--The Secretary 
shall establish guidelines for ensuring the quality of the training and 
supervision of community health workers under the programs funded under 
this section and for ensuring the cost-effectiveness of such programs.
 ``(g) Monitoring.--The Secretary shall monitor community health 
worker programs identified in approved applications and shall determine 
whether such programs are in compliance with the guidelines established 
under subsection (f).
 ``(h) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical 
assistance to community health worker programs identified in approved 
applications with respect to planning, developing, and operating 
programs under the grant.
 ``(i) Report to Congress.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 4 years after the date on 
 which the Secretary first awards grants under subsection (a), 
 the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report regarding the 
 grant project.
 ``(2) Contents.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 ``(A) A description of the programs for which grant 
 funds were used.
 ``(B) The number of individuals served.
 ``(C) An evaluation of--
 ``(i) the effectiveness of these programs;
 ``(ii) the cost of these programs; and
 ``(iii) the impact of these programs on the 
 health outcomes of the community residents.
 ``(D) Recommendations for sustaining the community 
 health worker programs developed or assisted under this 
 section.
 ``(E) Recommendations regarding training to enhance 
 career opportunities for community health workers.
 ``(j) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Community health worker.--The term `community health 
 worker' means an individual who promotes health or nutrition 
 within the community in which the individual resides--
 ``(A) by serving as a liaison between communities 
 and health care agencies;
 ``(B) by providing guidance and social assistance 
 to community residents;
 ``(C) by enhancing community residents' ability to 
 effectively communicate with health care providers;
 ``(D) by providing culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate health or nutrition education;
 ``(E) by advocating for individual and community 
 health, including dental, oral, mental, and 
 environmental health, or nutrition needs;
 ``(F) by taking into consideration the needs of the 
 communities served, including the prevalence rates of 
 risk factors that impede achieving positive healthy 
 outcomes among pregnant, birthing, and postpartum 
 people and children, especially among racial and ethnic 
 minority pregnant, birthing, and postpartum people and 
 children; or
 ``(G) by providing referral and followup services.
 ``(2) Community setting.--The term `community setting' 
 means a home or a community organization that serves a 
 population.
 ``(3) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) a unit of State, territorial, local, or 
 Tribal government (including a federally recognized 
 Tribe or Alaska Native village); or
 ``(B) a community-based organization.
 ``(4) Medically underserved community.--The term `medically 
 underserved community' means a community--
 ``(A) that has a substantial number of individuals 
 who are members of a medically underserved population, 
 as defined by section 330(b)(3);
 ``(B) a significant portion of which is a health 
 professional shortage area as designated under section 
 332; and
 ``(C) that includes populations that are 
 linguistically isolated, such as geographic areas with 
 a shortage of health professionals able to provide 
 linguistically appropriate services.
 ``(5) Support.--The term `support' means the provision of 
 training, supervision, and materials needed to effectively 
 deliver the services described in subsection (b), reimbursement 
 for services, and other benefits.
 ``(k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $15,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.

 Subtitle B--Pregnancy Screening

SEC. 5101. PREGNANCY INTENTION SCREENING INITIATIVE DEMONSTRATION 
 PROGRAM.

 Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-8. PREGNANCY INTENTION SCREENING INITIATIVE DEMONSTRATION 
 PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Program Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
establish a demonstration program to facilitate the clinical adoption 
of pregnancy intention screening initiatives by health care and social 
services providers.
 ``(b) Grants.--The Secretary may carry out the demonstration 
program through awarding grants to eligible entities to implement 
pregnancy intention screening initiatives, collect data, and evaluate 
such initiatives.
 ``(c) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under this 
section, an entity shall--
 ``(1) provide non-directive, comprehensive, medically 
 accurate information; and
 ``(2) be a community-based organization, voluntary health 
 organization, public health department, community health 
 center, or other interested public or private primary, 
 behavioral, or other health care or social service provider or 
 organization.
 ``(d) Pregnancy Intention Screening Initiative.--For purposes of 
this section, the term `pregnancy intention screening initiative' means 
any initiative by an eligible entity to routinely screen people with 
respect to their pregnancy intentions and goals to either prevent 
unintended pregnancies or improve the likelihood of healthy 
pregnancies, in order to better provide health care that meets the 
contraceptive or pre-pregnancy needs and goals of such people.
 ``(e) Evaluation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall, by grant or contract, and after consultation as 
 described in paragraph (2), conduct an evaluation of the 
 demonstration program, with respect to pregnancy intention 
 screening initiatives, conducted under this section. Such 
 evaluation shall include:
 ``(A) Assessment of the implementation of pregnancy 
 intention screening protocols among a diverse group of 
 patients and providers, including collecting data on 
 the experiences and outcomes for diverse patient 
 populations in a variety of clinical settings.
 ``(B) Analysis of outcome measures that will 
 facilitate effective and widespread adoption of such 
 protocols by health care providers for inquiring about 
 and responding to pregnancy goals of people with both 
 contraceptive and pre-pregnancy care.
 ``(C) Consideration of health inequities among the 
 population served.
 ``(D) Assessment of the equitable and voluntary 
 application of such initiatives to minority and 
 medically underserved communities.
 ``(E) Assessment of the training, capacity, and 
 ongoing technical assistance needed for providers to 
 effectively implement such pregnancy intention 
 screening protocols.
 ``(F) Assessment of whether referral systems for 
 selected protocols follow evidence-based standards that 
 ensure access to comprehensive health services and 
 appropriate follow-up care.
 ``(G) Measuring through rigorous methods the effect 
 of such initiatives on key health outcomes.
 ``(2) Consultation with independent, expert advisory 
 panel.--In conducting the evaluation under paragraph (1), the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 shall consult with physicians, physician assistants, advanced 
 practice registered nurses, nurse midwives, and other health 
 care providers who specialize in women's health, and other 
 experts in public health, clinical practice, program 
 evaluation, and research.
 ``(3) Report.--Not later than one year after the last day 
 of the demonstration program under this section, the Director 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall--
 ``(A) submit to Congress a report on the results of 
 the evaluation conducted under paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) make the report publicly available.
 ``(f) Funding.--
 ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 section, there is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(2) Limitation.--Not more than 20 percent of funds 
 appropriated to carry out this section pursuant to paragraph 
 (1) for a fiscal year may be used for purposes of the 
 evaluation under subsection (e).''.

SEC. 5102. BIRTH DEFECTS PREVENTION, RISK REDUCTION, AND AWARENESS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish and implement a 
birth defects prevention and public awareness program, consisting of 
the activities described in subsections (b) and (c).
 (b) Nationwide Media Campaign.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall conduct or support a nationwide media campaign to 
increase awareness among health care providers and at-risk populations 
about pregnancy and breastfeeding information services.
 (c) Grants for Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Information Services.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
 Secretary shall award grants to State or regional agencies or 
 organizations for any of the following:
 (A) Information services.--The provision of, or 
 campaigns to increase awareness about, pregnancy and 
 breastfeeding information services.
 (B) Surveillance and research.--The conduct or 
 support of--
 (i) surveillance of or research on--
 (I) maternal exposures and maternal 
 health conditions that may influence 
 the risk of birth defects, prematurity, 
 or other adverse pregnancy outcomes; 
 and
 (II) maternal exposures that may 
 influence health risks to a breastfed 
 infant; or
 (ii) networking to facilitate surveillance 
 or research described in this subparagraph.
 (2) Preference for certain states.--The Secretary, in 
 making any grant under this subsection, shall give preference 
 to States, otherwise equally qualified, that have pregnancy and 
 breastfeeding information services in place.
 (3) Matching funds.--The Secretary may only award a grant 
 under this subsection to a State or regional agency or 
 organization that agrees, with respect to the costs to be 
 incurred in carrying out the grant activities, to make 
 available (directly or through donations from public or private 
 entities) non-Federal funds toward such costs in an amount 
 equal to not less than 25 percent of the amount of the grant.
 (4) Coordination.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
 activities funded through a grant under this subsection are 
 coordinated, to the maximum extent practicable, with other 
 birth defects prevention and environmental health activities of 
 the Federal Government, including with respect to pediatric 
 environmental health specialty units and children's 
 environmental health centers.
 (d) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall provide for an evaluation of 
pregnancy and breastfeeding information services carried out by States 
to identify efficient and effective models of--
 (1) providing information;
 (2) raising awareness and increasing knowledge about birth 
 defects prevention measures and targeting education to at-risk 
 groups;
 (3) modifying risk behaviors; or
 (4) other outcome measures as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Maternal.--The term ``maternal'' refers to people who 
 are pregnant or breastfeeding.
 (2) Pregnancy and breastfeeding information services.--The 
 term ``pregnancy and breastfeeding information services'' 
 includes only--
 (A) information services to provide accurate, 
 evidence-based, clinical information regarding maternal 
 exposures during pregnancy or breastfeeding that may be 
 associated with birth defects, health risks to a 
 breastfed infant, or other health risks, such as 
 exposures to medications, chemicals, infections, 
 foodborne pathogens, illnesses, nutrition, lifestyle, 
 or climate- and weather-related factors;
 (B) the provision of accurate, evidence-based 
 information weighing risks of exposures during 
 breastfeeding against the benefits of breastfeeding; 
 and
 (C) the provision of information described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) through counselors, websites, 
 fact sheets, telephonic or electronic communication, 
 community outreach efforts, or other appropriate means.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated--
 (1) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 (2) $6,000,000 for fiscal year 2026;
 (3) $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2027;
 (4) $8,000,000 for fiscal year 2028; and
 (5) $9,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.

 Subtitle C--Pregnancy-related Care

SEC. 5201. COMMUNITY ACCESS, RESOURCES, AND EMPOWERMENT FOR MOMS.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Community 
Access, Resources, and Empowerment for Moms Act'' or the ``CARE for 
Moms Act''.
 (b) Improving Federal Efforts With Respect to Prevention of 
Maternal Mortality.--
 (1) Funding for state-based perinatal quality 
 collaboratives development and sustainability.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services, acting through the Division of 
 Reproductive Health of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention (referred to in this paragraph as the 
 ``Secretary''), shall establish a grant program to be 
 known as the ``State-Based Perinatal Quality 
 Collaborative Grant Program'', under which the 
 Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities for 
 the purpose of development and sustainability of State-
 based perinatal quality collaboratives in every State, 
 the District of Columbia, and eligible territories, in 
 order to measurably improve perinatal care and 
 perinatal health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum 
 women and their infants.
 (B) Grant amounts.--Grants awarded under this 
 paragraph shall be in amounts not to exceed $250,000 
 per year, for the duration of the grant period.
 (C) State-based perinatal quality collaborative 
 defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
 ``State-based perinatal quality collaborative'' means a 
 network of teams that--
 (i) is multidisciplinary in nature and 
 includes the full range of perinatal and 
 maternity care providers;
 (ii) works to improve measurable outcomes 
 for maternal and infant health by advancing 
 evidence-informed clinical practices using 
 quality improvement principles;
 (iii) works with hospital-based or 
 outpatient facility-based clinical teams, 
 experts, and stakeholders, including patients 
 and families, to spread best practices and 
 optimize resources to improve perinatal care 
 and outcomes;
 (iv) employs strategies that include the 
 use of the collaborative learning model to 
 provide opportunities for hospitals and 
 clinical teams to collaborate on improvement 
 strategies, rapid-response data to provide 
 timely feedback to hospital and other clinical 
 teams to track progress, and quality 
 improvement science to provide support and 
 coaching to hospital and clinical teams;
 (v) has the goal of improving population-
 level outcomes in maternal and infant health; 
 and
 (vi) has the goal of improving outcomes of 
 all birthing people, through the coordination, 
 integration, and collaboration across birth 
 settings.
 (D) Authorization of appropriations.--For purposes 
 of carrying out this paragraph, there is authorized to 
 be appropriated $35,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2025 through 2029.
 (2) Expansion of medicaid and chip coverage for pregnant 
 and postpartum women.--
 (A) Requiring coverage of oral health services for 
 pregnant and postpartum women.--
 (i) Medicaid.--Section 1905 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by 
 section 4251(d)(3)(A), is amended--
 (I) in subsection (a)(4)--
 (aa) by striking ``; and 
 (D)'' and inserting ``; (D)'';
 (bb) by striking ``; and 
 (E)'' and inserting ``; (E)'';
 (cc) by striking ``; and 
 (F)'' and inserting ``; (F)''; 
 and
 (dd) by striking the 
 semicolon at the end and 
 inserting ``; and (G) oral 
 health services for pregnant 
 and postpartum women (as 
 defined in subsection (nn));''; 
 and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(nn) Oral Health Services for Pregnant and Postpartum Women.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the term 
 `oral health services for pregnant and postpartum women' means 
 dental services necessary to prevent disease and promote oral 
 health, restore oral structures to health and function, and 
 treat emergency conditions that are furnished to a woman during 
 pregnancy (or during the 1-year period beginning on the last 
 day of the pregnancy).
 ``(2) Coverage requirements.--To satisfy the requirement to 
 provide oral health services for pregnant and postpartum women, 
 a State shall, at a minimum, provide coverage for preventive, 
 diagnostic, periodontal, and restorative care consistent with 
 recommendations for perinatal oral health care and dental care 
 during pregnancy from the American Academy of Pediatric 
 Dentistry and the American College of Obstetricians and 
 Gynecologists.''.
 (ii) CHIP.--Section 2103(c)(6) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(6)) is 
 amended--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) by inserting ``or a 
 targeted low-income pregnant 
 woman'' after ``targeted low-
 income child''; and
 (bb) by inserting ``, and, 
 in the case of a targeted low-
 income child who is pregnant or 
 a targeted low-income pregnant 
 woman, satisfy the coverage 
 requirements specified in 
 section 1905(nn)'' after 
 ``emergency conditions''; and
 (II) in subparagraph (B), by 
 inserting ``(but only if, in the case 
 of a targeted low-income child who is 
 pregnant or a targeted low-income 
 pregnant woman, the benchmark dental 
 benefit package satisfies the coverage 
 requirements specified in section 
 1905(nn))'' after ``subparagraph (C)''.
 (B) Requiring 12-month continuous coverage of full 
 benefits for pregnant and postpartum individuals under 
 medicaid and chip.--
 (i) Medicaid.--Section 1902 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
 (I) in subsection (a)--
 (aa) in paragraph (86), by 
 striking ``and'' at the end;
 (bb) in paragraph (87), by 
 striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (cc) by inserting after 
 paragraph (87) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(88) provide that the State plan is in compliance with 
 subsection (e)(16).''; and
 (II) in subsection (e)(16)--
 (aa) in subparagraph (A), 
 by striking ``At the option of 
 the State, the State plan (or 
 waiver of such State plan) may 
 provide'' and inserting ``A 
 State plan (or waiver of such 
 State plan) shall provide'';
 (bb) in subparagraph (B), 
 in the matter preceding clause 
 (i), by striking ``by a State 
 making an election under this 
 paragraph'' and inserting 
 ``under a State plan (or a 
 waiver of such State plan)''; 
 and
 (cc) by striking 
 subparagraph (C).
 (ii) CHIP.--
 (I) In general.--Section 
 2107(e)(1)(J) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)(J)), as 
 inserted by section 9822 of the 
 American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 
 (Public Law 117-2), is amended to read 
 as follows:
 ``(J) Paragraphs (5) and (16) of section 1902(e) 
 (relating to the requirement to provide medical 
 assistance under the State plan or waiver consisting of 
 full benefits during pregnancy and throughout the 12-
 month postpartum period under title XIX).''.
 (II) Conforming.--Section 
 2112(d)(2)(A) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ll(d)(2)(A)) is 
 amended by striking ``the month in 
 which the 60-day period'' and all that 
 follows through ``pursuant to section 
 2107(e)(1),''.
 (C) Maintenance of effort.--
 (i) Medicaid.--Section 1902(l) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(l)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) During the period that begins on the date of enactment of 
this paragraph and ends on the date that is 5 years after such date of 
enactment, as a condition for receiving any Federal payments under 
section 1903(a) for calendar quarters occurring during such period, a 
State shall not have in effect, with respect to women who are eligible 
for medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of such 
plan on the basis of being pregnant or having been pregnant, 
eligibility standards, methodologies, or procedures under the State 
plan or waiver that are more restrictive than the eligibility 
standards, methodologies, or procedures, respectively, under such plan 
or waiver that are in effect on the date of enactment of this 
paragraph.''.
 (ii) CHIP.--Section 2105(d) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(d)) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) In eligibility standards for targeted low-income 
 pregnant women.--During the period that begins on the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph and ends on the date that is 5 
 years after such date of enactment, as a condition of receiving 
 payments under subsection (a) and section 1903(a), a State that 
 elects to provide assistance to women on the basis of being 
 pregnant (including pregnancy-related assistance provided to 
 targeted low-income pregnant women (as defined in section 
 2112(d)), pregnancy-related assistance provided to women who 
 are eligible for such assistance through application of section 
 1902(v)(4)(A)(i) under section 2107(e)(1), or any other 
 assistance under the State child health plan (or a waiver of 
 such plan) which is provided to women on the basis of being 
 pregnant) shall not have in effect, with respect to such women, 
 eligibility standards, methodologies, or procedures under such 
 plan (or waiver) that are more restrictive than the eligibility 
 standards, methodologies, or procedures, respectively, under 
 such plan (or waiver) that are in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph.''.
 (D) Information on benefits.--The Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall make publicly available 
 on the internet website of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services, information regarding benefits 
 available to pregnant and postpartum women and under 
 the Medicaid program and the Children's Health 
 Insurance Program, including information on--
 (i) benefits that States are required to 
 provide to pregnant and postpartum women under 
 such programs;
 (ii) optional benefits that States may 
 provide to pregnant and postpartum women under 
 such programs; and
 (iii) the availability of different kinds 
 of benefits for pregnant and postpartum women, 
 including oral health and mental health 
 benefits and breastfeeding services and 
 supplies, under such programs.
 (E) Federal funding for cost of extended medicaid 
 and chip coverage for postpartum women.--
 (i) Medicaid.--Section 1905 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by 
 title IV and subparagraph (A)(i)(II), is 
 further amended--
 (I) in subsection (b), by striking 
 ``and (mm)'' and inserting ``(mm), and 
 (oo)''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(oo) Increased FMAP for Extended Medical Assistance for 
Postpartum Individuals.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage for a State, with respect 
 to amounts expended by such State for medical assistance for an 
 individual who is eligible for such assistance on the basis of 
 being pregnant or having been pregnant that is provided during 
 the 305-day period that begins on the 60th day after the last 
 day of the individual's pregnancy (including any such 
 assistance provided during the month in which such period 
 ends), shall be equal to--
 ``(A) during the first 20-quarter period for which 
 this subsection is in effect with respect to a State, 
 100 percent; and
 ``(B) with respect to a State, during each quarter 
 thereafter, 90 percent.
 ``(2) Exclusion from territorial caps.-- Any payment made 
 to a territory for expenditures for medical assistance for an 
 individual described in paragraph (1) that is subject to the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage specified under paragraph 
 (1) shall not be taken into account for purposes of applying 
 payment limits under subsections (f) and (g) of section 
 1108.''.
 (ii) CHIP.--Section 2105(c) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(c)) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(13) Enhanced payment for extended assistance provided to 
 pregnant women.-- Notwithstanding subsection (b), the enhanced 
 FMAP, with respect to payments under subsection (a) for 
 expenditures under the State child health plan (or a waiver of 
 such plan) for assistance provided under the plan (or waiver) 
 to a woman who is eligible for such assistance on the basis of 
 being pregnant (including pregnancy-related assistance provided 
 to a targeted low-income pregnant woman (as defined in section 
 2112(d)), pregnancy-related assistance provided to a woman who 
 is eligible for such assistance through application of section 
 1902(v)(4)(A)(i) under section 2107(e)(1), or any other 
 assistance under the plan (or waiver) provided to a woman who 
 is eligible for such assistance on the basis of being pregnant) 
 during the 305-day period that begins on the 60th day after the 
 last day of her pregnancy (including any such assistance 
 provided during the month in which such period ends), shall be 
 equal to--
 ``(A) during the first 20-quarter period for which 
 this subsection is in effect with respect to a State, 
 100 percent; and
 ``(B) with respect to a State, during each quarter 
 thereafter, 90 percent.''.
 (F) Guidance on state options for medicaid coverage 
 of doula services.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall issue guidance for the 
 States concerning options for Medicaid coverage and 
 payment for support services provided by doulas.
 (G) Enhanced fmap for rural obstetric and 
 gynecological services.--Section 1905 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by title IV 
 and subparagraphs (A) and (E), is further amended--
 (i) in subsection (b), by striking ``and 
 (oo)'' and inserting ``(oo), and (pp)''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(pp) Increased FMAP for Medical Assistance for Obstetric and 
Gynecological Services Furnished at Rural Hospitals.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage for a State, with respect 
 to amounts expended by such State for medical assistance for 
 obstetric or gynecological services that are furnished in a 
 hospital that is located in a rural area (as defined for 
 purposes of section 1886) shall be equal to 90 percent for each 
 calendar quarter beginning with the first calendar quarter 
 during which this subsection is in effect.
 ``(2) Exclusion from territorial caps.--Any payment made to 
 a territory for expenditures for medical assistance described 
 in paragraph (1) that is subject to the Federal medical 
 assistance percentage specified under paragraph (1) shall not 
 be taken into account for purposes of applying payment limits 
 under subsections (f) and (g) of section 1108.''.
 (H) Effective dates.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clauses (ii) 
 and (iii)--
 (I) the amendments made by 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (E) shall 
 take effect on the first day of the 
 first calendar quarter that begins on 
 or after the date that is 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this section;
 (II) the amendments made by 
 subparagraph (C) shall take effect on 
 the date of enactment of this section; 
 and
 (III) the amendments made by 
 subparagraph (G) shall take effect on 
 the first day of the first calendar 
 quarter that begins on or after the 
 date of enactment of this section.
 (ii) Exception for state legislation.--In 
 the case of a State plan under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act or a State child health 
 plan under title XXI of such Act that the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 determines requires State legislation in order 
 for the respective plan to meet any requirement 
 imposed by amendments made by this paragraph, 
 the respective plan shall not be regarded as 
 failing to comply with the requirements of such 
 title solely on the basis of its failure to 
 meet such an additional requirement before the 
 first day of the first calendar quarter 
 beginning after the close of the first regular 
 session of the State legislature that begins 
 after the date of enactment of this section. 
 For purposes of the previous sentence, in the 
 case of a State that has a 2-year legislative 
 session, each year of the session shall be 
 considered to be a separate regular session of 
 the State legislature.
 (iii) State option for earlier effective 
 date.--A State may elect to have subsection 
 (e)(16) of section 1902 of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) and subparagraph (J) of 
 section 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)), as amended by 
 subparagraph (B), and subsection (oo) of 
 section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d) and paragraph (13) of section 
 2105(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397ee(c)), as added by subparagraph (E), take 
 effect with respect to the State on the first 
 day of any fiscal quarter that begins before 
 the date described in clause (i) and apply to 
 amounts payable to the State for expenditures 
 for medical assistance, child health 
 assistance, or pregnancy-related assistance to 
 pregnant or postpartum individuals furnished on 
 or after such day.
 (3) Regional centers of excellence.--Part P of title III of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.) (as 
 amended by section 5101) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

``SEC. 399V-9. REGIONAL CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE ADDRESSING IMPLICIT BIAS 
 AND CULTURAL COMPETENCY IN PATIENT-PROVIDER INTERACTIONS 
 EDUCATION.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary, in consultation with such 
other agency heads as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall award 
cooperative agreements for the establishment or support of regional 
centers of excellence addressing implicit bias, cultural competency, 
and respectful care practices in patient-provider interactions 
education for the purpose of enhancing and improving how health care 
professionals are educated in implicit bias and delivering culturally 
competent health care.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a cooperative 
agreement under subsection (a), an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a public or other nonprofit entity specified by 
 the Secretary that provides educational and training 
 opportunities for students and health care professionals, which 
 may be a health system, teaching hospital, community health 
 center, medical school, school of public health, school of 
 nursing, dental school, social work school, school of 
 professional psychology, or any other health professional 
 school or program at an institution of higher education (as 
 defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965) 
 focused on the prevention, treatment, or recovery of health 
 conditions that contribute to maternal mortality and the 
 prevention of maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity;
 ``(2) demonstrate community engagement and participation, 
 such as through partnerships with home visiting and case 
 management programs and community-based organizations serving 
 minority populations;
 ``(3) demonstrate engagement with groups engaged in the 
 implementation of health care professional training in implicit 
 bias and delivering culturally competent care, such as 
 departments of public health, perinatal quality collaboratives, 
 hospital systems, and health care professional groups, in order 
 to obtain input on resources needed for effective 
 implementation strategies; and
 ``(4) provide to the Secretary such information, at such 
 time and in such manner, as the Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Diversity.--In awarding a cooperative agreement under 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall take into account any regional 
differences among eligible entities and make an effort to ensure 
geographic diversity among award recipients.
 ``(d) Dissemination of Information.--
 ``(1) Public availability.--The Secretary shall make 
 publicly available on the internet website of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services information submitted to the 
 Secretary under subsection (b)(4).
 ``(2) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate each 
 regional center of excellence established or supported pursuant 
 to subsection (a) and disseminate the findings resulting from 
 each such evaluation to the appropriate public and private 
 entities.
 ``(3) Distribution.--The Secretary shall share evaluations 
 and overall findings with State departments of health and other 
 relevant State level offices to inform State and local best 
 practices.
 ``(e) Maternal Mortality Defined.--In this section, the term 
`maternal mortality' means death of a woman that occurs during 
pregnancy or within the one-year period following the end of such 
pregnancy.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying 
out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (4) Special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children.--Section 17(d)(3)(A)(ii) of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(d)(3)(A)(ii)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking the clause designation and heading 
 and all that follows through ``A State'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(ii) Women.--
 ``(I) Breastfeeding women.--A 
 State'';
 (B) in subclause (I) (as so designated), by 
 striking ``1 year'' and all that follows through 
 ``earlier'' and inserting ``2 years postpartum''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(II) Postpartum women.--A State 
 may elect to certify a postpartum woman 
 for a period of 2 years.''.
 (c) Full Spectrum Doula Workforce.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall establish and implement a program to award grants or 
 contracts to health professions schools, schools of public 
 health, academic health centers, State or local governments, 
 territories, Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations, Urban 
 Indian organizations, Native Hawaiian organizations, or other 
 appropriate public or private nonprofit entities or community-
 based organizations (or consortia of any such entities, 
 including entities promoting multidisciplinary approaches), to 
 establish or expand programs to grow and diversify the doula 
 workforce, including through improving the capacity and supply 
 of health care providers.
 (2) Use of funds.--Amounts made available by paragraph (1) 
 shall be used for the following activities:
 (A) Establishing programs that provide education 
 and training to individuals seeking appropriate 
 training or certification as full spectrum doulas.
 (B) Expanding the capacity of existing programs 
 described in subparagraph (A), for the purpose of 
 increasing the number of students enrolled in such 
 programs, including by awarding scholarships for 
 students who agree to work in underserved communities 
 after receiving such education and training.
 (C) Developing and implementing strategies to 
 recruit and retain students from underserved 
 communities, particularly from demographic groups 
 experiencing high rates of maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity, including racial and ethnic 
 minority groups, into programs described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 (3) Funding.--In addition to amounts otherwise available, 
 there is appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services for fiscal year 2025, out of any money in the Treasury 
 not otherwise appropriated, $50,000,000, to remain available 
 until expended, for carrying out this subsection.
 (d) Grants for Rural Obstetric Mobile Health Units.--Part B of 
title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 320C. GRANTS FOR RURAL OBSTETRIC MOBILE HEALTH UNITS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration (referred to in 
this section as the `Secretary'), shall establish a pilot program under 
which the Secretary shall make grants to States--
 ``(1) to purchase and equip rural mobile health units for 
 the purpose of providing pre-conception, pregnancy, postpartum, 
 and obstetric emergency services in rural and underserved 
 communities;
 ``(2) to train providers including obstetrician-
 gynecologists, certified nurse-midwives, nurse practitioners, 
 nurses, and midwives to operate and provide obstetric services, 
 including training and planning for obstetric emergencies, in 
 such mobile health units; and
 ``(3) to address access issues, including social 
 determinants of health and wrap-around clinical and community 
 services including nutrition, housing, lactation services, and 
 transportation support and referrals.
 ``(b) No Sharing of Data With Law Enforcement.--As a condition of 
receiving a grant under this section, a State shall submit to the 
Secretary an assurance that the State will not make available to 
Federal or State law enforcement any personally identifiable 
information regarding any pregnant or postpartum individual collected 
pursuant to such grant.
 ``(c) Grant Duration.--The period of a grant under this section 
shall not exceed 5 years.
 ``(d) Implementing and Reporting.--
 ``(1) In general.--States that receive pilot grants under 
 this section shall--
 ``(A) implement the program funded by the pilot 
 grants; and
 ``(B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, and not later than 6 years 
 after such date of enactment, submit to the Secretary a 
 report that describes the results of such program, 
 including--
 ``(i) relevant information and relevant 
 quantitative indicators of the programs' 
 success in improving the standard of care and 
 maternal health outcomes for individuals in 
 rural and underserved communities seen for pre-
 conception, pregnancy, or postpartum visits in 
 the rural mobile health units, stratified by 
 the categories of data specified in paragraph 
 (2);
 ``(ii) relevant qualitative evaluations 
 from individuals receiving pre-conception, 
 pregnant, or postpartum care from rural mobile 
 health units, including measures of patient-
 reported experience of care and measures of 
 patient-reported issues with access to care 
 without the rural mobile health unit pilot; and
 ``(iii) strategies to sustain such programs 
 beyond the duration of the grant and expand 
 such programs to other rural and underserved 
 communities.
 ``(2) Categories of data.--The categories of data specified 
 in this paragraph are the following:
 ``(A) Race, ethnicity, sex, gender, gender 
 identity, primary language, age, geography, insurance 
 status, disability status.
 ``(B) Number of visits provided for preconception, 
 prenatal, or postpartum care.
 ``(C) Number of repeat visits provided for 
 preconception, prenatal, or postpartum care.
 ``(D) Number of screenings or tests provided for 
 smoking, substance use, hypertension, sexually-
 transmitted diseases, diabetes, HIV, depression, 
 intimate partner violence, pap smears, and pregnancy.
 ``(3) Data privacy protection.--The reports referred to in 
 paragraph (1)(B) shall not contain any personally identifiable 
 information regarding any pregnant or postpartum individual.
 ``(e) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the 
pilot program under this section to determine the impact of the pilot 
program with respect to--
 ``(1) the effectiveness of the grants awarded under this 
 section to improve maternal health outcomes in rural and 
 underserved communities, with data stratified by race, 
 ethnicity, primary language, socioeconomic status, geography, 
 insurance type, and other factors as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate;
 ``(2) spending on maternity care by States participating in 
 the pilot program;
 ``(3) to the extent practicable, qualitative and 
 quantitative measures of patient experience; and
 ``(4) any other areas of assessment that the Secretary 
 determines relevant.
 ``(f) Report.--Not later than one year after the completion of the 
pilot program under this section, the Secretary shall submit to 
Congress, and make publicly available, a report that describes--
 ``(1) the results of the evaluation conducted under 
 subsection (e); and
 ``(2) a recommendation regarding whether the pilot program 
 should be continued after fiscal year 2029 and expanded on a 
 national basis.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $10,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (e) Requiring Notification of Impending Hospital Obstetric Unit 
Closure.--Section 1866(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395cc(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (X), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (Y)(ii)(V), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``, and''; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (Y) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(Z) beginning 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
 this subparagraph, in the case of a hospital, not less than 90 
 days prior to the closure of any obstetric unit of the 
 hospital, to submit to the Secretary a notification which shall 
 include--
 ``(i) a report analyzing the impact the closure 
 will have on the community;
 ``(ii) steps the hospital will take to identify 
 other health care providers that can alleviate any 
 service gaps as a result of the closure; and
 ``(iii) any additional information as may be 
 required by the Secretary.''.
 (f) Evaluation and Report on Maternal Health Needs.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall conduct, and submit to Congress a report that 
 describes the results of, an evaluation of--
 (A) where the maternal health needs are greatest in 
 the United States; and
 (B) the Federal expenditures made to address such 
 needs.
 (2) Period covered.--The evaluation under paragraph (1) 
 shall cover the period of calendar years 2000 through 2023.
 (3) Analysis.--The evaluation under paragraph (1) shall 
 include analysis of the following:
 (A) How Federal funds provided to States for 
 maternal health were distributed across regions, 
 States, and localities or counties.
 (B) Barriers to applying for and receiving Federal 
 funds for maternal health, including, with respect to 
 initial applications--
 (i) requirements for submission in 
 partnership with other entities; and
 (ii) stringent network requirements.
 (C) Why applicants did not receive funding, 
 including limited availability of funds, the strength 
 of the respective applications, and failure to adhere 
 to requirements.
 (4) Disaggregation of data.--The report under paragraph (1) 
 shall disaggregate data on mothers served by race, ethnicity, 
 insurance status, and language spoken.
 (g) Increasing Excise Taxes on Cigarettes and Establishing Excise 
Tax Equity Among All Tobacco Product Tax Rates.--
 (1) Tax parity for roll-your-own tobacco.--Section 5701(g) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking 
 ``$24.78'' and inserting ``$49.56''.
 (2) Tax parity for pipe tobacco.--Section 5701(f) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``$2.8311 
 cents'' and inserting ``$49.56''.
 (3) Tax parity for smokeless tobacco.--
 (A) Section 5701(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$1.51'' 
 and inserting ``$26.84'';
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking ``50.33 
 cents'' and inserting ``$10.74''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Smokeless tobacco sold in discrete single-use 
 units.--On discrete single-use units, $100.66 per thousand.''.
 (B) Section 5702(m) of such Code is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or 
 chewing tobacco'' and inserting ``, chewing 
 tobacco, or discrete single-use unit'';
 (ii) in paragraphs (2) and (3), by 
 inserting ``that is not a discrete single-use 
 unit'' before the period in each such 
 paragraph; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Discrete single-use unit.--The term `discrete single-
 use unit' means any product containing, made from, or derived 
 from tobacco or nicotine that--
 ``(A) is not intended to be smoked; and
 ``(B) is in the form of a lozenge, tablet, pill, 
 pouch, dissolvable strip, or other discrete single-use 
 or single-dose unit.''.
 (4) Tax parity for small cigars.--Paragraph (1) of section 
 5701(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by 
 striking ``$50.33'' and inserting ``$100.66''.
 (5) Tax parity for large cigars.--
 (A) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 5701(a) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by 
 striking ``52.75 percent'' and all that follows through 
 the period and inserting the following: ``$49.56 per 
 pound and a proportionate tax at the like rate on all 
 fractional parts of a pound but not less than 10.066 
 cents per cigar.''.
 (B) Guidance.--The Secretary of the Treasury, or 
 the Secretary's delegate, may issue guidance regarding 
 the appropriate method for determining the weight of 
 large cigars for purposes of calculating the applicable 
 tax under section 5701(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
 (C) Conforming amendment.--Section 5702 of such 
 Code is amended by striking subsection (l).
 (6) Tax parity for roll-your-own tobacco and certain 
 processed tobacco.--Subsection (o) of section 5702 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``, and 
 includes processed tobacco that is removed for delivery or 
 delivered to a person other than a person with a permit 
 provided under section 5713, but does not include removals of 
 processed tobacco for exportation'' after ``wrappers thereof''.
 (7) Clarifying tax rate for other tobacco products.--
 (A) In general.--Section 5701 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Other Tobacco Products.--Any product not otherwise described 
under this section that has been determined to be a tobacco product by 
the Food and Drug Administration through its authorities under the 
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act shall be taxed at a 
level of tax equivalent to the tax rate for cigarettes on an estimated 
per use basis as determined by the Secretary.''.
 (B) Establishing per use basis.--For purposes of 
 section 5701(i) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 
 not later than 12 months after the later of the date of 
 the enactment of this Act or the date that a product 
 has been determined to be a tobacco product by the Food 
 and Drug Administration, the Secretary of the Treasury 
 (or the Secretary of the Treasury's delegate) shall 
 issue final regulations establishing the level of tax 
 for such product that is equivalent to the tax rate for 
 cigarettes on an estimated per use basis.
 (8) Clarifying definition of tobacco products.--
 (A) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 5702 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(c) Tobacco Products.--The term `tobacco products' means--
 ``(1) cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, 
 and roll-your-own tobacco, and
 ``(2) any other product subject to tax pursuant to section 
 5701(i).''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--Subsection (d) of 
 section 5702 of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, 
 or roll-your-own tobacco'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``tobacco products''.
 (9) Increasing tax on cigarettes.--
 (A) Small cigarettes.--Section 5701(b)(1) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``$50.33'' and inserting 
 ``$100.66''.
 (B) Large cigarettes.--Section 5701(b)(2) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``$105.69'' and inserting 
 ``$211.38''.
 (10) Tax rates adjusted for inflation.--Section 5701 of 
 such Code, as amended by paragraph (7), is amended by adding at 
 the end the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Inflation Adjustment.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of any calendar year 
 beginning after 2024, the dollar amounts provided under this 
 chapter shall each be increased by an amount equal to--
 ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by
 ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined 
 under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year, determined 
 by substituting `calendar year 2023' for `calendar year 
 2016' in subparagraph (A)(ii) thereof.
 ``(2) Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under paragraph 
 (1) is not a multiple of $0.01, such amount shall be rounded to 
 the next highest multiple of $0.01.''.
 (11) Floor stocks taxes.--
 (A) Imposition of tax.--On tobacco products 
 manufactured in or imported into the United States 
 which are removed before any tax increase date and held 
 on such date for sale by any person, there is hereby 
 imposed a tax in an amount equal to the excess of--
 (i) the tax which would be imposed under 
 section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 on the article if the article had been 
 removed on such date, over
 (ii) the prior tax (if any) imposed under 
 section 5701 of such Code on such article.
 (B) Credit against tax.--Each person shall be 
 allowed as a credit against the taxes imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) an amount equal to the lesser of 
 $1,000 or the amount of such taxes. For purposes of the 
 preceding sentence, all persons treated as a single 
 employer under subsection (b), (c), (m), or (o) of 
 section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall 
 be treated as 1 person for purposes of this 
 subparagraph.
 (C) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (i) Liability for tax.--A person holding 
 tobacco products on any tax increase date to 
 which any tax imposed by subparagraph (A) 
 applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be paid in such manner 
 as the Secretary shall prescribe by 
 regulations.
 (iii) Time for payment.--The tax imposed by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be paid on or before the 
 date that is 120 days after the effective date 
 of the tax rate increase.
 (D) Articles in foreign trade zones.--
 Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (commonly 
 known as the Foreign Trade Zone Act, 48 Stat. 998, 19 
 U.S.C. 81a et seq.), or any other provision of law, any 
 article which is located in a foreign trade zone on any 
 tax increase date shall be subject to the tax imposed 
 by subparagraph (A) if--
 (i) internal revenue taxes have been 
 determined, or customs duties liquidated, with 
 respect to such article before such date 
 pursuant to a request made under the first 
 proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
 (ii) such article is held on such date 
 under the supervision of an officer of the 
 United States Customs and Border Protection of 
 the Department of Homeland Security pursuant to 
 the second proviso of such section 3(a).
 (E) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
 (i) In general.--Any term used in this 
 paragraph which is also used in section 5702 of 
 such Code shall have the same meaning as such 
 term has in such section.
 (ii) Tax increase date.--The term ``tax 
 increase date'' means the effective date of any 
 increase in any tobacco product excise tax rate 
 pursuant to the amendments made by this 
 subsection (other than paragraph (10) thereof).
 (iii) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' 
 means the Secretary of the Treasury or the 
 Secretary's delegate.
 (F) Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules 
 of section 5061(e)(3) of such Code shall apply for 
 purposes of this paragraph.
 (G) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, applicable with respect to the 
 taxes imposed by section 5701 of such Code shall, 
 insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the 
 provisions of this paragraph, apply to the floor stocks 
 taxes imposed by subparagraph (A), to the same extent 
 as if such taxes were imposed by such section 5701. The 
 Secretary may treat any person who bore the ultimate 
 burden of the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) as the 
 person to whom a credit or refund under such provisions 
 may be allowed or made.
 (12) Effective dates.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), the amendments made by this 
 subsection shall apply to articles removed (as defined 
 in section 5702(j) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986) after the last day of the month which includes 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (B) Discrete single-use units, large cigars, and 
 processed tobacco.--The amendments made by paragraphs 
 (3)(A)(iii), (3)(B), (5), and (6) shall apply to 
 articles removed (as defined in section 5702(j) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986) after the date that is 6 
 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (C) Other tobacco products.--The amendments made by 
 paragraph (7)(A) shall apply to products removed after 
 the last day of the month which includes the date that 
 the Secretary of the Treasury (or the Secretary of the 
 Treasury's delegate) issues final regulations 
 establishing the level of tax for such product.

SEC. 5202. MOMMIES.

 (a) GAO Study and Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to Congress a report on the gaps in 
 coverage with respect to--
 (A) pregnant individuals enrolled under a State 
 plan (or waiver of such plan) under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and the 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.); and
 (B) postpartum individuals enrolled under a State 
 plan (or waiver of such plan) under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and the 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) who 
 received assistance under either such program during 
 their pregnancy.
 (2) Content of report.--The report required under this 
 paragraph shall include the following:
 (A) Information about the abilities and successes 
 of State Medicaid agencies in determining whether 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals are eligible under 
 another insurance affordability program, and in 
 transitioning any such individuals who are so eligible 
 to coverage under such a program at the end of their 
 period of eligibility for medical assistance, pursuant 
 to section 435.1200 of the title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (as in effect on September 1, 2018).
 (B) Information on factors contributing to gaps in 
 coverage that disproportionately impact underserved 
 populations, including low-income individuals, Black, 
 Indigenous, and other individuals of color, individuals 
 who reside in a health professional shortage area (as 
 defined in section 332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e(a)(1)(A))) or individuals 
 who are members of a medically underserved population 
 (as defined by section 330(b)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 254b(b)(3)(A))).
 (C) Recommendations for addressing and reducing 
 such gaps in coverage.
 (D) Such other information as the Comptroller 
 General deems necessary.
 (3) Data disaggregation.--To the greatest extent possible, 
 the Comptroller General shall disaggregate data presented in 
 the report, including by age, gender identity, race, ethnicity, 
 income level, and other demographic factors.
 (b) Maternity Care Home Demonstration Project.--Title XIX of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by inserting 
the following new section after section 1947:

``SEC. 1948. MATERNITY CARE HOME DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a 
demonstration project (in this section referred to as the 
`demonstration project') under which the Secretary shall provide grants 
to States to enter into arrangements with eligible entities to 
implement or expand a maternity care home model for eligible 
individuals.
 ``(b) Goals of Demonstration Project.--The goals of the 
demonstration project are the following:
 ``(1) To improve--
 ``(A) maternity and infant care outcomes;
 ``(B) birth equity;
 ``(C) health equity for--
 ``(i) Black, Indigenous, and other people 
 of color;
 ``(ii) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
 queer, non-binary, and gender nonconfirming 
 individuals;
 ``(iii) people with disabilities; and
 ``(iv) other underserved populations;
 ``(D) communication by maternity, infant care, and 
 social services providers;
 ``(E) integration of perinatal support services, 
 including community health workers, doulas, social 
 workers, public health nurses, peer lactation 
 counselors, lactation consultants, childbirth 
 educators, peer mental health workers, and others, into 
 health care entities and organizations;
 ``(F) care coordination between maternity, infant 
 care, oral health services, and social services 
 providers within the community;
 ``(G) the quality and safety of maternity and 
 infant care;
 ``(H) the experience of individuals receiving 
 maternity care, including by increasing the ability of 
 an individual to develop and follow their own birthing 
 plans; and
 ``(I) access to adequate prenatal and postpartum 
 care, including--
 ``(i) prenatal care that is initiated in a 
 timely manner;
 ``(ii) not fewer than 5 post-pregnancy 
 visits to a maternity care provider; and
 ``(iii) interpregnancy care.
 ``(2) To provide coordinated, evidence-based, respectful, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate, and person-centered 
 maternity care management.
 ``(3) To decrease--
 ``(A) severe and preventable maternal morbidity and 
 maternal mortality;
 ``(B) overall health care spending;
 ``(C) unnecessary emergency department visits;
 ``(D) inequities in maternal and infant care 
 outcomes, including racial, economic, disability, 
 gender-based, and geographical inequities;
 ``(E) racial, gender, economic, and other 
 discrimination among health care professionals;
 ``(F) racism, discrimination, disrespect, and abuse 
 in maternity care settings;
 ``(G) the rate of cesarean deliveries for low-risk 
 pregnancies;
 ``(H) the rate of pre-term births and infants born 
 with low birth weight; and
 ``(I) the rate of avoidable maternal and newborn 
 hospitalizations and admissions to intensive care 
 units.
 ``(c) Consultation.--In designing and implementing the 
demonstration project the Secretary shall consult with stakeholders, 
including--
 ``(1) States;
 ``(2) organizations representing relevant health care 
 professionals, including oral health services professionals;
 ``(3) organizations, particularly reproductive justice and 
 birth justice organizations led by people of color, that 
 represent consumers of maternal health care, including 
 consumers of maternal health care who are disproportionately 
 impacted by poor maternal health outcomes;
 ``(4) representatives with experience implementing other 
 maternity care home models, including representatives from the 
 Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation;
 ``(5) community-based health care professionals, including 
 doulas, lactation consultants, and other stakeholders;
 ``(6) experts in promoting health equity and combating 
 racial bias in health care settings; and
 ``(7) Black, Indigenous, and other maternal health care 
 consumers of color who have experienced severe maternal 
 morbidity.
 ``(d) Application and Selection of States.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State seeking to participate in the 
 demonstration project shall submit an application to the 
 Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary 
 shall require.
 ``(2) Selection of states.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall select at 
 least 10 States to participate in the demonstration 
 project.
 ``(B) Selection requirements.--In selecting States 
 to participate in the demonstration project, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) ensure that there is geographic and 
 regional diversity in the areas in which 
 activities will be carried out under the 
 project;
 ``(ii) ensure that States with significant 
 inequities in maternal and infant health 
 outcomes, including severe maternal morbidity, 
 and other inequities based on race, income, or 
 access to maternity care, are included; and
 ``(iii) ensure that at least 1 territory is 
 included.
 ``(e) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under 
 subsection (l), the Secretary shall award 1 grant for each year 
 of the demonstration project to each State that is selected to 
 participate in the demonstration project.
 ``(2) Use of grant funds.--A State may use funds received 
 under this section to--
 ``(A) award grants or make payments to eligible 
 entities as part of an arrangement described in 
 subsection (f)(2);
 ``(B) provide financial incentives to health care 
 professionals, including community-based health care 
 workers and community-based doulas, who participate in 
 the State's maternity care home model;
 ``(C) provide adequate training for health care 
 professionals, including community-based health care 
 workers, doulas, and care coordinators, who participate 
 in the State's maternity care home model, which may 
 include training for cultural humility and antiracism, 
 racial bias, health equity, reproductive and birth 
 justice, trauma-informed care, home visiting skills, 
 and respectful communication and listening skills, 
 particularly in regards to maternal health;
 ``(D) pay for personnel and administrative expenses 
 associated with designing, implementing, and operating 
 the State's maternity care home model;
 ``(E) pay for items and services that are furnished 
 under the State's maternity care home model and for 
 which payment is otherwise unavailable under this 
 title;
 ``(F) pay for services and materials to ensure 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 communication, including--
 ``(i) language services such as 
 interpreters and translation of written 
 materials; and
 ``(ii) development of culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate materials; and 
 auxiliary aids and services; and
 ``(G) pay for other costs related to the State's 
 maternity care home model, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(3) Grant for national independent evaluator.--
 ``(A) In general.--From the amounts appropriated 
 under subsection (l), prior to awarding any grants 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall enter into a 
 contract with a national external entity to create a 
 single, uniform process to--
 ``(i) ensure that States that receive 
 grants under paragraph (1) comply with the 
 requirements of this section; and
 ``(ii) evaluate the outcomes of the 
 demonstration project in each participating 
 State.
 ``(B) Annual report.--The contract described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall require the national external 
 entity to submit to the Secretary--
 ``(i) a yearly evaluation report for each 
 year of the demonstration project; and
 ``(ii) a final impact report after the 
 demonstration project has concluded.
 ``(C) Secretary's authority.--Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall prevent the Secretary from making a 
 determination that a State is not in compliance with 
 the requirements of this section without the national 
 external entity making such a determination.
 ``(f) Partnership With Eligible Entities.--
 ``(1) In general.--As a condition of receiving a grant 
 under this section, a State shall enter into an arrangement 
 with one or more eligible entities that meets the requirements 
 of paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Arrangements with eligible entities.--Under an 
 arrangement between a State and an eligible entity under this 
 subsection, the eligible entity shall perform the following 
 functions, with respect to eligible individuals enrolled with 
 the entity under the State's maternity care home model--
 ``(A) provide culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate congruent care, which may include prenatal 
 care, family planning services, medical care, mental 
 and behavioral care, postpartum care, and oral health 
 services to such eligible individuals through a team of 
 health care professionals, which may include 
 obstetrician-gynecologists, maternal-fetal medicine 
 specialists, family physicians, primary care providers, 
 oral health providers, physician assistants, advanced 
 practice registered nurses such as nurse practitioners 
 and certified nurse midwives, certified midwives, 
 certified professional midwives, physical therapists, 
 social workers, traditional and community-based doulas, 
 lactation consultants, childbirth educators, community 
 health workers, peer mental health supporters, and 
 other health care professionals;
 ``(B) conduct a risk assessment of each such 
 eligible individual to determine if their pregnancy is 
 high or low risk, and establish a tailored pregnancy 
 care plan, which takes into consideration the 
 individual's own preferences and pregnancy care and 
 birthing plans and determines the appropriate support 
 services to reduce the individual's medical, social, 
 and environmental risk factors, for each such eligible 
 individual based on the results of such risk 
 assessment;
 ``(C) assign each such eligible individual to a 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate care 
 coordinator, which may be a nurse, social worker, 
 traditional or community-based doula, community health 
 worker, midwife, or other health care provider, who is 
 responsible for ensuring that such eligible individual 
 receives the necessary medical care and connections to 
 essential support services;
 ``(D) provide, or arrange for the provision of, 
 essential support services, such as services that 
 address--
 ``(i) food access, nutrition, and exercise;
 ``(ii) smoking cessation;
 ``(iii) substance use disorder and 
 addiction treatment;
 ``(iv) anxiety, depression, trauma, and 
 other mental and behavioral health issues;
 ``(v) breastfeeding, chestfeeding, or other 
 infant feeding options supports, initiation, 
 continuation, and duration;
 ``(vi) stable, affordable, safe, and 
 healthy housing;
 ``(vii) transportation;
 ``(viii) intimate partner violence;
 ``(ix) community and police violence;
 ``(x) home visiting services;
 ``(xi) childbirth and newborn care 
 education;
 ``(xii) oral health education;
 ``(xiii) continuous labor support;
 ``(xiv) group prenatal care;
 ``(xv) family planning and contraceptive 
 care and supplies; and
 ``(xvi) affordable child care;
 ``(E) as appropriate, facilitate connections to a 
 usual primary care provider, which may be a 
 reproductive health care provider;
 ``(F) refer to guidelines and opinions of medical 
 associations when determining whether an elective 
 delivery should be performed on an eligible individual 
 before 39 weeks of gestation;
 ``(G) provide such eligible individual with 
 evidence-based and culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate education and resources to identify 
 potential warning signs of pregnancy and postpartum 
 complications and when and how to obtain medical 
 attention;
 ``(H) provide, or arrange for the provision of, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate pregnancy and 
 postpartum health services, including family planning 
 counseling and services, to eligible individuals;
 ``(I) track and report postpartum health and birth 
 outcomes of such eligible individuals and their 
 children;
 ``(J) ensure that care is person-centered, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate, and patient-
 led, including by engaging eligible individuals in 
 their own care, including through communication and 
 education; and
 ``(K) ensure adequate training for appropriately 
 serving the population of individuals eligible for 
 medical assistance under the State plan (or waiver of 
 such plan), including through reproductive justice, 
 birth justice, birth equity, and anti-racist 
 frameworks, home visiting skills, and knowledge of 
 social services.
 ``(g) Term of Demonstration Project.--The Secretary shall conduct 
the demonstration project for a period of 5 years.
 ``(h) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section and annually thereafter for each year of the 
demonstration project term, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
Congress on the results of the demonstration project, including--
 ``(1) the results of the final report of the national 
 external entity required under subsection (e)(3)(B)(ii); and
 ``(2) recommendations on whether the model studied in the 
 demonstration project should be continued or more widely 
 adopted, including by private health plans.
 ``(i) Waiver Authority.--To the extent that the Secretary 
determines necessary in order to carry out the demonstration project, 
the Secretary may waive section 1902(a)(1) (relating to statewideness) 
and section 1902(a)(10)(B) (relating to comparability).
 ``(j) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall establish a 
process to provide technical assistance to States that are awarded 
grants under this section and to eligible entities and other providers 
participating in a State maternity care home model funded by such a 
grant.
 ``(k) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
 entity or organization that provides medically accurate, 
 comprehensive maternity services to individuals who are 
 eligible for medical assistance under a State plan under this 
 title or a waiver of such a plan, and may include:
 ``(A) A freestanding birth center.
 ``(B) An entity or organization receiving 
 assistance under section 330 of the Public Health 
 Service Act.
 ``(C) A federally qualified health center.
 ``(D) A rural health clinic.
 ``(E) A health facility operated by an Indian tribe 
 or tribal organization (as those terms are defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act).
 ``(2) Eligible individual.--The term `eligible individual' 
 means a pregnant individual or a formerly pregnant individual 
 during the 1-year period beginning on the last day of the 
 pregnancy, or such longer period beginning on such day as a 
 State may elect, who is--
 ``(A) enrolled in a State plan under this title, a 
 waiver of such a plan, or a State child health plan 
 under title XXI; and
 ``(B) a patient of an eligible entity which has 
 entered into an arrangement with a State under 
 subsection (g).
 ``(l) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary, for each of fiscal years 2025 through 
2032, such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
 (c) Reapplication of Medicare Payment Rate Floor to Primary Care 
Services Furnished Under Medicaid and Inclusion of Additional 
Providers.--
 (1) Reapplication of payment floor; additional providers.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1902(a)(13) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(13)) is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``; 
 and'' and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking the 
 semicolon and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(D) payment for primary care services (as defined 
 in subsection (jj)(1)) furnished in the period that 
 begins on the first day of the first month that begins 
 after the date of enactment of this subparagraph by a 
 provider described in subsection (jj)(2)--
 ``(i) at a rate that is not less than 100 
 percent of the payment rate that applies to 
 such services and the provider of such services 
 under part B of title XVIII (or, if greater, 
 the payment rate that would be applicable under 
 such part if the conversion factor under 
 section 1848(d) for the year were the 
 conversion factor under such section for 2009);
 ``(ii) in the case of items and services 
 that are not items and services provided under 
 such part, at a rate to be established by the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(iii) in the case of items and services 
 that are furnished in rural areas (as defined 
 in section 1886(d)(2)(D)), health professional 
 shortage areas (as defined in section 
 332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 254e(a)(1)(A))), or medically 
 underserved areas (according to a designation 
 under section 330(b)(3)(A) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(b)(3)(A))), at the 
 rate otherwise applicable to such items or 
 services under clause (i) or (ii) increased, at 
 the Secretary's discretion, by not more than 25 
 percent;''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Section 1902(a)(13)(C) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(13)(C)) is 
 amended by striking ``subsection (jj)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (jj)(1)''.
 (ii) Section 1905(dd) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(dd)) is amended--
 (I) by striking ``Notwithstanding'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding'';
 (II) by striking ``section 
 1902(a)(13)(C)'' and inserting 
 ``subparagraph (C) of section 
 1902(a)(13)'';
 (III) by inserting ``or for 
 services described in subparagraph (D) 
 of section 1902(a)(13) furnished during 
 an additional period specified in 
 paragraph (2),'' after ``2015,'';
 (IV) by striking ``under such 
 section'' and inserting ``under 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 
 1902(a)(13), as applicable''; and
 (V) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(2) Additional periods.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the following are additional periods:
 ``(A) The period that begins on the first day of 
 the first month that begins after the date of enactment 
 of this paragraph.''.
 (2) Improved targeting of primary care.--Section 1902(jj) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(jj)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 clauses (i) and (ii), respectively, and realigning the 
 left margins accordingly;
 (B) by striking ``For purposes of subsection 
 (a)(13)(C)'' and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Definition.--For purposes of subparagraphs 
 (C) and (D) of subsection (a)(13)''; and
 (C) by inserting after clause (ii) (as so 
 redesignated) the following:
 ``(B) Exclusions.--Such term does not include any 
 services described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 paragraph (1) if such services are provided in an 
 emergency department of a hospital.
 ``(2) Additional providers.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (D) of subsection (a)(13), a provider described in this 
 paragraph is any of the following:
 ``(A) A physician with a primary specialty 
 designation of family medicine, general internal 
 medicine, or pediatric medicine, or obstetrics and 
 gynecology.
 ``(B) An advanced practice clinician, as defined by 
 the Secretary, that works under the supervision of--
 ``(i) a physician that satisfies the 
 criteria specified in subparagraph (A);
 ``(ii) a nurse practitioner or a physician 
 assistant (as such terms are defined in section 
 1861(aa)(5)(A)) who is working in accordance 
 with State law; or
 ``(iii) or a certified nurse-midwife (as 
 defined in section 1861(gg)) or a certified 
 professional midwife who is working in 
 accordance with State law.
 ``(C) A rural health clinic, federally qualified 
 health center, health center that receives funding 
 under title X of the Public Health Service Act, or 
 other health clinic that receives reimbursement on a 
 fee schedule applicable to a physician.
 ``(D) An advanced practice clinician supervised by 
 a physician described in subparagraph (A), another 
 advanced practice clinician, or a certified nurse-
 midwife.
 ``(E) A midwife who is working in accordance with 
 State law.''.
 (3) Ensuring payment by managed care entities.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1903(m)(2)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(m)(2)(A)) is 
 amended--
 (i) in clause (xii), by striking ``and'' 
 after the semicolon;
 (ii) by realigning the left margin of 
 clause (xiii) so as to align with the left 
 margin of clause (xii) and by striking the 
 period at the end of clause (xiii) and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by inserting after clause (xiii) the 
 following:
 ``(xiv) such contract provides that (I) payments to 
 providers specified in section 1902(a)(13)(D) for primary care 
 services (as defined in section 1902(jj)) that are furnished 
 during a year or period (as specified in section 1902(a)(13)(D) 
 and section 1905(dd)) are at least equal to the amounts set 
 forth and required by the Secretary by regulation; (II) the 
 entity shall, upon request, provide documentation to the State, 
 sufficient to enable the State and the Secretary to ensure 
 compliance with subclause (I); and (III) the Secretary shall 
 approve payments described in subclause (I) that are furnished 
 through an agreed upon capitation, partial capitation, or other 
 value-based payment arrangement if the capitation, partial 
 capitation, or other value-based payment arrangement is based 
 on a reasonable methodology and the entity provides 
 documentation to the State sufficient to enable the State and 
 the Secretary to ensure compliance with subclause (I).''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 1932(f) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(f)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``section 1902(a)(13)(C)'' 
 and inserting ``subsections (C) and (D) of 
 section 1902(a)(13)''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, and clause (xiv) of 
 section 1903(m)(2)(A)'' before the period.
 (d) MACPAC Report and CMS Guidance on Increasing Access to Doula 
Services for Medicaid Beneficiaries.--
 (1) MACPAC report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Medicaid and 
 CHIP Payment and Access Commission (referred to in this 
 subsection as ``MACPAC'') shall publish a report on the 
 coverage of doula services under State Medicaid 
 programs, which shall at a minimum include the 
 following:
 (i) Information about coverage for doula 
 services under State Medicaid programs that 
 currently provide coverage for such care, 
 including the type of doula services offered 
 (such as prenatal, labor and delivery, 
 postpartum support, and also community-based 
 and traditional doula services).
 (ii) An analysis of barriers to covering 
 doula services under State Medicaid programs.
 (iii) An identification of effective 
 strategies to increase the use of doula 
 services in order to provide better care and 
 achieve better maternal and infant health 
 outcomes, including strategies that States may 
 use to recruit, train, and certify a diverse 
 doula workforce, particularly from underserved 
 communities, communities of color, and 
 communities facing linguistic or cultural 
 barriers.
 (iv) Recommendations for legislative and 
 administrative actions to increase access to 
 doula services in State Medicaid programs, 
 including actions that ensure doulas may earn a 
 living wage that accounts for their time and 
 costs associated with providing care and 
 community-based doula program administration 
 and operation.
 (B) Stakeholder consultation.--In developing the 
 report required under subparagraph (A), MACPAC shall 
 consult with relevant stakeholders, including--
 (i) States;
 (ii) organizations, especially reproductive 
 justice and birth justice organizations led by 
 people of color, representing consumers of 
 maternal health care, including those that are 
 disproportionately impacted by poor maternal 
 health outcomes;
 (iii) organizations and individuals 
 representing doulas, including community-based 
 doula programs and those who serve underserved 
 communities, including communities of color, 
 and communities facing linguistic or cultural 
 barriers;
 (iv) organizations representing health care 
 providers; and
 (v) Black, Indigenous, and other maternal 
 health care consumers of color who have 
 experienced severe maternal morbidity.
 (2) CMS guidance.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date that MACPAC publishes the report required under 
 paragraph (1)(A), the Administrator of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services shall issue guidance to 
 States on increasing access to doula services under 
 Medicaid. Such guidance shall at a minimum include--
 (i) options for States to provide medical 
 assistance for doula services under State 
 Medicaid programs;
 (ii) best practices for ensuring that 
 doulas, including community-based doulas, 
 receive reimbursement for doula services 
 provided under a State Medicaid program, at a 
 level that allows doulas to earn a living wage 
 that accounts for their time and costs 
 associated with providing care and community-
 based doula program administration; and
 (iii) best practices for increasing access 
 to doula services, including services provided 
 by community-based doulas, under State Medicaid 
 programs.
 (B) Stakeholder consultation.--In developing the 
 guidance required under subparagraph (A), the 
 Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services shall consult with MACPAC and other relevant 
 stakeholders, including--
 (i) State Medicaid officials;
 (ii) organizations representing consumers 
 of maternal health care, including those that 
 are disproportionately impacted by poor 
 maternal health outcomes;
 (iii) organizations representing doulas, 
 including community-based doulas and those who 
 serve underserved communities, such as 
 communities of color and communities facing 
 linguistic or cultural barriers; and
 (iv) organizations representing medical 
 professionals.
 (e) GAO Report on State Medicaid Programs' Use of Telehealth To 
Increase Access to Maternity Care.--Not later than 1 year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall submit a report to Congress on State Medicaid 
programs' use of telehealth to increase access to maternity care. Such 
report shall include the following:
 (1) The number of State Medicaid programs that utilize 
 telehealth that increases access to maternity care.
 (2) With respect to State Medicaid programs that utilize 
 telehealth that increases access to maternity care, information 
 about--
 (A) common characteristics of such programs' 
 approaches to utilizing telehealth that increases 
 access to maternity care;
 (B) differences in States' approaches to utilizing 
 telehealth to improve access to maternity care, and the 
 resulting differences in State maternal health 
 outcomes, as determined by factors described in 
 subsection (C); and
 (C) when compared to patients who receive maternity 
 care in person, what is known about--
 (i) the demographic characteristics, such 
 as race, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, 
 gender identity, disability status, age, and 
 preferred language of the individuals enrolled 
 in such programs who use telehealth to access 
 maternity care;
 (ii) health outcomes for such individuals, 
 including frequency of mortality and severe 
 morbidity, as compared to individuals with 
 similar characteristics who did not use 
 telehealth to access maternity care;
 (iii) the services provided to individuals 
 through telehealth, including family planning 
 services, mental health care services, and oral 
 health services;
 (iv) the devices and equipment provided to 
 individuals for remote patient monitoring and 
 telehealth, including blood pressure monitors 
 and blood glucose monitors;
 (v) the quality of maternity care provided 
 through telehealth, including whether maternity 
 care provided through telehealth is culturally 
 and linguistically appropriate;
 (vi) the level of patient satisfaction with 
 maternity care provided through telehealth to 
 individuals enrolled in State Medicaid 
 programs;
 (vii) the impact of utilizing telehealth to 
 increase access to maternity care on spending, 
 cost savings, access to care, and utilization 
 of care under State Medicaid programs; and
 (viii) the accessibility and effectiveness 
 of telehealth for maternity care during the 
 COVID-19 pandemic.
 (3) An identification and analysis of the barriers to using 
 telehealth to increase access to maternity care under State 
 Medicaid programs.
 (4) Recommendations for such legislative and administrative 
 actions related to increasing access to telehealth maternity 
 services under Medicaid as the Comptroller General deems 
 appropriate.

SEC. 5203. SOCIAL DETERMINANTS FOR MOMS.

 (a) Task Force to Develop a Strategy to Address Social Determinants 
of Maternal Health.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall convene a task force (in this subsection referred to as 
 the ``Task Force'') to develop a strategy to coordinate efforts 
 between Federal agencies to address social determinants of 
 maternal health with respect to pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals.
 (2) Ex officio members.--The ex officio members of the Task 
 Force shall consist of the following:
 (A) The Secretary of Health and Human Services (or 
 a designee thereof).
 (B) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
 (or a designee thereof).
 (C) The Secretary of Transportation (or a designee 
 thereof).
 (D) The Secretary of Agriculture (or a designee 
 thereof).
 (E) The Secretary of Labor (or a designee thereof).
 (F) The Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency (or a designee thereof).
 (G) The Assistant Secretary for the Administration 
 for Children and Families (or a designee thereof).
 (H) The Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services (or a designee thereof).
 (I) The Director of the Indian Health Service (or a 
 designee thereof).
 (J) The Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health (or a designee thereof).
 (K) The Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration (or a designee thereof).
 (L) The Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
 Health of the Department of Health and Human Services 
 (or a designee thereof).
 (M) The Deputy Assistant Secretary for Women's 
 Health of the Department of Health and Human Services 
 (or a designee thereof).
 (N) The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention (or a designee thereof).
 (O) The Director of the Office on Violence Against 
 Women of the Department of Justice (or a designee 
 thereof).
 (3) Appointed members.--In addition to the ex officio 
 members of the Task Force, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall appoint the following members of the Task Force:
 (A) At least two representatives of patients, to 
 include--
 (i) a representative of patients who have 
 suffered from severe maternal morbidity; or
 (ii) a representative of patients who is a 
 family member of an individual who suffered a 
 pregnancy-related death.
 (B) At least two leaders of community-based 
 organizations that address maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity with a specific focus on 
 racial and ethnic inequities. In appointing such 
 leaders under this subparagraph, the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall give priority to 
 individuals who are leaders of organizations led by 
 individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (C) At least two perinatal health workers.
 (D) A professionally diverse panel of maternity 
 care providers.
 (4) Chair.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall select the chair of the Task Force from among the members 
 of the Task Force.
 (5) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall submit to Congress 
 a report on--
 (A) the strategy developed under paragraph (1);
 (B) recommendations on funding amounts with respect 
 to implementing such strategy; and
 (C) recommendations for how to expand coverage of 
 social services to address social determinants of 
 maternal health under Medicaid managed care 
 organizations and State Medicaid programs.
 (6) Termination.--Section 1013 of title 5, United States 
 Code, shall not apply to the Task Force with respect to 
 termination.
 (b) Housing for Moms Grant Program.--
 (1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' 
 means--
 (i) a community-based organization;
 (ii) a State or local governmental entity, 
 including a State or local public health 
 department;
 (iii) an Indian tribe or Tribal 
 organization (as such terms are defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304)); or
 (iv) an Urban Indian organization (as such 
 term is defined in section 4 of the Indian 
 Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)).
 (B) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
 (2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a Housing 
 for Moms grant program to make grants to eligible entities to 
 increase access to safe, stable, affordable, and adequate 
 housing for pregnant and postpartum individuals and their 
 families.
 (3) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may provide.
 (4) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity that--
 (A) is a community-based organization or will 
 partner with a community-based organization to 
 implement initiatives to increase access to safe, 
 stable, affordable, and adequate housing for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals and their families;
 (B) is operating in an area with high rates of 
 adverse maternal health outcomes or significant racial 
 or ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, to 
 the extent such data are available; and
 (C) is operating in an area with a high poverty 
 rate or a significant number of individuals who lack 
 consistent access to safe, stable, affordable, and 
 adequate housing.
 (5) Use of funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant 
 under this subsection shall use funds from the grant for the 
 purposes of--
 (A) identifying and conducting outreach to pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals who are low-income and lack 
 consistent access to safe, stable, affordable, and 
 adequate housing;
 (B) providing safe, stable, affordable, and 
 adequate housing options to such individuals;
 (C) connecting such individuals with local 
 organizations offering safe, stable, affordable, and 
 adequate housing options;
 (D) providing application assistance to such 
 individuals seeking to enroll in programs offering 
 safe, stable, affordable, and adequate housing options;
 (E) providing direct financial assistance to such 
 individuals for the purposes of maintaining safe, 
 stable, and adequate housing for the duration of the 
 individual's pregnancy and postpartum periods; and
 (F) working with relevant stakeholders to ensure 
 that local housing and homeless shelter infrastructure 
 is supportive to pregnant and postpartum individuals, 
 including through--
 (i) health-promoting housing codes;
 (ii) enforcement of housing codes;
 (iii) proactive rental inspection programs;
 (iv) code enforcement officer training; and
 (v) partnerships between regional offices 
 of the Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development and community-based organizations 
 to ensure housing laws are understood and 
 violations are discovered.
 (6) Reporting.--
 (A) Eligible entities.--The Secretary shall require 
 each eligible entity receiving a grant under this 
 subsection to annually submit to the Secretary and make 
 publicly available a report on the status of activities 
 conducted using the grant.
 (B) Secretary.--Not later than the end of each 
 fiscal year in which grants are made under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress and 
 make publicly available a report that--
 (i) summarizes the reports received under 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) evaluates the effectiveness of grants 
 awarded under this subsection in increasing 
 access to safe, stable, affordable, and 
 adequate housing for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals and their families; and
 (iii) makes recommendations with respect to 
 ensuring activities described in paragraph (5) 
 continue after grant amounts made available 
 under this subsection are expended.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 2025, which shall remain available until expended.
 (c) Department of Transportation.--
 (1) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall 
 submit to Congress and make publicly available a report 
 containing--
 (A) an assessment of transportation barriers 
 preventing individuals from attending prenatal and 
 postpartum appointments, accessing maternal health care 
 services, or accessing services and resources related 
 to social determinants of maternal health;
 (B) recommendations on how to overcome the barriers 
 assessed under subparagraph (A); and
 (C) an assessment of transportation safety risks 
 for pregnant individuals and recommendations on how to 
 mitigate those risks.
 (2) Considerations.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of Transportation shall give special consideration to 
 solutions for--
 (A) pregnant and postpartum individuals living in a 
 health professional shortage area designated under 
 section 332 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 254e);
 (B) pregnant and postpartum individuals living in 
 areas with high maternal mortality or severe morbidity 
 rates or significant racial or ethnic inequities in 
 maternal health outcomes; and
 (C) pregnant and postpartum individuals with a 
 disability that impacts mobility.
 (d) Department of Agriculture.--
 (1) Special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children.--
 (A) Extension of postpartum period.--Section 
 17(b)(10) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 
 1786(b)(10)) is amended by striking ``six'' and 
 inserting ``24''.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to 
 Congress a report that evaluates the effect of the 
 amendment made by subparagraph (A) on--
 (i) maternal and infant health outcomes, 
 including racial and ethnic inequities with 
 respect to those outcomes;
 (ii) breastfeeding rates among postpartum 
 individuals;
 (iii) qualitative evaluations of family 
 experiences under the special supplemental 
 nutrition program for women, infants, and 
 children established under section 17 of the 
 Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786); 
 and
 (iv) other relevant information as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Grant program for healthy food and clean water for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 program (referred to in this paragraph as the 
 ``program'') to award grants, on a competitive basis, 
 to eligible entities to carry out the activities 
 described in subparagraph (D).
 (B) Application.--To be eligible for a grant under 
 the program, an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 (C) Priority.--In awarding grants under the 
 program, the Secretary shall give priority to an 
 eligible entity that--
 (i) is, or will partner with, an eligible 
 entity described in paragraph (3)(A)(i); and
 (ii) is operating in an area with a high 
 rate of--
 (I) adverse maternal health 
 outcomes; or
 (II) significant racial or ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes.
 (D) Use of funds.--An eligible entity shall use a 
 grant awarded under the program to deliver healthy 
 food, infant formula, clean water, or diapers to 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals located in areas 
 that are food deserts, as determined by the Secretary 
 using data from the Food Access Research Atlas of the 
 Department of Agriculture.
 (E) Reports.--
 (i) Eligible entities.--Not later than 1 
 year after the date on which an eligible entity 
 receives a grant under the program, and 
 annually thereafter, the eligible entity shall 
 submit to the Secretary a report on the status 
 of activities conducted using the grant, which 
 shall contain such information as the Secretary 
 may require.
 (ii) Secretary.--
 (I) In general.--Not later than 2 
 years after the date on which the first 
 grant is awarded under the program, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
 report that includes--
 (aa) a summary of the 
 reports submitted by eligible 
 entities under clause (i);
 (bb) an assessment of the 
 extent to which food 
 distributed using grants 
 awarded under the program was 
 purchased from local and 
 regional food systems;
 (cc) an evaluation of the 
 effect of the program on 
 maternal and infant health 
 outcomes, including racial and 
 ethnic inequities with respect 
 to those outcomes; and
 (dd) recommendations with 
 respect to ensuring the 
 activities described in 
 subparagraph (D) continue after 
 the grant period funding those 
 activities expires.
 (II) Publication.--The Secretary 
 shall make the report submitted under 
 subclause (I) publicly available on the 
 website of the Department of 
 Agriculture.
 (F) Authorization of appropriations.--There is 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out the program 
 $5,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 
 2027.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' 
 means--
 (i) a community-based organization;
 (ii) a State or local governmental entity, 
 including a State or local public health 
 department;
 (iii) an Indian Tribe or Tribal 
 organization (as those terms are defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304)); and
 (iv) an Urban Indian organization (as 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)).
 (B) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the 
 Secretary of Agriculture.
 (e) Environmental Study Through National Academies.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency shall seek to enter into an agreement with 
 the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``National Academies'') 
 under which the National Academies agree to conduct a study on 
 the impacts of, with respect to maternal and infant health 
 incomes, water and air quality, exposure to extreme 
 temperatures, environmental chemicals, environmental risks in 
 the workplace and the home, and pollution levels.
 (2) Study requirements.--The agreement under paragraph (1) 
 shall direct the National Academies to make recommendations 
 for--
 (A) improving environmental conditions to improve 
 maternal and infant health outcomes; and
 (B) reducing or eliminating racial and ethnic 
 inequities in those outcomes.
 (3) Report.--The agreement under paragraph (1) shall direct 
 the National Academies to complete the study under this 
 subsection, and submit to Congress and make publicly available 
 a report on the results of the study, not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (f) Child Care Access.--
 (1) Grant program.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') 
 shall award grants to eligible organizations to carry out 
 programs to provide pregnant and postpartum individuals with 
 free and accessible drop-in child care services during prenatal 
 and postpartum appointments.
 (2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 (3) Eligible organizations.--
 (A) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this subsection, an organization shall be an 
 organization that--
 (i) provides child care services; and
 (ii) can carry out a program providing 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals with free 
 and accessible drop-in child care services 
 during prenatal and postpartum appointments.
 (B) Prioritization.--In selecting grant recipients 
 under this subsection, the Secretary shall give 
 priority to eligible organizations that operate in an 
 area that has, to the extent data with respect to such 
 an area are available--
 (i) high rates of adverse maternal health 
 outcomes; or
 (ii) significant racial or ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes.
 (4) Timing.--The Secretary shall commence the grant program 
 under paragraph (1) not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (5) Reporting.--
 (A) Grantees.--Each recipient of a grant under this 
 subsection shall annually submit to the Secretary and 
 make publicly available a report on the status of 
 activities conducted using the grant. Each such report 
 shall include--
 (i) an analysis of the effect of the funded 
 program on prenatal and postpartum appointment 
 attendance rates;
 (ii) summaries of qualitative assessments 
 of the funded program from--
 (I) pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals participating in the 
 program; and
 (II) the families of such 
 individuals; and
 (iii) such additional information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 (B) Secretary.--Not later than the end of fiscal 
 year 2027, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress, 
 and make publicly available, a report containing each 
 of the following:
 (i) A summary of the reports received under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (ii) An assessment of the effects, if any, 
 of the funded programs on maternal health 
 outcomes, with a specific focus on racial and 
 ethnic inequities in such outcomes.
 (iii) A description of actions the 
 Secretary can take to ensure that pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals eligible for medical 
 assistance under a State plan under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1936 et 
 seq.) have access to free and accessible drop-
 in child care services during prenatal and 
 postpartum appointments, including 
 identification of the funding necessary to 
 carry out such actions.
 (6) Drop-in child care services defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``drop-in child care services'' means 
 child care (including early childhood education) services that 
 are--
 (A) delivered at a facility that meets the 
 requirements of all applicable laws and regulations of 
 the State or local government in which it is located, 
 including the requirements for licensing of the 
 facility as a child care facility; and
 (B) provided in single encounters without requiring 
 full-time enrollment of a person in a child care 
 program.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 
 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2027.
 (g) Grants to Local Entities Addressing Social Determinants of 
Maternal Health.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (in this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 award grants to eligible entities to--
 (A) address social determinants of maternal health 
 for pregnant and postpartum individuals; and
 (B) eliminate racial and ethnic inequities in 
 maternal health outcomes.
 (2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may provide.
 (3) Prioritization.--In awarding grants under paragraph 
 (1), the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity 
 that--
 (A) is a community-based organization, or will 
 partner with a community-based organization to carry 
 out the activities under paragraph (4);
 (B) is operating in an area with high rates of 
 adverse maternal health outcomes or significant racial 
 or ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes; and
 (C) is operating in an area with a high poverty 
 rate.
 (4) Activities.--An eligible entity that receives a grant 
 under this subsection may use funds received through the grant 
 to--
 (A) hire and retain staff;
 (B) develop and distribute a list of available 
 resources with respect to social service programs in a 
 community;
 (C) establish a resource center that provides 
 multiple social service programs in a single location;
 (D) offer programs and resources in the communities 
 in which the respective eligible entities are located 
 to address social determinants of health for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals; and
 (E) consult with such pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals to conduct an assessment of the activities 
 under this paragraph.
 (5) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide to 
 grant recipients under this subsection technical assistance to 
 plan for sustaining programs to address social determinants of 
 maternal health among pregnant and postpartum individuals after 
 the period of the grant.
 (6) Reporting.--
 (A) Grantees.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 on which an eligible entity first receives a grant 
 under this subsection, and annually thereafter, an 
 eligible entity shall submit to the Secretary, and make 
 publicly available, a report on the status of 
 activities conducted using the grant. Each such report 
 shall include data on the effects of such activities, 
 disaggregated by race, ethnicity, gender, and other 
 relevant factors.
 (B) Secretary.--Not later than the end of fiscal 
 year 2029, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
 report that includes--
 (i) a summary of the reports received under 
 subparagraph (A); and
 (ii) recommendations for--
 (I) improving maternal health 
 outcomes; and
 (II) reducing or eliminating racial 
 and ethnic inequities in maternal 
 health outcomes.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $15,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Culturally congruent.--The term ``culturally 
 congruent'', with respect to care or maternity care provided to 
 a health care consumer, means care that is in agreement with 
 the preferred cultural values, beliefs, worldview, language, 
 and practices of the health care consumer and other relevant 
 stakeholders.
 (2) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity care 
 provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, physician assistant, midwife 
 who meets at a minimum the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (3) Maternal mortality.--The term ``maternal mortality'' 
 means a death occurring during or within a one-year period 
 after pregnancy, caused by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications, including a suicide, overdose, or other death 
 resulting from a mental health or substance use disorder 
 attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications.
 (4) Perinatal health worker.--The term ``perinatal health 
 worker'' means a doula, community health worker, peer 
 supporter, breastfeeding and lactation educator or counselor, 
 nutritionist or dietitian, childbirth educator, social worker, 
 home visitor, language interpreter, or navigator.
 (5) Postpartum and postpartum period.--The terms 
 ``postpartum'' and ``postpartum period'' refer to the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (6) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).
 (7) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term ``severe maternal 
 morbidity'' means a health condition, including mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth that results in 
 significant short-term or long-term consequences to the health 
 of the individual who was pregnant.
 (8) Social determinants of maternal health defined.--The 
 term ``social determinants of maternal health'' means non-
 clinical factors that impact maternal health outcomes, 
 including--
 (A) economic factors, which may include poverty, 
 employment, food security, support for and access to 
 lactation and other infant feeding options, housing 
 stability, and related factors;
 (B) neighborhood factors, which may include quality 
 of housing, access to transportation, access to child 
 care, availability of healthy foods and nutrition 
 counseling, availability of clean water, air and water 
 quality, ambient temperatures, neighborhood crime and 
 violence, access to broadband, and related factors;
 (C) social and community factors, which may include 
 systemic racism, gender discrimination or 
 discrimination based on other protected classes, 
 workplace conditions, incarceration, and related 
 factors;
 (D) household factors, which may include ability to 
 conduct lead testing and abatement, car seat 
 installation, indoor air temperatures, and related 
 factors;
 (E) education access and quality factors, which may 
 include educational attainment, language and literacy, 
 and related factors; and
 (F) health care access factors, including health 
 insurance coverage, access to culturally congruent 
 health care services, providers, and non-clinical 
 support, access to home visiting services, access to 
 wellness and stress management programs, health 
 literacy, access to telehealth and items required to 
 receive telehealth services, and related factors.

SEC. 5204. KIRA JOHNSON ACT.

 (a) Investments in Community-Based Organizations To Improve Black 
Maternal Health Outcomes.--
 (1) Awards.--Following the 1-year period described in 
 paragraph (3), the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
 this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall award 
 grants to eligible entities to establish or expand programs to 
 prevent maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity among 
 Black pregnant and postpartum individuals.
 (2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to seek a grant under this 
 subsection, an entity shall be a community-based organization 
 offering programs and resources aligned with evidence-based 
 practices for improving maternal health outcomes for Black 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals.
 (3) Outreach and technical assistance period.--During the 
 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary shall--
 (A) conduct outreach to encourage eligible entities 
 to apply for grants under this subsection; and
 (B) provide technical assistance to eligible 
 entities on best practices for applying for grants 
 under this subsection.
 (4) Special consideration.--
 (A) Outreach.--In conducting outreach under 
 paragraph (3), the Secretary shall give special 
 consideration to eligible entities that--
 (i) are based in, and provide support for, 
 communities with high rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes or significant racial and 
 ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, 
 to the extent such data are available;
 (ii) are led by Black people; and
 (iii) offer programs and resources that are 
 aligned with evidence-based practices for 
 improving maternal health outcomes for Black 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals.
 (B) Awards.--In awarding grants under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall give special 
 consideration to eligible entities that--
 (i) are described in clauses (i), (ii), and 
 (iii) of subparagraph (A);
 (ii) offer programs and resources designed 
 in consultation with and intended for Black 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals; and
 (iii) offer programs and resources in the 
 communities in which the respective eligible 
 entities are located that--
 (I) promote maternal mental health 
 and maternal substance use disorder 
 treatments and supports that are 
 aligned with evidence-based practices 
 for improving maternal mental and 
 behavioral health outcomes for Black 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals;
 (II) address social determinants of 
 maternal health for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (III) promote evidence-based health 
 literacy and pregnancy, childbirth, and 
 parenting education for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (IV) provide support from perinatal 
 health workers to pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (V) provide culturally congruent 
 training to perinatal health workers;
 (VI) conduct or support research on 
 maternal health issues 
 disproportionately impacting Black 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals;
 (VII) provide support to family 
 members of individuals who suffered a 
 pregnancy-associated death or 
 pregnancy-related death;
 (VIII) operate midwifery practices 
 that provide culturally congruent 
 maternal health care and support, 
 including for the purposes of--
 (aa) supporting additional 
 education, training, and 
 certification programs, 
 including support for distance 
 learning;
 (bb) providing financial 
 support to current and future 
 midwives to address education 
 costs, debts, and other needs;
 (cc) clinical site 
 investments;
 (dd) supporting preceptor 
 development trainings;
 (ee) expanding the 
 midwifery practice; or
 (ff) related needs 
 identified by the midwifery 
 practice and described in the 
 practice's application; or
 (IX) have developed other programs 
 and resources that address community-
 specific needs for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals and are aligned 
 with evidence-based practices for 
 improving maternal health outcomes for 
 Black pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals.
 (5) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide to 
 grant recipients under this subsection technical assistance 
 on--
 (A) capacity building to establish or expand 
 programs to prevent adverse maternal health outcomes 
 among Black pregnant and postpartum individuals;
 (B) best practices in data collection, measurement, 
 evaluation, and reporting; and
 (C) planning for sustaining programs to prevent 
 maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity among 
 Black pregnant and postpartum individuals after the 
 period of the grant.
 (6) Evaluation.--Not later than the end of fiscal year 
 2029, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress an evaluation 
 of the grant program under this subsection that--
 (A) assesses the effectiveness of outreach efforts 
 during the application process in diversifying the pool 
 of grant recipients;
 (B) makes recommendations for future outreach 
 efforts to diversify the pool of grant recipients for 
 Department of Health and Human Services grant programs 
 and funding opportunities related to maternal health;
 (C) assesses the effectiveness of programs funded 
 by grants under this subsection in improving maternal 
 health outcomes for Black pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals, to the extent practicable; and
 (D) makes recommendations for future Department of 
 Health and Human Services grant programs and funding 
 opportunities that deliver funding to community-based 
 organizations that provide programs and resources that 
 are aligned with evidence-based practices for improving 
 maternal health outcomes for Black pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (b) Investments in Community-Based Organizations To Improve 
Maternal Health Outcomes in Underserved Communities.--
 (1) Awards.--Following the 1-year period described in 
 paragraph (3), the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
 this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall award 
 grants to eligible entities to establish or expand programs to 
 prevent maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity among 
 underserved groups.
 (2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to seek a grant under this 
 subsection, an entity shall be a community-based organization 
 offering programs and resources aligned with evidence-based 
 practices for improving maternal health outcomes for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals.
 (3) Outreach and technical assistance period.--During the 
 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary shall--
 (A) conduct outreach to encourage eligible entities 
 to apply for grants under this subsection; and
 (B) provide technical assistance to eligible 
 entities on best practices for applying for grants 
 under this subsection.
 (4) Special consideration.--
 (A) Outreach.--In conducting outreach under 
 paragraph (3), the Secretary shall give special 
 consideration to eligible entities that--
 (i) are based in, and provide support for, 
 communities with high rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes or significant racial and 
 ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, 
 to the extent such data are available;
 (ii) are led by individuals from racially, 
 ethnically, and geographically diverse 
 backgrounds; and
 (iii) offer programs and resources that are 
 aligned with evidence-based practices for 
 improving maternal health outcomes for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals.
 (B) Awards.--In awarding grants under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall give special 
 consideration to eligible entities that--
 (i) are described in clauses (i), (ii), and 
 (iii) of subparagraph (A);
 (ii) offer programs and resources designed 
 in consultation with and intended for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals from underserved 
 groups;
 (iii) offer programs and resources in the 
 communities in which the respective eligible 
 entities are located that--
 (I) promote maternal mental health 
 and maternal substance use disorder 
 treatments and support that are aligned 
 with evidence-based practices for 
 improving maternal mental and 
 behavioral health outcomes for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals;
 (II) address social determinants of 
 maternal health for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (III) promote evidence-based health 
 literacy and pregnancy, childbirth, and 
 parenting education for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (IV) provide support from perinatal 
 health workers to pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (V) provide culturally congruent 
 training to perinatal health workers;
 (VI) conduct or support research on 
 maternal health outcomes and 
 inequities;
 (VII) provide support to family 
 members of individuals who suffered a 
 pregnancy-associated death or 
 pregnancy-related death; or
 (VIII) operate midwifery practices 
 that provide culturally congruent 
 maternal health care and support, 
 including for the purposes of--
 (aa) supporting additional 
 education, training, and 
 certification programs, 
 including support for distance 
 learning;
 (bb) providing financial 
 support to current and future 
 midwives to address education 
 costs, debts, and other needs;
 (cc) clinical site 
 investments;
 (dd) supporting preceptor 
 development trainings;
 (ee) expanding the 
 midwifery practice; or
 (ff) related needs 
 identified by the midwifery 
 practice and described in the 
 practice's application; or
 (iv) have developed other programs and 
 resources that address community-specific needs 
 for pregnant and postpartum individuals and are 
 aligned with evidence-based practices for 
 improving maternal health outcomes for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals.
 (5) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide to 
 grant recipients under this subsection technical assistance 
 on--
 (A) capacity building to establish or expand 
 programs to prevent adverse maternal health outcomes 
 among pregnant and postpartum individuals from 
 underserved groups;
 (B) best practices in data collection, measurement, 
 evaluation, and reporting; and
 (C) planning for sustaining programs to prevent 
 maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity among 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from underserved 
 groups after the period of the grant.
 (6) Evaluation.--Not later than the end of fiscal year 
 2029, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress an evaluation 
 of the grant program under this subsection that--
 (A) assesses the effectiveness of outreach efforts 
 during the application process in diversifying the pool 
 of grant recipients;
 (B) makes recommendations for future outreach 
 efforts to diversify the pool of grant recipients for 
 Department of Health and Human Services grant programs 
 and funding opportunities related to maternal health;
 (C) assesses the effectiveness of programs funded 
 by grants under this subsection in improving maternal 
 health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum individuals 
 from underserved groups, to the extent practicable; and
 (D) makes recommendations for future Department of 
 Health and Human Services grant programs and funding 
 opportunities that deliver funding to community-based 
 organizations that provide programs and resources that 
 are aligned with evidence-based practices for improving 
 maternal health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals.
 (7) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``underserved 
 groups'' refers to pregnant and postpartum individuals--
 (A) from racial and ethnic minority groups;
 (B) whose household income is equal to or less than 
 150 percent of the Federal poverty line;
 (C) who live in health professional shortage areas 
 (as such term is defined in section 332 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e));
 (D) who live in counties with no hospital offering 
 obstetric care, no birth center, and no obstetric 
 provider; or
 (E) who live in counties with a level of 
 vulnerability of moderate-to-high or higher, according 
 to the Social Vulnerability Index of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention.
 (8) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (c) Respectful Maternity Care Training for All Employees in 
Maternity Care Settings.--Part B of title VII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293 et seq.) (as amended by section 3002), is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 743. RESPECTFUL MATERNITY CARE TRAINING FOR ALL EMPLOYEES IN 
 MATERNITY CARE SETTINGS.

 ``(a) Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants for programs to 
reduce and prevent bias, racism, and discrimination in maternity care 
settings and to advance respectful, culturally congruent, trauma-
informed care.
 ``(b) Special Consideration.--In awarding grants under subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall give special consideration to applications for 
programs that would--
 ``(1) apply to all maternity care providers and any 
 employees who interact with pregnant and postpartum individuals 
 in the provider setting, including front desk employees, 
 sonographers, schedulers, health care professionals, hospital 
 or health system administrators, security staff, and other 
 employees;
 ``(2) emphasize periodic, as opposed to one-time, trainings 
 for all birthing professionals and employees described in 
 paragraph (1);
 ``(3) address implicit bias, racism, and cultural humility;
 ``(4) be delivered in ongoing education settings for 
 providers maintaining their licenses, with a preference for 
 trainings that provide continuing education units;
 ``(5) include trauma-informed care best practices and an 
 emphasis on shared decision making between providers and 
 patients;
 ``(6) include antiracism training and programs;
 ``(7) be delivered in undergraduate programs that funnel 
 into health professions schools;
 ``(8) be delivered in settings that apply to providers of 
 the special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, 
 and children under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966;
 ``(9) integrate bias training in obstetric emergency 
 simulation trainings or related trainings;
 ``(10) include training for emergency department employees 
 and emergency medical technicians on recognizing warning signs 
 for severe pregnancy-related complications;
 ``(11) offer training to all maternity care providers on 
 the value of racially, ethnically, and professionally diverse 
 maternity care teams to provide culturally congruent care; or
 ``(12) be based on one or more programs designed by a 
 historically Black college or university or other minority-
 serving institution.
 ``(c) Application.--To seek a grant under subsection (a), an entity 
shall submit an application at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Reporting to Secretary.--Each recipient of a grant under this 
section shall annually submit to the Secretary a report on the status 
of activities conducted using the grant, including, as applicable, a 
description of the impact of training provided through the grant on 
patient outcomes and patient experience for pregnant and postpartum 
individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups and their families.
 ``(e) Dissemination of Findings.--Based on the annual reports 
submitted pursuant to subsection (d), the Secretary--
 ``(1) shall produce an annual report on the findings 
 resulting from programs funded through this section;
 ``(2) shall disseminate such report to all recipients of 
 grants under this section and to the public; and
 ``(3) may include in such report findings on best practices 
 for improving patient outcomes and patient experience for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups and their families in maternity care settings.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `postpartum' means the one-year period 
 beginning on the last day of an individual's pregnancy.
 ``(2) The term `culturally congruent' means in agreement 
 with the preferred cultural values, beliefs, world view, 
 language, and practices of the health care consumer and other 
 stakeholders.
 ``(3) The term `maternity care provider' means a health 
 care provider who--
 ``(A) is a physician, physician assistant, midwife 
 who meets at a minimum the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 ``(B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 ``(4) The term `racial and ethnic minority group' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 1707(g)(1).
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (d) Study on Reducing and Preventing Bias, Racism, and 
Discrimination in Maternity Care Settings.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall seek to enter into an agreement, not later than 90 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, with the National 
 Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (referred to 
 in this subsection as the ``National Academies'') under which 
 the National Academies agree to--
 (A) conduct a study on the design and 
 implementation of programs to reduce and prevent bias, 
 racism, and discrimination in maternity care settings 
 and to advance respectful, culturally congruent, 
 trauma-informed care; and
 (B) not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act--
 (i) complete the study; and
 (ii) transmit a report on the results of 
 the study to the Congress.
 (2) Possible topics.--The agreement entered into pursuant 
 to paragraph (1) may provide for the study of any of the 
 following:
 (A) The development of a scorecard or other 
 evaluation standards for programs designed to reduce 
 and prevent bias, racism, and discrimination in 
 maternity care settings to assess the effectiveness of 
 such programs in improving patient outcomes and patient 
 experience for pregnant and postpartum individuals from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups and their families.
 (B) Determination of the types and frequency of 
 training to reduce and prevent bias, racism, and 
 discrimination in maternity care settings that are 
 demonstrated to improve patient outcomes or patient 
 experience for pregnant and postpartum individuals from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups and their families.
 (e) Respectful Maternity Care Compliance Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 award grants to accredited hospitals, health systems, and other 
 maternity care settings to establish as an integral part of 
 quality implementation initiatives within one or more hospitals 
 or other birth settings a respectful maternity care compliance 
 program.
 (2) Program requirements.--A respectful maternity care 
 compliance program funded through a grant under this subsection 
 shall--
 (A) institutionalize mechanisms to allow patients 
 receiving maternity care services, the families of such 
 patients, or perinatal health workers supporting such 
 patients to report instances of racism or evidence of 
 bias on the basis of race, ethnicity, or another 
 protected class;
 (B) institutionalize response mechanisms through 
 which representatives of the program can directly 
 follow up with the patient, if possible, and the 
 patient's family in a timely manner;
 (C) prepare, and make publicly available, a 
 hospital- or health system-wide strategy to reduce bias 
 on the basis of race, ethnicity, or another protected 
 class in the delivery of maternity care that includes--
 (i) information on the training programs to 
 reduce and prevent bias, racism, and 
 discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, 
 or another protected class for all employees in 
 maternity care settings;
 (ii) information on the number of cases 
 reported to the compliance program; and
 (iii) the development of methods to 
 routinely assess the extent to which bias, 
 racism, or discrimination on the basis of race, 
 ethnicity, or another protected class are 
 present in the delivery of maternity care to 
 patients from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 (D) develop mechanisms to routinely collect and 
 publicly report hospital-level data related to patient-
 reported experience of care; and
 (E) provide annual reports to the Secretary with 
 information about each case reported to the compliance 
 program over the course of the year containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require, such as--
 (i) de-identified demographic information 
 on the patient in the case, such as race, 
 ethnicity, gender identity, and primary 
 language;
 (ii) the content of the report from the 
 patient or the family of the patient to the 
 compliance program;
 (iii) the response from the compliance 
 program; and
 (iv) to the extent applicable, 
 institutional changes made as a result of the 
 case.
 (3) Secretary requirements.--
 (A) Processes.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 establish processes for--
 (i) disseminating best practices for 
 establishing and implementing a respectful 
 maternity care compliance program within a 
 hospital or other birth setting;
 (ii) promoting coordination and 
 collaboration between hospitals, health 
 systems, and other maternity care delivery 
 settings on the establishment and 
 implementation of respectful maternity care 
 compliance programs; and
 (iii) evaluating the effectiveness of 
 respectful maternity care compliance programs 
 on maternal health outcomes and patient and 
 family experiences, especially for patients 
 from racial and ethnic minority groups and 
 their families.
 (B) Study.--
 (i) In general.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary shall, through a contract with an 
 independent research organization, conduct a 
 study on strategies to address--
 (I) racism or bias on the basis of 
 race, ethnicity, or another protected 
 class in the delivery of maternity care 
 services; and
 (II) successful implementation of 
 respectful care initiatives.
 (ii) Components of study.--The study shall 
 include the following:
 (I) An assessment of the reports 
 submitted to the Secretary from the 
 respectful maternity care compliance 
 programs pursuant to paragraph (2)(E).
 (II) Based on such assessment, 
 recommendations for potential 
 accountability mechanisms related to 
 cases of racism or bias on the basis of 
 race, ethnicity, or another protected 
 class in the delivery of maternity care 
 services at hospitals and other birth 
 settings. Such recommendations shall 
 take into consideration medical and 
 non-medical factors that contribute to 
 adverse patient experiences and 
 maternal health outcomes.
 (iii) Report.--The Secretary shall submit 
 to the Congress, and make publicly available, a 
 report on the results of the study under this 
 subparagraph.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
 may be necessary for fiscal years 2025 through 2030.
 (f) GAO Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Comptroller 
 General of the United States shall submit to the Congress, and 
 make publicly available, a report on the establishment of 
 respectful maternity care compliance programs within hospitals, 
 health systems, and other maternity care settings.
 (2) Matters included.--The report under paragraph (1) shall 
 include the following:
 (A) Information regarding the extent to which 
 hospitals, health systems, and other maternity care 
 settings have elected to establish respectful maternity 
 care compliance programs, including--
 (i) which hospitals and other birth 
 settings elect to establish compliance programs 
 and when such programs are established;
 (ii) to the extent practicable, impacts of 
 the establishment of such programs on maternal 
 health outcomes and patient and family 
 experiences in the hospitals and other birth 
 settings that have established such programs, 
 especially for patients from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups and their families;
 (iii) information on geographic areas, and 
 types of hospitals or other birth settings, 
 where respectful maternity care compliance 
 programs are not being established and 
 information on factors contributing to 
 decisions to not establish such programs; and
 (iv) recommendations for establishing 
 respectful maternity care compliance programs 
 in geographic areas, and types of hospitals or 
 other birth settings, where such programs are 
 not being established.
 (B) Whether the funding made available to carry out 
 this subsection has been sufficient and, if applicable, 
 recommendations for additional appropriations to carry 
 out this subsection.
 (C) Such other information as the Comptroller 
 General determines appropriate.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Culturally congruent.--The term ``culturally 
 congruent'', with respect to care or maternity care, means care 
 that is in agreement with the preferred cultural values, 
 beliefs, worldview, language, and practices of the health care 
 consumer and other stakeholders.
 (2) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity care 
 provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, physician assistant, midwife 
 who meets at a minimum the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (3) Maternal mortality.--The term ``maternal mortality'' 
 means a death occurring during or within a one-year period 
 after pregnancy, caused by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications, including a suicide, overdose, or other death 
 resulting from a mental health or substance use disorder 
 attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications.
 (4) Perinatal health worker.--The term ``perinatal health 
 worker'' means a doula, community health worker, peer 
 supporter, breastfeeding and lactation educator or counselor, 
 nutritionist or dietitian, childbirth educator, social worker, 
 home visitor, language interpreter, or navigator.
 (5) Postpartum and postpartum period.--The terms 
 ``postpartum'' and ``postpartum period'' refer to the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (6) Pregnancy-associated death.--The term ``pregnancy-
 associated death'' means a death of a pregnant or postpartum 
 individual, by any cause, that occurs during, or within 1 year 
 following, the individual's pregnancy, regardless of the 
 outcome, duration, or site of the pregnancy.
 (7) Pregnancy-related death.--The term ``pregnancy-related 
 death'' means a death of a pregnant or postpartum individual 
 that occurs during, or within 1 year following, the 
 individual's pregnancy, from a pregnancy complication, a chain 
 of events initiated by pregnancy, or the aggravation of an 
 unrelated condition by the physiologic effects of pregnancy.
 (8) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).
 (9) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term ``severe maternal 
 morbidity'' means a health condition, including mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth that results in 
 significant short-term or long-term consequences to the health 
 of the individual who was pregnant.
 (10) Social determinants of maternal health defined.--The 
 term ``social determinants of maternal health'' means non-
 clinical factors that impact maternal health outcomes, 
 including--
 (A) economic factors, which may include poverty, 
 employment, food security, support for and access to 
 lactation and other infant feeding options, housing 
 stability, and related factors;
 (B) neighborhood factors, which may include quality 
 of housing, access to transportation, access to child 
 care, availability of healthy foods and nutrition 
 counseling, availability of clean water, air and water 
 quality, ambient temperatures, neighborhood crime and 
 violence, access to broadband, and related factors;
 (C) social and community factors, which may include 
 systemic racism, gender discrimination or 
 discrimination based on other protected classes, 
 workplace conditions, incarceration, and related 
 factors;
 (D) household factors, which may include ability to 
 conduct lead testing and abatement, car seat 
 installation, indoor air temperatures, and related 
 factors;
 (E) education access and quality factors, which may 
 include educational attainment, language and literacy, 
 and related factors; and
 (F) health care access factors, including health 
 insurance coverage, access to culturally congruent 
 health care services, providers, and non-clinical 
 support, access to home visiting services, access to 
 wellness and stress management programs, health 
 literacy, access to telehealth and items required to 
 receive telehealth services, and related factors.

SEC. 5205. PERINATAL WORKFORCE.

 (a) HHS Agency Directives.--
 (1) Guidance to states.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services shall issue and disseminate guidance 
 to States to educate providers, managed care entities, 
 and other insurers about the value and process of 
 delivering respectful maternal health care through 
 diverse and multidisciplinary care provider models.
 (B) Contents.--The guidance required by 
 subparagraph (A) shall address how States can encourage 
 and incentivize hospitals, health systems, midwifery 
 practices, freestanding birth centers, other maternity 
 care provider groups, managed care entities, and other 
 insurers--
 (i) to recruit and retain maternity care 
 providers, mental and behavioral health care 
 providers acting in accordance with State law, 
 registered dietitians or nutrition 
 professionals (as such term is defined in 
 section 1861(vv)(2) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x(vv)(2))), and lactation 
 consultants certified by the International 
 Board of Lactation Consultants Examiners--
 (I) from racially, ethnically, and 
 linguistically diverse backgrounds;
 (II) with experience practicing in 
 racially and ethnically diverse 
 communities; and
 (III) who have undergone training 
 on implicit bias and racism;
 (ii) to incorporate into maternity care 
 teams--
 (I) midwives who meet, at a 
 minimum, the international definition 
 of the midwife and global standards for 
 midwifery education, as established by 
 the International Confederation of 
 Midwives; and
 (II) perinatal health workers;
 (iii) to provide collaborative, culturally 
 congruent care; and
 (iv) to provide opportunities for 
 individuals enrolled in accredited midwifery 
 education programs to participate in job 
 shadowing with maternity care teams in 
 hospitals, health systems, midwifery practices, 
 and freestanding birth centers.
 (2) Study on respectful and culturally congruent maternity 
 care.--
 (A) Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health (in this paragraph referred to as 
 the ``Secretary''), shall conduct a study on best 
 practices in respectful and culturally congruent 
 maternity care.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (i) complete the study required by 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) submit to the Congress, and make 
 publicly available, a report on the results of 
 such study; and
 (iii) include in such report--
 (I) a compendium of examples of 
 hospitals, health systems, midwifery 
 practices, freestanding birth centers, 
 other maternity care provider groups, 
 managed care entities, and other 
 insurers that are delivering respectful 
 and culturally congruent maternal 
 health care;
 (II) a compendium of examples of 
 hospitals, health systems, midwifery 
 practices, freestanding birth centers, 
 other maternity care provider groups, 
 managed care entities, and other 
 insurers that have made progress in 
 reducing inequities in maternal health 
 outcomes and improving birthing 
 experiences for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups; and
 (III) recommendations to hospitals, 
 health systems, midwifery practices, 
 freestanding birth centers, other 
 maternity care provider groups, managed 
 care entities, and other insurers, for 
 best practices in respectful and 
 culturally congruent maternity care.
 (b) Grants To Grow and Diversify the Perinatal Workforce.--Title 
VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after 
section 757 (42 U.S.C. 294f) the following:

``SEC. 758. PERINATAL WORKFORCE GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to entities to 
establish or expand programs described in subsection (b) to grow and 
diversify the perinatal workforce.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--Recipients of grants under this section shall 
use the grants to grow and diversify the perinatal workforce by--
 ``(1) establishing schools or programs that provide 
 education and training to individuals seeking appropriate 
 licensing or certification as--
 ``(A) physician assistants who will complete 
 clinical training in the field of maternal and 
 perinatal health; or
 ``(B) perinatal health workers; and
 ``(2) expanding the capacity of existing schools or 
 programs described in paragraph (1), for the purposes of 
 increasing the number of students enrolled in such schools or 
 programs, including by awarding scholarships for students.
 ``(c) Prioritization.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to any entity that--
 ``(1) has demonstrated a commitment to recruiting and 
 retaining students and faculty from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 ``(2) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain a 
 diverse pool of students into the perinatal workforce program 
 or school supported by funds received through the grant, 
 particularly from racial and ethnic minority groups and other 
 underserved populations;
 ``(3) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain 
 students who plan to practice in a health professional shortage 
 area designated under section 332;
 ``(4) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain 
 students who plan to practice in an area with significant 
 racial and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, to 
 the extent practicable; and
 ``(5) includes in the standard curriculum for all students 
 within the perinatal workforce program or school a bias, 
 racism, or discrimination training program that includes 
 training on implicit bias and racism.
 ``(d) Reporting.--As a condition on receipt of a grant under this 
section for a perinatal workforce program or school, an entity shall 
agree to submit to the Secretary an annual report on the activities 
conducted through the grant, including--
 ``(1) the number and demographics of students participating 
 in the program or school;
 ``(2) the extent to which students in the program or school 
 are entering careers in--
 ``(A) health professional shortage areas designated 
 under section 332; and
 ``(B) areas with significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes, to the extent 
 such data are available; and
 ``(3) whether the program or school has included in the 
 standard curriculum for all students a bias, racism, or 
 discrimination training program that includes explicit and 
 implicit bias, and if so the effectiveness of such training 
 program.
 ``(e) Period of Grants.--The period of a grant under this section 
shall not exceed 5 years.
 ``(f) Application.--To seek a grant under this section, an entity 
shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
including any information necessary for prioritization under subsection 
(c).
 ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide, directly 
or by contract, technical assistance to entities seeking or receiving a 
grant under this section on the development, use, evaluation, and post-
grant period sustainability of the perinatal workforce programs or 
schools proposed to be, or being, established or expanded through the 
grant.
 ``(h) Report by the Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the 
date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
submit to the Congress, and post on the internet website of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, a report on the effectiveness 
of the grant program under this section at--
 ``(1) recruiting students from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 ``(2) increasing the number of physician assistants who 
 will complete clinical training in the field of maternal and 
 perinatal health, and perinatal health workers, from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups and other underserved populations;
 ``(3) increasing the number of physician assistants who 
 will complete clinical training in the field of maternal and 
 perinatal health, and perinatal health workers, working in 
 health professional shortage areas designated under section 
 332; and
 ``(4) increasing the number of physician assistants who 
 will complete clinical training in the field of maternal and 
 perinatal health, and perinatal health workers, working in 
 areas with significant racial and ethnic inequities in maternal 
 health outcomes, to the extent such data are available.
 ``(i) Definition.--In this section, the term `racial and ethnic 
minority group' has the meaning given such term in section 1707(g).
 ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (c) Grants To Grow and Diversify the Nursing Workforce in Maternal 
and Perinatal Health.--Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act is 
amended by inserting after section 811 (42 U.S.C. 296j) the following:

``SEC. 812. PERINATAL NURSING WORKFORCE GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to schools of 
nursing to grow and diversify the perinatal nursing workforce.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--Recipients of grants under this section shall 
use the grants to grow and diversify the perinatal nursing workforce by 
providing scholarships to students seeking to become--
 ``(1) nurse practitioners whose education includes a focus 
 on maternal and perinatal health; or
 ``(2) clinical nurse specialists whose education includes a 
 focus on maternal and perinatal health.
 ``(c) Prioritization.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to any school of nursing that--
 ``(1) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain a 
 diverse pool of students seeking to enter careers focused on 
 maternal and perinatal health, particularly students from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups and other underserved 
 populations;
 ``(2) has developed a partnership with a practice setting 
 in a health professional shortage area designated under section 
 332 for the clinical placements of the school's students;
 ``(3) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain 
 students who plan to practice in an area with significant 
 racial and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, to 
 the extent practicable; and
 ``(4) includes in the standard curriculum for all students 
 seeking to enter careers focused on maternal and perinatal 
 health a bias, racism, or discrimination training program that 
 includes education on implicit bias and racism.
 ``(d) Reporting.--As a condition on receipt of a grant under this 
section, a school of nursing shall agree to submit to the Secretary an 
annual report on the activities conducted through the grant, including, 
to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) the number and demographics of students in the school 
 of nursing seeking to enter careers focused on maternal and 
 perinatal health;
 ``(2) the extent to which such students are preparing to 
 enter careers in--
 ``(A) health professional shortage areas designated 
 under section 332; and
 ``(B) areas with significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes, to the extent 
 such data are available; and
 ``(3) whether the standard curriculum for all students 
 seeking to enter careers focused on maternal and perinatal 
 health includes a bias, racism, or discrimination training 
 program that includes education on implicit bias and racism.
 ``(e) Period of Grants.--The period of a grant under this section 
shall be up to 5 years.
 ``(f) Application.--To seek a grant under this section, an entity 
shall submit to the Secretary an application, at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
including any information necessary for prioritization under subsection 
(c).
 ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide, directly 
or by contract, technical assistance to schools of nursing seeking or 
receiving a grant under this section on the processes of awarding and 
evaluating scholarships through the grant.
 ``(h) Report by the Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the 
date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
submit to the Congress, and post on the internet website of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, a report on the effectiveness 
of the grant program under this section at--
 ``(1) recruiting students from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups and other underserved populations;
 ``(2) increasing the number of nurse practitioners and 
 clinical nurse specialists entering careers focused on maternal 
 and perinatal health from racial and ethnic minority groups and 
 other underserved populations;
 ``(3) increasing the number of nurse practitioners and 
 clinical nurse specialists entering careers focused on maternal 
 and perinatal health working in health professional shortage 
 areas designated under section 332; and
 ``(4) increasing the number of nurse practitioners and 
 clinical nurse specialists entering careers focused on maternal 
 and perinatal health working in areas with significant racial 
 and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, to the 
 extent such data are available.
 ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (d) GAO Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and every 5 years thereafter, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
 Congress a report on barriers to maternal health education and 
 access to care in the United States. Such report shall include 
 the information and recommendations described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Content of report.--The report under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) an assessment of current barriers to entering 
 accredited midwifery education programs, and 
 recommendations for addressing such barriers, 
 particularly for low-income people and people from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups;
 (B) an assessment of current barriers to entering 
 and successfully completing accredited education 
 programs for other health professional careers related 
 to maternity care, including maternity care providers, 
 mental and behavioral health care providers acting in 
 accordance with State law, registered dietitians or 
 nutrition professionals (as such term is defined in 
 section 1861(vv)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395x(vv)(2))), and lactation consultants 
 certified by the International Board of Lactation 
 Consultants Examiners, particularly for low-income 
 people and people from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 (C) an assessment of current barriers that prevent 
 midwives from meeting the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, and recommendations for 
 addressing such barriers, particularly for low-income 
 people and people from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 (D) an assessment of inequities in access to 
 maternity care providers, mental or behavioral health 
 care providers acting in accordance with State law, 
 registered dietitians or nutrition professionals (as 
 such term is defined in section 1861(vv)(2) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(vv)(2))), 
 lactation consultants certified by the International 
 Board of Lactation Consultants Examiners, and perinatal 
 health workers, stratified by race, ethnicity, gender 
 identity, geographic location, and insurance type and 
 recommendations to promote greater access equity; and
 (E) recommendations to promote greater equity in 
 compensation for perinatal health workers under public 
 and private insurers, particularly for such individuals 
 from racially and ethnically diverse backgrounds.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Culturally congruent.--The term ``culturally 
 congruent'', with respect to care or maternity care, means care 
 that is in agreement with the preferred cultural values, 
 beliefs, worldview, language, and practices of the health care 
 consumer and other stakeholders.
 (2) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity care 
 provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, physician assistant, midwife 
 who meets at a minimum the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (3) Perinatal health worker.--The term ``perinatal health 
 worker'' means a doula, community health worker, peer 
 supporter, breastfeeding and lactation educator or counselor, 
 nutritionist or dietitian, childbirth educator, social worker, 
 home visitor, language interpreter, or navigator.
 (4) Postpartum.--The terms ``postpartum'' refers to the 1-
 year period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (5) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).

SEC. 5206. DATA TO SAVE MOMS ACT.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Data To Save 
Moms Act''.
 (b) Funding for Maternal Mortality Review Committees To Promote 
Representative Community Engagement.--
 (1) In general.--Section 317K(d) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(d)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(9) Grants to promote representative community engagement 
 in maternal mortality review committees.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may, using funds 
 made available pursuant to subparagraph (C), provide 
 assistance to an applicable maternal mortality review 
 committee of a State, Indian tribe, tribal 
 organization, or Urban Indian organization (as such 
 terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Health 
 Care Improvement Act)--
 ``(i) to select for inclusion in the 
 membership of such a committee community 
 members from the State, Indian tribe, tribal 
 organization, or Urban Indian organization by--
 ``(I) prioritizing community 
 members who can increase the diversity 
 of the committee's membership with 
 respect to race and ethnicity, 
 location, and professional background, 
 including members with non-clinical 
 experiences; and
 ``(II) to the extent applicable, 
 using funds reserved under subsection 
 (f), to address barriers to maternal 
 mortality review committee 
 participation for community members, 
 including through providing required 
 training, reducing transportation 
 barriers, providing compensation, and 
 providing other supports as may be 
 necessary;
 ``(ii) to establish initiatives to conduct 
 outreach and community engagement efforts 
 within communities throughout the State or 
 Indian tribe to seek input from community 
 members on the work of such maternal mortality 
 review committee, with a particular focus on 
 outreach to people who are members of minority 
 groups; and
 ``(iii) to release public reports 
 assessing--
 ``(I) the pregnancy-related death 
 and pregnancy-associated death review 
 processes of the maternal mortality 
 review committee, with a particular 
 focus on the maternal mortality review 
 committee's sensitivity to the unique 
 circumstances of pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups (as such term is 
 defined in section 1707(g)(1)) who have 
 suffered pregnancy-related deaths; and
 ``(II) the impact of the use of 
 funds made available pursuant to 
 paragraph (C) on increasing the 
 diversity of the maternal mortality 
 review committee membership and 
 promoting community engagement efforts 
 throughout the State or Indian tribe.
 ``(B) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall 
 provide (either directly through the Department of 
 Health and Human Services or by contract) technical 
 assistance to any maternal mortality review committee 
 receiving a grant under this paragraph on best 
 practices for increasing the diversity of the maternal 
 mortality review committee's membership and for 
 conducting effective community engagement throughout 
 the State or Indian tribe.
 ``(C) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition 
 to any funds made available under subsection (f), there 
 are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
 paragraph $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 
 through 2029.''.
 (2) Reservation of funds.--Section 317K(f) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(f)) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following: ``Of the amount made available under 
 the preceding sentence for a fiscal year, not less than 
 $1,500,000 shall be reserved for grants awarded under 
 subsection (d)(9) to Indian tribes, tribal organizations, or 
 Urban Indian organizations (as such terms are defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act).''.
 (c) Data Collection and Review.--Section 317K(d)(3)(A)(i) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(d)(3)(A)(i)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subclauses (II) and (III) as 
 subclauses (V) and (VI), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subclause (I) the following:
 ``(II) to the extent practicable, 
 reviewing cases of severe maternal 
 morbidity, according to the most up-to-
 date indicators;
 ``(III) to the extent practicable, 
 reviewing deaths during pregnancy or up 
 to 1 year after the end of a pregnancy 
 from suicide, overdose, or other death 
 from a mental health condition or 
 substance use disorder attributed to, 
 or aggravated by, pregnancy or 
 childbirth complications;
 ``(IV) to the extent practicable, 
 consulting with local community-based 
 organizations representing pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals from demographic 
 groups disproportionately impacted by 
 poor maternal health outcomes to ensure 
 that, in addition to clinical factors, 
 non-clinical factors that might have 
 contributed to a pregnancy-related 
 death are appropriately considered;''.
 (d) Review of Maternal Health Data Collection Processes and Quality 
Measures.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Administrator for the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services and the Director of the Agency for 
 Healthcare Research and Quality (referred to in this subsection 
 as the ``Secretary''), shall consult with relevant 
 stakeholders--
 (A) to review existing maternal health data 
 collection processes and quality measures; and
 (B) to make recommendations to improve such 
 processes and measures, including topics described in 
 paragraph (3).
 (2) Collaboration.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall consult with a diverse group of maternal health 
 stakeholders, which may include--
 (A) pregnant and postpartum individuals and their 
 family members, and nonprofit organizations 
 representing such individuals, with a particular focus 
 on patients from racial and ethnic minority groups;
 (B) community-based organizations that provide 
 support for pregnant and postpartum individuals, with a 
 particular focus on patients from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups;
 (C) membership organizations for maternity care 
 providers;
 (D) organizations representing perinatal health 
 workers;
 (E) organizations that focus on maternal mental or 
 behavioral health;
 (F) organizations that focus on intimate partner 
 violence;
 (G) institutions of higher education, with a 
 particular focus on minority-serving institutions;
 (H) licensed and accredited hospitals, birth 
 centers, midwifery practices, or other medical 
 practices that provide maternal health care services to 
 pregnant and postpartum patients;
 (I) relevant State and local public agencies, 
 including State maternal mortality review committees; 
 and
 (J) the National Quality Forum, or such other 
 standard-setting organizations specified by the 
 Secretary.
 (3) Topics.--The review of maternal health data collection 
 processes and recommendations to improve such processes and 
 measures required under paragraph (1) shall assess all 
 available relevant information, including information from 
 State-level sources, and shall consider at least the following:
 (A) Current State and Tribal practices for maternal 
 health, maternal mortality, and severe maternal 
 morbidity data collection and dissemination, including 
 consideration of--
 (i) the timeliness of processes for 
 amending a death certificate when new 
 information pertaining to the death becomes 
 available to reflect whether the death was a 
 pregnancy-related death;
 (ii) relevant data collected with 
 electronic health records, including data on 
 race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, 
 insurance type, and other relevant demographic 
 information;
 (iii) maternal health data collected and 
 publicly reported by hospitals, health systems, 
 midwifery practices, and birth centers;
 (iv) the barriers preventing States from 
 correlating maternal outcome data with race and 
 ethnicity data;
 (v) processes for determining the cause of 
 a pregnancy-associated death in States that do 
 not have a maternal mortality review committee;
 (vi) whether maternal mortality review 
 committees include multidisciplinary and 
 diverse membership (as described in section 
 317K(d)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(d)(1)(A)));
 (vii) whether members of maternal mortality 
 review committees participate in trainings on 
 bias, racism, or discrimination, and the 
 quality of such trainings;
 (viii) the extent to which States have 
 implemented systematic processes of listening 
 to the stories of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals and their family members, with a 
 particular focus on pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups and their family members, to fully 
 understand the causes of, and inform potential 
 solutions to, the maternal mortality and severe 
 maternal morbidity crisis within their 
 respective States;
 (ix) the extent to which maternal mortality 
 review committees are considering social 
 determinants of maternal health when examining 
 the causes of pregnancy-associated and 
 pregnancy-related deaths;
 (x) the extent to which maternal mortality 
 review committees are making actionable 
 recommendations based on their reviews of 
 adverse maternal health outcomes and the extent 
 to which such recommendations are being 
 implemented by appropriate stakeholders;
 (xi) the legal and administrative barriers 
 preventing the collection, collation, and 
 dissemination of State maternity care data;
 (xii) the effectiveness of data collection 
 and reporting processes in separating 
 pregnancy-associated deaths from pregnancy-
 related deaths; and
 (xiii) the current Federal, State, local, 
 and Tribal funding support for the activities 
 referred to in clauses (i) through (xii).
 (B) Whether the funding support referred to in 
 subparagraph (A)(xiii) is adequate for States to carry 
 out optimal data collection and dissemination processes 
 with respect to maternal health, maternal mortality, 
 and severe maternal morbidity.
 (C) Current quality measures for maternity care, 
 including prenatal measures, labor and delivery 
 measures, and postpartum measures, including topics 
 such as--
 (i) effective quality measures for 
 maternity care used by hospitals, health 
 systems, midwifery practices, birth centers, 
 health plans, and other relevant entities;
 (ii) the sufficiency of current outcome 
 measures used to evaluate maternity care for 
 driving improved care, experiences, and 
 outcomes in maternity care payment and delivery 
 system models;
 (iii) maternal health quality measures that 
 other countries effectively use;
 (iv) validated measures that have been used 
 for research purposes that could be tested, 
 refined, and submitted for national 
 endorsement;
 (v) barriers preventing maternity care 
 providers and insurers from implementing 
 quality measures that are aligned with best 
 practices;
 (vi) the frequency with which maternity 
 care quality measures are reviewed and revised;
 (vii) the strengths and weaknesses of the 
 Prenatal and Postpartum Care measures of the 
 Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set 
 measures established by the National Committee 
 for Quality Assurance;
 (viii) the strengths and weaknesses of 
 maternity care quality measures under the 
 Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and the 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under title 
 XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.), 
 including the extent to which States 
 voluntarily report relevant measures;
 (ix) the extent to which maternity care 
 quality measures are informed by patient 
 experiences that include measures of patient-
 reported experience of care;
 (x) the current processes for collecting 
 stratified data on the race and ethnicity of 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals in 
 hospitals, health systems, midwifery practices, 
 and birth centers, and for incorporating such 
 racially and ethnically stratified data in 
 maternity care quality measures;
 (xi) the extent to which maternity care 
 quality measures account for the unique 
 experiences of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups; and
 (xii) the extent to which hospitals, health 
 systems, midwifery practices, and birth centers 
 are implementing existing maternity care 
 quality measures.
 (D) Recommendations on authorizing additional funds 
 and providing additional technical assistance to 
 improve maternal mortality review committees and State 
 and Tribal maternal health data collection and 
 reporting processes.
 (E) Recommendations for new authorities that may be 
 granted to maternal mortality review committees to be 
 able to--
 (i) access records from other Federal and 
 State agencies and departments that may be 
 necessary to identify causes of pregnancy-
 associated and pregnancy-related deaths that 
 are unique to pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from specific populations, such as 
 veterans and individuals who are incarcerated; 
 and
 (ii) work with relevant experts who are not 
 members of the maternal mortality review 
 committee to assist in the review of pregnancy-
 associated deaths of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from specific populations, such as 
 veterans and individuals who are incarcerated.
 (F) Recommendations to improve and standardize 
 current quality measures for maternity care, with a 
 particular focus on racial and ethnic inequities in 
 maternal health outcomes.
 (G) Recommendations to improve the coordination by 
 the Department of Health and Human Services of the 
 efforts undertaken by the agencies and organizations 
 within the Department related to maternal health data 
 and quality measures.
 (4) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress, 
 and make publicly available, a report on the results of the 
 review of maternal health data collection processes and quality 
 measures and recommendations to improve such processes and 
 measures required under paragraph (1).
 (5) Definition of maternal mortality review committee.--In 
 this subsection, the term ``maternal mortality review 
 committee'' means a maternal mortality review committee duly 
 authorized by a State and receiving funding under section 
 317K(a)(2)(D) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-
 12(a)(2)(D)).
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
 this subsection for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (e) Indian Health Service Study on Maternal Mortality and Severe 
Maternal Morbidity.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the Indian Health Service 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``Director'') shall, in 
 coordination with entities described in paragraph (2)--
 (A) not later than 90 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, enter into a contract with an 
 independent research organization or Tribal 
 Epidemiology Center to conduct a comprehensive study on 
 maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity in the 
 populations of American Indian and Alaska Native 
 individuals; and
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, submit to Congress a report on 
 that study that contains recommendations for policies 
 and practices that can be adopted to improve maternal 
 health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum American 
 Indian and Alaska Native individuals.
 (2) Participating entities.--
 (A) In general.--The entities referred to in 
 paragraph (1) shall consist of 12 members, selected by 
 the Director from among individuals nominated by Indian 
 Tribes and Tribal organizations (as those terms are 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination 
 and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304)) and 
 Urban Indian organizations (as defined in section 4 of 
 the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
 1603)).
 (B) Requirement.--In selecting members under 
 subparagraph (A), the Director shall ensure that each 
 of the 12 service areas of the Indian Health Service 
 are represented.
 (3) Contents of study.--The study conducted pursuant to 
 paragraph (1)(A) shall--
 (A) examine the causes of maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity that are unique to American 
 Indian and Alaska Native individuals;
 (B) include a systematic process of listening to 
 the stories of American Indian and Alaska Native 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals to fully understand 
 the causes of, and inform potential solutions to, the 
 maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity crisis 
 within the communities of those individuals;
 (C) distinguish between the causes of, landscape of 
 maternity care at, and recommendations to improve 
 maternal health outcomes within the different settings 
 in which American Indian and Alaska Native pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals receive maternity care, 
 including--
 (i) facilities operated by the Indian 
 Health Service;
 (ii) an Indian health program operated by 
 an Indian Tribe or a Tribal organization (as 
 those terms are defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304)) pursuant to a 
 contract, grant, cooperative agreement, or 
 compact with the Indian Health Service pursuant 
 to the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.); and
 (iii) an Urban Indian health program 
 operated by an Urban Indian organization (as 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) pursuant to a 
 grant or contract with the Indian Health 
 Service pursuant to title V of the Indian 
 Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1651 et 
 seq.);
 (D) review processes for coordinating programs of 
 the Indian Health Service with social services provided 
 through other programs administered by the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services (other than the Medicare 
 program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), and the 
 State Children's Health Insurance Program under title 
 XXI of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.));
 (E) review current data collection and quality 
 measurement processes and practices;
 (F) assess causes and frequency of maternal mental 
 health conditions and substance use disorders;
 (G) consider social determinants of health, 
 including poverty, lack of health insurance, 
 unemployment, sexual violence, and environmental 
 conditions in Tribal areas;
 (H) consider the role that historical mistreatment 
 of American Indian and Alaska Native people has played 
 in causing currently high rates of maternal mortality 
 and severe maternal morbidity;
 (I) consider how current funding of the Indian 
 Health Service affects the ability of the Indian Health 
 Service to deliver quality maternity care;
 (J) consider the extent to which the delivery of 
 maternity care services is culturally appropriate for 
 American Indian and Alaska Native pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals;
 (K) make recommendations to reduce 
 misclassification of American Indian and Alaska Native 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals, including 
 consideration of best practices in training for 
 maternal mortality review committee members to be able 
 to correctly classify American Indian and Alaska Native 
 individuals; and
 (L) make recommendations informed by the stories 
 shared by American Indian and Alaska Native pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals pursuant to subparagraph (B) 
 to improve maternal health outcomes for those 
 individuals.
 (4) Report.--The agreement entered into under paragraph 
 (1)(A) with an independent research organization or Tribal 
 Epidemiology Center shall require that the independent research 
 organization or Tribal Epidemiology Center, as applicable, 
 submit to Congress a report on the results of the study 
 conducted pursuant to that agreement not later than 36 months 
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (5) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $2,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2027.
 (f) Grants to Minority-Serving Institutions to Study Maternal 
Mortality, Severe Maternal Morbidity, and Other Adverse Maternal Health 
Outcomes.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 establish a program under which the Secretary shall award 
 grants to research centers, health professions schools and 
 programs, and other entities at minority-serving institutions 
 to study specific aspects of the maternal health crisis among 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups. Such research may--
 (A) include the development and implementation of 
 systematic processes of listening to the stories of 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups, and perinatal health workers 
 supporting such individuals, to fully understand the 
 causes of, and inform potential solutions to, the 
 maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity crisis 
 within their respective communities;
 (B) assess the potential causes of relatively low 
 rates of maternal mortality among Hispanic individuals, 
 including potential racial misclassification and other 
 data collection and reporting issues that might be 
 misrepresenting maternal mortality rates among Hispanic 
 individuals in the United States; and
 (C) assess differences in rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes among subgroups identifying as 
 Hispanic.
 (2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 paragraph (1), an entity described in such paragraph shall 
 submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 (3) Technical assistance.--The Secretary may use not more 
 than 10 percent of the funds made available under paragraph 
 (7)--
 (A) to conduct outreach to minority-serving 
 institutions to raise awareness of the availability of 
 grants under paragraph (1);
 (B) to provide technical assistance in the 
 application process for such a grant; and
 (C) to promote capacity building, as needed to 
 enable entities described in such paragraph to submit 
 such an application.
 (4) Reporting requirement.--Each entity awarded a grant 
 under this subsection shall periodically submit to the 
 Secretary a report on the status of activities conducted using 
 the grant.
 (5) Evaluation.--Beginning one year after the date on which 
 the first grant is awarded under this subsection, the Secretary 
 shall submit to Congress an annual report summarizing the 
 findings of research conducted using funds made available under 
 this subsection.
 (6) Minority-serving institutions defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``minority-serving institution'' means an 
 eligible institution described in section 371(a) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Culturally congruent.--The term ``culturally 
 congruent'', with respect to care or maternity care, means care 
 that is in agreement with the preferred cultural values, 
 beliefs, worldview, language, and practices of the health care 
 consumer and other stakeholders.
 (2) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity care 
 provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, physician assistant, midwife 
 who meets at a minimum the international definition of 
 the midwife and global standards for midwifery 
 education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (3) Maternal mortality.--The term ``maternal mortality'' 
 means a death occurring during or within a one-year period 
 after pregnancy, caused by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications, including a suicide, overdose, or other death 
 resulting from a mental health or substance use disorder 
 attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications.
 (4) Perinatal health worker.--The term ``perinatal health 
 worker'' means a doula, community health worker, peer 
 supporter, breastfeeding and lactation educator or counselor, 
 nutritionist or dietitian, childbirth educator, social worker, 
 home visitor, language interpreter, or navigator.
 (5) Postpartum and postpartum period.--The terms 
 ``postpartum'' and ``postpartum period'' refer to the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (6) Pregnancy-associated.--The term ``pregnancy-
 associated'', with respect to a death, means a death of a 
 pregnant or postpartum individual, by any cause, that occurs 
 during, or within 1 year following, the individual's pregnancy, 
 regardless of the outcome, duration, or site of the pregnancy.
 (7) Pregnancy-related.--The term ``pregnancy-related'', 
 with respect to a death, means a death of a pregnant or 
 postpartum individual that occurs during, or within 1 year 
 following, the individual's pregnancy, from a pregnancy 
 complication, a chain of events initiated by pregnancy, or the 
 aggravation of an unrelated condition by the physiologic 
 effects of pregnancy.
 (8) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).
 (9) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term ``severe maternal 
 morbidity'' means a health condition, including mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth that results in 
 significant short-term or long-term consequences to the health 
 of the individual who was pregnant.
 (10) Social determinants of maternal health.--The term 
 ``social determinants of maternal health'' means non-clinical 
 factors that impact maternal health outcomes, including--
 (A) economic factors, which may include poverty, 
 employment, food security, support for and access to 
 lactation and other infant feeding options, housing 
 stability, and related factors;
 (B) neighborhood factors, which may include quality 
 of housing, access to transportation, access to child 
 care, availability of healthy foods and nutrition 
 counseling, availability of clean water, air and water 
 quality, ambient temperatures, neighborhood crime and 
 violence, access to broadband, and related factors;
 (C) social and community factors, which may include 
 systemic racism, gender discrimination or 
 discrimination based on other protected classes, 
 workplace conditions, incarceration, and related 
 factors;
 (D) household factors, which may include ability to 
 conduct lead testing and abatement, car seat 
 installation, indoor air temperatures, and related 
 factors;
 (E) education access and quality factors, which may 
 include educational attainment, language and literacy, 
 and related factors; and
 (F) health care access factors, including health 
 insurance coverage, access to culturally congruent 
 health care services, providers, and non-clinical 
 support, access to home visiting services, access to 
 wellness and stress management programs, health 
 literacy, access to telehealth and items required to 
 receive telehealth services, and related factors.

SEC. 5207. MOMS MATTER.

 (a) Maternal Mental Health Equity Grant Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
 award grants to eligible entities to address maternal mental 
 health conditions and substance use disorders with respect to 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals, with a focus on racial and 
 ethnic minority groups.
 (2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may provide, 
 including how such entity will use funds for activities 
 described in paragraph (4) that are culturally congruent.
 (3) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity that--
 (A) is, or will partner with, a community-based 
 organization to address maternal mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders described in 
 paragraph (1);
 (B) is operating in an area with high rates of--
 (i) adverse maternal health outcomes; or
 (ii) significant racial or ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes; and
 (C) is operating in a health professional shortage 
 area designated under section 332 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e).
 (4) Use of funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant 
 under this subsection shall use funds for the following:
 (A) Establishing or expanding maternity care 
 programs to improve the integration of maternal health 
 and behavioral health care services into primary care 
 settings where pregnant individuals regularly receive 
 health care services.
 (B) Establishing or expanding group prenatal care 
 programs or postpartum care programs.
 (C) Expanding existing programs that improve 
 maternal mental and behavioral health during the 
 prenatal and postpartum periods, with a focus on 
 individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (D) Providing services and support for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals with maternal mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, including 
 referrals to addiction treatment centers that offer 
 evidence-based treatment options.
 (E) Addressing stigma associated with maternal 
 mental health conditions and substance use disorders, 
 with a focus on racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (F) Raising awareness of warning signs of maternal 
 mental health conditions and substance use disorders, 
 with a focus on pregnant and postpartum individuals 
 from racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (G) Establishing or expanding programs to prevent 
 suicide or self-harm among pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals.
 (H) Offering evidence-aligned programs at 
 freestanding birth centers that provide maternal mental 
 and behavioral health care education, treatments, and 
 services, and other services for individuals throughout 
 the prenatal and postpartum period.
 (I) Establishing or expanding programs to provide 
 education and training to maternity care providers with 
 respect to--
 (i) identifying potential warning signs for 
 maternal mental health conditions or substance 
 use disorders in pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals, with a focus on individuals from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups; and
 (ii) in the case where such providers 
 identify such warning signs, offering referrals 
 to mental and behavioral health care 
 professionals.
 (J) Developing a website, or other source, that 
 includes information on health care providers who treat 
 maternal mental health conditions and substance use 
 disorders.
 (K) Establishing or expanding programs in 
 communities to improve coordination between maternity 
 care providers and mental and behavioral health care 
 providers who treat maternal mental health conditions 
 and substance use disorders, including through the use 
 of toll-free hotlines.
 (L) Carrying out other programs aligned with 
 evidence-based practices for addressing maternal mental 
 health conditions and substance use disorders for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups.
 (5) Reporting.--
 (A) Eligible entities.--An eligible entity that 
 receives a grant under paragraph (1) shall submit 
 annually to the Secretary, and make publicly available, 
 a report on the activities conducted using funds 
 received through a grant under this subsection. Such 
 reports shall include quantitative and qualitative 
 evaluations of such activities, including the 
 experience of individuals who received health care 
 through such grant.
 (B) Secretary.--Not later than the end of fiscal 
 year 2026, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
 report that includes--
 (i) a summary of the reports received under 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
 grants awarded under this subsection;
 (iii) recommendations with respect to 
 expanding coverage of evidence-based screenings 
 and treatments for maternal mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders; and
 (iv) recommendations with respect to 
 ensuring activities described under paragraph 
 (4) continue after the end of a grant period.
 (6) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Culturally congruent.--The term ``culturally 
 congruent'', with respect to care or maternity care, 
 means care that is in agreement with the preferred 
 cultural values, beliefs, worldview, language, and 
 practices of the health care consumer and other 
 stakeholders.
 (B) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' 
 means--
 (i) a community-based organization serving 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals, including 
 such organizations serving individuals from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups and other 
 underserved populations;
 (ii) a nonprofit or patient advocacy 
 organization with expertise in maternal mental 
 and behavioral health;
 (iii) a maternity care provider;
 (iv) a mental or behavioral health care 
 provider who treats maternal mental health 
 conditions or substance use disorders;
 (v) a State or local governmental entity, 
 including a State or local public health 
 department;
 (vi) an Indian Tribe or Tribal organization 
 (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304)); and
 (vii) an Urban Indian organization (as such 
 term is defined in section 4 of the Indian 
 Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)).
 (C) Freestanding birth center.--The term 
 ``freestanding birth center'' has the meaning given 
 that term under section 1905(l) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(1)).
 (D) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity 
 care provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (i) is a physician, physician assistant, 
 midwife who meets at a minimum the 
 international definition of the midwife and 
 global standards for midwifery education as 
 established by the International Confederation 
 of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or clinical 
 nurse specialist; and
 (ii) has a focus on maternal or perinatal 
 health.
 (E) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through 
 the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance 
 Use.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.
 (b) Grants To Grow and Diversify the Maternal Mental and Behavioral 
Health Care Workforce.--Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is 
amended by inserting after section 758 (as added by section 5205(b)) 
the following:

``SEC. 758A. MATERNAL MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE WORKFORCE 
 GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants to entities to 
establish or expand programs described in subsection (b) to grow and 
diversify the maternal mental and behavioral health care workforce.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--Recipients of grants under this section shall 
use the grants to grow and diversify the maternal mental and behavioral 
health care workforce by--
 ``(1) establishing schools or programs that provide 
 education and training to individuals seeking appropriate 
 licensing or certification as mental or behavioral health care 
 providers who will specialize in maternal mental health 
 conditions or substance use disorders; or
 ``(2) expanding the capacity of existing schools or 
 programs described in paragraph (1), for the purposes of 
 increasing the number of students enrolled in such schools or 
 programs, including by awarding scholarships for students.
 ``(c) Prioritization.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to any entity that--
 ``(1) has demonstrated a commitment to recruiting and 
 retaining students and faculty from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 ``(2) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain a 
 diverse pool of students into the maternal mental or behavioral 
 health care workforce program or school supported by funds 
 received through the grant, particularly from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups and other underserved populations;
 ``(3) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain 
 students who plan to practice in a health professional shortage 
 area designated under section 332;
 ``(4) has developed a strategy to recruit and retain 
 students who plan to practice in an area with significant 
 racial and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes, to 
 the extent practicable; and
 ``(5) includes in the standard curriculum for all students 
 within the maternal mental or behavioral health care workforce 
 program or school a bias, racism, or discrimination training 
 program that includes training on implicit bias and racism.
 ``(d) Reporting.--As a condition on receipt of a grant under this 
section for a maternal mental or behavioral health care workforce 
program or school, an entity shall agree to submit to the Secretary an 
annual report on the activities conducted through the grant, 
including--
 ``(1) the number and demographics of students participating 
 in the program or school;
 ``(2) the extent to which students in the program or school 
 are entering careers in--
 ``(A) health professional shortage areas designated 
 under section 332; and
 ``(B) areas with significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes, to the extent 
 such data are available; and
 ``(3) whether the program or school has included in the 
 standard curriculum for all students a bias, racism, or 
 discrimination training program that includes training on 
 implicit bias and racism, and if so the effectiveness of such 
 training program.
 ``(e) Period of Grants.--The period of a grant under this section 
shall be up to 5 years.
 ``(f) Application.--To seek a grant under this section, an entity 
shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
including any information necessary for prioritization under subsection 
(c).
 ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide, directly 
or by contract, technical assistance to entities seeking or receiving a 
grant under this section on the development, use, evaluation, and post-
grant period sustainability of the maternal mental or behavioral health 
care workforce programs or schools proposed to be, or being, 
established or expanded through the grant.
 ``(h) Report by the Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the 
date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
submit to the Congress, and post on the internet website of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, a report on the effectiveness 
of the grant program under this section at--
 ``(1) recruiting students from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups and other underserved populations;
 ``(2) increasing the number of mental or behavioral health 
 care providers specializing in maternal mental health 
 conditions or substance use disorders from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups and other underserved populations;
 ``(3) increasing the number of mental or behavioral health 
 care providers specializing in maternal mental health 
 conditions or substance use disorders working in health 
 professional shortage areas designated under section 332; and
 ``(4) increasing the number of mental or behavioral health 
 care providers specializing in maternal mental health 
 conditions or substance use disorders working in areas with 
 significant racial and ethnic inequities in maternal health 
 outcomes, to the extent such data are available.
 ``(i) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term `racial 
 and ethnic minority group' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1).
 ``(2) Mental or behavioral health care provider.--The term 
 `mental or behavioral health care provider' refers to a health 
 care provider in the field of mental and behavioral health, 
 including substance use disorders, acting in accordance with 
 State law.
 ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 5208. JUSTICE FOR INCARCERATED MOMS.

 (a) Ending the Shackling of Pregnant Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning on the date that is 6 months 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually 
 thereafter, in each State that receives a grant under subpart 1 
 of part E of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
 Streets Act of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 10151 et seq.) (commonly 
 referred to as the ``Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance 
 Grant Program'') and that does not have in effect throughout 
 the State for such fiscal year laws restricting the use of 
 restraints on pregnant individuals in prison that are 
 substantially similar to the rights, procedures, requirements, 
 effects, and penalties set forth in section 4322 of title 18, 
 United States Code, the amount of such grant that would 
 otherwise be allocated to such State under such subpart for the 
 fiscal year shall be decreased by 25 percent.
 (2) Reallocation.--Amounts not allocated to a State for 
 failure to comply with paragraph (1) shall be reallocated in 
 accordance with subpart 1 of part E of title I of the Omnibus 
 Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 10151 et 
 seq.) to States that have complied with such paragraph.
 (b) Creating Model Programs for the Care of Incarcerated 
Individuals in the Prenatal and Postpartum Periods.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, acting through the 
 Director of the Bureau of Prisons, shall establish, in not 
 fewer than 6 Bureau of Prisons facilities, programs to optimize 
 maternal health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals incarcerated in such facilities. The Attorney 
 General shall establish such programs in consultation with 
 stakeholders such as--
 (A) relevant community-based organizations, 
 particularly organizations that represent incarcerated 
 and formerly incarcerated individuals and organizations 
 that seek to improve maternal health outcomes for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from demographic 
 groups with elevated rates of maternal mortality, 
 severe maternal morbidity, maternal health disparities, 
 or other adverse perinatal or childbirth outcomes;
 (B) relevant organizations representing patients, 
 with a particular focus on patients from demographic 
 groups with elevated rates of maternal mortality, 
 severe maternal morbidity, maternal health disparities, 
 or other adverse perinatal or childbirth outcomes;
 (C) organizations representing maternity care 
 providers and maternal health care education programs;
 (D) perinatal health workers; and
 (E) researchers and policy experts in fields 
 related to maternal health care for incarcerated 
 individuals.
 (2) Start date.--Each selected facility shall begin 
 facility programs not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (3) Facility priority.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Director shall give priority to a facility based on--
 (A) the number of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals incarcerated in such facility and, among 
 such individuals, the number of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from demographic groups with elevated rates 
 of maternal mortality, severe maternal morbidity, 
 maternal health disparities, or other adverse perinatal 
 or childbirth outcomes; and
 (B) the extent to which the leaders of such 
 facility have demonstrated a commitment to developing 
 exemplary programs for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals incarcerated in such facility.
 (4) Program duration.--The programs established under this 
 subsection shall be for a 5-year period.
 (5) Programs.--Bureau of Prisons facilities selected by the 
 Director shall establish programs for pregnant and postpartum 
 incarcerated individuals, and such programs may--
 (A) provide access to perinatal health workers from 
 pregnancy through the postpartum period;
 (B) provide access to healthy foods and counseling 
 on nutrition, recommended activity levels, and safety 
 measures throughout pregnancy;
 (C) train correctional officers to ensure that 
 pregnant incarcerated individuals receive safe and 
 respectful treatment;
 (D) train medical personnel to ensure that pregnant 
 incarcerated individuals receive trauma-informed, 
 culturally and linguistically congruent care that 
 promotes the health and safety of the pregnant 
 individuals;
 (E) provide counseling and treatment for 
 individuals who have suffered from--
 (i) diagnosed mental or behavioral health 
 conditions, including trauma and substance use 
 disorders;
 (ii) trauma or violence, including domestic 
 violence;
 (iii) human immunodeficiency virus;
 (iv) sexual abuse;
 (v) pregnancy or infant loss; or
 (vi) chronic conditions;
 (F) provide evidence-based pregnancy and childbirth 
 education, parenting support, and other relevant forms 
 of health literacy;
 (G) provide clinical education opportunities to 
 maternity care providers in training to expand pathways 
 into maternal health care careers serving incarcerated 
 individuals;
 (H) offer opportunities for postpartum individuals 
 to maintain contact with the individual's newborn child 
 to promote bonding, including enhanced visitation 
 policies, access to prison nursery programs, or 
 breastfeeding support;
 (I) provide reentry assistance, particularly to--
 (i) ensure access to health insurance 
 coverage and transfer of health records to 
 community providers if an incarcerated 
 individual exits the criminal justice system 
 during such individual's pregnancy or in the 
 postpartum period; and
 (ii) connect individuals exiting the 
 criminal justice system during pregnancy or in 
 the postpartum period to community-based 
 resources, such as referrals to health care 
 providers, substance use disorder treatments, 
 and social services that address social 
 determinants of maternal health; or
 (J) establish partnerships with local public 
 entities, private community entities, community-based 
 organizations, Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations 
 (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian 
 Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 
 U.S.C. 5304)), and Urban Indian organizations (as such 
 term is defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) to establish or 
 expand pretrial diversion programs as an alternative to 
 incarceration for pregnant and postpartum individuals. 
 Such programs may include--
 (i) evidence-based childbirth education or 
 parenting classes;
 (ii) prenatal health coordination;
 (iii) family and individual counseling;
 (iv) evidence-based screenings, education, 
 and, as needed, treatment for mental and 
 behavioral health conditions, including drug 
 and alcohol treatments;
 (v) family case management services;
 (vi) domestic violence education and 
 prevention;
 (vii) physical and sexual abuse counseling; 
 and
 (viii) programs to address social 
 determinants of health such as employment, 
 housing, education, transportation, and 
 nutrition.
 (6) Implementation and reporting.--A selected facility 
 shall be responsible for--
 (A) implementing programs, which may include the 
 programs described in paragraph (5); and
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, reporting results of the 
 programs to the Director, including information 
 describing--
 (i) relevant quantitative indicators of 
 success in improving the standard of care and 
 health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum 
 incarcerated individuals in the facility, 
 including data stratified by race, ethnicity, 
 sex, gender, primary language, age, geography, 
 disability status, the category of the criminal 
 charge against such individual, rates of 
 pregnancy-related deaths, pregnancy-associated 
 deaths, cases of infant mortality and 
 morbidity, rates of preterm births and low-
 birthweight births, cases of severe maternal 
 morbidity, cases of violence against pregnant 
 or postpartum individuals, diagnoses of 
 maternal mental or behavioral health 
 conditions, and other such information as 
 appropriate;
 (ii) relevant qualitative and quantitative 
 evaluations from pregnant and postpartum 
 incarcerated individuals who participated in 
 such programs, including measures of patient-
 reported experience of care; and
 (iii) strategies to sustain such programs 
 after fiscal year 2029 and expand such programs 
 to other facilities.
 (7) Report.--Not later than 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit to the 
 Attorney General and to Congress a report describing the 
 results of the programs funded under this subsection.
 (8) Oversight.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall award a 
 contract to an independent organization or independent 
 organizations to conduct oversight of the programs described in 
 paragraph (5).
 (9) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (c) Grant Program To Improve Maternal Health Outcomes for 
Individuals in State and Local Prisons and Jails.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, acting through the 
 Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, shall award 
 Justice for Incarcerated Moms grants to States to establish or 
 expand programs in State and local prisons and jails for 
 pregnant and postpartum incarcerated individuals. The Attorney 
 General shall award such grants in consultation with 
 stakeholders such as--
 (A) relevant community-based organizations, 
 particularly organizations that represent incarcerated 
 and formerly incarcerated individuals and organizations 
 that seek to improve maternal health outcomes for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals from demographic 
 groups with elevated rates of maternal mortality, 
 severe maternal morbidity, maternal health disparities, 
 or other adverse perinatal or childbirth outcomes;
 (B) relevant organizations representing patients, 
 with a particular focus on patients from demographic 
 groups with elevated rates of maternal mortality, 
 severe maternal morbidity, maternal health disparities, 
 or other adverse perinatal or childbirth outcomes;
 (C) organizations representing maternity care 
 providers and maternal health care education programs;
 (D) perinatal health workers; and
 (E) researchers and policy experts in fields 
 related to maternal health care for incarcerated 
 individuals.
 (2) Applications.--Each applicant for a grant under this 
 subsection shall submit to the Director of the Bureau of 
 Justice Assistance an application at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the Director may require.
 (3) Use of funds.--A State that is awarded a grant under 
 this subsection shall use such grant to establish or expand 
 programs for pregnant and postpartum incarcerated individuals, 
 and such programs may--
 (A) provide access to perinatal health workers from 
 pregnancy through the postpartum period;
 (B) provide access to healthy foods and counseling 
 on nutrition, recommended activity levels, and safety 
 measures throughout pregnancy;
 (C) train correctional officers to ensure that 
 pregnant incarcerated individuals receive safe and 
 respectful treatment;
 (D) train medical personnel to ensure that pregnant 
 incarcerated individuals receive trauma-informed, 
 culturally and linguistically congruent care that 
 promotes the health and safety of the pregnant 
 individuals;
 (E) provide counseling and treatment for 
 individuals who have suffered from--
 (i) diagnosed mental or behavioral health 
 conditions, including trauma and substance use 
 disorders;
 (ii) trauma or violence, including domestic 
 violence;
 (iii) human immunodeficiency virus;
 (iv) sexual abuse;
 (v) pregnancy or infant loss; or
 (vi) chronic conditions;
 (F) provide evidence-based pregnancy and childbirth 
 education, parenting support, and other relevant forms 
 of health literacy;
 (G) provide clinical education opportunities to 
 maternity care providers in training to expand pathways 
 into maternal health care careers serving incarcerated 
 individuals;
 (H) offer opportunities for postpartum individuals 
 to maintain contact with the individual's newborn child 
 to promote bonding, including enhanced visitation 
 policies, access to prison nursery programs, or 
 breastfeeding support;
 (I) provide reentry assistance, particularly to--
 (i) ensure access to health insurance 
 coverage and transfer of health records to 
 community providers if an incarcerated 
 individual exits the criminal justice system 
 during such individual's pregnancy or in the 
 postpartum period; and
 (ii) connect individuals exiting the 
 criminal justice system during pregnancy or in 
 the postpartum period to community-based 
 resources, such as referrals to health care 
 providers, substance use disorder treatments, 
 and social services that address social 
 determinants of maternal health; or
 (J) establish partnerships with local public 
 entities, private community entities, community-based 
 organizations, Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations 
 (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian 
 Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 
 U.S.C. 5304)), and Urban Indian organizations (as such 
 term is defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) to establish or 
 expand pretrial diversion programs as an alternative to 
 incarceration for pregnant and postpartum individuals. 
 Such programs may include--
 (i) evidence-based childbirth education or 
 parenting classes;
 (ii) prenatal health coordination;
 (iii) family and individual counseling;
 (iv) evidence-based screenings, education, 
 and, as needed, treatment for mental and 
 behavioral health conditions, including drug 
 and alcohol treatments;
 (v) family case management services;
 (vi) domestic violence education and 
 prevention;
 (vii) physical and sexual abuse counseling; 
 and
 (viii) programs to address social 
 determinants of health such as employment, 
 housing, education, transportation, and 
 nutrition.
 (4) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall give 
 priority to applicants based on--
 (A) the number of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals incarcerated in the State and, among such 
 individuals, the number of pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from demographic groups with elevated rates 
 of maternal mortality, severe maternal morbidity, 
 maternal health disparities, or other adverse perinatal 
 or childbirth outcomes; and
 (B) the extent to which the State has demonstrated 
 a commitment to developing exemplary programs for 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals incarcerated in the 
 prisons and jails in the State.
 (5) Grant duration.--A grant awarded under this subsection 
 shall be for a 5-year period.
 (6) Implementing and reporting.--A State that receives a 
 grant under this subsection shall be responsible for--
 (A) implementing the program funded by the grant; 
 and
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, reporting results of such 
 program to the Attorney General, including information 
 describing--
 (i) relevant quantitative indicators of the 
 program's success in improving the standard of 
 care and health outcomes for pregnant and 
 postpartum incarcerated individuals in the 
 facility, including data stratified by race, 
 ethnicity, sex, gender, primary language, age, 
 geography, disability status, category of the 
 criminal charge against such individual, 
 incidence rates of pregnancy-related deaths, 
 pregnancy-associated deaths, cases of infant 
 mortality and morbidity, rates of preterm 
 births and low-birthweight births, cases of 
 severe maternal morbidity, cases of violence 
 against pregnant or postpartum individuals, 
 diagnoses of maternal mental or behavioral 
 health conditions, and other such information 
 as appropriate;
 (ii) relevant qualitative and quantitative 
 evaluations from pregnant and postpartum 
 incarcerated individuals who participated in 
 such programs, including measures of patient-
 reported experience of care; and
 (iii) strategies to sustain such programs 
 beyond the duration of the grant and expand 
 such programs to other facilities.
 (7) Report.--Not later than 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to 
 Congress a report describing the results of such grant 
 programs.
 (8) Oversight.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall award a 
 contract to an independent organization or independent 
 organizations to conduct oversight of the programs described in 
 paragraph (3).
 (9) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (d) GAO Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall submit to Congress a report on adverse maternal 
 and infant health outcomes among incarcerated individuals and 
 infants born to such individuals, with a particular focus on 
 racial and ethnic disparities in maternal and infant health 
 outcomes for incarcerated individuals.
 (2) Contents of report.--The report described in this 
 subsection shall include--
 (A) to the extent practicable--
 (i) the number of pregnant individuals who 
 are incarcerated in Bureau of Prisons 
 facilities;
 (ii) the number of incarcerated 
 individuals, including those incarcerated in 
 Federal, State, and local correctional 
 facilities, who have experienced a pregnancy-
 related death, pregnancy-associated death, or 
 the death of an infant in the most recent 10 
 years of available data;
 (iii) the number of cases of severe 
 maternal morbidity among incarcerated 
 individuals, including those incarcerated in 
 Federal, State, and local detention facilities, 
 in the most recent 10 years of available data;
 (iv) the number of preterm and low-
 birthweight births of infants born to 
 incarcerated individuals, including those 
 incarcerated in Federal, State, and local 
 correctional facilities, in the most recent 10 
 years of available data; and
 (v) statistics on the racial and ethnic 
 disparities in maternal and infant health 
 outcomes and severe maternal morbidity rates 
 among incarcerated individuals, including those 
 incarcerated in Federal, State, and local 
 detention facilities;
 (B) in the case that the Comptroller General of the 
 United States is unable determine the information 
 required in clauses (i) through (iii) of subparagraph 
 (A), an assessment of the barriers to determining such 
 information and recommendations for improvements in 
 tracking maternal health outcomes among incarcerated 
 individuals, including those incarcerated in Federal, 
 State, and local detention facilities;
 (C) the implications of pregnant and postpartum 
 incarcerated individuals being ineligible for medical 
 assistance under a State plan under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) including 
 information about--
 (i) the effects of such ineligibility on 
 maternal health outcomes for pregnant and 
 postpartum incarcerated individuals, with 
 emphasis given to such effects for pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups; and
 (ii) potential implications on maternal 
 health outcomes resulting from temporarily 
 suspending, rather than permanently 
 terminating, such eligibility when a pregnant 
 or postpartum individual is incarcerated;
 (D) the extent to which Federal, State, and local 
 correctional facilities are holding pregnant and 
 postpartum individuals who test positive for illicit 
 drug use in detention with special conditions, such as 
 additional bond requirements, due to the individual's 
 drug use, and the effect of such detention policies on 
 maternal and infant health outcomes;
 (E) causes of adverse maternal health outcomes that 
 are unique to incarcerated individuals, including those 
 incarcerated in Federal, State, and local detention 
 facilities;
 (F) causes of adverse maternal health outcomes and 
 severe maternal morbidity that are unique to 
 incarcerated individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups;
 (G) recommendations to reduce maternal mortality 
 and severe maternal morbidity among incarcerated 
 individuals and to address racial and ethnic 
 disparities in maternal health outcomes for 
 incarcerated individuals in Bureau of Prisons 
 facilities and State and local prisons and jails; and
 (H) such other information as may be appropriate to 
 reduce the occurrence of adverse maternal health 
 outcomes among incarcerated individuals and to address 
 racial and ethnic disparities in maternal health 
 outcomes for such individuals.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Culturally and linguistically congruent.--The term 
 ``culturally and linguistically congruent'', with respect to 
 care or maternity care, means care that is in agreement with 
 the preferred cultural values, beliefs, worldview, language, 
 and practices of the health care consumer and other 
 stakeholders.
 (2) Maternal mortality.--The term ``maternal mortality'' 
 means a death occurring during or within a 1-year period after 
 pregnancy, caused by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications, including a suicide, overdose, or other death 
 resulting from a mental health or substance use disorder 
 attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications.
 (3) Maternity care provider.--The term ``maternity care 
 provider'' means a health care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, a physician assistant, a 
 midwife who meets, at a minimum, the international 
 definition of a midwife and global standards for 
 midwifery education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, an advanced practice 
 registered nurse, or a lactation consultant certified 
 by the International Board of Lactation Consultant 
 Examiners; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (4) Perinatal health worker.--The term ``perinatal health 
 worker'' means a nonclinical health worker focused on maternal 
 or perinatal health, such as a doula, community health worker, 
 peer supporter, lactation educator or counselor, nutritionist 
 or dietitian, childbirth educator, social worker, home visitor, 
 patient navigator or coordinator, or language interpreter.
 (5) Postpartum and postpartum period.--The terms 
 ``postpartum'' and ``postpartum period'' refer to the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (6) Pregnancy-associated death.--The term ``pregnancy-
 associated death'' means a death of a pregnant or postpartum 
 individual, by any cause, that occurs during, or within 1 year 
 following, the individual's pregnancy, regardless of the 
 outcome, duration, or site of the pregnancy.
 (7) Pregnancy-related death.--The term ``pregnancy-related 
 death'' means a death of a pregnant or postpartum individual 
 that occurs during, or within 1 year following, the 
 individual's pregnancy, from a pregnancy complication, a chain 
 of events initiated by pregnancy, or the aggravation of an 
 unrelated condition by the physiologic effects of pregnancy.
 (8) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).
 (9) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term ``severe maternal 
 morbidity'' means a health condition, including mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth that results in 
 significant short-term or long-term consequences to the health 
 of the individual who was pregnant.
 (10) Social determinants of maternal health.--The term 
 ``social determinants of maternal health'' means nonclinical 
 factors that impact maternal health outcomes.

SEC. 5209. TECH TO SAVE MOMS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Postpartum and postpartum period.--The terms 
 ``postpartum'' and ``postpartum period'' refer to the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy of an 
 individual.
 (2) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)(1)).
 (3) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term ``severe maternal 
 morbidity'' means a health condition, including mental health 
 conditions and substance use disorders, attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth that results in 
 significant short-term or long-term consequences to the health 
 of the individual who was pregnant.
 (4) Social determinants of maternal health.--The term 
 ``social determinants of maternal health'' means non-clinical 
 factors that impact maternal health outcomes, including--
 (A) economic factors, which may include poverty, 
 employment, food security, support for and access to 
 lactation and other infant feeding options, housing 
 stability, and related factors;
 (B) neighborhood factors, which may include quality 
 of housing, access to transportation, access to child 
 care, availability of healthy foods and nutrition 
 counseling, availability of clean water, air and water 
 quality, ambient temperatures, neighborhood crime and 
 violence, access to broadband, and related factors;
 (C) social and community factors, which may include 
 systemic racism, gender discrimination or 
 discrimination based on other protected classes, 
 workplace conditions, incarceration, and related 
 factors;
 (D) household factors, which may include ability to 
 conduct lead testing and abatement, car seat 
 installation, indoor air temperatures, and related 
 factors;
 (E) education access and quality factors, which may 
 include educational attainment, language and literacy, 
 and related factors; and
 (F) health care access factors, including health 
 insurance coverage, access to culturally congruent 
 health care services, providers, and non-clinical 
 support, access to home visiting services, access to 
 wellness and stress management programs, health 
 literacy, access to telehealth and items required to 
 receive telehealth services, and related factors.
 (b) Integrated Telehealth Models in Maternity Care Services.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1115A(b)(2)(B) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315a(b)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(xxviii) Focusing on title XIX, providing 
 for the adoption of and use of telehealth tools 
 that allow for screening, monitoring, and 
 management of common health complications with 
 respect to an individual receiving medical 
 assistance during such individual's pregnancy 
 and for not more than a 1-year period beginning 
 on the last day of the pregnancy.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of 
 this section.
 (c) Grants To Expand the Use of Technology-Enabled Collaborative 
Learning and Capacity Models for Pregnant and Postpartum Individuals.--
Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting 
after section 330N (42 U.S.C. 254c-20) the following:

``SEC. 330N-1. EXPANDING CAPACITY FOR MATERNAL HEALTH OUTCOMES.

 ``(a) Establishment.--Beginning not later than 1 year after the 
date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall award grants to 
eligible entities to evaluate, develop, and expand the use of 
technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity building models 
and improve maternal health outcomes--
 ``(1) in health professional shortage areas;
 ``(2) in areas with high rates of maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity;
 ``(3) in areas with significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes; and
 ``(4) for medically underserved populations and American 
 Indians and Alaska Natives, including Indian Tribes, Tribal 
 organizations, and Urban Indian organizations.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Required uses.--Recipients of grants under this 
 section shall use the grants to--
 ``(A) train maternal health care providers, 
 students, and other similar professionals through 
 models that include--
 ``(i) methods to increase safety and health 
 care quality;
 ``(ii) training to increase awareness of, 
 and eliminate implicit bias, racism, and 
 discrimination in, the provision of health 
 care;
 ``(iii) best practices in screening for 
 and, as needed, evaluating and treating 
 maternal mental health conditions and substance 
 use disorders;
 ``(iv) training on best practices in 
 maternity care for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals during the COVID-19 public health 
 emergency or future public health emergencies;
 ``(v) methods to screen for social 
 determinants of maternal health risks in the 
 prenatal and postpartum periods; and
 ``(vi) the use of remote patient monitoring 
 tools for pregnancy-related complications 
 described in section 1115A(b)(2)(B)(xxviii) of 
 the Social Security Act;
 ``(B) evaluate and collect information on the 
 effect of such models on--
 ``(i) access to, and quality of, care;
 ``(ii) outcomes with respect to the health 
 of an individual; and
 ``(iii) the experience of individuals who 
 receive pregnancy-related health care;
 ``(C) develop qualitative and quantitative measures 
 to identify best practices for the expansion and use of 
 such models;
 ``(D) study the effect of such models on patient 
 outcomes and maternity care providers; and
 ``(E) conduct any other activity, as determined by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(2) Permissible uses.--Recipients of grants under this 
 section may use grants to support--
 ``(A) the use and expansion of technology-enabled 
 collaborative learning and capacity building models, 
 including hardware and software that--
 ``(i) enable distance learning and 
 technical support; and
 ``(ii) support the secure exchange of 
 electronic health information; and
 ``(B) maternity care providers, students, and other 
 similar professionals in the provision of maternity 
 care through such models.
 ``(c) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under 
 subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary an application, at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Assurance.--An application under paragraph (1) shall 
 include an assurance that such entity shall collect information 
 on, and assess the effect of, the use of technology-enabled 
 collaborative learning and capacity building models, including 
 with respect to--
 ``(A) maternal health outcomes;
 ``(B) access to maternal health care services;
 ``(C) quality of maternal health care; and
 ``(D) retention of maternity care providers serving 
 areas and populations described in subsection (a).
 ``(d) Limitations.--
 ``(1) Number.--The Secretary may not award more than 1 
 grant under this section to an eligible entity.
 ``(2) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section shall 
 be for a 5-year period.
 ``(e) Access to Broadband.--In administering grants under this 
section, the Secretary may coordinate with other agencies to ensure 
that funding opportunities are available to support access to reliable, 
high-speed internet for grantees.
 ``(f) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide (either 
directly or by contract) technical assistance to eligible entities, 
including recipients of grants under subsection (a), on the 
development, use, and sustainability of technology-enabled 
collaborative learning and capacity building models to expand access to 
maternal health care services provided by such entities, including--
 ``(1) in health professional shortage areas;
 ``(2) in areas with high rates of maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity or significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes; and
 ``(3) for medically underserved populations or American 
 Indians and Alaska Natives.
 ``(g) Research and Evaluation.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
experts, shall develop a strategic plan to research and evaluate the 
evidence for such models.
 ``(h) Reporting.--
 ``(1) Eligible entities.--An eligible entity that receives 
 a grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary a 
 report, at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Congress, and make available on the website of the Department 
 of Health and Human Services, a report that includes--
 ``(A) a description of grants awarded under 
 subsection (a) and the purpose and amounts of such 
 grants;
 ``(B) a summary of--
 ``(i) the evaluations conducted under 
 subsection (b)(1)(B);
 ``(ii) any technical assistance provided 
 under subsection (f); and
 ``(iii) the activities conducted under 
 subsection (a); and
 ``(C) a description of any significant findings 
 with respect to--
 ``(i) patient outcomes; and
 ``(ii) best practices for expanding, using, 
 or evaluating technology-enabled collaborative 
 learning and capacity building models.
 ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $6,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(j) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible entity' means 
 an entity that provides, or supports the provision of, 
 maternal health care services or other evidence-based 
 services for pregnant and postpartum individuals--
 ``(i) in health professional shortage 
 areas;
 ``(ii) in areas with high rates of adverse 
 maternal health outcomes or significant racial 
 and ethnic inequities in maternal health 
 outcomes; or
 ``(iii) who are--
 ``(I) members of medically 
 underserved populations; or
 ``(II) American Indians and Alaska 
 Natives, including Indian Tribes, 
 Tribal organizations, and Urban Indian 
 organizations.
 ``(B) Inclusions.--An eligible entity may include 
 entities that lead, or are capable of leading, a 
 technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity 
 building model.
 ``(2) Health professional shortage area.--The term `health 
 professional shortage area' means a health professional 
 shortage area designated under section 332.
 ``(3) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian Tribe' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian Self-
 Determination and Education Assistance Act.
 ``(4) Maternal mortality.--The term `maternal mortality' 
 means a death occurring during or within the 1-year period 
 after pregnancy caused by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications, including a suicide, overdose, or other death 
 resulting from a mental health or substance use disorder 
 attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy or childbirth 
 complications.
 ``(5) Medically underserved population.--The term 
 `medically underserved population' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 330(b)(3).
 ``(6) Postpartum.--The term `postpartum' means the 1-year 
 period beginning on the last date of an individual's pregnancy.
 ``(7) Severe maternal morbidity.--The term `severe maternal 
 morbidity' means a health condition, including a mental health 
 or substance use disorder, attributed to or aggravated by 
 pregnancy or childbirth that results in significant short-term 
 or long-term consequences to the health of the individual who 
 was pregnant.
 ``(8) Technology-enabled collaborative learning and 
 capacity building model.--The term `technology-enabled 
 collaborative learning and capacity building model' means a 
 distance health education model that connects health care 
 professionals, and other specialists, through simultaneous 
 interactive videoconferencing for the purpose of facilitating 
 case-based learning, disseminating best practices, and 
 evaluating outcomes in the context of maternal health care.
 ``(9) Tribal organization.--The term `Tribal organization' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian 
 Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
 ``(10) Urban indian organization.--The term `Urban Indian 
 organization' has the meaning given such term in section 4 of 
 the Indian Health Care Improvement Act.''.
 (d) Grants To Promote Equity in Maternal Health Outcomes Through 
Digital Tools.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services (referred to in this subsection as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall make grants to eligible entities to reduce 
 racial and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes by 
 increasing access to digital tools related to maternal health 
 care.
 (2) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an eligible entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 (3) Prioritization.--In awarding grants under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall prioritize an eligible entity--
 (A) in an area with high rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes or significant racial and ethnic 
 inequities in maternal health outcomes;
 (B) in a health professional shortage area 
 designated under section 332 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e); and
 (C) that promotes technology that addresses racial 
 and ethnic inequities in maternal health outcomes.
 (4) Limitations.--
 (A) Number.--The Secretary may award not more than 
 1 grant under this subsection to an eligible entity.
 (B) Duration.--A grant awarded under this 
 subsection shall be for a 5-year period.
 (5) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to an eligible entity on the development, 
 use, evaluation, and post-grant sustainability of digital tools 
 for purposes of promoting equity in maternal health outcomes.
 (6) Reporting.--
 (A) Eligible entities.--An eligible entity that 
 receives a grant under paragraph (1) shall submit to 
 the Secretary a report, at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 (B) Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 submit to Congress a report that includes--
 (i) an evaluation on the effectiveness of 
 grants awarded under this subsection to improve 
 health outcomes for pregnant and postpartum 
 individuals from racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 (ii) recommendations on new grant programs 
 that promote the use of technology to improve 
 such maternal health outcomes; and
 (iii) recommendations with respect to--
 (I) technology-based privacy and 
 security safeguards in maternal health 
 care;
 (II) reimbursement rates for 
 maternal telehealth services;
 (III) the use of digital tools to 
 analyze large data sets to identify 
 potential pregnancy-related 
 complications;
 (IV) barriers that prevent 
 maternity care providers from providing 
 telehealth services across States;
 (V) the use of consumer digital 
 tools such as mobile phone 
 applications, patient portals, and 
 wearable technologies to improve 
 maternal health outcomes;
 (VI) barriers that prevent access 
 to telehealth services, including a 
 lack of access to reliable, high-speed 
 internet or electronic devices;
 (VII) barriers to data sharing 
 between the Special Supplemental 
 Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, 
 and Children program and maternity care 
 providers, and recommendations for 
 addressing such barriers; and
 (VIII) lessons learned from 
 expanded access to telehealth related 
 to maternity care during the COVID-19 
 public health emergency.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $6,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (e) Report on the Use of Technology in Maternity Care.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall enter into an agreement with the National 
 Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (referred to 
 in this section as the ``National Academies'') under which the 
 National Academies shall conduct a study on the use of 
 technology and patient monitoring devices in maternity care.
 (2) Content.--The agreement entered into pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall provide for the study of the following:
 (A) The use of innovative technology (including 
 artificial intelligence) in maternal health care, 
 including the extent to which such technology has 
 affected racial or ethnic biases in maternal health 
 care.
 (B) The use of patient monitoring devices 
 (including pulse oximeter devices) in maternal health 
 care, including the extent to which such devices have 
 affected racial or ethnic biases in maternal health 
 care.
 (C) Best practices for reducing and preventing 
 racial or ethnic biases in the use of innovative 
 technology and patient monitoring devices in maternity 
 care.
 (D) Best practices in the use of innovative 
 technology and patient monitoring devices for pregnant 
 and postpartum individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups.
 (E) Best practices with respect to privacy and 
 security safeguards in such use.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the National Academies shall complete 
 the study under this subsection, and transmit a report of the 
 results of such study to Congress.

SEC. 5210. IMPACT TO SAVE MOMS ACT.

 (a) Perinatal Care Alternative Payment Model Demonstration 
Project.--
 (1) In general.--For the period of fiscal years 2025 
 through 2028, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary''), acting 
 through the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services, shall establish and implement, in accordance 
 with the requirements of this subsection, a demonstration 
 project, to be known as the Perinatal Care Alternative Payment 
 Model Demonstration Project (referred to in this subsection as 
 the ``Demonstration Project''), for purposes of allowing States 
 to test payment models under their State plans under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and State 
 child health plans under title XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa et seq.) with respect to maternity care provided to 
 pregnant and postpartum individuals enrolled in such State 
 plans and State child health plans.
 (2) Coordination.--In establishing the Demonstration 
 Project, the Secretary shall coordinate with stakeholders such 
 as--
 (A) State Medicaid programs;
 (B) relevant organizations representing maternal 
 health care providers;
 (C) relevant organizations representing patients, 
 with a particular focus on individuals from demographic 
 groups with disproportionate rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes;
 (D) relevant community-based organizations, 
 particularly organizations that seek to improve 
 maternal health outcomes for individuals from 
 demographic groups with disproportionate rates of 
 adverse maternal health outcomes;
 (E) non-clinical perinatal health workers such as 
 doulas, community health workers, peer supporters, 
 certified lactation consultants, nutritionists and 
 dieticians, social workers, home visitors, and 
 navigators;
 (F) relevant health insurance issuers;
 (G) hospitals, health systems, freestanding birth 
 centers (as such term is defined in paragraph (3)(B) of 
 section 1905(l) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396d(l))), Federally-qualified health centers (as such 
 term is defined in paragraph (2)(B) of such section), 
 and rural health clinics (as such term is defined in 
 section 1861(aa) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)));
 (H) researchers and policy experts in fields 
 related to maternity care payment models; and
 (I) any other stakeholders as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate, with a particular focus on 
 stakeholders from demographic groups with 
 disproportionate rates of adverse maternal health 
 outcomes.
 (3) Considerations.--In establishing the Demonstration 
 Project, the Secretary shall consider each of the following:
 (A) Findings from any evaluations of the Strong 
 Start for Mothers and Newborns initiative carried out 
 by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the 
 Health Resources and Services Administration, and the 
 Administration on Children and Families.
 (B) Any alternative payment model that--
 (i) is designed to improve maternal health 
 outcomes for racial and ethnic groups with 
 disproportionate rates of adverse maternal 
 health outcomes;
 (ii) includes methods for stratifying 
 patients by pregnancy risk level and, as 
 appropriate, adjusting payments under such 
 model to take into account pregnancy risk 
 level;
 (iii) establishes evidence-based quality 
 metrics for such payments;
 (iv) includes consideration of non-hospital 
 birth settings such as freestanding birth 
 centers (as so defined);
 (v) includes consideration of social 
 determinants of health that are relevant to 
 maternal health outcomes such as housing, 
 transportation, nutrition, and other non-
 clinical factors that influence maternal health 
 outcomes; or
 (vi) includes diverse maternity care teams 
 that include--
 (I) maternity care providers, 
 including obstetrician-gynecologists, 
 family physicians, physician 
 assistants, midwives who meet, at a 
 minimum, the international definition 
 of the term ``midwife'' and global 
 standards for midwifery education (as 
 established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives), and nurse 
 practitioners--
 (aa) from racially, 
 ethnically, and professionally 
 diverse backgrounds;
 (bb) with experience 
 practicing in racially and 
 ethnically diverse communities; 
 or
 (cc) who have undergone 
 trainings on racism, implicit 
 bias, and explicit bias; and
 (II) non-clinical perinatal health 
 workers such as doulas, community 
 health workers, peer supporters, 
 certified lactation consultants, 
 nutritionists and dieticians, social 
 workers, home visitors, and navigators.
 (4) Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate in the 
 Demonstration Project, a State shall submit an application to 
 the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 (5) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation 
 of the Demonstration Project to determine the impact of the 
 Demonstration Project on--
 (A) maternal health outcomes, with data stratified 
 by race, ethnicity, socioeconomic indicators, and any 
 other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate;
 (B) spending on maternity care by States 
 participating in the Demonstration Project;
 (C) to the extent practicable, subjective measures 
 of patient experience; and
 (D) any other areas of assessment that the 
 Secretary determines relevant.
 (6) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the completion or 
 termination date of the Demonstration Project, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the 
 Committee on Ways and Means, and the Committee on Education and 
 the Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
 on Finance and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions of the Senate, and make publicly available, a report 
 containing--
 (A) the results of any evaluation conducted under 
 paragraph (5); and
 (B) a recommendation regarding whether the 
 Demonstration Project should be continued after fiscal 
 year 2028 and expanded on a national basis.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this 
 subsection.
 (8) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Alternative payment model.--The term 
 ``alternative payment model'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1833(z)(3)(C) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(z)(3)(C)).
 (B) Perinatal.--The term ``perinatal'' means the 
 period beginning on the day a person becomes pregnant 
 and ending on the last day of the 1-year period 
 beginning on the last day of such person's pregnancy.
 (b) MACPAC Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 the enactment of this section, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment 
 and Access Commission shall publish a report on issues relating 
 to the continuity of coverage under State plans under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and State 
 child health plans under title XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa et seq.) for pregnant and postpartum individuals. Such 
 report shall, at a minimum, include the following:
 (A) An assessment of any existing policies under 
 such State plans and such State child health plans 
 regarding presumptive eligibility for pregnant 
 individuals while their application for enrollment in 
 such a State plan or such a State child health plan is 
 being processed.
 (B) An assessment of any existing policies under 
 such State plans and such State child health plans 
 regarding measures to ensure continuity of coverage 
 under such a State plan or such a State child health 
 plan for pregnant and postpartum individuals, including 
 such individuals who need to change their health 
 insurance coverage during their pregnancy or the 
 postpartum period following their pregnancy.
 (C) An assessment of any existing policies under 
 such State plans and such State child health plans 
 regarding measures to automatically reenroll 
 individuals who are eligible to enroll under such a 
 State plan or such a State child health plan as a 
 parent.
 (D) If determined appropriate by the Commission, 
 any recommendations for the Department of Health and 
 Human Services, or such State plans and such State 
 child health plans, to ensure continuity of coverage 
 under such a State plan or such a State child health 
 plan for pregnant and postpartum people.
 (2) Postpartum defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``postpartum'' means the 1-year period beginning on the last 
 day of a person's pregnancy.

SEC. 5211. PROTECTING MOMS AND BABIES AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE.

 (a) Grant Program To Protect Vulnerable Mothers and Babies From 
Climate Change Risks.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') 
 shall establish a grant program (in this subsection referred to 
 as the ``Program'') to protect vulnerable individuals from 
 risks associated with climate change.
 (2) Grant authority.--In carrying out the Program, the 
 Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, grants to 10 
 covered entities.
 (3) Applications.--To be eligible for a grant under the 
 Program, a covered entity shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such form, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require, which shall include, 
 at a minimum, a description of the following:
 (A) Plans for the use of grant funds awarded under 
 the Program and how patients and stakeholder 
 organizations were involved in the development of such 
 plans.
 (B) How such grant funds will be targeted to 
 geographic areas that have disproportionately high 
 levels of risks associated with climate change for 
 vulnerable individuals.
 (C) How such grant funds will be used to address 
 racial and ethnic inequities in--
 (i) adverse maternal and infant health 
 outcomes; and
 (ii) exposure to risks associated with 
 climate change for vulnerable individuals.
 (D) Strategies to prevent an initiative assisted 
 with such grant funds from causing--
 (i) adverse environmental impacts;
 (ii) displacement of residents and 
 businesses;
 (iii) rent and housing price increases; or
 (iv) disproportionate adverse impacts on 
 racial and ethnic minority groups and other 
 underserved populations.
 (4) Selection of grant recipients.--
 (A) Timing.--Not later than 270 days after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall select 
 the recipients of grants under the Program.
 (B) Consultation.--In selecting covered entities 
 for grants under the Program, the Secretary shall 
 consult with--
 (i) representatives of stakeholder 
 organizations;
 (ii) the Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency;
 (iii) the Administrator of the National 
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; and
 (iv) from the Department of Health and 
 Human Services--
 (I) the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
 for Minority Health;
 (II) the Administrator of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services;
 (III) the Administrator of the 
 Health Resources and Services 
 Administration;
 (IV) the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health; and
 (V) the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention.
 (C) Priority.--In selecting a covered entity to be 
 awarded a grant under the Program, the Secretary shall 
 give priority to covered entities that serve a county--
 (i) designated, or located in an area 
 designated, as a nonattainment area pursuant to 
 section 107 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
 7407) for any air pollutant for which air 
 quality criteria have been issued under section 
 108(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 7408(a));
 (ii) with a level of vulnerability of 
 moderate-to-high or higher, according to the 
 Social Vulnerability Index of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention; or
 (iii) with temperatures that pose a risk to 
 human health, as determined by the Secretary, 
 in consultation with the Administrator of the 
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
 and the Chair of the United States Global 
 Change Research Program, based on the best 
 available science.
 (D) Limitation.--A recipient of grant funds under 
 the Program may not use such grant funds to serve a 
 county that is served by any other recipient of a grant 
 under the Program.
 (5) Use of funds.--A covered entity awarded grant funds 
 under the Program may only use such grant funds for the 
 following:
 (A) Initiatives to identify risks associated with 
 climate change for vulnerable individuals and to 
 provide services and support to such individuals that 
 address such risks, which may include--
 (i) training for health care providers, 
 doulas, and other employees in hospitals, birth 
 centers, midwifery practices, and other health 
 care practices that provide prenatal or labor 
 and delivery services to vulnerable individuals 
 on the identification of, and patient 
 counseling relating to, risks associated with 
 climate change for vulnerable individuals;
 (ii) hiring, training, or providing 
 resources to community health workers and 
 perinatal health workers who can help identify 
 risks associated with climate change for 
 vulnerable individuals, provide patient 
 counseling about such risks, and carry out the 
 distribution of relevant services and support;
 (iii) enhancing the monitoring of risks 
 associated with climate change for vulnerable 
 individuals, including by--
 (I) collecting data on such risks 
 in specific census tracts, 
 neighborhoods, or other geographic 
 areas; and
 (II) sharing such data with local 
 health care providers, doulas, and 
 other employees in hospitals, birth 
 centers, midwifery practices, and other 
 health care practices that provide 
 prenatal or labor and delivery services 
 to local vulnerable individuals; and
 (iv) providing vulnerable individuals--
 (I) air conditioning units, 
 residential weatherization support, 
 filtration systems, household 
 appliances, or related items;
 (II) direct financial assistance; 
 and
 (III) services and support, 
 including housing and transportation 
 assistance, to prepare for or recover 
 from extreme weather events, which may 
 include floods, hurricanes, wildfires, 
 droughts, and related events.
 (B) Initiatives to mitigate levels of and exposure 
 to risks associated with climate change for vulnerable 
 individuals, which shall be based on the best available 
 science and which may include initiatives to--
 (i) develop, maintain, or expand urban or 
 community forestry initiatives and tree canopy 
 coverage initiatives;
 (ii) improve infrastructure, including 
 buildings and paved surfaces;
 (iii) develop or improve community outreach 
 networks to provide culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate information and 
 notifications about risks associated with 
 climate change for vulnerable individuals; and
 (iv) provide enhanced services to racial 
 and ethnic minority groups and other 
 underserved populations.
 (6) Length of award.--A grant under this subsection shall 
 be disbursed over 4 fiscal years.
 (7) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to a covered entity awarded a grant under 
 the Program to support the development, implementation, and 
 evaluation of activities funded with such grant.
 (8) Reports to secretary.--
 (A) Annual report.--For each fiscal year during 
 which a covered entity is disbursed grant funds under 
 the Program, such covered entity shall submit to the 
 Secretary a report that summarizes the activities 
 carried out by such covered entity with such grant 
 funds during such fiscal year, which shall include a 
 description of the following:
 (i) The involvement of stakeholder 
 organizations in the implementation of 
 initiatives assisted with such grant funds.
 (ii) Relevant health and environmental 
 data, disaggregated, to the extent practicable, 
 by race, ethnicity, gender, and pregnancy 
 status.
 (iii) Qualitative feedback received from 
 vulnerable individuals with respect to 
 initiatives assisted with such grant funds.
 (iv) Criteria used in selecting the 
 geographic areas assisted with such grant 
 funds.
 (v) Efforts to address racial and ethnic 
 inequities in adverse maternal and infant 
 health outcomes and in exposure to risks 
 associated with climate change for vulnerable 
 individuals.
 (vi) Any negative and unintended impacts of 
 initiatives assisted with such grant funds, 
 including--
 (I) adverse environmental impacts;
 (II) displacement of residents and 
 businesses;
 (III) rent and housing price 
 increases; and
 (IV) disproportionate adverse 
 impacts on racial and ethnic minority 
 groups and other underserved 
 populations.
 (vii) How the covered entity will address 
 and prevent any impacts described in clause 
 (vi).
 (B) Publication.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 date on which a report is submitted under subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary shall publish such report on a 
 public website of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (9) Report to congress.--Not later than the date that is 5 
 years after the date on which the Program is established, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress and publish on a public 
 website of the Department of Health and Human Services a report 
 on the results of the Program, including the following:
 (A) Summaries of the annual reports submitted under 
 paragraph (8).
 (B) Evaluations of the initiatives assisted with 
 grant funds under the Program.
 (C) An assessment of the effectiveness of the 
 Program in--
 (i) identifying risks associated with 
 climate change for vulnerable individuals;
 (ii) providing services and support to such 
 individuals;
 (iii) mitigating levels of and exposure to 
 such risks; and
 (iv) addressing racial and ethnic 
 inequities in adverse maternal and infant 
 health outcomes and in exposure to such risks.
 (D) A description of how the Program could be 
 expanded, including--
 (i) monitoring efforts or data collection 
 that would be required to identify areas with 
 high levels of risks associated with climate 
 change for vulnerable individuals;
 (ii) how such areas could be identified 
 using the strategy developed under subsection 
 (d); and
 (iii) recommendations for additional 
 funding.
 (10) Covered entity defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered entity'' means a consortium of organizations serving 
 a county that--
 (A) shall include a community-based organization; 
 and
 (B) may include--
 (i) another stakeholder organization;
 (ii) the government of such county;
 (iii) the governments of one or more 
 municipalities within such county;
 (iv) a State or local public health 
 department or emergency management agency;
 (v) a local health care practice, which may 
 include a licensed and accredited hospital, 
 birth center, midwifery practice, or other 
 health care practice that provides prenatal or 
 labor and delivery services to vulnerable 
 individuals;
 (vi) an Indian tribe or tribal organization 
 (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304));
 (vii) an Urban Indian organization (as 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)); and
 (viii) an institution of higher education.
 (11) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $100,000,000 
 for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.
 (b) Grant Program for Education and Training at Health Profession 
Schools.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a grant 
 program (in this subsection referred to as the ``Program'') to 
 provide funds to health profession schools to support the 
 development and integration of education and training programs 
 for identifying and addressing risks associated with climate 
 change for vulnerable individuals.
 (2) Grant authority.--In carrying out the Program, the 
 Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, grants to health 
 profession schools.
 (3) Application.--To be eligible for a grant under the 
 Program, a health profession school shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such form, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require, which 
 shall include, at a minimum, a description of the following:
 (A) How such health profession school will engage 
 with vulnerable individuals, and stakeholder 
 organizations representing such individuals, in 
 developing and implementing the education and training 
 programs supported by grant funds awarded under the 
 Program.
 (B) How such health profession school will ensure 
 that such education and training programs will address 
 racial and ethnic inequities in exposure to, and the 
 effects of, risks associated with climate change for 
 vulnerable individuals.
 (4) Use of funds.--A health profession school awarded a 
 grant under the Program shall use the grant funds to develop, 
 and integrate into the curriculum and continuing education of 
 such health profession school, education and training on each 
 of the following:
 (A) Identifying risks associated with climate 
 change for vulnerable individuals and individuals with 
 the intent to become pregnant.
 (B) How risks associated with climate change affect 
 vulnerable individuals and individuals with the intent 
 to become pregnant.
 (C) Racial and ethnic inequities in exposure to, 
 and the effects of, risks associated with climate 
 change for vulnerable individuals and individuals with 
 the intent to become pregnant.
 (D) Patient counseling and mitigation strategies 
 relating to risks associated with climate change for 
 vulnerable individuals.
 (E) Relevant services and support for vulnerable 
 individuals relating to risks associated with climate 
 change and strategies for ensuring vulnerable 
 individuals have access to such services and support.
 (F) Implicit and explicit bias, racism, and 
 discrimination.
 (G) Related topics identified by such health 
 profession school based on the engagement of such 
 health profession school with vulnerable individuals 
 and stakeholder organizations representing such 
 individuals.
 (5) Partnerships.--In carrying out activities with grant 
 funds, a health profession school awarded a grant under the 
 Program may partner with one or more of the following:
 (A) A State or local public health department.
 (B) A health care professional membership 
 organization.
 (C) A stakeholder organization.
 (D) A health profession school.
 (E) An institution of higher education.
 (6) Reports to secretary.--
 (A) Annual report.--For each fiscal year during 
 which a health profession school is disbursed grant 
 funds under the Program, such health profession school 
 shall submit to the Secretary a report that describes 
 the activities carried out with such grant funds during 
 such fiscal year.
 (B) Final report.--Not later than the date that is 
 1 year after the end of the last fiscal year during 
 which a health profession school is disbursed grant 
 funds under the Program, the health profession school 
 shall submit to the Secretary a final report that 
 summarizes the activities carried out with such grant 
 funds.
 (7) Report to congress.--Not later than the date that is 6 
 years after the date on which the Program is established, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress and publish on a public 
 website of the Department of Health and Human Services a report 
 that includes the following:
 (A) A summary of the reports submitted under 
 paragraph (6).
 (B) Recommendations to improve education and 
 training programs at health profession schools with 
 respect to identifying and addressing risks associated 
 with climate change for vulnerable individuals.
 (8) Health profession school defined.--In this subsection, 
 the term ``health profession school'' means an accredited--
 (A) medical school;
 (B) school of nursing;
 (C) midwifery program;
 (D) physician assistant education program;
 (E) teaching hospital;
 (F) residency or fellowship program; or
 (G) other school or program determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary.
 (9) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $5,000,000 for 
 fiscal years 2025 through 2028.
 (c) NIH Consortium on Birth and Climate Change Research.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Institutes 
 of Health (in this subsection referred to as the ``Director of 
 NIH'') shall establish the Consortium on Birth and Climate 
 Change Research (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``Consortium'').
 (2) Duties.--
 (A) In general.--The Consortium shall coordinate, 
 across the institutes, centers, and offices of the 
 National Institutes of Health, research on the risks 
 associated with climate change for vulnerable 
 individuals.
 (B) Required activities.--In carrying out 
 subparagraph (A), the Consortium shall--
 (i) establish research priorities, 
 including by prioritizing research that--
 (I) identifies the risks associated 
 with climate change for vulnerable 
 individuals with a particular focus on 
 inequities in such risks among racial 
 and ethnic minority groups and other 
 underserved populations; and
 (II) identifies strategies to 
 reduce levels of, and exposure to, such 
 risks, with a particular focus on risks 
 among racial and ethnic minority groups 
 and other underserved populations;
 (ii) identify gaps in available data 
 related to such risks;
 (iii) identify gaps in, and opportunities 
 for, research collaborations;
 (iv) identify funding opportunities for 
 community-based organizations and researchers 
 from racially, ethnically, and geographically 
 diverse backgrounds; and
 (v) publish annual reports on the work and 
 findings of the Consortium on a public website 
 of the National Institutes of Health.
 (3) Membership.--The Director of NIH shall appoint to the 
 Consortium representatives of such institutes, centers, and 
 offices of the National Institutes of Health as the Director of 
 NIH considers appropriate, including, at a minimum, 
 representatives of--
 (A) the National Institute of Environmental Health 
 Sciences;
 (B) the National Institute on Minority Health and 
 Health Disparities;
 (C) the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
 of Child Health and Human Development;
 (D) the National Institute of Nursing Research; and
 (E) the Office of Research on Women's Health.
 (4) Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Consortium shall 
 be designated by the Director of NIH and selected from among 
 the representatives appointed under paragraph (3).
 (5) Consultation.--In carrying out the duties described in 
 paragraph (2), the Consortium shall consult with--
 (A) the heads of relevant Federal agencies, 
 including--
 (i) the Environmental Protection Agency;
 (ii) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration;
 (iii) the Occupational Safety and Health 
 Administration; and
 (iv) from the Department of Health and 
 Human Services--
 (I) the Office of Minority Health 
 in the Office of the Secretary;
 (II) the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services;
 (III) the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration;
 (IV) the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention;
 (V) the Indian Health Service; and
 (VI) the Administration for 
 Children and Families; and
 (B) representatives of--
 (i) stakeholder organizations;
 (ii) health care providers and professional 
 membership organizations with expertise in 
 maternal health or environmental justice;
 (iii) State and local public health 
 departments;
 (iv) licensed and accredited hospitals, 
 birth centers, midwifery practices, or other 
 health care practices that provide prenatal or 
 labor and delivery services to vulnerable 
 individuals; and
 (v) institutions of higher education, 
 including such institutions that are minority-
 serving institutions or have expertise in 
 maternal health or environmental justice.
 (d) Strategy for Identifying Climate Change Risk Zones for 
Vulnerable Mothers and Babies.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
 develop a strategy (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``Strategy'') for designating areas that the Secretary 
 determines to have a high risk of adverse maternal and infant 
 health outcomes among vulnerable individuals as a result of 
 risks associated with climate change.
 (2) Strategy requirements.--
 (A) In general.--In developing the Strategy, the 
 Secretary shall establish a process to identify areas 
 where vulnerable individuals are exposed to a high risk 
 of adverse maternal and infant health outcomes as a 
 result of risks associated with climate change in 
 conjunction with other factors that can impact such 
 health outcomes, including--
 (i) the incidence of diseases associated 
 with air pollution, extreme heat, and other 
 environmental factors;
 (ii) the availability and accessibility of 
 maternal and infant health care providers;
 (iii) English-language proficiency among 
 people of reproductive age;
 (iv) the health insurance status of people 
 of reproductive age;
 (v) the number of people of reproductive 
 age who are members of racial or ethnic groups 
 with disproportionately high rates of adverse 
 maternal and infant health outcomes;
 (vi) the socioeconomic status of people of 
 reproductive age, including with respect to--
 (I) poverty;
 (II) unemployment;
 (III) household income; and
 (IV) educational attainment; and
 (vii) access to quality housing, 
 transportation, and nutrition.
 (B) Resources.--In developing the Strategy, the 
 Secretary shall identify, and incorporate a description 
 of, the following:
 (i) Existing mapping tools or Federal 
 programs that identify--
 (I) risks associated with climate 
 change for vulnerable individuals; and
 (II) other factors that can 
 influence maternal and infant health 
 outcomes, including the factors 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Environmental, health, socioeconomic, 
 and demographic data relevant to identifying 
 risks associated with climate change for 
 vulnerable individuals.
 (iii) Existing monitoring networks that 
 collect data described in clause (ii), and any 
 gaps in such networks.
 (iv) Federal, State, and local stakeholders 
 involved in maintaining monitoring networks 
 identified under clause (iii), and how such 
 stakeholders are coordinating their monitoring 
 efforts.
 (v) Additional monitoring networks, and 
 enhancements to existing monitoring networks, 
 that would be required to address gaps 
 identified under clause (iii), including at the 
 subcounty and census tract level.
 (vi) Funding amounts required to establish 
 the monitoring networks identified under clause 
 (v) and recommendations for Federal, State, and 
 local coordination with respect to such 
 networks.
 (vii) Potential uses for data collected and 
 generated as a result of the Strategy, 
 including how such data may be used in 
 determining recipients of grants under the 
 program established by subsection (a) or other 
 similar programs.
 (viii) Other information the Secretary 
 considers relevant for the development of the 
 Strategy.
 (3) Coordination and consultation.--In developing the 
 Strategy, the Secretary shall--
 (A) coordinate with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency and the Administrator 
 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; 
 and
 (B) consult with--
 (i) stakeholder organizations;
 (ii) health care providers and professional 
 membership organizations with expertise in 
 maternal health or environmental justice;
 (iii) State and local public health 
 departments;
 (iv) licensed and accredited hospitals, 
 birth centers, midwifery practices, or other 
 health care providers that provide prenatal or 
 labor and delivery services to vulnerable 
 individuals; and
 (v) institutions of higher education, 
 including such institutions that are minority-
 serving institutions or have expertise in 
 maternal health or environmental justice.
 (4) Notice and comment.--At least 240 days before the date 
 on which the Strategy is published in accordance with paragraph 
 (5), the Secretary shall provide--
 (A) notice of the Strategy on a public website of 
 the Department of Health and Human Services; and
 (B) an opportunity for public comment of at least 
 90 days.
 (5) Publication.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish on a 
 public website of the Department of Health and Human Services--
 (A) the Strategy;
 (B) the public comments received under paragraph 
 (4); and
 (C) the responses of the Secretary to such public 
 comments.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply:
 (1) Adverse maternal and infant health outcomes.--The term 
 ``adverse maternal and infant health outcomes'' includes the 
 outcomes of pre-term birth, low birth weight, stillbirth, 
 infant or maternal mortality, and severe maternal morbidity.
 (2) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (3) Minority-serving institution.--The term ``minority-
 serving institution'' means an entity specified in any of 
 paragraphs (1) through (7) of section 371(a) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 (4) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)).
 (5) Risks associated with climate change.--The term ``risks 
 associated with climate change'' includes risks associated with 
 extreme heat, air pollution, extreme weather events, and other 
 environmental issues associated with climate change that can 
 result in adverse maternal and infant health outcomes.
 (6) Stakeholder organization.--The term ``stakeholder 
 organization'' means--
 (A) a community-based organization with expertise 
 in providing assistance to vulnerable individuals;
 (B) a nonprofit organization with expertise in 
 maternal or infant health or environmental justice; and
 (C) a patient advocacy organization representing 
 vulnerable individuals.
 (7) Vulnerable individual.--The term ``vulnerable 
 individual'' means--
 (A) an individual who is pregnant;
 (B) an individual who was pregnant during any 
 portion of the preceding 1-year period; and
 (C) an individual under 3 years of age.

SEC. 5212. PROTECT MOMS FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

 (a) Study by Department of Health and Human Services.--
 (1) Study.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, the Substance Abuse and 
 Mental Health Services Administration, and the Administration 
 for Children and Families, and in consultation with the 
 Attorney General of the United States, the Director of the 
 Indian Health Service, and stakeholders (including community-
 based organizations, culturally specific organizations, and 
 Tribal public health authorities), shall conduct a study on the 
 extent to which individuals are more at risk of maternal 
 mortality or severe maternal morbidity as a result of being a 
 victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
 stalking, human trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual 
 abuse, or forced marriage.
 (2) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete the study 
 under paragraph (1) and submit a report to the Congress on the 
 results of such study. Such report shall include--
 (A) an analysis of the extent to which domestic 
 violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, 
 human trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, 
 and forced marriage contribute to, or result in, 
 maternal mortality;
 (B) an analysis of the impact of domestic violence, 
 dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, human 
 trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, and 
 forced marriage on access to health care (including 
 mental health care) and substance use disorder 
 treatment and recovery support;
 (C) a breakdown (including by race and ethnicity) 
 of categories of individuals who are disproportionately 
 victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, stalking, human trafficking, sex trafficking, 
 child sexual abuse, or forced marriage that contributes 
 to, or results in, pregnancy-related death;
 (D) an analysis of the impact on health, mental 
 health, and substance use resulting from domestic 
 violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, 
 human trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, 
 and forced marriage among Alaskan Natives, Native 
 Hawaiians, and American Indians during the prenatal and 
 postpartum period;
 (E) an assessment of the factors that increase or 
 decrease risks for maternal mortality or severe 
 maternal morbidity among victims of domestic violence, 
 dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, human 
 trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, or 
 forced marriage;
 (F) an assessment of increased risk of maternal 
 mortality or severe maternal morbidity stemming from 
 suicide, substance use disorders, or drug overdose due 
 to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
 stalking, human trafficking, sex trafficking, child 
 sexual abuse, or forced marriage;
 (G) recommendations for legislative or policy 
 changes--
 (i) to reduce maternal mortality rates; and
 (ii) to address health inequities that 
 contribute to inequities in such rates and 
 deaths;
 (H) best practices to reduce maternal mortality and 
 severe maternal morbidity among victims of domestic 
 violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, 
 human trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, 
 and forced marriage, including--
 (i) reducing reproductive coercion, mental 
 health conditions, and substance use coercion; 
 and
 (ii) routinely assessing pregnant people 
 for domestic violence and other forms of 
 reproductive violence; and
 (I) any other information on maternal mortality or 
 severe maternal morbidity the Secretary determines 
 appropriate to include in the report.
 (b) Study by National Academy of Medicine.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into an 
 arrangement with the National Academy of Medicine (or, if the 
 Academy declines to enter into such arrangement, another 
 appropriate entity) to study--
 (A) the impact of domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, stalking, human trafficking, 
 sex trafficking, child sexual abuse, and forced 
 marriage on an individual's health; relative to
 (B) maternal mortality and severe maternal 
 morbidity.
 (2) Topics.--The study under paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) examine--
 (i) whether domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, stalking, human 
 trafficking, sex trafficking, child sexual 
 abuse, or forced marriage, or generational 
 intimate partner violence, trauma, and 
 psychiatric disorders, increase the risk of 
 suicide, substance use, and drug overdose among 
 pregnant and postpartum persons; and
 (ii) the intersection of domestic violence, 
 dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, 
 human trafficking, sex trafficking, child 
 sexual abuse, and forced marriage as a social 
 determinant of health; and
 (B) give particular focus to impacts among African 
 American, American Indian, Native Hawaiian, Alaskan 
 Native, and LGBTQ birthing persons.
 (c) Grants for Innovative Approaches.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, and in collaboration with the Administration 
 for Children and Families, the Indian Health Service, and the 
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 
 shall award grants to eligible entities for developing and 
 implementing innovative approaches to improve maternal and 
 child health outcomes of victims of domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, stalking, human trafficking, sex 
 trafficking, child sexual abuse, or forced marriage.
 (2) Eligible entity.--To seek a grant under this 
 subsection, an entity shall be--
 (A) a State, local, or federally recognized Tribal 
 government;
 (B) a nonprofit organization or community-based 
 organization that provides prevention or intervention 
 services related to domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, stalking, human trafficking, sex 
 trafficking, child sexual abuse, or forced marriage;
 (C) a tribal organization or Urban Indian 
 organization (as such terms are defined in section 4 of 
 the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
 1603));
 (D) an entity, the principal purpose of which is to 
 provide health care, such as a hospital, clinic, health 
 department, freestanding birthing center, perinatal 
 health worker, or maternity care provider;
 (E) an institution of higher education; or
 (F) a comprehensive substance use disorder 
 parenting program.
 (3) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to applicants proposing to 
 address--
 (A) mental health and substance use disorders among 
 pregnant persons; or
 (B) pregnant and postpartum persons experiencing 
 intimate partner violence.
 (4) Freestanding birth center defined.--In this subsection, 
 the term ``freestanding birth center'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 1905(l) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d(l)).
 (5) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 
 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2027.
 (d) Guidance.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall issue and disseminate guidance to 
States, Tribes, territories, maternity care providers, and managed care 
entities on--
 (1) providing universal education on healthy relationships 
 and intimate partner violence;
 (2) developing protocols on--
 (A) routine assessment of intimate partner 
 violence; and
 (B) health promotion and strategies for trauma-
 informed care plans; and
 (3) creating sustainable partnerships with community-based 
 organizations that address domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, stalking, human trafficking, sex trafficking, 
 child sexual abuse, or forced marriage.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``maternal mortality''--
 (A) means death that--
 (i) occurs during, or within the 1-year 
 period after, pregnancy; and
 (ii) is attributed to or aggravated by 
 pregnancy-related or childbirth complications; 
 and
 (B) includes a suicide, drug overdose death, 
 homicide (including a domestic violence-related 
 homicide), or other death resulting from a mental 
 health or substance use disorder attributed to or 
 aggravated by pregnancy-related or childbirth 
 complications.
 (2) The term ``maternity care provider'' means a health 
 care provider who--
 (A) is a physician, physician assistant, nurse, 
 midwife who meets at a minimum the international 
 definition of the midwife and global standards for 
 midwifery education as established by the International 
 Confederation of Midwives, nurse practitioner, or 
 clinical nurse specialist; and
 (B) has a focus on maternal or perinatal health.
 (3) The term ``perinatal health worker'' means a worker 
 who--
 (A) is a doula, community health worker, peer 
 supporter, breastfeeding and lactation educator or 
 counselor, nutritionist or dietitian, childbirth 
 educator, social worker, home visitor, language 
 interpreter, or navigator; and
 (B) provides assistance with perinatal health.
 (4) The term ``postpartum'' refers to the 12-month period 
 following childbirth.
 (5) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services.
 (6) The term ``severe maternal morbidity'' means a health 
 condition, including a mental health condition or substance use 
 disorder, that--
 (A) is attributed to or aggravated by pregnancy or 
 childbirth; and
 (B) results in significant short-term or long-term 
 consequences to the health of the individual who was 
 pregnant.

SEC. 5213. MIDWIVES SCHOOLS AND PROGRAMS EXPANSION.

 (a) Midwifery Schools and Programs.--
 (1) In general.--Title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
 is amended by inserting after section 760 (42 U.S.C. 294k) the 
 following:

``SEC. 760A. MIDWIFERY SCHOOLS AND PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants to institutions 
of higher education (as defined in subsections (a) and (b) of section 
101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965) for the following:
 ``(1) Direct support of students in an accredited midwifery 
 school or program.
 ``(2) Establishment or expansion of an accredited midwifery 
 school or program.
 ``(3) Securing, preparing, or providing support for 
 increasing the number of, qualified preceptors for training the 
 students of an accredited midwifery school or program.
 ``(b) Special Considerations.--In awarding grants under subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall give special consideration to any institution 
of higher education that--
 ``(1) agrees to prioritize students who plan to practice in 
 a health professional shortage area designated under section 
 332; and
 ``(2) demonstrates a focus on increasing racial and ethnic 
 minority representation in midwifery education.
 ``(c) Restriction.--The Secretary shall not provide any assistance 
under this section to be used with respect to a midwifery school or 
program within a school of nursing (as defined in section 801).
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated 
 to carry out this section $15,000,000 for the period of fiscal 
 years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(2) Allocation.--Of the amounts made available to carry 
 out this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall use--
 ``(A) 50 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(1);
 ``(B) 25 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(2); and
 ``(C) 25 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(3).''.
 (2) Definitions.--
 (A) Midwifery school or program.--Section 
 799B(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 295p(1)(A)) is amended--
 (i) by inserting ```midwifery school or 
 program','' before ``and `school of 
 chiropractic''';
 (ii) by inserting ``a degree or certificate 
 in midwifery or an equivalent degree or 
 certificate,'' before ``and a degree of doctor 
 of chiropractic or an equivalent degree''; and
 (iii) by striking ``any such school'' and 
 inserting ``any such school or program''.
 (B) Accredited.--Section 799B(1)(E) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295p(1)(E)) is amended by 
 inserting ``a midwifery school or program,'' before 
 ``or a graduate program in health administration''.
 (b) Nurse-Midwives.--Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act is 
amended by inserting after section 812 (as added by section 5205(c)), 
the following:

``SEC. 812A. MIDWIFERY EXPANSION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants to schools of 
nursing for the following:
 ``(1) Direct support of students in an accredited nurse-
 midwifery school or program.
 ``(2) Establishment or expansion of an accredited nurse-
 midwifery school or program.
 ``(3) Securing, preparing, or providing support for 
 increasing the numbers of, preceptors at clinical training 
 sites to precept students training to become certified nurse-
 midwives.
 ``(b) Special Considerations.--In awarding grants under subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall give special consideration to any school of 
nursing that--
 ``(1) agrees to prioritize students who choose to pursue an 
 advanced education degree in nurse-midwifery to practice in a 
 health professional shortage area designated under section 332; 
 and
 ``(2) demonstrates a focus on increasing racial and ethnic 
 minority representation in nurse-midwifery education.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--To carry out this section, there is 
 authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for the period of 
 fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(2) Allocation.--Of the amounts made available to carry 
 out this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall use--
 ``(A) 50 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(1);
 ``(B) 25 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(2); and
 ``(C) 25 percent to award grants for purposes 
 specified in subsection (a)(3).''.

SEC. 5214. GESTATIONAL DIABETES.

 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 
et seq.) is amended by adding after section 317H (42 U.S.C. 247b-9) the 
following:

``SEC. 317H-1. GESTATIONAL DIABETES.

 ``(a) Understanding and Monitoring Gestational Diabetes.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 
 consultation with the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency 
 Coordinating Committee established under section 429 and 
 representatives of appropriate national health organizations, 
 shall develop a multisite gestational diabetes research project 
 within the diabetes program of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention to expand and enhance surveillance data and 
 public health research on gestational diabetes.
 ``(2) Areas to be addressed.--The research project 
 developed under paragraph (1) shall address--
 ``(A) procedures to establish accurate and 
 efficient systems for the collection of gestational 
 diabetes data within each State and commonwealth, 
 territory, or possession of the United States;
 ``(B) the progress of collaborative activities with 
 the National Vital Statistics System, the National 
 Center for Health Statistics, and State health 
 departments with respect to the standard birth 
 certificate, in order to improve surveillance of 
 gestational diabetes;
 ``(C) postpartum methods of tracking individuals 
 with gestational diabetes after delivery as well as 
 targeted interventions proven to lower the incidence of 
 type 2 diabetes in that population;
 ``(D) variations in the distribution of diagnosed 
 and undiagnosed gestational diabetes, and of impaired 
 fasting glucose tolerance and impaired fasting glucose, 
 within and among groups of pregnant individuals; and
 ``(E) factors and culturally sensitive 
 interventions that influence risks and reduce the 
 incidence of gestational diabetes and related 
 complications during childbirth, including cultural, 
 behavioral, racial, ethnic, geographic, demographic, 
 socioeconomic, and genetic factors.
 ``(3) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall generate a report on the findings and 
 recommendations of the research project including prevalence of 
 gestational diabetes in the multisite area and disseminate the 
 report to the appropriate Federal and non-Federal agencies.
 ``(b) Expansion of Gestational Diabetes Research.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall expand and intensify 
 public health research regarding gestational diabetes. Such 
 research may include--
 ``(A) developing and testing novel approaches for 
 improving postpartum diabetes testing or screening and 
 for preventing type 2 diabetes in individuals who can 
 become pregnant with a history of gestational diabetes; 
 and
 ``(B) conducting public health research to further 
 understanding of the epidemiologic, socioenvironmental, 
 behavioral, translation, and biomedical factors and 
 health systems that influence the risk of gestational 
 diabetes and the development of type 2 diabetes in 
 individuals who can become pregnant with a history of 
 gestational diabetes.
 ``(2) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $5,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(c) Demonstration Grants To Lower the Rate of Gestational 
Diabetes.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible 
 entities for demonstration projects that implement evidence-
 based interventions to reduce the incidence of gestational 
 diabetes, the recurrence of gestational diabetes in subsequent 
 pregnancies, and the development of type 2 diabetes in 
 individuals who can become pregnant with a history of 
 gestational diabetes.
 ``(2) Priority.--In making grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to projects focusing on--
 ``(A) helping individuals who can become pregnant 
 who have 1 or more risk factors for developing 
 gestational diabetes;
 ``(B) working with individuals who can become 
 pregnant with a history of gestational diabetes during 
 a previous pregnancy;
 ``(C) providing postpartum care for individuals who 
 can become pregnant with gestational diabetes;
 ``(D) tracking cases where individuals who can 
 become pregnant with a history of gestational diabetes 
 developed type 2 diabetes;
 ``(E) educating mothers with a history of 
 gestational diabetes about the increased risk of their 
 child developing diabetes;
 ``(F) working to prevent gestational diabetes and 
 prevent or delay the development of type 2 diabetes in 
 individuals who can become pregnant with a history of 
 gestational diabetes; and
 ``(G) achieving outcomes designed to assess the 
 efficacy and cost-effectiveness of interventions that 
 can inform decisions on long-term sustainability, 
 including third-party reimbursement.
 ``(3) Application.--An eligible entity desiring to receive 
 a grant under this subsection shall submit to the Secretary--
 ``(A) an application at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require; and
 ``(B) a plan to--
 ``(i) lower the rate of gestational 
 diabetes during pregnancy; or
 ``(ii) develop methods of tracking 
 individuals who can become pregnant with a 
 history of gestational diabetes and develop 
 effective interventions to lower the incidence 
 of the recurrence of gestational diabetes in 
 subsequent pregnancies and the development of 
 type 2 diabetes.
 ``(4) Uses of funds.--An eligible entity receiving a grant 
 under this subsection shall use the grant funds to carry out 
 demonstration projects described in paragraph (1), including--
 ``(A) expanding community-based health promotion 
 education, activities, and incentives focused on the 
 prevention of gestational diabetes and development of 
 type 2 diabetes in individuals who can become pregnant 
 with a history of gestational diabetes;
 ``(B) aiding State- and Tribal-based diabetes 
 prevention and control programs to collect, analyze, 
 disseminate, and report surveillance data on 
 individuals who can become pregnant with, and at risk 
 for, gestational diabetes, the recurrence of 
 gestational diabetes in subsequent pregnancies, and, 
 for individuals who can become pregnant with a history 
 of gestational diabetes, the development of type 2 
 diabetes; and
 ``(C) training and encouraging health care 
 providers--
 ``(i) to promote risk assessment, high-
 quality care, and self-management for 
 gestational diabetes and the recurrence of 
 gestational diabetes in subsequent pregnancies; 
 and
 ``(ii) to prevent the development of type 2 
 diabetes in individuals who can become pregnant 
 with a history of gestational diabetes, and its 
 complications in the practice settings of the 
 health care providers.
 ``(5) Report.--Not later than 4 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
 submit to the Congress a report concerning the results of the 
 demonstration projects conducted through the grants awarded 
 under this subsection.
 ``(6) Definition of eligible entity.--In this subsection, 
 the term `eligible entity' means a nonprofit organization (such 
 as a nonprofit academic center or community health center) or a 
 State, Tribal, or local health agency.
 ``(7) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $5,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(d) Postpartum Followup Regarding Gestational Diabetes.--The 
Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, shall work with the State- and Tribal-based 
diabetes prevention and control programs assisted by the Centers to 
encourage postpartum followup after gestational diabetes, as medically 
appropriate, for the purpose of reducing the incidence of gestational 
diabetes, the recurrence of gestational diabetes in subsequent 
pregnancies, the development of type 2 diabetes in individuals with a 
history of gestational diabetes, and related complications.''.

SEC. 5215. CONSUMER EDUCATION CAMPAIGN.

 Section 229(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 237a(b)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
 this paragraph, develop and implement a 4-year culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate multimedia consumer education 
 campaign that is designed to promote understanding and 
 acceptance of evidence-based maternity practices and models of 
 care for optimal maternity outcomes among individuals of 
 childbearing ages and families of such individuals and that--
 ``(A) highlights the importance of protecting, 
 promoting, and supporting the innate capacities of 
 childbearing individuals and their newborns for 
 childbirth, breastfeeding, and attachment;
 ``(B) promotes understanding of the importance of 
 using obstetric interventions when medically necessary 
 and when supported by strong, high-quality evidence;
 ``(C) highlights the widespread overuse of 
 maternity practices that have been shown to have 
 benefit when used appropriately in situations of 
 medical necessity, but which can expose pregnant 
 individuals, infants, or both to risk of harm if used 
 routinely and indiscriminately;
 ``(D) emphasizes the noninvasive maternity 
 practices that have proven correlation or may be 
 associated with improvement in outcomes with no 
 detrimental side effects, and are significantly 
 underused in the United States, including smoking 
 cessation programs in pregnancy, group model prenatal 
 care, continuous labor support, nonsupine positions for 
 birth, and external version to turn breech babies at 
 term;
 ``(E) educates consumers about--
 ``(i) the qualifications of licensed 
 providers of maternity care, including 
 obstetrician-gynecologists, family physicians, 
 certified nurse-midwives, certified midwives, 
 and certified professional midwives; and
 ``(ii) the best evidence about the safety, 
 satisfaction, outcomes, and costs of such 
 providers;
 ``(F) informs consumers about the best available 
 research comparing birth center births, planned home 
 births, and hospital births, including information 
 about each setting's safety, satisfaction, outcomes, 
 and costs;
 ``(G) fosters participation in high-quality, 
 evidence-based childbirth education that promotes a 
 healthy and safe approach to pregnancy, childbirth, and 
 early parenting; is taught by certified educators, peer 
 counselors, and health professionals; and promotes 
 informed decision making by childbearing individuals;
 ``(H) informs consumers about--
 ``(i) the effects of systemic, 
 institutional, and interpersonal racism on the 
 health, well-being, and outcomes of birthing 
 people;
 ``(ii) the importance of respectful, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate, and 
 culturally congruent care; and
 ``(iii) the value of community-based and 
 community-led maternal care and support; and
 ``(I) is pilot tested for consumer comprehension, 
 cultural sensitivity, and acceptance of the messages 
 across geographically, racially, ethnically, and 
 linguistically diverse populations;''.

SEC. 5216. BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATABASE OF SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS FOR CARE OF 
 CHILDBEARING INDIVIDUALS AND NEWBORNS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through 
the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall--
 (1) make publicly available an online bibliographic 
 database identifying systematic reviews, including an 
 explanation of the level and quality of evidence, for care of 
 childbearing individuals and newborns; and
 (2) initiate regular updates that incorporate newly issued 
 and updated systematic reviews.
 (b) Sources.--To aim for a comprehensive inventory of systematic 
reviews relevant to maternal and newborn care, the database shall 
identify reviews from diverse sources, including--
 (1) scientific peer-reviewed journals;
 (2) databases, including the Cochrane Database of 
 Systematic Reviews; and
 (3) internet websites of agencies and organizations 
 throughout the world that produce such systematic reviews.
 (c) Features.--The database shall--
 (1) provide bibliographic citations for each record within 
 the database, and for each such citation include an explanation 
 of the level and quality of evidence;
 (2) include abstracts, as available;
 (3) provide reference to companion documents as may exist 
 for each review, such as evidence tables and guidelines or 
 consumer educational materials developed from the review;
 (4) provide links to the source of the full review and to 
 any companion documents;
 (5) provide links to the source of a previous version or 
 update of the review;
 (6) be searchable by intervention or other topic of the 
 review, reported outcomes, author, title, and source; and
 (7) offer to users periodic electronic notification of 
 database updates relating to users' topics of interest.
 (d) Outreach.--Not later than the first date the database is made 
publicly available and periodically thereafter, the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall publicize the availability, features, and uses 
of the database under this section to the stakeholders described in 
subsection (e).
 (e) Consultation.--For purposes of developing the database under 
this section and maintaining and updating such database, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services shall convene and consult with an advisory 
committee composed of relevant stakeholders, including--
 (1) Federal Medicaid administrators and State agencies 
 administrating State plans under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act pursuant to section 1902(a)(5) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(5));
 (2) providers of maternity and newborn care from both 
 academic and community-based settings, including obstetrician-
 gynecologists, family physicians, certified nurse midwives, 
 certified midwives, certified professional midwives, physician 
 assistants, perinatal nurses, pediatricians, and nurse 
 practitioners;
 (3) maternal-fetal medicine specialists;
 (4) neonatologists;
 (5) childbearing individuals and advocates for such 
 individuals, including childbirth educators certified by a 
 nationally accredited program, representing communities that 
 are diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, indigenous status, and 
 geographic area;
 (6) employers and purchasers;
 (7) health facility and system leaders, including both 
 hospital and birth center facilities;
 (8) journalists; and
 (9) bibliographic informatics specialists.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $2,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2027 for 
the purpose of developing the database and such sums as may be 
necessary for each subsequent fiscal year for updating the database and 
providing outreach and notification to users, as described in this 
section.

SEC. 5217. DEVELOPMENT OF INTERPROFESSIONAL MATERNITY CARE EDUCATIONAL 
 MODELS AND TOOLS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
acting in conjunction with the Administrator of Health Resources and 
Services Administration, shall convene, for a 1-year period, an 
Interprofessional Maternity Provider Education Commission (referred to 
in this section as the ``Commission'') to discuss and make 
recommendations for--
 (1) a consensus standard physiologic maternity care 
 curriculum that takes into account the core competencies for 
 basic midwifery practice such as those developed by the 
 American College of Nurse-Midwives and the North American 
 Registry of Midwives, and the educational objectives for 
 physicians practicing in obstetrics and gynecology as 
 determined by the Council on Resident Education in Obstetrics 
 and Gynecology;
 (2) suggestions for multidisciplinary use of the consensus 
 physiologic curriculum;
 (3) strategies to integrate and coordinate education across 
 maternity care disciplines, including recommendations to 
 increase medical and midwifery student exposure to out-of-
 hospital birth;
 (4) curriculum and strategies for continuing education of 
 practicing perinatal professionals who have completed their 
 undergraduate and graduate education; and
 (5) pilot demonstrations of interprofessional educational 
 models.
 (b) Participants.--
 (1) Professions.--The Commission shall include maternity 
 care educators, curriculum developers, service leaders, 
 certification leaders, and accreditation leaders from the 
 various professions that provide or support maternity care in 
 the United States. Such professions shall include obstetrician 
 gynecologists, certified nurse midwives or certified midwives, 
 family practice physicians, nurse practitioners, physician 
 assistants, certified professional midwives, perinatal nurses, 
 doulas, lactation personnel, and community health workers.
 (2) Consumer advocates.--The Commission shall also include 
 representation from maternity care consumer advocates.
 (c) Curriculum.--The consensus standard physiologic maternity care 
curriculum described in subsection (a)(1) shall--
 (1) have a public health focus with a foundation in health 
 promotion and disease prevention;
 (2) foster physiologic childbearing and person and family 
 centered care;
 (3) reflect the extensive, growing research evidence 
 about--
 (A) the innate abilities and processes of the 
 birthing person and the fetus or newborn for labor, 
 birth, postpartum transition, breastfeeding, and 
 attachment, when promoted, supported, and protected; 
 and
 (B) the effects of factors that disturb and disrupt 
 these processes;
 (4) integrate strategies to reduce maternal and infant 
 morbidity and mortality;
 (5) incorporate recommendations to ensure respectful, safe, 
 and seamless consultation, referral, transport, and transfer of 
 care when necessary;
 (6) include cultural sensitivity and strategies to decrease 
 inequities in maternity outcomes; and
 (7) include implicit bias training.
 (d) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the final meeting of the 
Commission, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall--
 (1) submit to Congress a report containing the 
 recommendations made by the Commission under this section; and
 (2) make such report publicly available.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section--
 (1) $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 and 2026; and
 (2) such sums as are necessary for each of fiscal years 
 2027 through 2029.

SEC. 5218. DISSEMINATION OF THE QUALITY FAMILY PLANNING GUIDELINES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall--
 (1) develop a plan for outreach to publicly funded health 
 care providers, including federally qualified health centers 
 (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(4))) and branches of the Indian Health 
 Service, about the quality family planning guidelines referred 
 to in section 5304; and
 (2) award grants to eligible entities to implement such 
 guidelines for all patients seeking family planning services.
 (b) Definition.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' 
means a publicly funded health care provider that serves persons of 
reproductive age.

 Subtitle D--Federal Agency Coordination on Maternal Health

SEC. 5301. INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE PROMOTION OF 
 OPTIMAL MATERNITY OUTCOMES.

 (a) In General.--Part A of title II of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 229A. INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE PROMOTION OF 
 OPTIMAL MATERNITY OUTCOMES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Women's Health under section 229 and in 
collaboration with the Federal officials specified in subsection (b), 
shall establish the Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Promotion 
of Optimal Maternity Outcomes (referred to in this section as the 
`ICCPOM').
 ``(b) Other Agencies.--The officials specified in this subsection 
are the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of 
Veterans Affairs, the Surgeon General, the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, the Administrator of the Health 
Resources and Services Administration, the Administrator of the Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Director of the Indian Health 
Service, the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration, the Director of the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, the Director of the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, the Assistant Secretary for Children 
and Families, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, the 
Director of the Office of Personnel Management, and such other Federal 
officials as the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines to 
be appropriate.
 ``(c) Chair.--The Deputy Assistant Secretary for Women's Health 
shall serve as the chair of the ICCPOM.
 ``(d) Duties.--The ICCPOM shall guide policy and program 
development across the Federal Government with respect to promotion of 
optimal maternity care, provided, however, that nothing in this section 
shall be construed as transferring regulatory or program authority from 
an agency to the ICCPOM.
 ``(e) Consultations.--The ICCPOM shall actively seek the input of, 
and shall consult with, all appropriate and interested stakeholders, 
including State health departments, public health research and interest 
groups, foundations, childbearing individuals and their advocates, and 
maternity care professional associations and organizations, reflecting 
racially, ethnically, demographically, and geographically diverse 
communities.
 ``(f) Annual Report.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, on behalf of the ICCPOM, 
 shall annually submit to Congress a report that summarizes--
 ``(A) all programs and policies of Federal agencies 
 (including the Medicare Program under title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act and the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of such Act) designed to promote optimal 
 maternity care, focusing particularly on programs and 
 policies that support the adoption of evidence-based 
 maternity care, as defined by timely, scientifically 
 sound systematic reviews;
 ``(B) all programs and policies of Federal agencies 
 (including the Medicare Program under title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act and the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of such Act) designed to address the problems 
 of maternal mortality and morbidity, infant mortality, 
 prematurity, and low birth weight, including such 
 programs and policies designed to address racial and 
 ethnic inequities with respect to each of such 
 problems;
 ``(C) the extent of progress in reducing maternal 
 mortality and infant mortality, low birth weight, and 
 prematurity at State and national levels; and
 ``(D) such other information regarding optimal 
 maternity care (such as quality and performance 
 measures) as the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate.
 ``(2) Reducing inequities with respect to indigenous 
 status.--The information specified in paragraph (1)(C) shall be 
 included in each such report in a manner that disaggregates 
 such information by race, ethnicity, and indigenous status in 
 order to determine the extent of progress in reducing racial 
 and ethnic inequities and inequities related to indigenous 
 status.
 ``(3) Certain information.--Each report under paragraph (1) 
 shall include information (disaggregated by race, ethnicity, 
 and indigenous status, as applicable) on the following rates, 
 trends, and costs by State:
 ``(A) The rate and trend of primary cesarean 
 deliveries and repeat cesarean deliveries.
 ``(B) The rate and trend of vaginal births after 
 cesarean.
 ``(C) The rate and trend of vaginal breech births.
 ``(D) The rate and trend of induction of labor.
 ``(E) The rate and trend of freestanding birth 
 center births.
 ``(F) The rate and trend of planned and unplanned 
 home birth.
 ``(G) The rate and trends of attended births by 
 different types of maternity care providers, including 
 by an obstetrician-gynecologist, family practice 
 physician, obstetrician-gynecologist, physician 
 assistant, certified nurse-midwife, certified midwife, 
 and certified professional midwife.
 ``(H) The rate and trend of severe maternal 
 morbidity.
 ``(I) The rates and trends of prenatal and 
 postpartum anxiety and depression.
 ``(J) The rate and trend of preterm birth.
 ``(K) The rate and trend of low birth weight.
 ``(L) The cost of maternity care disaggregated by 
 place of birth and provider of care, including--
 ``(i) uncomplicated vaginal birth;
 ``(ii) complicated vaginal birth;
 ``(iii) uncomplicated cesarean birth; and
 ``(iv) complicated cesarean birth.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated, in addition to amounts authorized to be appropriated 
under section 229(e), to carry out this section $1,000,000 for each of 
the fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Inclusion as duty of hhs office on women's health.--
 Section 229(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 237a(b)) (as amended by section 5215) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(9) establish the Interagency Coordinating Committee on 
 the Promotion of Optimal Maternity Outcomes in accordance with 
 section 229A; and''.
 (2) Treatment of biennial reports.--Section 229(d) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 237a(d)) is amended by inserting ``(other than 
 under subsection (b)(9))'' after ``under this section''.

SEC. 5302. EXPANSION OF CDC PREVENTION RESEARCH CENTERS PROGRAM TO 
 INCLUDE CENTERS ON OPTIMAL MATERNITY OUTCOMES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall support 
the establishment of additional Prevention Research Centers under the 
Prevention Research Center Program administered by the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. Such additional centers shall each be 
known as a Center for Excellence on Optimal Maternity Outcomes.
 (b) Research.--Each Center for Excellence on Optimal Maternity 
Outcomes shall--
 (1) conduct at least one focused program of research to 
 improve maternity outcomes, including the reduction of cesarean 
 birth rates, early elective inductions, prematurity rates, and 
 low birth weight rates within an underserved population that 
 has a disproportionately large burden of suboptimal maternity 
 outcomes, including maternal mortality and morbidity, infant 
 mortality, prematurity, or low birth weight, which such program 
 shall include developing performance and quality measures for 
 accountability;
 (2) work with partners on special interest projects, as 
 specified by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
 other relevant agencies within the Department of Health and 
 Human Services, and on projects funded by other sources; and
 (3) involve a minimum of two distinct birth setting models, 
 such as--
 (A) a hospital labor and delivery model and 
 freestanding birth center model; or
 (B) a hospital labor and delivery model and planned 
 home birth model.
 (c) Interdisciplinary Providers.--Each Center for Excellence on 
Optimal Maternity Outcomes shall include the following 
interdisciplinary providers of maternity care:
 (1) Obstetrician-gynecologists.
 (2) At least two of the following providers:
 (A) Family practice physicians.
 (B) Nurse practitioners.
 (C) Physician assistants.
 (D) Certified professional midwives, certified 
 nurse-midwives, or certified midwives.
 (d) Services.--Research conducted by each Center for Excellence on 
Optimal Maternity Outcomes shall include at least 2 (and preferably 
more) of the following supportive provider services:
 (1) Mental health.
 (2) Doula labor support.
 (3) Nutrition education.
 (4) Childbirth education.
 (5) Social work.
 (6) Physical therapy or occupation therapy.
 (7) Substance use disorder services.
 (8) Home visiting.
 (e) Coordination.--The programs of research at each of the Centers 
of Excellence on Optimal Maternity Outcomes shall complement and not 
replicate the work of the other.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $2,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 5303. EXPANDING MODELS TO BE TESTED BY CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND 
 MEDICAID INNOVATION TO EXPLICITLY INCLUDE MATERNITY CARE 
 AND CHILDREN'S HEALTH MODELS.

 Section 1115A(b)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1315a(b)(2)), as amended by section 5209(b), is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(xxix) Promoting evidence-based models of 
 care that have been associated with reductions 
 in pregnancy-related and infant health 
 inequities, including incorporating the use of 
 and payment for doulas, particularly community-
 based doulas, and promoting support for people 
 during pregnancy and for the one-year period 
 after the last day of such person's pregnancy, 
 through evidence-based models of antepartum, 
 birth, postpartum care, and two-generation 
 birthing person and newborn care models, and 
 supporting the risk-appropriate use of out-of-
 hospital birth models, including births at home 
 and in freestanding birth centers. Such models 
 shall be selected and evaluated based on their 
 impact on quality, equity, and developmental 
 outcomes, notwithstanding any other provision 
 of this section.'';
 (2) in subparagraph (C), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(ix) Whether the model includes a regular 
 process for ensuring the provision of 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 services.
 ``(x) Whether health care services and 
 supportive services included in the model are 
 tailored to community health and health-related 
 social needs and provided by community-based 
 and community-led providers.
 ``(xi) Whether the model is designed to 
 mitigate harmful effects of discrimination on 
 the basis of race, sex, disability, ethnicity, 
 language, and age.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Mandatory health equity models to be 
 tested.--The Secretary shall select--
 ``(i) Medicaid payment models for 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 antepartum, labor and delivery, and postpartum 
 doula services, including community-based doula 
 services, that are--
 ``(I) structured to provide payment 
 to doulas as individuals, health care 
 entity staff, or members of a doula 
 group or collective, or through a 
 third-party administrator;
 ``(II) designed to reduce racial 
 and intersecting health inequities;
 ``(III) designed to provide doulas 
 providing support with an equitable and 
 sustainable reimbursement rate;
 ``(IV) designed to reduce barriers 
 to workforce entry for culturally and 
 linguistically competent and racially 
 congruent doulas to provide services to 
 Medicaid enrollees; and
 ``(V) designed with input from 
 community-based doulas, maternal health 
 advocates, reproductive justice 
 advocates, and Medicaid beneficiaries;
 ``(ii) a Medicaid episode-based payment 
 model for pregnancy-related services, including 
 health care services and supportive services to 
 address health-related social needs, during the 
 prenatal, intrapartum, and postpartum periods, 
 to improve health outcomes and reduce racial 
 health inequities, and to be designed with 
 input from maternity care providers, maternal 
 health advocates, reproductive justice 
 advocates, and Medicaid beneficiaries;
 ``(iii) a Medicaid alternative payment 
 model for a pregnancy-related health home 
 service to improve health outcomes during and 
 for one year after pregnancy and during the 
 newborn period, and to reduce racial health 
 inequities, designed with input from maternity 
 care providers, maternal health advocates, 
 reproductive justice advocates, and Medicaid 
 beneficiaries;
 ``(iv) a Medicaid perinatal health worker 
 service delivery model for culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate and respectful 
 health care and supportive services that are 
 tailored to community health and health-related 
 social needs, designed to improve health 
 outcomes and mitigate harmful effects of racism 
 and other forms of discrimination, and provided 
 by community-based and community-led providers; 
 and
 ``(v) one or more models exclusively 
 focused on early intervention and prevention 
 for children enrolled in a State plan (or 
 waiver of such plan) under title XIX or a State 
 child health plan under title XXI using 
 evidence-based interventions including 
 parenting support programs, home-visiting 
 services, and dyadic therapy treatment for 
 children and adolescents at risk.
 Such models shall be selected and evaluated based on 
 their impact on quality, equity, and developmental 
 outcomes, notwithstanding any other provision of this 
 section.''.

SEC. 5304. INTERAGENCY UPDATE TO THE QUALITY FAMILY PLANNING 
 GUIDELINES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention and the Office of Population Affairs shall review and 
expand the 2014 Quality Family Planning Guidelines to address--
 (1) health inequities; and
 (2) the importance of patient-directed contraceptive 
 decision making.
 (b) Consultation.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Office of 
Population Affairs shall convene a meeting, and solicit the views of, 
stakeholders including experts on health inequities, experts on 
reproductive coercion, representatives of provider organizations, 
patient advocates, reproductive justice organizations, organizations 
that represent racial and ethnic minority communities, organizations 
that represent people with disabilities, organizations that represent 
LGBTQ persons, and organizations that represent people with limited 
English proficiency.

 Subtitle E--Reproductive and Sexual Health

SEC. 5401. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON URGENT ISSUES CONCERNING BARRIERS TO 
 ABORTION ACCESS AND VITAL SOLUTIONS.

 It is the sense of Congress that eliminating the Hyde amendment, 
enacting the Equal Access to Abortion Coverage in Health Insurance Act 
of 2021, and enacting the Women's Health Protection Act of 2021, are 
critical to--
 (1) promoting equitable abortion access, including 
 coverage, for all who seek care;
 (2) creating enforceable rights to receive, and receive 
 coverage for, such care;
 (3) advancing equitable access to comprehensive health 
 coverage, which cannot be achieved without abortion coverage; 
 and
 (4) alleviating urgent racial, gender, and other inequities 
 in health and health care and corresponding reproductive 
 injustices.

SEC. 5402. EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION EDUCATION AND INFORMATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Emergency Contraception Public Education Program.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
 develop and disseminate to the public medically accurate and 
 complete information on emergency contraceptives.
 (2) Dissemination.--The Secretary may disseminate medically 
 accurate and complete information under paragraph (1) directly 
 or through arrangements with nonprofit organizations, community 
 health workers, including patient advocates, consumer groups, 
 institutions of higher education, clinics, the media, and 
 Federal, State, and local agencies.
 (3) Information.--The information disseminated under 
 paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) include, at a minimum, a description of 
 emergency contraceptives and an explanation of the use, 
 safety, efficacy, affordability, and availability, 
 including over-the-counter access, of such 
 contraceptives and options for access to such 
 contraceptives without cost-sharing through insurance 
 and other programs; and
 (B) be pilot tested for consumer comprehension, 
 cultural and linguistic appropriateness, and acceptance 
 of the messages across geographically, racially, 
 ethnically, and linguistically di-verse populations.
 (b) Emergency Contraception Information Program for Health Care 
Providers.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration and in consultation with major medical and 
 public health organizations, shall develop and disseminate to 
 health care providers, including pharmacists, information on 
 emergency contraceptives.
 (2) Information.--The information disseminated under 
 paragraph (1) shall include, at a minimum--
 (A) information describing the use, safety, 
 efficacy, and availability of emergency contraceptives, 
 and options for access without cost-sharing through 
 insurance and other programs;
 (B) a recommendation regarding the use of such 
 contraceptives; and
 (C) information explaining how to obtain copies of 
 the information developed under subsection (a) for 
 distribution to the patients of the providers.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means an individual who is licensed or certified 
 under State law to provide health care services and who is 
 operating within the scope of such license. Such term shall 
 include a pharmacist.
 (2) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given 
 such term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1001(a)).
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 5403. DUTIES OF PHARMACIES TO ENSURE PROVISION OF FDA-APPROVED 
 CONTRACEPTION.

 Part B of title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 238 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 249. DUTIES OF PHARMACIES TO ENSURE PROVISION OF FDA-APPROVED 
 CONTRACEPTION.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (c), a pharmacy that 
receives Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs or devices in 
interstate commerce shall maintain compliance with each of the 
following:
 ``(1) If a customer requests a contraceptive or a 
 medication related to a contraceptive, including emergency 
 contraception, that is in stock, the pharmacy shall ensure that 
 the requested contraceptive or medication is provided to the 
 customer without delay.
 ``(2) If a customer requests a contraceptive or a 
 medication related to a contraceptive that is not in stock and 
 the pharmacy in the normal course of business stocks 
 contraception, the pharmacy shall immediately inform the 
 customer that the requested contraceptive or medication is not 
 in stock and without delay offer the customer the following 
 options:
 ``(A) If the customer prefers to obtain the 
 requested contraceptive or medication through a 
 referral or transfer, the pharmacy shall--
 ``(i) locate a pharmacy of the customer's 
 choice or the closest pharmacy confirmed to 
 have the requested contraceptive or medication 
 in stock; and
 ``(ii) refer the customer or transfer the 
 prescription to that pharmacy.
 ``(B) If the customer prefers for the pharmacy to 
 order the requested contraceptive or medication, the 
 pharmacy shall obtain the contraceptive or medication 
 under the pharmacy's standard procedure for expedited 
 ordering of medication and notify the customer when the 
 contraceptive or medication arrives.
 ``(3) The pharmacy shall ensure that--
 ``(A) the pharmacy does not operate an environment 
 in which customers are intimidated, threatened, or 
 harassed in the delivery of services relating to a 
 request for contraception or a medication related to a 
 contraceptive;
 ``(B) the pharmacy's employees do not interfere 
 with or obstruct the delivery of services relating to a 
 request for contraception or a medication related to a 
 contraceptive;
 ``(C) the pharmacy's employees do not intentionally 
 misrepresent or deceive customers about the 
 availability of a contraceptive or a medication related 
 to a contraceptive, or the mechanism of action of such 
 contraceptive or medication;
 ``(D) the pharmacy's employees do not breach 
 medical confidentiality with respect to a request for a 
 contraceptive or a medication related to a 
 contraceptive or threaten to breach such 
 confidentiality; or
 ``(E) the pharmacy's employees do not refuse to 
 return a valid, lawful prescription for a contraceptive 
 or a medication related to a contraceptive upon 
 customer request.
 ``(b) Contraceptives Not Ordinarily Stocked.--Nothing in subsection 
(a)(2) shall be construed to require any pharmacy to comply with such 
subsection if the pharmacy does not ordinarily stock contraceptives or 
medications related to contraceptives, as the case may be, in the 
normal course of business.
 ``(c) Refusals Pursuant to Standard Pharmacy Practice.--This 
section does not prohibit a pharmacy from refusing to provide a 
contraceptive or a medication related to a contraceptive to a customer 
in accordance with any of the following:
 ``(1) If it is unlawful to dispense the requested 
 contraceptive or medication to the customer without a valid, 
 lawful prescription and no such prescription is presented.
 ``(2) If the customer is unable to pay for the requested 
 contraceptive or medication.
 ``(3) If the employee of the pharmacy refuses to provide 
 the requested contraceptive or medication on the basis of a 
 professional clinical judgment.
 ``(d) Relation to Other Law.--
 ``(1) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed to invalidate or limit rights, remedies, 
 procedures, or legal standards under title VII of the Civil 
 Rights Act of 1964.
 ``(2) Certain claims.--The Religious Freedom Restoration 
 Act of 1993 shall not provide a basis for a claim concerning, 
 or a defense to a claim under, this section, or provide a basis 
 for challenging the application or enforcement of this section.
 ``(e) Preemption.--This section does not preempt any provision of 
State law or affect any professional obligation made applicable by a 
State board or other entity responsible for licensing or discipline of 
pharmacies or pharmacists, to the extent that such State law or 
professional obligation provides protections for customers that are 
greater than the protections provided by this section.
 ``(f) Enforcement.--
 ``(1) Civil penalty.--A pharmacy that violates a 
 requirement of subsection (a) is liable to the United States 
 for a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding $1,000 per day 
 of violation, not to exceed $100,000 for all violations 
 adjudicated in a single proceeding.
 ``(2) Private cause of action.--Any person aggrieved as a 
 result of a violation of a requirement of subsection (a) may, 
 in any court of competent jurisdiction, commence a civil action 
 against the pharmacy involved to obtain appropriate relief, 
 including actual and punitive damages, injunctive relief, and a 
 reasonable attorney's fee and costs.
 ``(3) Limitations.--A civil action under paragraph (1) or 
 (2) may not be commenced against a pharmacy after the 
 expiration of the 5-year period beginning on the date on which 
 the pharmacy allegedly engaged in the violation involved.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Contraception.--The term `contraception' or 
 `contraceptive' means any drug or device approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration to prevent pregnancy.
 ``(2) Employee.--The term `employee' means a person hired, 
 by contract or any other form of an agreement, by a pharmacy.
 ``(3) Medication related to a contraceptive.--The term 
 `medication related to a contraceptive' means any drug or 
 device approved by the Food and Drug Administration that a 
 medical professional determines necessary to use before or in 
 conjunction with use of a contraceptive.
 ``(4) Pharmacy.--The term `pharmacy' means an entity that--
 ``(A) is authorized by a State to engage in the 
 business of selling prescription drugs at retail; and
 ``(B) employs one or more employees.
 ``(5) Product.--The term `product' means a Food and Drug 
 Administration-approved drug or device.
 ``(6) Professional clinical judgment.--The term 
 `professional clinical judgment' means a clinical judgment, 
 formed with the use of professional knowledge and skills, in 
 accordance with prevailing medical standards.
 ``(7) Without delay.--The term `without delay', with 
 respect to a pharmacy providing, providing a referral for, or 
 ordering contraception, or transferring the prescription for 
 contraception, means within the usual and customary timeframe 
 at the pharmacy for providing, providing a referral for, or 
 ordering other products, or transferring the prescription for 
 other products, respectively.
 ``(h) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the 31st 
day after the date of the enactment of this section, without regard to 
whether the Secretary has issued any guidance or final rule regarding 
this section.''.

SEC. 5404. REAL EDUCATION AND ACCESS FOR HEALTHY YOUTH ACT.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Real Education 
and Access for Healthy Youth Act of 2024''.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Age and developmentally appropriate.--The term ``age 
 and developmentally appropriate'' means topics, messages, and 
 teaching methods suitable to particular ages, age groups, or 
 developmental levels, based on cognitive, emotional, social, 
 and behavioral capacity of most young people at that age level.
 (2) Consent.--The term ``consent'' means affirmative, 
 conscious, and voluntary agreement to engage in interpersonal, 
 physical, or sexual activity.
 (3) Culturally responsive.--The term ``culturally 
 responsive'' means education and services that--
 (A) embrace and actively engage and adjust to young 
 people and their various cultural identities;
 (B) recognize the ways in which many marginalized 
 young people face unique barriers in society that 
 result in increased adverse health outcomes and 
 associated stereotypes; and
 (C) may address the ways in which racism has shaped 
 national health care policy, the lasting historical 
 trauma associated with reproductive health experiments 
 and forced sterilizations of Black, Latine, and 
 Indigenous communities, or sexual stereotypes assigned 
 to young People of Color or LGBTQ+ people.
 (4) Evidence-informed.--The term ``evidence-informed'' 
 means incorporates characteristics, content, or skills that 
 have been proven to be effective through evaluation in changing 
 sexual behavior.
 (5) Gender expression.--The term ``gender expression'' 
 means the expression of one's gender, such as through behavior, 
 clothing, haircut, or voice, and which may or may not conform 
 to socially defined behaviors and characteristics typically 
 associated with being either masculine or feminine.
 (6) Gender identity.--The term ``gender identity'' means 
 the gender-related identity, appearance, mannerisms, or other 
 gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of 
 the individual's designated sex at birth.
 (7) Inclusive.--The term ``inclusive'' means content and 
 skills that ensure marginalized young people are valued, 
 respected, centered, and supported in sex education instruction 
 and materials.
 (8) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (9) Interpersonal violence.--The term ``interpersonal 
 violence'' means abuse, assault, bullying, dating violence, 
 domestic violence, harassment, intimate partner violence, or 
 stalking.
 (10) Local educational agency.--The term ``local 
 educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 
 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7801).
 (11) Marginalized young people.--The term ``marginalized 
 young people'' means young people who are disadvantaged by 
 underlying structural barriers and social inequities, including 
 young people who are--
 (A) Black, Indigenous, Latine, Asian American, 
 Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and other People of 
 Color;
 (B) immigrants;
 (C) in contact with the foster care system;
 (D) in contact with the juvenile justice system;
 (E) experiencing homelessness;
 (F) pregnant or parenting;
 (G) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer;
 (H) living with HIV;
 (I) living with disabilities;
 (J) from families with low-incomes; or
 (K) living in rural areas.
 (12) Medically accurate and complete.--The term ``medically 
 accurate and complete'' means that--
 (A) the information provided through the education 
 is verified or supported by the weight of research 
 conducted in compliance with accepted scientific 
 methods and is published in peer-reviewed journals, 
 where applicable; or
 (B) the education contains information that leading 
 professional organizations and agencies with relevant 
 expertise in the field recognize as accurate, 
 objective, and complete.
 (13) Resilience.--The term ``resilience'' means the ability 
 to adapt to trauma and tragedy.
 (14) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (15) Sex education.--The term ``sex education'' means high 
 quality teaching and learning that--
 (A) is delivered, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, following the National Sexuality Education 
 Standards of the Future of Sex Ed Initiative;
 (B) is about a broad variety of topics related to 
 sex and sexuality, including--
 (i) puberty and adolescent development;
 (ii) sexual and reproductive anatomy and 
 physiology;
 (iii) sexual orientation, gender identity, 
 and gender expression;
 (iv) contraception, pregnancy, pregnancy 
 options, and reproduction;
 (v) HIV and other STIs;
 (vi) consent and healthy relationships; and
 (vii) interpersonal violence;
 (C) explores values and beliefs about such topics; 
 and
 (D) helps young people in gaining the skills that 
 are needed to navigate relationships and manage one's 
 own sexual health.
 (16) Sexual health services.--The term ``sexual health 
 services'' includes--
 (A) sexual health information, education, and 
 counseling;
 (B) all methods of contraception approved by the 
 Food and Drug Administration;
 (C) routine gynecological care, including human 
 papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines and cancer screenings;
 (D) pre-exposure prophylaxis or post-exposure 
 prophylaxis;
 (E) substance use and mental health services;
 (F) interpersonal violence survivor services; and
 (G) other pregnancy and STI prevention, care, or 
 treatment services.
 (17) Sexual orientation.--The term ``sexual orientation'' 
 means an individual's romantic, emotional, or sexual attraction 
 to other people.
 (18) State educational agency.--The term ``State 
 educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 
 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7801).
 (19) Trauma.--The term ``trauma'' means a response to an 
 event, series of events, or set of circumstances that is 
 experienced or witnessed by an individual or group of people as 
 physically or emotionally harmful or life-threatening with 
 lasting adverse effects on their functioning and mental, 
 physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well-being.
 (20) Trauma-informed and resilience-oriented.--The term 
 ``trauma-informed and resilience-oriented'' means an approach 
 that realizes the prevalence of trauma, recognizes the various 
 ways individuals, organizations, and communities may respond to 
 trauma differently, recognizes that resilience can be built, 
 and responds by putting this knowledge into practice.
 (21) Young people.--The term ``young people'' means 
 individuals who are ages 10 through 29 at the time of 
 commencement of participation in a project supported under this 
 section.
 (22) Youth-friendly sexual health services.--The term 
 ``youth-friendly sexual health services'' means sexual health 
 services that are provided in a confidential, equitable, and 
 accessible manner that makes it easy and comfortable for young 
 people to seek out and receive services.
 (c) Grants for Sex Education at Elementary and Secondary Schools 
and Youth-Serving Organizations.--
 (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable such eligible 
 entities to carry out projects that provide young people with 
 sex education.
 (2) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be 
 for a period of 5 years.
 (3) Eligible entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
 entity'' means a public or private entity that delivers 
 evidence-based sex education to young people.
 (4) Applications.--An eligible entity desiring a grant 
 under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
 at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
 as the Secretary may require.
 (5) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
 Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that are--
 (A) State educational agencies or local educational 
 agencies; or
 (B) Indian Tribes or Tribal organizations, as 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination 
 and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304).
 (6) Use of funds.--Each eligible entity that receives a 
 grant under this section shall use the grant funds to carry out 
 a project that provides young people with sex education.
 (d) Grants for Sex Education at Institutions of Higher Education.--
 (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to institutions of higher education or 
 consortia of such institutions to enable such institutions to 
 provide students with age and developmentally appropriate sex 
 education.
 (2) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be 
 for a period of 5 years.
 (3) Applications.--An institution of higher education or 
 consortium of such institutions desiring a grant under this 
 section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
 time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 (4) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
 Secretary shall give priority to an institution of higher 
 education that--
 (A) has an enrollment of needy students, as defined 
 in section 318(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1059e(b));
 (B) is a Hispanic-serving institution, as defined 
 in section 502(a) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1101a(a));
 (C) is a Tribal College or University, as defined 
 in section 316(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b));
 (D) is an Alaska Native-serving institution, as 
 defined in section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1059d(b));
 (E) is a Native Hawaiian-serving institution, as 
 defined in section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1059d(b));
 (F) is a Predominantly Black Institution, as 
 defined in section 318(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1059e(b));
 (G) is a Native American-serving, nontribal 
 institution, as defined in section 319(b) of such Act 
 (20 U.S.C. 1059f(b));
 (H) is an Asian American and Native American 
 Pacific Islander-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 320(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059g(b)); or
 (I) is a minority institution, as defined in 
 section 365 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1067k), with an 
 enrollment of needy students, as defined in section 312 
 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1058).
 (5) Uses of funds.--An institution of higher education or 
 consortium of such institutions receiving a grant under this 
 section shall use grant funds to develop and implement a 
 project to integrate sex education into the institution of 
 higher education in order to reach a large number of students, 
 by carrying out 1 or more of the following activities:
 (A) Adopting and incorporating age and 
 developmentally appropriate sex education into student 
 orientation, general education, or courses.
 (B) Developing or adopting and implementing 
 educational programming outside of class that delivers 
 age and developmentally appropriate sex education to 
 students.
 (C) Developing or adopting and implementing 
 innovative technology-based approaches to deliver age 
 and developmentally appropriate sex education to 
 students.
 (D) Developing or adopting and implementing peer-
 led activities to generate discussion, educate, and 
 raise awareness among students about age and 
 developmentally appropriate sex education.
 (E) Developing or adopting and implementing 
 policies and practices to link students to sexual 
 health services.
 (e) Grants for Educator Training.--
 (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable such eligible 
 entities to carry out the activities described in paragraph 
 (5).
 (2) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be 
 for a period of 5 years.
 (3) Eligible entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
 entity'' means--
 (A) a State educational agency or local educational 
 agency;
 (B) an Indian Tribe or Tribal organization, as 
 defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination 
 and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304);
 (C) a State or local department of health;
 (D) an educational service agency, as defined in 
 section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801);
 (E) a nonprofit institution of higher education or 
 a consortium of such institutions; or
 (F) a national or statewide nonprofit organization 
 or consortium of nonprofit organizations that has as 
 its primary purpose the improvement of provision of sex 
 education through training and effective teaching of 
 sex education.
 (4) Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under 
 this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require.
 (5) Authorized activities.--
 (A) Required activity.--Each eligible entity 
 receiving a grant under this section shall use grant 
 funds for professional development and training of 
 relevant teachers, health educators, faculty, 
 administrators, and staff, in order to increase 
 effective teaching of sex education to young people.
 (B) Permissible activities.--Each eligible entity 
 receiving a grant under this section may use grant 
 funds to--
 (i) provide training and support for 
 educators about the content, skills, and 
 professional disposition needed to implement 
 sex education effectively;
 (ii) develop and provide training and 
 support to educators on incorporating anti-
 racist and gender inclusive policies and 
 practices in sex education;
 (iii) support the dissemination of 
 information on effective practices and research 
 findings concerning the teaching of sex 
 education;
 (iv) support research on--
 (I) effective sex education 
 teaching practices; and
 (II) the development of assessment 
 instruments and strategies to 
 document--
 (aa) young people's 
 understanding of sex education; 
 and
 (bb) the effects of sex 
 education;
 (v) convene conferences on sex education, 
 in order to effectively train educators in the 
 provision of sex education; and
 (vi) develop and disseminate appropriate 
 research-based materials to foster sex 
 education.
 (C) Subgrants.--Each eligible entity receiving a 
 grant under this section may award subgrants to 
 nonprofit organizations that possess a demonstrated 
 record of providing training to teachers, health 
 educators, faculty, administrators, and staff on sex 
 education to--
 (i) train educators in sex education;
 (ii) support internet or distance learning 
 related to sex education;
 (iii) promote rigorous academic standards 
 and assessment techniques to guide and measure 
 student performance in sex education;
 (iv) encourage replication of best 
 practices and model programs to promote sex 
 education;
 (v) develop and disseminate effective, 
 research-based sex education learning 
 materials; or
 (vi) develop academic courses on the 
 pedagogy of sex education at institutions of 
 higher education.
 (f) Authorization of Grants to Support the Delivery of Sexual 
Health Services to Marginalized Young People.--
 (1) Program authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants, 
 on a competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable such 
 entities to provide youth-friendly sexual health services to 
 marginalized young people.
 (2) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be 
 for a period of 5 years.
 (3) Eligible entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
 entity'' means--
 (A) a public or private youth-serving organization; 
 or
 (B) a covered entity, as defined in section 340B of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b).
 (4) Applications.--An eligible entity desiring a grant 
 under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
 at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
 as the Secretary may require.
 (5) Uses of funds.--Each eligible entity that receives a 
 grant under this section may use the grant funds to--
 (A) develop and implement an evidence-informed 
 project to deliver sexual health services to 
 marginalized young people;
 (B) establish, alter, or modify staff positions, 
 service delivery policies and practices, service 
 delivery locations, service delivery environments, 
 service delivery schedules, or other services 
 components in order to increase youth-friendly sexual 
 health services to marginalized young people;
 (C) conduct outreach to marginalized young people 
 to invite them to participate in the eligible entity's 
 sexual health services and to provide feedback to 
 inform improvements in the delivery of such services;
 (D) establish and refine systems of referral to 
 connect marginalized young people to other sexual 
 health services and supportive services;
 (E) establish partnerships and collaborations with 
 entities providing services to marginalized young 
 people to link such young people to sexual health 
 services, such as by delivering health services at 
 locations where they congregate, providing 
 transportation to locations where sexual health 
 services are provided, or other linkages to services 
 approaches;
 (F) provide evidence-informed, comprehensive in 
 scope, confidential, equitable, accessible, medically 
 accurate and complete, age and developmentally 
 appropriate, culturally responsive, and trauma-informed 
 and resilience-oriented sexual health information to 
 marginalized young people in the languages and cultural 
 contexts that are most appropriate for the marginalized 
 young people to be served by the eligible entity;
 (G) promote effective communication regarding 
 sexual health among marginalized young people; and
 (H) provide training and support for eligible 
 entity personnel and community members who work with 
 marginalized young people about the content, skills, 
 and professional disposition needed to provide youth-
 friendly sex education and youth-friendly sexual health 
 services.
 (g) Reporting and Impact Evaluation.--
 (1) Grantee report to secretary.--For each year a grantee 
 receives grant funds under subsection (c), (d), (e), or (f) the 
 grantee shall submit to the Secretary a report that includes--
 (A) a description of the use of grant funds by the 
 grantee;
 (B) a description of how the use of grant funds has 
 increased the access of young people to sex education 
 or sexual health services; and
 (C) such other information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 (2) Secretary's report to congress.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually 
 thereafter for a period of 5 years, the Secretary shall prepare 
 and submit to Congress a report on the activities funded under 
 this section. The Secretary's report to Congress shall 
 include--
 (A) a statement of how grants awarded by the 
 Secretary meet the purposes of the grants; and
 (B) information about--
 (i) the number of grantees that are 
 receiving grant funds under subsections (c), 
 (d), (e), and (f);
 (ii) the specific activities supported by 
 grant funds awarded under subsections (c), (d), 
 (e), and (f);
 (iii) the number of young people served by 
 projects funded under subsections (c),(d), and 
 (f), in the aggregate and disaggregated and 
 cross-tabulated by grant program, race and 
 ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, gender 
 identity, and other characteristics determined 
 by the Secretary (except that such 
 disaggregation or cross-tabulation shall not be 
 required in a case in which the results would 
 reveal personally identifiable information 
 about an individual young person);
 (iv) the number of teachers, health 
 educators, faculty, school administrators, and 
 staff trained under subsection (e); and
 (v) the status of the evaluation required 
 under paragraph (3).
 (3) Multi-year evaluation.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary 
 shall enter into a contract with a nonprofit 
 organization with experience in conducting impact 
 evaluations to conduct a multi-year evaluation on the 
 impact of the projects funded under subsections (c), 
 (d), (e), and (f) and to report to Congress and the 
 Secretary on the findings of such evaluation.
 (B) Evaluation.--The evaluation conducted under 
 this subsection shall--
 (i) be conducted in a manner consistent 
 with relevant, nationally recognized 
 professional and technical evaluation 
 standards;
 (ii) use sound statistical methods and 
 techniques relating to the behavioral sciences, 
 including quasi-experimental designs, 
 inferential statistics, and other methodologies 
 and techniques that allow for conclusions to be 
 reached;
 (iii) be carried out by an independent 
 organization that has not received a grant 
 under subsection (c), (d), (e), or (f); and
 (iv) be designed to provide information on 
 output measures and outcome measures to be 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (C) Report.--Not later than 6 years after the date 
 of enactment of this section, the organization 
 conducting the evaluation under this paragraph shall 
 prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of 
 Congress and the Secretary an evaluation report. Such 
 report shall be made publicly available, including on 
 the website of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (h) Nondiscrimination.--Activities funded under this section shall 
not discriminate on the basis of actual or perceived sex (including 
sexual orientation and gender identity), age, parental status, race, 
color, ethnicity, national origin, disability, or religion. Nothing in 
this section shall be construed to invalidate or limit rights, 
remedies, procedures, or legal standards available under any other 
Federal law or any law of a State or a political subdivision of a 
State, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000a et 
seq.), title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
seq.), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), 
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.), 
and section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 
U.S.C. 18116).
 (i) Limitation.--No Federal funds provided under this section may 
be used for sex education or sexual health services that--
 (1) withhold health-promoting or life-saving information 
 about sexuality-related topics, including HIV;
 (2) are medically inaccurate or incomplete;
 (3) promote gender or racial stereotypes or are 
 unresponsive to gender or racial inequities;
 (4) fail to address the needs of sexually active young 
 people;
 (5) fail to address the needs of pregnant or parenting 
 young people;
 (6) fail to address the needs of survivors of interpersonal 
 violence;
 (7) fail to address the needs of young people of all 
 physical, developmental, or mental abilities;
 (8) fail to be inclusive of individuals with varying gender 
 identities, gender expressions, and sexual orientations; or
 (9) are inconsistent with the ethical imperatives of 
 medicine and public health.
 (j) Amendments to Other Laws.--
 (1) Amendment to the public health service act.--Section 
 2500 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ee) is 
 amended by striking subsections (b) through (d) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(b) Contents of Programs.--All programs of education and 
information receiving funds under this subchapter shall include 
information about the potential effects of intravenous substance 
use.''.
 (2) Amendments to the elementary and secondary education 
 act of 1965.--Section 8526 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7906) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraphs (3), (5), and (6);
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
 (3);
 (C) in paragraph (3), as redesignated by paragraph 
 (2), by inserting ``or'' after the semicolon; and
 (D) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph 
 (4).
 (k) Funding.--
 (1) Authorization.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
 section, there is authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2030. Amounts 
 appropriated under this subsection shall remain available until 
 expended.
 (2) Reservations of funds.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary--
 (i) shall reserve not more than 30 percent 
 of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) 
 for the purposes of awarding grants for sex 
 education at elementary and secondary schools 
 and youth-serving organizations under 
 subsection (c);
 (ii) shall reserve not more than 10 percent 
 of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) 
 for the purpose of awarding grants for sex 
 education at institutions of higher education 
 under subsection (d);
 (iii) shall reserve not more than 15 
 percent of the amount authorized under 
 paragraph (1) for the purpose of awarding 
 grants for educator training under subsection 
 (e);
 (iv) shall reserve not more than 30 percent 
 of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) 
 for the purpose of awarding grants for sexual 
 health services for marginalized youth under 
 subsection (f); and
 (v) shall reserve not less than 5 percent 
 of the amount authorized under paragraph (1) 
 for the purpose of carrying out the reporting 
 and impact evaluation required under subsection 
 (g).
 (B) Research, training, and technical assistance.--
 The Secretary shall reserve not less than 10 percent of 
 the amount authorized under paragraph (1) for 
 expenditures by the Secretary to provide, directly or 
 through a competitive grant process, research, 
 training, and technical assistance, including 
 dissemination of research and information regarding 
 effective and promising practices, providing 
 consultation and resources, and developing resources 
 and materials to support the activities of recipients 
 of grants. In carrying out such functions, the 
 Secretary shall collaborate with a variety of entities 
 that have expertise in sex education and sexual health 
 services standards setting, design, development, 
 delivery, research, monitoring, and evaluation.
 (3) Reprogramming of abstinence only until marriage program 
 funding.--The unobligated balance of funds made available to 
 carry out section 510 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 710) (as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of 
 this section) are transferred and shall be used by the 
 Secretary to carry out this section. The amounts transferred 
 and made available to carry out this section shall remain 
 available until expended.
 (4) Repeal of abstinence only until marriage program.--
 Section 510 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 710 et seq.) 
 is repealed.

SEC. 5405. COMPASSIONATE ASSISTANCE FOR RAPE EMERGENCIES.

 (a) Medicare.--
 (1) Limitation on payment.--Section 1866(a)(1) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(1)), as amended by 
 section 5201(f), is further amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (W), by moving the indentation 
 2 ems to the left;
 (B) in subparagraph (X), by moving the indentation 
 2 ems to the left;
 (C) in subparagraph (Y)(ii)(V), by striking ``and'' 
 at the end;
 (D) in subparagraph (Z)(iii), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``, and''; and
 (E) by inserting after subparagraph (Z) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(AA) in the case of a hospital or critical access 
 hospital, to adopt and enforce a policy to ensure compliance 
 with the requirements of subsection (l) and to meet the 
 requirements of such subsection.''.
 (2) Assistance to victims.--Section 1866 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Compassionate Assistance for Rape Emergencies.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(AA), a 
 hospital meets the requirements of this subsection if the 
 hospital provides each of the services described in paragraph 
 (2) to each individual, whether or not eligible for benefits 
 under this title or under any other form of health insurance, 
 who comes to the hospital on or after January 1, 2025, and--
 ``(A) who states to hospital personnel that they 
 are victims of sexual assault;
 ``(B) who is accompanied by an individual who 
 states to hospital personnel that the individual is a 
 victim of sexual assault; or
 ``(C) whom hospital personnel, during the course of 
 treatment and care for the individual, have reason to 
 believe is a victim of sexual assault.
 ``(2) Required services described.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the services described in this subparagraph are 
 the following:
 ``(A) Provision of medically and factually accurate 
 and unbiased written and oral information about 
 emergency contraception that--
 ``(i) is written in clear and concise 
 language;
 ``(ii) is readily comprehensible;
 ``(iii) includes an explanation that 
 emergency contraceptives--
 ``(I) have been approved by the 
 Food and Drug Administration for 
 individuals and are a safe and 
 effective way to prevent pregnancy 
 after unprotected intercourse or 
 contraceptive failure if taken in a 
 timely manner;
 ``(II) are more effective the 
 sooner it is taken; and
 ``(III) do not cause an abortion 
 and cannot interrupt an established 
 pregnancy;
 ``(iv) meet such conditions regarding the 
 provision of such information in languages 
 other than English as the Secretary may 
 establish; and
 ``(v) are provided without regard to the 
 ability of the individual or their family to 
 pay costs associated with the provision of such 
 information to the individual.
 ``(B) Immediate offer to provide emergency 
 contraception to the individual at the hospital and, in 
 the case that such individual accepts such offer, 
 immediate provision to such individual of such 
 contraception on the same day it is requested without 
 regard to the inability of the individual or their 
 family to pay costs associated with the offer and 
 provision of such contraception.
 ``(C) Development and implementation of a written 
 policy to ensure that an individual is present at the 
 hospital, or on-call, who--
 ``(i) has authority to dispense or 
 prescribe emergency contraception, 
 independently, or under a protocol prepared by 
 a physician for the administration of emergency 
 contraception at the hospital to a victim of 
 sexual assault; and
 ``(ii) is trained to comply with the 
 requirements of this section.
 ``(D) Provision of medically and factually accurate 
 and unbiased written and oral information and 
 counseling about post-exposure prophylaxis (referred to 
 in this paragraph as `PEP') protocol for the prevention 
 of HIV.
 ``(E) Immediate offer to begin PEP to the 
 individual at the hospital except in cases where the 
 medical professional's best judgement is that further 
 evaluation is required or that such a regimen will be 
 substantially detrimental to the health of such 
 individual. Such provision shall be offered regardless 
 of the individual's ability to pay. Hospitals shall be 
 responsible for ensuring adequate supply of PEP 
 medications to provide to patients.
 ``(3) Hospital defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the term `hospital' includes a critical access hospital, as 
 defined in section 1861(mm)(1).''.
 (b) Limitation on Payment Under Medicaid.--Section 1903(i) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)), as amended by section 
4106(b)(2), is further amended--
 (1) in paragraph (27), by striking ``or'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (28), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; or''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (28) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(29) with respect to any amount expended for care or 
 services furnished under the plan by a hospital on or after 
 January 1, 2025, unless such hospital meets the requirements 
 specified in section 1866(l) for purposes of title XVIII.''.

SEC. 5406. MENSTRUAL EQUITY FOR ALL ACT OF 2024.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Menstrual 
Equity For All Act of 2024''.
 (b) Menstrual Products for Students at Elementary and Secondary 
Schools.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4108(5)(C) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7118(5)(C)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in clause (vi), by striking ``or'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in clause (vii), by inserting ``or'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(viii) provide free menstrual products to 
 students who use menstrual products;''.
 (2) Definitions.--Section 4102 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7112) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (7) through (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
 ``(6) Menstrual products.--The term `menstrual products' 
 means sanitary napkins and tampons that conform to applicable 
 industry standards.''.
 (3) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary of Education, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 shall promulgate rules with respect to the definition of 
 ``menstrual products'' in paragraph (6) of section 4102 of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7112), as amended by paragraph (2).
 (c) Menstrual Products for Students at Institutions of Higher 
Education.--
 (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to 
 alleviate--
 (A) the barriers to academic success faced by many 
 college and graduate students due to the inability of 
 such students to afford to purchase menstrual products; 
 and
 (B) the unique set of burdens that college and 
 graduate students experiencing period poverty face that 
 can be compounded by lack of access to basic needs such 
 as housing, food, transportation, and access to 
 physical and mental health services.
 (2) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall establish 
 a program to award grants, on a competitive basis, to not less 
 than 4 institutions of higher education to--
 (A) support programs that provide free menstrual 
 products to students; and
 (B) report on best practices of such programs.
 (3) Application.--To apply for a grant under this 
 subsection, an institution of higher education shall submit to 
 the Secretary an application in such form, at such time, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate, including an assurance that such grant will be 
 used to carry out the activities described in paragraph (5).
 (4) Community colleges.--Not less than 50 percent of the 
 grants awarded under this subsection shall be awarded to 
 community colleges.
 (5) Grant uses.--A grant awarded under this subsection may 
 only be used to--
 (A) carry out or expand activities that fund 
 programs that support direct provision of free 
 menstrual products to students in appropriate campus 
 locations, including--
 (i) campus restroom facilities;
 (ii) wellness centers; and
 (iii) on-campus residential buildings;
 (B) report on best practices of such programs;
 (C) conduct outreach to students to encourage 
 participation in menstrual equity programs and 
 services;
 (D) help eligible students apply for and enroll in 
 local, State, and Federal public assistance programs; 
 and
 (E) coordinate and collaborate with government or 
 community-based organizations to carry out the 
 activities described in subparagraphs (A) through (D).
 (6) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall prioritize--
 (A) institutions with respect to which not less 
 than 25 percent of the enrolled students receive a 
 Federal Pell Grant; and
 (B) historically Black colleges and universities, 
 Hispanic-serving institutions, Asian American and 
 Native American Pacific Islander-serving institutions, 
 and other minority serving institutions.
 (7) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001)).
 (B) Menstrual product defined.--The term 
 ``menstrual product'' means a sanitary napkin or tampon 
 that conforms to industry standards.
 (8) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated $5,000,000 out of funds appropriated for a 
 fiscal year to the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary 
 Education under section 741 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1138) to carry out the grant program under this 
 subsection.
 (d) Menstrual Products for Incarcerated Individuals and 
Detainees.--
 (1) Menstrual products defined.--In this subsection, the 
 term ``menstrual products'' means sanitary napkins and tampons 
 that conform to applicable industry standards.
 (2) Requirement for states.--Beginning on the date that is 
 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and 
 annually thereafter, the chief executive officer of each State 
 that receives a grant under subpart 1 of part E of title I of 
 the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 
 U.S.C. 10151 et seq.) shall submit to the Attorney General a 
 certification, in such form and containing such information as 
 the Attorney General may require, that--
 (A) all incarcerated individuals and detainees in 
 the State have access to menstrual products--
 (i) on demand; and
 (ii) at no cost to the incarcerated 
 individuals and detainees; and
 (B) no visitor of an incarcerated individual or 
 detainee of the State is prohibited from visiting an 
 incarcerated individual or detainee due to the 
 visitor's use of menstrual products.
 (3) Reduction in grant funding.--In the case of a State of 
 which the chief executive officer fails to submit a 
 certification required under paragraph (2) in a fiscal year, 
 the Attorney General shall reduce the amount that the State 
 would otherwise receive under section 505 of title I of the 
 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 
 10156) by 20 percent for the following fiscal year.
 (4) Reallocation.--Amounts not allocated to a State under 
 section 505 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
 Streets Act of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 10156) for a fiscal year 
 pursuant to paragraph (3) shall be reallocated under such 
 section to States that submit certifications under paragraph 
 (2).
 (5) Availability for federal prisoners.--The Attorney 
 General shall make rules requiring, and the Director of the 
 Bureau of Prisons shall take such actions as may be necessary 
 to ensure, the distribution and accessibility without charge of 
 menstrual products to prisoners in the custody of the Bureau of 
 Prisons, including any prisoner in a Federal penal or 
 correctional institution, any Federal prisoner in a State penal 
 or correctional institution, and any Federal prisoner in a 
 facility administered by a private detention entity, to ensure 
 that each prisoner who requires menstrual products may receive 
 them in sufficient quantity.
 (6) Availability for detainees.--The Secretary of Homeland 
 Security shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure 
 that menstrual products are distributed and made accessible to 
 each alien detained by the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
 including any alien in a facility administered by a private 
 detention entity, at no expense to the alien.
 (e) Menstrual Products Availability for Homeless Individuals Under 
Emergency Food and Shelter Grant Program.--Subsection (a) of section 
316 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11346(a)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) guidelines that ensure that amounts provided under 
 the program to private nonprofit organizations and local 
 governments may be used to provide sanitary napkins and tampons 
 that conform to applicable industry standards.''.
 (f) Menstrual Products Covered by Medicaid.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by section 5201, is further 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (32), by striking ``; 
 and'' and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) by redesignating paragraph (33) as 
 paragraph (34); and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (32) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(33) menstrual products (as defined in subsection (qq)); 
 and''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(qq) Menstrual Products.--For purposes of subsection (a)(33), the 
term `menstrual products' means menstrual cups, menstrual discs, 
menstrual underwear, and sanitary napkins and tampons, that conform to 
applicable industry standards.''.
 (2) Effective date.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 amendments made by this subsection shall apply with 
 respect to medical assistance furnished during or after 
 the first calendar quarter beginning on or after the 
 date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (B) Exception for state legislation.--In the case 
 of a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) that the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services determines requires State 
 legislation in order for the respective plan to meet 
 any requirement imposed by amendments made by this 
 subsection, the respective plan shall not be regarded 
 as failing to comply with the requirements of such 
 title solely on the basis of its failure to meet such 
 an additional requirement before the first day of the 
 first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the 
 first regular session of the State legislature that 
 begins after the date of the enactment of this Act. For 
 purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a 
 State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year 
 of the session shall be considered to be a separate 
 regular session of the State legislature.
 (g) Menstrual Products for Employees.--Section 6 of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 655) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) The Secretary shall by rule promulgate a requirement that 
each employer with not less than 100 employees provide menstrual 
products free of charge for employees of the employer. For purposes of 
the preceding sentence, `menstrual products' means sanitary napkins and 
tampons that conform to applicable industry standards.''.
 (h) Menstrual Products in Federal Buildings.--
 (1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Appropriate authority.--The term ``appropriate 
 authority'' means the head of a Federal agency, the 
 Architect of the Capitol, or any other official 
 authority responsible for the operation of a covered 
 public building.
 (B) Covered public building.--
 (i) In general.--The term ``covered public 
 building'' means a public building (as defined 
 in section 3301(a) of title 40, United States 
 Code) that is open to the public and contains a 
 public restroom.
 (ii) Inclusions.--The term ``covered public 
 building'' includes specified buildings and 
 grounds (as defined in section 6301 of title 
 40, United States Code) and the Capitol 
 Buildings (as defined in section 5101 of that 
 title).
 (C) Covered restroom.--The term ``covered 
 restroom'' means a restroom in a covered public 
 building.
 (D) Menstrual products.--The term ``menstrual 
 products'' means sanitary napkins and tampons that 
 conform to applicable industry standards.
 (2) Requirement.--Each appropriate authority shall ensure 
 that menstrual products are stocked in, and available free of 
 charge in, each covered restroom in each covered public 
 building under the jurisdiction of that authority.
 (i) Menstrual Products in the Social Services Block Grant 
Program.--
 (1) Increase in funding for social services block grant 
 program.--
 (A) In general.--The amount specified in subsection 
 (c) of section 2003 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1397b) for purposes of subsections (a) and (b) 
 of such section is deemed to be $1,900,000,000 for each 
 of fiscal years 2025 through 2028, of which, the amount 
 equal to $200,000,000, reduced by the amounts reserved 
 under subparagraph (B)(ii) for each such fiscal year, 
 shall be obligated by States in accordance with 
 paragraph (2).
 (B) Appropriation.--
 (i) In general.--Out of any money in the 
 Treasury of the United States not otherwise 
 appropriated, there is appropriated 
 $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 
 through 2028, to carry out this subsection.
 (ii) Reservations.--
 (I) Purposes.--The Secretary shall 
 reserve, from the amount appropriated 
 under clause (i) to carry out this 
 subsection--
 (aa) for each of fiscal 
 years 2025 through 2028, not 
 more than 2 percent of the 
 amount appropriated for the 
 fiscal year for purposes of 
 entering into an agreement with 
 an eligible entity described in 
 clause (iii) to assist in 
 providing technical assistance 
 and training, to support 
 effective policy, practice, 
 research, and cross-system 
 collaboration among grantees 
 and subgrantees, and to assist 
 in the administration of the 
 program described in this 
 subsection; and
 (bb) for fiscal year 2025, 
 an amount, not to exceed 
 $2,000,000, for purposes of 
 conducting an evaluation under 
 paragraph (4).
 (II) No state entitlement to 
 reserved funds.--The State entitlement 
 under section 2002(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397a(a)) shall 
 not apply to the amounts reserved under 
 subclause (I).
 (iii) Eligible entity described.--An 
 eligible entity described in this clause is a 
 nonprofit organization described in section 
 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) 
 of such Code, that--
 (I) has experience in more than 1 
 State in the area of community 
 distributions of basic need services, 
 including experience collecting, 
 warehousing, and distributing basic 
 necessities such as menstrual products;
 (II) demonstrates competency to 
 implement a project, provide fiscal 
 accountability, collect data, and 
 prepare reports and other necessary 
 documentation; and
 (III) demonstrates a willingness to 
 share information with researchers, 
 practitioners, and other interested 
 parties.
 (2) Rules governing use of additional funds.--
 (A) In general.--Funds are used in accordance with 
 this paragraph if--
 (i) the State, in consultation with 
 relevant stakeholders, including agencies, 
 professional associations, and nonprofit 
 organizations, distributes the funds to 
 eligible entities to--
 (I) decrease the unmet need for 
 menstrual products by low-income 
 menstruating individuals through--
 (aa) the distribution of 
 free menstrual products;
 (bb) community outreach to 
 assist in participation in 
 existing menstrual product 
 distribution programs; or
 (cc) improving access to 
 menstrual products among low-
 income individuals; and
 (II) increase the ability of 
 communities and low-income families in 
 such communities to provide for the 
 need for menstrual products of low-
 income adults; and
 (ii) the funds are used subject to the 
 limitations in section 2005 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397d).
 (B) Allowable uses by eligible entities.--
 (i) In general.--An eligible entity 
 receiving funds made available under paragraph 
 (1) shall use the funds for any of the 
 following:
 (I) To pay for the purchase and 
 distribution of menstrual products 
 among low-income individuals.
 (II) To integrate activities 
 carried out under subclause (I) with 
 other basic needs assistance programs 
 serving low-income families, including 
 the following:
 (aa) Programs funded by the 
 temporary assistance for needy 
 families program under part A 
 of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et 
 seq.), including the State 
 maintenance of effort 
 provisions of such program.
 (bb) Programs designed to 
 support the health of eligible 
 children, such as the 
 Children's Health Insurance 
 Program under title XXI of the 
 Social Security Act, the 
 Medicaid program under title 
 XIX of such Act, or State 
 funded health care programs.
 (cc) Programs funded 
 through the special 
 supplemental nutrition program 
 for women, infants, and 
 children under section 17 of 
 the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966.
 (dd) Programs that offer 
 early home visiting services, 
 including the maternal, infant, 
 and early childhood home 
 visiting program (including the 
 Tribal home visiting program) 
 under section 511 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 711).
 (III) To provide training or 
 technical assistance in carrying out 
 activities under this subsection.
 (IV) To cover administrative costs.
 (ii) Limitation on use of funds for 
 administrative costs.--An eligible entity 
 receiving funds made available under this 
 subsection shall not use more than 9 percent of 
 the funds for administrative costs incurred 
 pursuant to this subsection.
 (C) Availability of funds.--
 (i) Funds distributed to eligible 
 entities.--Funds made available under paragraph 
 (1) that are distributed to an eligible entity 
 by a State for a fiscal year may be expended by 
 the eligible entity only in such fiscal year or 
 the succeeding fiscal year.
 (ii) Evaluation.--Funds reserved under 
 paragraph (1)(B)(ii)(I)(aa) to carry out the 
 evaluation under paragraph (4) shall be 
 available for expenditure through September 30, 
 2029.
 (D) No effect on other programs.--Any assistance or 
 benefits received by a family through funds made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be disregarded for 
 purposes of determining the family's eligibility for, 
 or amount of, benefits under any other Federal needs-
 based programs.
 (3) Annual reports.--Section 2004 of the Social Security 
 Act shall apply with respect to payments made to a State under 
 this section in the same way it applies with respect to 
 payments made to a State under section 2002 of such Act.
 (4) Evaluation.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
 States, the eligible entities described in paragraph 
 (1)(B)(iii) receiving funds made available under this 
 subsection, shall--
 (A) not later than December 30, 2031, complete an 
 evaluation of the effectiveness of the assistance 
 program carried out pursuant to this subsection, such 
 as the effect of activities carried out under this Act 
 on mitigating the health risks of unmet menstrual 
 products need among individuals in low-income families;
 (B) not later than March 31, 2032, submit to the 
 Committees on Energy and Commerce and on Ways and Means 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate a report on the results of the 
 evaluation; and
 (C) not later than April 30, 2032, publish the 
 results of the evaluation on the internet website of 
 the Department of Health and Human Services.
 (5) Guidance.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue guidance 
 regarding how the provisions of this subsection should be 
 carried out, including information regarding eligible entities, 
 allowable use of funds, and reporting requirements.
 (6) Best practices.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, in cooperation with the Secretary of Education, shall 
 develop best practices for school officials to use in 
 discussing menstruation with students, and shall publish this 
 information on the internet website of the Department of Health 
 and Human Services.
 (7) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Menstrual products.--The term ``menstrual 
 products'' means menstrual cups, menstrual discs, 
 menstrual underwear, and sanitary napkins and tampons, 
 that conform to applicable industry standards.
 (B) Eligible entities.--The term ``eligible 
 entity'' means a State or local governmental entity, an 
 Indian tribe or tribal organization (as defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act), or a nonprofit organization 
 described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 
 501(a) of such Code that--
 (i) has experience in the area of community 
 distributions of basic need services, including 
 experience collecting, warehousing, and 
 distributing basic necessities such as diapers, 
 food, or menstrual products;
 (ii) demonstrates competency to implement a 
 project, provide fiscal accountability, collect 
 data, and prepare reports and other necessary 
 documentation; and
 (iii) demonstrates a willingness to share 
 information with researchers, practitioners, 
 and other interested parties.
 (C) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning 
 given in section 1101(a)(1) of the Social Security Act 
 for purposes of title XX of such Act.
 (8) Limitation on authorization of appropriations.--For the 
 administration of this subsection, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services not 
 more than $6,000,000 for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.
 (9) Exemption from sequestration.--Funds made available to 
 carry out this subsection shall be exempt from reduction under 
 any order issued under the Balanced Budget and Emergency 
 Deficit Control Act of 1985.
 (j) Menstrual Products and Taxation.--
 (1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for a State, or unit 
 of local government of a State, to impose a tax on the retail 
 sale of a menstrual product.
 (2) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) Menstrual product.--The term ``menstrual 
 products'' means menstrual cups, menstrual discs, 
 menstrual underwear, and sanitary napkins and tampons, 
 that conform to applicable industry standards.
 (B) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the 
 several States or the District of Columbia.
 (3) Effective date.--This subsection shall take effect 120 
 days after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
 (k) Menstrual Products in TANF.--
 (1) In general.--Section 403(a) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 603(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(6) Grants for menstrual products.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may make grants, 
 on a competitive basis, for each fiscal year to 
 eligible applicants for the grants, in such amounts as 
 the Secretary deems appropriate to enable the eligible 
 applicants to provide, to covered families that include 
 an individual who is capable of menstruating, such 
 benefits as are needed to ensure that the individual 
 can purchase menstrual products for personal use.
 ``(B) Definitions.--In subparagraph (A):
 ``(i) Covered families.--The term `covered 
 families' means families eligible for 
 assistance under a State program funded under 
 this part.
 ``(ii) Eligible applicant.--The term 
 `eligible applicant' means--
 ``(I) a State to which a grant is 
 made under paragraph (1) for a fiscal 
 year; and
 ``(II) a political subdivision of a 
 State that administers the State 
 program funded under this part in the 
 political subdivision.
 ``(iii) Menstrual products.--The term 
 `menstrual products' means menstrual cups, 
 menstrual discs, menstrual underwear, and 
 sanitary napkins and tampons, that conform to 
 applicable industry standards.
 ``(C) Consideration of applications.--The Secretary 
 shall award grants under this paragraph on the basis of 
 how effectively the programs proposed by the eligible 
 applicants will help low-income individuals suffering 
 from material deprivation meet their need for menstrual 
 products.
 ``(D) Administration.--A State or political 
 subdivision to which a grant is made under this 
 paragraph may use the grant to provide benefits under 
 this paragraph in such form and in such manner as the 
 State or political subdivision deems appropriate.
 ``(E) Treatment of assistance.--Benefits provided 
 using funds made available under this paragraph shall 
 not be considered assistance under any State program 
 funded under this part.
 ``(F) Appropriation.--Out of any money in the 
 Treasury of the United States not otherwise 
 appropriated, there are appropriated for fiscal year 
 2025 and each succeeding fiscal year $10,000,000 for 
 grants under this paragraph.''.
 (2) Evaluations.--Section 413 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 613) 
 is amended by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i) 
 and inserting after subsection (g) the following:
 ``(h) Evaluations of Grants for Menstrual Products.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall submit to the 
 Congress reports, in writing, that evaluate the effectiveness 
 of the benefit program provided for in section 403(a)(6). Each 
 such report shall, for the period covered by the report--
 ``(A) describe--
 ``(i) the extent of material deprivation in 
 the population, including lacking sufficient 
 funds to regularly purchase necessities such as 
 menstrual products; and
 ``(ii) the extent to which the program 
 alleviated such material deprivation;
 ``(B) specify the number and identity of the 
 entities to which a grant has been made under such 
 section, and the amount of the grant made to each such 
 entity;
 ``(C) describe how the grantees used the grants to 
 provide benefits under the program;
 ``(D) specify the number of individuals who 
 received the benefits;
 ``(E) describe how efficacious the program has been 
 in helping low-income individuals meet their need for 
 menstrual products;
 ``(F) describe the extent to which the program has 
 improved the economic security of the benefit 
 recipients; and
 ``(G) include such other relevant information as 
 the Secretary deems appropriate.
 ``(2) Timing.--The Secretary shall submit a report that 
 meets the requirements of paragraph (1) within 2 years after 
 the date of the enactment of this paragraph and every 2 years 
 thereafter.''.

SEC. 5407. ADDITIONAL FOCUS AREA FOR THE OFFICE ON WOMEN'S HEALTH.

 Section 229(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
237a(b)), as amended by sections 5215 and 5301, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) facilitate the understanding of policymakers, health 
 system leaders and providers, consumers, and other stakeholders 
 concerning optimal maternity care and support for the provision 
 of such care, including the priorities of--
 ``(A) protecting, promoting, and supporting the 
 innate capacities of childbearing individuals and their 
 newborns for childbirth, breastfeeding, and attachment;
 ``(B) using obstetric interventions only when such 
 interventions are supported by strong, high-quality 
 evidence, and minimizing overuse of maternity practices 
 that have been shown to have benefit in limited 
 situations and that can expose people, infants, or both 
 to risk of harm if used routinely and indiscriminately, 
 including overuse of continuous electronic fetal 
 monitoring, labor induction, epidural analgesia, 
 primary cesarean section, and routine repeat cesarean 
 birth;
 ``(C) reliably incorporating noninvasive, evidence-
 based practices that have a documented correlation with 
 considerable improvement in outcomes with no 
 detrimental side effects, such as incorporation of 
 smoking cessation programs in pregnancy, maternal 
 immunizations, and proven models (including group 
 prenatal care, midwifery care, and doula support) that 
 integrate health assessment, education, and support 
 into a unified program, and supporting evidence-based 
 breastfeeding promotion efforts with respect for a 
 breastfeeding individual's personal decisionmaking;
 ``(D) a shared understanding of the qualifications 
 of licensed providers of maternity care and the best 
 evidence about the safety, satisfaction, outcomes, and 
 costs of maternity care, and appropriate deployment of 
 such caregivers within the maternity care workforce to 
 address the needs of childbearing individuals and 
 newborns and the growing shortage of maternity 
 caregivers;
 ``(E) a shared understanding of the results of the 
 best available research comparing hospital, birth 
 center, and planned home births, including information 
 about each setting's safety, satisfaction, outcomes, 
 and costs;
 ``(F) a shared understanding of the importance for 
 the safety and choices of birthing families of an 
 integrated maternity care system with seamless 
 processes for consultation, shared care, transfer and 
 transport across maternity care settings, and use of 
 providers when birthing people and their newborns 
 require a higher level of care;
 ``(G) advancing high-quality, evidence-based 
 childbirth education that--
 ``(i) promotes a healthy and safe approach 
 to pregnancy, childbirth, and early parenting;
 ``(ii) is taught by certified educators, 
 peer counselors, and health professionals; and
 ``(iii) promotes informed decisionmaking by 
 childbearing individuals; and
 ``(H) developing measures that enable a more 
 robust, balanced set of standardized maternity care 
 measures, including performance and quality 
 measures.''.

SEC. 5408. INCLUDING SERVICES FURNISHED BY CERTAIN STUDENTS, INTERNS, 
 AND RESIDENTS SUPERVISED BY CERTIFIED NURSE MIDWIVES OR 
 CERTIFIED MIDWIVES WITHIN INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES 
 UNDER MEDICARE.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6), by striking ``; or'' at the end and 
 inserting ``, or in the case of services in a hospital or 
 osteopathic hospital by a student midwife or an intern or 
 resident-in-training under a teaching program previously 
 described in this paragraph who is in the field of obstetrics 
 and gynecology, if such student midwife, intern, or resident-
 in-training is supervised by a certified nurse-midwife or 
 certified midwife to the extent permitted under applicable 
 State law and as may be authorized by the hospital;'';
 (2) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) a certified nurse-midwife or certified midwife where 
 the hospital has a teaching program approved as specified in 
 paragraph (6), if--
 ``(A) the hospital elects to receive any payment 
 due under this title for reasonable costs of such 
 services; and
 ``(B) all certified nurse-midwives or certified 
 midwives in such hospital agree not to bill charges for 
 professional services rendered in such hospital to 
 individuals covered under the insurance program 
 established by this title.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to services furnished on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 5409. GRANTS TO PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND MINORITY-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS TO INCREASE DIVERSITY IN MATERNAL, 
 REPRODUCTIVE, AND SEXUAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS.

 (a) Grants to Health Professional Organizations.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Administrator of the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration (referred to in this 
 section as the ``Secretary''), shall carry out a grant program 
 under which the Secretary may make to eligible organizations--
 (A) for fiscal year 2025, planning grants described 
 in paragraph (2); and
 (B) for the subsequent 4-year period, 
 implementation grants described in paragraph (3).
 (2) Planning grants.--
 (A) In general.--Planning grants described in this 
 paragraph are grants for each of the following 
 purposes:
 (i) To collect data and identify any 
 workforce inequalities, with respect to a 
 health profession, at each of the following 
 stages along the health professional continuum:
 (I) Pipeline availability, with 
 respect to students at the high school 
 and college or university levels 
 considering, and working toward, 
 entrance in the profession, including 
 inequalities due to barriers triggered 
 by criminal records.
 (II) Entrance into the training 
 program for the profession.
 (III) Graduation from such training 
 program.
 (IV) Entrance into practice, 
 including inequalities due to barriers 
 triggered by criminal records.
 (V) Retention in practice for more 
 than a 5-year period.
 (ii) To develop one or more strategies to 
 address the workforce inequalities within the 
 health profession, as identified under (and in 
 response to the findings pursuant to) clause 
 (i).
 (B) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this paragraph, an eligible health professional 
 organization shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application in such form and manner and containing such 
 information as specified by the Secretary.
 (C) Amount.--Each grant awarded under this 
 paragraph shall be for an amount not to exceed 
 $300,000.
 (D) Report.--Each recipient of a grant under this 
 paragraph shall submit to the Secretary a report 
 containing--
 (i) information on the extent and 
 distribution of workforce inequalities 
 identified through the grant; and
 (ii) reasonable objectives and strategies 
 developed to address such inequalities within a 
 5-, 10-, and 25-year period.
 (3) Implementation grants.--
 (A) In general.--Implementation grants described in 
 this paragraph are grants to implement one or more of 
 the strategies developed pursuant to a planning grant 
 awarded under paragraph (2).
 (B) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this paragraph, an eligible health professional 
 organization shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application in such form and manner as specified by the 
 Secretary. Each such application shall contain 
 information on--
 (i) the capability of the organization to 
 carry out a strategy described in subparagraph 
 (A);
 (ii) the involvement of partners or 
 coalitions;
 (iii) the organization's plans for 
 developing sustainability of the implementation 
 efforts after the culmination of the grant 
 cycle; and
 (iv) any other matter specified by the 
 Secretary.
 (C) Amount; duration.--Each grant awarded under 
 this paragraph shall be for an amount not to exceed 
 $500,000 for each year of the grant. The term of a 
 grant under this paragraph shall not exceed 4 years.
 (D) Reports.--For each of the first 3 years for 
 which an eligible health professional organization is 
 awarded a grant under this paragraph, the organization 
 shall submit to the Secretary a report on the 
 activities carried out by such organization through the 
 grant during such year and objectives for the 
 subsequent year. For the fourth year for which an 
 eligible health professional organization is awarded a 
 grant under this paragraph, the organization shall 
 submit to the Secretary a report that includes an 
 analysis of all the activities carried out by the 
 organization through the grant and a detailed plan for 
 the continuation of the organization's implementation 
 efforts.
 (4) Eligible health professional organization defined.--For 
 purposes of this subsection, the term ``eligible health 
 professional organization'' means a professional organization 
 representing obstetrician-gynecologists, certified nurse 
 midwives, certified midwives, family practice physicians, nurse 
 practitioners whose scope of practice includes pregnancy-
 related or sexual and reproductive health care, physician 
 assistants whose scope of practice includes obstetrical or 
 sexual and reproductive health care, certified professional 
 midwives, adolescent medicine specialists who provide sexual 
 and reproductive health care, or pediatricians who provide 
 sexual and reproductive health care.
 (b) Grants to Minority-Serving Institutions.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a grant 
 program under which the Secretary may make to eligible 
 minority-serving institutions--
 (A) for fiscal years 2025 and 2026, planning grants 
 described in paragraph (2); and
 (B) for the subsequent 10-year period, 
 implementation grants described in paragraph (3).
 (2) Planning grants.--
 (A) In general.--Planning grants described in this 
 paragraph are grants for plans relating to 1 or more of 
 the following purposes:
 (i) To develop or expand academic programs 
 to educate maternity care clinicians and 
 maternity care support personnel, including--
 (I) nurses who have the intention 
 of providing maternity, newborn, or 
 sexual and reproductive health care;
 (II) nurse practitioners whose 
 scope of practice includes maternity, 
 newborn, or sexual and reproductive 
 health care; and
 (III) maternity care support 
 personnel, such as doulas and lactation 
 counselors.
 (ii) To develop or expand academic programs 
 to educate obstetrician-gynecologists.
 (B) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this paragraph, an eligible minority-serving 
 institution shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application in such form and manner and containing such 
 information as specified by the Secretary.
 (C) Amount.--Each grant awarded under this 
 paragraph shall be for an amount not to exceed $400,000 
 for each of 2 years.
 (D) Report.--Each recipient of a grant under this 
 paragraph shall submit to the Secretary an annual 
 report describing the planned development or expansion 
 of academic programs, including--
 (i) the types of clinical or support 
 personnel to be served and the degrees or 
 certificates to be conferred;
 (ii) the associated curricula;
 (iii) the faculty and their capabilities 
 and commitments, including any plans for 
 recruitment;
 (iv) the anticipated number of students to 
 be enrolled and plans for their recruitment and 
 social, emotional, and financial support; and
 (v) the objectives and strategies for 
 addressing inequalities and preparing students 
 to provide high-quality culturally congruent 
 care.
 (3) Implementation grants.--
 (A) In general.--Implementation grants described in 
 this paragraph are grants to implement the plans 
 developed under paragraph (2).
 (B) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this paragraph, an eligible minority-serving 
 institution shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application in such form and manner as specified by the 
 Secretary. Each such application shall contain 
 information on the capability of the institution to 
 carry out a plan described in paragraph (2), plans for 
 sustainability of the academic program involved after 
 the culmination of the grant cycle, and any other 
 matter specified by the Secretary.
 (C) Amount.--Each grant under this paragraph shall 
 be for an amount not to exceed $1,000,000 for each year 
 during the 10-year period of the grant.
 (D) Reports.--
 (i) Initial period.--For each of the first 
 9 years for which an eligible minority-serving 
 institution is awarded a grant under this 
 paragraph, the institution shall submit a 
 report to the Secretary on the activities 
 carried out by such institution through the 
 grant during such year and objectives for the 
 subsequent year.
 (ii) Final year.--For the tenth year for 
 which an eligible minority-serving institution 
 is awarded a grant under this paragraph, the 
 organization shall submit to the Secretary a 
 report that includes an analysis of all the 
 activities carried out by the institution 
 through the grant and a detailed plan for 
 continuation of the academic program.
 (4) Minority-serving institution.--For the purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``minority-serving institution'' means any 
 of the following:
 (A) A Hispanic-serving institution, as that term is 
 defined in section 502(a) of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1101a(a)).
 (B) A Tribal College or University, as that term is 
 defined in section 316(b) of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b)).
 (C) An Alaska Native-serving institution, as that 
 term is defined in section 317(b) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b)).
 (D) A Native Hawaiian-serving institution, as that 
 term is defined in section 317(b) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b)).
 (E) A Predominantly Black Institution, as that term 
 is defined in section 318(b) of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059e(b)).
 (F) A Native American-serving, nontribal 
 institution, as that term is defined in section 319(b) 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1059f(b)).
 (G) An Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution, as that term is defined 
 in section 320(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1059g(b)).
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out--
 (1) subsection (a), $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2025 and 
 $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2026 through 2029; and
 (2) subsection (b), $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2025 and 2026 and $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2027 
 through 2036.

 Subtitle F--Children's Health

SEC. 5501. CARING FOR KIDS ACT.

 (a) Permanent Extension of Children's Health Insurance Program.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2104(a)(28) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(a)(28)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(28) for fiscal year 2029 and each subsequent year, such 
 sums as are necessary to fund allotments to States under 
 subsections (c) and (m).''.
 (2) Allotments.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2104(m) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(m)) is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (2)(B)--
 (I) in the matter preceding clause 
 (i), by striking ``through (27)'' and 
 inserting ``through (28)''; and
 (II) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``2023, and 2029'' and inserting ``and 
 2023'';
 (ii) in paragraph (7)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``and ending with fiscal year 
 2029,''; and
 (II) in the flush left matter at 
 the end, by striking ``fiscal year 
 2026, or fiscal year 2028'' and 
 inserting ``fiscal year 2026, or a 
 subsequent even-numbered fiscal year'';
 (iii) in paragraph (9)--
 (I) by striking ``(10), or (11)'' 
 and inserting ``or (10)''; and
 (II) by striking ``2023, or 2029,'' 
 and inserting ``or 2023''; and
 (iv) by striking paragraph (11).
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 50101(b)(2) of 
 the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-123) 
 is repealed.
 (b) Permanent Extensions of Other Programs and Demonstration 
Projects.--
 (1) Pediatric quality measures program.--Section 
 1139A(i)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-
 9a(i)(1)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (B) in subparagraph (E), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(F) for a subsequent fiscal year, the amount 
 appropriated under this paragraph for the previous 
 fiscal year, increased by the percentage increase in 
 the consumer price index for all urban consumers (all 
 items; United States city average) over such previous 
 fiscal year, for the purpose of carrying out this 
 section (other than subsections (e), (f), and (g)).''.
 (2) Express lane eligibility option.--Section 1902(e)(13) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(13)) is amended 
 by striking subparagraph (I).
 (3) Assurance of affordability standard for children and 
 families.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2105(d)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(d)(3)) is amended--
 (i) in the paragraph heading, by striking 
 ``through september 30, 2029''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i)--
 (I) by striking ``During the period 
 that begins on the date of enactment of 
 the Patient Protection and Affordable 
 Care Act and ends on September 30, 
 2029'' and inserting ``Beginning on the 
 date of the enactment of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act'';
 (II) by striking ``During the 
 period that begins on October 1, 2019, 
 and ends on September 30, 2029'' and 
 inserting ``Beginning on October 1, 
 2019''; and
 (III) by striking ``The preceding 
 sentences shall not be construed as 
 preventing a State during any such 
 periods from'' and inserting ``The 
 preceding sentences shall not be 
 construed as preventing a State from''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--Section 1902(gg)(2) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(gg)(2)) is 
 amended--
 (i) in the paragraph heading, by striking 
 ``through september 30, 2029''; and
 (ii) by striking ``through September 30'' 
 and all that follows through ``ends on 
 September 30, 2029'' and inserting ``(but 
 beginning on October 1, 2019''.
 (4) Qualifying states option.--Section 2105(g)(4) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(g)(4)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``for 
 fiscal years 2009 through 2029'' and inserting ``after 
 fiscal year 2008''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``for any of 
 fiscal years 2009 through 2029'' and inserting ``for 
 any fiscal year after fiscal year 2008''.
 (5) Outreach and enrollment program.--Section 2113 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397mm) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``during 
 the period of fiscal years 2009 through 2029'' 
 and inserting ``, beginning with fiscal year 
 2009,'';
 (ii) in paragraph (2)--
 (I) by striking ``10 percent of 
 such amounts'' and inserting ``10 
 percent of such amounts for the period 
 or the fiscal year for which such 
 amounts are appropriated''; and
 (II) by striking ``during such 
 period'' and inserting ``, during such 
 period or such fiscal year,''; and
 (iii) in paragraph (3), by striking ``For 
 the period of fiscal years 2024 through 2029, 
 an amount equal to 10 percent of such amounts'' 
 and inserting ``Beginning with fiscal year 
 2024, an amount equal to 10 percent of such 
 amounts for the period or the fiscal year for 
 which such amounts are appropriated''; and
 (B) in subsection (g)--
 (i) by striking ``and $40,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$40,000,000''; and
 (ii) by inserting after ``fiscal years 2028 
 and 2029,'' the following: ``$12,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 2030, and, for each fiscal year 
 after fiscal year 2030, the amount appropriated 
 under this subsection for the previous fiscal 
 year, increased by the percentage increase in 
 the consumer price index for all urban 
 consumers (all items; United States city 
 average) over such previous fiscal year,''.
 (6) Child enrollment contingency fund.--Section 2104(n) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(n)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)(ii)--
 (I) by striking ``and 2024 through 
 2028'' and inserting ``and for each 
 fiscal year after fiscal year 2023''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``2023, and 2029'' 
 and inserting ``and 2023''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) by striking ``2024 through 
 2028'' and inserting ``and for each 
 fiscal year after fiscal year 2023''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``2023, and 2029'' 
 and inserting ``and 2023''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3)(A)--
 (i) by striking ``fiscal years 2024 through 
 2028'' and inserting ``a fiscal year after 
 fiscal year 2023''; and
 (ii) by striking ``2023, or 2029'' and 
 inserting ``or 2023''.

SEC. 5502. END DIAPER NEED ACT OF 2024.

 (a) Targeted Funding for Diaper Assistance (Including Diapering 
Supplies and Adult Incontinence Materials and Supplies) Through the 
Social Services Block Grant Program.--
 (1) Increase in funding for social services block grant 
 program.--
 (A) In general.--The amount specified in subsection 
 (c) of section 2003 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1397b) for purposes of subsections (a) and (b) 
 of such section is deemed to be $1,900,000,000 for each 
 of fiscal years 2025 through 2028, of which, the amount 
 equal to $200,000,000, reduced by the amounts reserved 
 under subparagraph (B)(ii) for each such fiscal year, 
 shall be obligated by States in accordance with 
 paragraph (2).
 (B) Appropriation.--
 (i) In general.--Out of any money in the 
 Treasury of the United States not otherwise 
 appropriated, there is appropriated 
 $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 
 through 2028, to carry out this subsection.
 (ii) Reservations.--
 (I) Purposes.--The Secretary shall 
 reserve, from the amount appropriated 
 under clause (i) to carry out this 
 subsection--
 (aa) for each of fiscal 
 years 2025 through 2028, not 
 more than 2 percent of the 
 amount appropriated for the 
 fiscal year for purposes of 
 entering into an agreement with 
 a national entity described in 
 clause (iii) to assist in 
 providing technical assistance 
 and training, to support 
 effective policy, practice, 
 research, and cross-system 
 collaboration among grantees 
 and subgrantees, and to assist 
 in the administration of the 
 program described in this 
 subsection; and
 (bb) for fiscal year 2025, 
 an amount, not to exceed 
 $2,000,000, for purposes of 
 conducting an evaluation under 
 paragraph (4).
 (II) No state entitlement to 
 reserved funds.--The State entitlement 
 under section 2002(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397a(a)) shall 
 not apply to the amounts reserved under 
 subclause (I).
 (iii) National entity described.--A 
 national entity described in this clause is a 
 nonprofit organization described in section 
 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) 
 of such Code, that--
 (I) has experience in more than 1 
 State in the area of--
 (aa) community 
 distributions of basic need 
 services, including experience 
 collecting, warehousing, and 
 distributing basic necessities 
 such as diapers, food, or 
 menstrual products;
 (bb) child care;
 (cc) child development 
 activities in low-income 
 communities; or
 (dd) motherhood, 
 fatherhood, or parent education 
 efforts serving low-income 
 parents of young children;
 (II) demonstrates competency to 
 implement a project, provide fiscal 
 accountability, collect data, and 
 prepare reports and other necessary 
 documentation; and
 (III) demonstrates a willingness to 
 share information with researchers, 
 practitioners, and other interested 
 parties.
 (2) Rules governing use of additional funds.--
 (A) In general.--Funds are used in accordance with 
 this paragraph if--
 (i) the State, in consultation with 
 relevant stakeholders, including agencies, 
 professional associations, and nonprofit 
 organizations, distributes the funds to 
 eligible entities to--
 (I) decrease the need for diapers 
 and diapering supplies and adult 
 incontinence materials and supplies in 
 low-income families and meet such unmet 
 needs of infants and toddlers, 
 medically complex children, and low-
 income adults and adults with 
 disabilities in such families through--
 (aa) the distribution of 
 free diapers and diapering 
 supplies, medically necessary 
 diapers, and adult incontinence 
 materials and supplies;
 (bb) community outreach to 
 assist in participation in 
 existing diaper distribution 
 programs or programs that 
 distribute medically necessary 
 diapers or adult incontinence 
 materials and supplies; or
 (cc) improving access to 
 diapers and diapering supplies, 
 medically necessary diapers, 
 and adult incontinence 
 materials and supplies; and
 (II) increase the ability of 
 communities and low-income families in 
 such communities to provide for the 
 need for diapers and diapering 
 supplies, medically necessary diapers, 
 and adult incontinence materials and 
 supplies, of infants and toddlers, 
 medically complex children, and low-
 income adults and adults with 
 disabilities;
 (ii) the funds are used subject to the 
 limitations in section 2005 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397d);
 (iii) the funds are used to supplement, not 
 supplant, State general revenue funds provided 
 for the purposes described in clause (i); and
 (iv) the funds are not used for costs that 
 are reimbursable by the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, under a contract for 
 insurance, or by self-insurance.
 (B) Allowable uses by eligible entities.--An 
 eligible entity receiving funds made available under 
 paragraph (1) shall use the funds for any of the 
 following:
 (i) To pay for the purchase and 
 distribution of diapers and diapering supplies, 
 medically necessary diapers, and funding diaper 
 (including medically necessary diapers) 
 distribution that serves low-income families 
 with--
 (I) 1 or more children 3 years of 
 age or younger; or
 (II) 1 or more medically complex 
 children.
 (ii) To pay for the purchase and 
 distribution of adult incontinence materials 
 and supplies and funding distribution of such 
 materials and supplies that serves low-income 
 families with 1 or more low-income adults or 
 adults with disabilities who rely on adult 
 incontinence materials and supplies.
 (iii) To integrate activities carried out 
 under clause (i) with other basic needs 
 assistance programs serving eligible children 
 and their families, including the following:
 (I) Programs funded by the 
 temporary assistance for needy families 
 program under part A of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et 
 seq.), including the State maintenance 
 of effort provisions of such program.
 (II) Programs designed to support 
 the health of eligible children, such 
 as the Children's Health Insurance 
 Program under title XXI of the Social 
 Security Act, the Medicaid program 
 under title XIX of such Act, or State-
 funded health care programs.
 (III) Programs funded through the 
 special supplemental nutrition program 
 for women, infants, and children under 
 section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act 
 of 1966.
 (IV) Programs that offer early home 
 visiting services, including the 
 maternal, infant, and early childhood 
 home visiting program (including the 
 Tribal home visiting program) under 
 section 511 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 711).
 (V) Programs to provide improved 
 and affordable access to child care, 
 including programs funded through the 
 Child Care and Development Fund, the 
 temporary assistance for needy families 
 program under part A of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et 
 seq.), or a State-funded program.
 (C) Availability of funds.--
 (i) Funds distributed to eligible 
 entities.--Funds made available under paragraph 
 (1) that are distributed to an eligible entity 
 by a State for a fiscal year may be expended by 
 the eligible entity only in such fiscal year or 
 the succeeding fiscal year.
 (ii) Evaluation.--Funds reserved under 
 paragraph (1)(B)(ii)(I)(aa) to carry out the 
 evaluation under paragraph (4) shall be 
 available for expenditure during the 3-year 
 period that begins on the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (D) No effect on other programs.--Any assistance or 
 benefits received by a family through funds made 
 available under paragraph (1) shall be disregarded for 
 purposes of determining the family's eligibility for, 
 or amount of, benefits under any other Federal needs-
 based programs.
 (3) Annual reports.--A State shall include in the annual 
 report required under section 2006 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397e) covering each of fiscal years 2024 through 
 2027, information detailing how eligible entities, including 
 subgrantees, used funds made available under paragraph (1) to 
 distribute diapers and diapering supplies and adult 
 incontinence materials and supplies to families in need. Each 
 such report shall include the following:
 (A) The number and age of infants, toddlers, 
 medically complex children, and low-income adults and 
 adults with disabilities who received assistance or 
 benefits through such funds.
 (B) The number of families that have received 
 assistance or benefits through such funds.
 (C) The number of diapers, medically necessary 
 diapers, or adult incontinence materials and supplies 
 (such as adult diapers, briefs, protective underwear, 
 pull-ons, pull-ups, liners, shields, guards, pads, 
 undergarments), and the number of each type of 
 diapering or adult incontinence supply, distributed 
 through the use of such funds.
 (D) The ZIP Code or ZIP Codes where the eligible 
 entity (or subgrantee) distributed diapers and 
 diapering supplies and adult incontinence materials and 
 supplies.
 (E) The method or methods the eligible entity (or 
 subgrantee) uses to distribute diapers and diapering 
 supplies and, adult incontinence materials and 
 supplies.
 (F) Such other information as the Secretary may 
 specify.
 (4) Evaluation.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
 States, the national entity described in paragraph (1)(B)(iii), 
 and eligible entities receiving funds made available under this 
 subsection, shall--
 (A) not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act--
 (i) complete an evaluation of the 
 effectiveness of the assistance program carried 
 out pursuant to this subsection, such as the 
 effect of activities carried out under this 
 section on mitigating the health and 
 developmental risks of unmet diaper need among 
 infants, toddlers, medically complex children, 
 and other family members in low-income 
 families, including the risks of diaper 
 dermatitis, urinary tract infections, and 
 parental and child depression and anxiety;
 (ii) submit to the relevant congressional 
 committees a report on the results of such 
 evaluation; and
 (iii) publish the results of the evaluation 
 on the internet website of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services;
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, update the evaluation required 
 by subparagraph (A)(i); and
 (C) not later than 90 days after completion of the 
 updated evaluation under subparagraph (B)--
 (i) submit to the relevant congressional 
 committees a report describing the results of 
 such updated evaluation; and
 (ii) publish the results of such evaluation 
 on the internet website of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services.
 (5) Guidance.--Not later than 180 days after enactment of 
 this Act, the Secretary shall issue guidance regarding how the 
 provisions of this subsection should be carried out, including 
 information regarding eligible entities, allowable use of 
 funds, and reporting requirements.
 (6) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Adult incontinence materials and supplies.--The 
 term ``adult incontinence materials and supplies'' 
 means those supplies that are used to assist low-income 
 adults or adults with disabilities and includes adult 
 diapers, briefs, protective underwear, pull-ons, pull-
 ups, liners, shields, guards, pads, undergarments, 
 disposable wipes, over-the-counter adult diaper rash 
 cream products, intermittent catheterization, 
 indwelling catheters, condom catheters, urinary 
 drainage bags, external collection devices, wearable 
 urinals, and penile clamps.
 (B) Adults with disabilities.--The term ``adults 
 with disabilities'' means individuals who--
 (i) have attained age 18; and
 (ii) have a disability (as such term is 
 defined, with respect to an individual, in 
 section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102)).
 (C) Diaper.--The term ``diaper'' means an absorbent 
 garment that--
 (i) is washable or disposable that may be 
 worn by an infant or toddler who is not toilet-
 trained; and
 (ii) if disposable--
 (I) does not use any latex or 
 common allergens; and
 (II) meets or exceeds the quality 
 standards for diapers commercially 
 available through retail sale in the 
 following categories:
 (aa) Absorbency (with 
 acceptable rates for first and 
 second wetting).
 (bb) Waterproof outer 
 cover.
 (cc) Flexible leg openings.
 (dd) Refastening closures.
 (D) Diapering supplies.--The term ``diapering 
 supplies'' means items, including diaper wipes and 
 diaper cream, necessary to ensure that--
 (i) an eligible child using a diaper is 
 properly cleaned and protected from diaper 
 rash; or
 (ii) a medically complex child who uses a 
 medically necessary diaper is properly cleaned 
 and protected from diaper rash.
 (E) Eligible child.--The term ``eligible child'' 
 means a child who--
 (i) has not attained 4 years of age; and
 (ii) is a member of a low-income family.
 (F) Eligible entities.--The term ``eligible 
 entity'' means a State or local governmental entity, an 
 Indian tribe or tribal organization (as defined in 
 section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act), or a nonprofit organization 
 described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 
 501(a) of such Code that--
 (i) has experience in the area of--
 (I) community distributions of 
 basic need services, including 
 experience collecting, warehousing, and 
 distributing basic necessities such as 
 diapers, food, or menstrual products;
 (II) child care;
 (III) child development activities 
 in low-income communities; or
 (IV) motherhood, fatherhood, or 
 parent education efforts serving low-
 income parents of young children;
 (ii) demonstrates competency to implement a 
 project, provide fiscal accountability, collect 
 data, and prepare reports and other necessary 
 documentation; and
 (iii) demonstrates a willingness to share 
 information with researchers, practitioners, 
 and other interested parties.
 (G) Federal poverty line.--The term ``Federal 
 poverty line'' means the Federal poverty line as 
 defined by the Office of Management and Budget and 
 revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of 
 the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 
 applicable to a family of the size involved.
 (H) Low-income.--The term ``low-income'', with 
 respect to a family, means a family whose self-
 certified income is not more than 200 percent of the 
 Federal poverty line.
 (I) Medically complex child.--The term ``medically 
 complex child'' means an individual who has attained 
 age 3 and for whom a licensed health care provider has 
 provided a diagnosis of bowel or bladder incontinence, 
 a bowel or bladder condition that causes excess urine 
 or stool (such as short gut syndrome or diabetes 
 insipidus), or a severe skin condition that causes skin 
 erosions (such as epidermolysis bullosa).
 (J) Medically necessary diaper.--The term 
 ``medically necessary diaper'' means an absorbent 
 garment that is--
 (i) washable or disposable;
 (ii) worn by a medically complex child who 
 has been diagnosed with bowel or bladder 
 incontinence, a bowel or bladder condition that 
 causes excess urine or stool (such as short gut 
 syndrome or diabetes insipidus), or a severe 
 skin condition that causes skin erosions (such 
 as epidermolysis bullosa) and needs such 
 garment to correct or ameliorate such 
 condition; and
 (iii) if disposable--
 (I) does not use any latex or 
 common allergens; and
 (II) meets or exceeds the quality 
 standards for diapers commercially 
 available through retail sale in the 
 following categories:
 (aa) Absorbency (with 
 acceptable rates for first and 
 second wetting).
 (bb) Waterproof outer 
 cover.
 (cc) Flexible leg openings.
 (dd) Refastening closures.
 (7) Exemption of program from sequestration.--
 (A) In general.--Section 255(h) of the Balanced 
 Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 
 U.S.C. 905(h)) is amended by inserting after 
 ``Supplemental Security Income Program (28-0406-0-1-
 609).'' the following:
 ``Targeted funding for States for diaper assistance 
 (including diapering supplies and adult incontinence materials 
 and supplies) through the Social Services Block Grant 
 Program.''.
 (B) Applicability.--The amendment made by this 
 paragraph shall apply to any sequestration order issued 
 under the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control 
 Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 900 et seq.) on or after the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Improving Access to Diapers for Medically Complex Children.--
Section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(c)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11)(A) In the case of any waiver under this subsection that 
provides medical assistance to a medically complex child who has been 
diagnosed with bowel or bladder incontinence, a bowel or bladder 
condition that causes excess urine or stool (such as short gut syndrome 
or diabetes insipidus), or a severe skin condition that causes skin 
erosions (such as epidermolysis bullosa), such medical assistance shall 
include, for the duration of the waiver, the provision of 200 medically 
necessary diapers per month and diapering supplies. Such medical 
assistance may include the provision of medically necessary diapers in 
amounts greater than 200 if a licensed health care provider (such as a 
physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant) specifies that 
such greater amounts are necessary for such medically complex child.
 ``(B) For purposes of this paragraph:
 ``(i) The term `medically complex child' means an 
 individual who has attained age 3 and for whom a licensed 
 health care provider has provided a diagnosis of 1 or more 
 significant chronic conditions.
 ``(ii) The term `medically necessary diaper' means an 
 absorbent garment that is--
 ``(I) washable or disposable;
 ``(II) worn by a medically complex child who has 
 been diagnosed with a condition described in 
 subparagraph (A) and needs such garment to correct or 
 ameliorate such condition; and
 ``(III) if disposable--
 ``(aa) does not use any latex or common 
 allergens; and
 ``(bb) meets or exceeds the quality 
 standards for diapers commercially available 
 through retail sale in the following 
 categories:
 ``(AA) Absorbency (with acceptable 
 rates for first and second wetting).
 ``(BB) Waterproof outer cover.
 ``(CC) Flexible leg openings.
 ``(DD) Refastening closures.
 ``(iii) The term `diapering supplies' means items, 
 including diaper wipes and diaper creams, necessary to ensure 
 that a medically complex child who has been diagnosed with a 
 condition described in subparagraph (A) and uses a medically 
 necessary diaper is properly cleaned and protected from diaper 
 rash.''.
 (c) Inclusion of Diapers and Diapering Supplies as Qualified 
Medical Expenses.--
 (1) Health savings accounts.--Section 223(d)(2) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``, medically necessary diapers, 
 and diapering supplies'' after ``menstrual care 
 products'' in the last sentence of subparagraph (A); 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(E) Medically necessary diapers and diapering 
 supplies.--For purposes of this paragraph--
 ``(i) Medically necessary diapers.--The 
 term `medically necessary diaper' means an 
 absorbent garment which is washable or 
 disposable and which is worn by an individual 
 who has attained 3 years of age because of 
 medical necessity, such as someone who has been 
 diagnosed with bowel or bladder incontinence, a 
 bowel or bladder condition that causes excess 
 urine or stool (such as short gut syndrome or 
 diabetes insipidus), or a severe skin condition 
 that causes skin erosions (such as 
 epidermolysis bullosa) and needs such garment 
 to correct or ameliorate such condition, to 
 serve a preventative medical purpose, or to 
 correct or ameliorate defects or physical or 
 mental illnesses or conditions diagnosed by a 
 licensed health care provider, and, if 
 disposable--
 ``(I) does not use any latex or 
 common allergens; and
 ``(II) meets or exceeds the quality 
 standards for diapers commercially 
 available through retail sale in the 
 following categories:
 ``(aa) Absorbency (with 
 acceptable rates for first and 
 second wetting).
 ``(bb) Waterproof outer 
 cover.
 ``(cc) Flexible leg 
 openings.
 ``(dd) Refastening 
 closures.
 ``(ii) Diapering supplies.--The term 
 `diapering supplies' means items, including 
 diaper wipes and diaper creams, necessary to 
 ensure that an individual wearing medically 
 necessary diapers is properly cleaned and 
 protected from diaper rash.''.
 (2) Archer msas.--The last sentence of section 220(d)(2)(A) 
 of such Code is amended by inserting ``, medically necessary 
 diapers (as defined in section 223(d)(2)(E)), and diapering 
 supplies (as defined in section 223(d)(2)(E))'' after 
 ``menstrual care products (as defined in section 
 223(d)(2)(D))''.
 (3) Health flexible spending arrangements and health 
 reimbursement arrangements.--Section 106(f) of such Code is 
 amended--
 (A) by inserting ``, medically necessary diapers 
 (as defined in section 223(d)(2)(E)), and diapering 
 supplies (as defined in section 223(d)(2)(E))'' after 
 ``menstrual care products (as defined in section 
 223(d)(2)(D))''; and
 (B) in the heading, by inserting ``, Medically 
 Necessary Diapers, and Diapering Supplies'' after 
 ``Menstrual Care Products''.
 (4) Effective dates.--
 (A) Distributions from certain accounts.--The 
 amendments made by paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply 
 to amounts paid after December 31, 2024.
 (B) Reimbursements.--The amendment made by 
 paragraph (3) shall apply to expenses incurred after 
 December 31, 2024.

SEC. 5503. DECREASING THE RISK FACTORS FOR SUDDEN UNEXPECTED INFANT 
 DEATH AND SUDDEN UNEXPLAINED DEATH IN CHILDHOOD.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration and in consultation with the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the National 
Institutes of Health (in this section referred to as the 
``Secretary''), shall establish and implement a culturally and 
linguistically competent public health awareness and education campaign 
to provide information that is focused on decreasing the risk factors 
for sudden unexpected infant death and sudden unexplained death in 
childhood, including educating individuals about safe sleep 
environments, sleep positions, and reducing exposure to smoking during 
pregnancy and after birth.
 (b) Targeted Populations.--The campaign under subsection (a) shall 
be designed to reduce health inequalities through the targeting of 
populations with high rates of sudden unexpected infant death or of 
sudden unexplained death in childhood.
 (c) Consultation.--In establishing and implementing the campaign 
under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with national 
organizations representing (collectively) health care providers, 
including nurses and physicians, parents, child care providers, 
children's advocacy and safety organizations, maternal and child health 
programs, nutrition professionals focusing on (collectively) people, 
infants, and children, and other individuals and groups determined 
necessary by the Secretary for such establishment and implementation.
 (d) Grants.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out the campaign under 
 subsection (a), the Secretary shall award grants to national 
 organizations, State and local health departments, and 
 community-based organizations for the conduct of education and 
 outreach programs for nurses, parents, child care providers, 
 community health workers, public health agencies, and community 
 organizations.
 (2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 paragraph (1), an entity shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

 Subtitle G--Elder Care

SEC. 5601. EXPENSES FOR HOUSEHOLD AND ELDER CARE SERVICES NECESSARY FOR 
 GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after 
section 25E the following new section:

``SEC. 25F. EXPENSES FOR HOUSEHOLD AND ELDER CARE SERVICES NECESSARY 
 FOR GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual for which 
 there are one or more qualifying individuals (as defined in 
 subsection (b)(1)) with respect to such individual, there shall 
 be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter 
 for the taxable year an amount equal to the applicable 
 percentage of the employment-related expenses (as defined in 
 subsection (b)(3)) paid by such individual during the taxable 
 year.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage defined.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term `applicable percentage' means 35 
 percent reduced (but not below 20 percent) by 1 percentage 
 point for each $2,000 (or fraction thereof) by which the 
 taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds 
 $15,000.
 ``(b) Definitions of Qualifying Individual and Employment-Related 
Expenses.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualifying individual.--The term `qualifying 
 individual' means an individual who--
 ``(A) has attained age 50, and
 ``(B) satisfies the requirements of any of the 
 following clauses:
 ``(i) An individual who bears a 
 relationship to the taxpayer described in 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 152(d)(2) 
 (relating to fathers, mothers, and ancestors).
 ``(ii) An individual who would be a 
 dependent of the taxpayer (as defined in 
 section 152, determined without regard to 
 subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2)) as a qualifying 
 relative described in section 152(d)(1) if--
 ``(I) in lieu of the requirements 
 under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of such 
 section, with respect to such 
 individual--
 ``(aa) the taxpayer has 
 provided over one-half of the 
 individual's support for the 
 calendar year in which such 
 taxable year begins and each of 
 the preceding 4 taxable years, 
 and
 ``(bb) the individual's 
 modified adjusted gross income 
 for the calendar year in which 
 such taxable year begins is 
 less than the exemption amount 
 (as defined in section 151(d)),
 ``(II) the individual is physically 
 or mentally incapable of caring for 
 himself or herself, and
 ``(III) the individual has the same 
 principal place of abode as the 
 taxpayer for more than one-half of such 
 taxable year.
 ``(iii) The spouse of the taxpayer, if such 
 spouse is physically or mentally incapable of 
 caring for himself or herself.
 ``(2) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified 
 adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income determined 
 without regard to section 86.
 ``(3) Employment-related expenses.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `employment-related 
 expenses' means amounts paid for the following 
 expenses, but only if such expenses are incurred to 
 enable the taxpayer to be gainfully employed for any 
 period for which there are one or more qualifying 
 individuals with respect to the taxpayer:
 ``(i) Expenses for household services with 
 respect to the qualifying individual.
 ``(ii) Expenses for the care of a 
 qualifying individual, including expenses for 
 respite care and hospice care.
 ``(B) Exception.--The term `employment-related 
 expenses' shall not include services provided outside 
 the taxpayer's household unless such expenses are 
 incurred for the care of--
 ``(i) a qualifying individual described in 
 paragraph (1)(A), or
 ``(ii) a qualifying individual (not 
 described in paragraph (1)(A)) who regularly 
 spends at least 8 hours each day in the 
 taxpayer's household.
 ``(C) Dependent care centers.--The term 
 `employment-related expenses' shall not include 
 services provided outside the taxpayer's household by a 
 dependent care center (as defined in subparagraph (D)) 
 unless--
 ``(i) such center complies with all 
 applicable laws and regulations of the State 
 and local government in which such center is 
 located, and
 ``(ii) the requirements of subparagraph (B) 
 are met.
 ``(D) Dependent care center defined.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the term `dependent care center' 
 means any facility which--
 ``(i) provides care for more than 6 
 individuals (other than individuals who reside 
 at the facility), and
 ``(ii) receives a fee, payment, or grant 
 for providing services for any of the 
 individuals (regardless of whether such 
 facility is operated for profit).
 ``(c) Dollar Limit on Amount Creditable.--The amount of the 
employment-related expenses incurred during any taxable year which may 
be taken into account under subsection (a) shall not exceed--
 ``(1) if there is 1 qualifying individual with respect to 
 the taxpayer for such taxable year, $3,000, or
 ``(2) if there are 2 or more qualifying individuals with 
 respect to the taxpayer for such taxable year, $6,000.
The amount determined under this subsection shall be reduced by the 
aggregate amount excludable from gross income under section 129 for the 
taxable year.
 ``(d) Earned Income Limitation.--The amount of the employment-
related expenses incurred during any taxable year which may be taken 
into account under subsection (a) shall not exceed--
 ``(1) in the case of an individual who is not married at 
 the close of such year, such individual's earned income for 
 such year, or
 ``(2) in the case of an individual who is married at the 
 close of such year, the lesser of such individual's earned 
 income or the earned income of his spouse for such year.
 ``(e) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Place of abode.--An individual shall not be treated 
 as having the same principal place of abode of the taxpayer if 
 at any time during the taxable year of the taxpayer the 
 relationship between the individual and the taxpayer is in 
 violation of local law.
 ``(2) Married couples must file joint return.--In the case 
 of an individual who is married as of the close of the taxable 
 year, the credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) only if 
 a joint return is filed for the taxable year under section 
 6013.
 ``(3) Marital status.--An individual legally separated from 
 his or her spouse under a decree of divorce or of separate 
 maintenance shall not be considered as married.
 ``(4) Certain married individuals living apart.--In the 
 case of an individual who is married and does not file a joint 
 return for the taxable year, if--
 ``(A) such individual--
 ``(i) maintains as his or her home a 
 household which constitutes for more than one-
 half of the taxable year the principal place of 
 abode of a qualifying individual, and
 ``(ii) furnishes over half of the cost of 
 maintaining such household during the taxable 
 year, and
 ``(B) during the last 6 months of such taxable 
 year, such individual's spouse is not a member of such 
 household,
 such individual shall not be considered as married.
 ``(5) Payments to related individuals.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under subsection (a) for any amount paid by the 
 taxpayer to an individual--
 ``(A) with respect to whom, for the taxable year, a 
 deduction under section 151(c) (relating to deduction 
 for personal exemptions for dependents) is allowable 
 either to the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse, or
 ``(B) who--
 ``(i) is a child of the taxpayer (within 
 the meaning of section 152(f)(1)), and
 ``(ii) has not attained the age of 19 at 
 the close of the taxable year.
 For purposes of this paragraph, the term `taxable year' means 
 the taxable year of the taxpayer in which the service (as 
 described in clause (i) of subsection (b)(3)(A)) is performed 
 or the care (as described in clause (ii) of such subsection) is 
 provided.
 ``(6) Identifying information required with respect to 
 service provider.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection 
 (a) for any amount paid to any person unless--
 ``(A) the name, address, and taxpayer 
 identification number of such person are included on 
 the return of tax for the taxable year in which the 
 credit under this section is being claimed, or
 ``(B) if such person is an organization described 
 in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 
 501(a), the name and address of such person are 
 included on the return of tax for the taxable year in 
 which the credit under this section is being claimed.
 In the case of a failure to provide the information required 
 under the preceding sentence, the preceding sentence shall not 
 apply if it is shown that the taxpayer exercised due diligence 
 in attempting to provide the information so required.
 ``(7) Identifying information required with respect to 
 qualifying individuals.--No credit shall be allowed under this 
 section with respect to any qualifying individual unless the 
 TIN of such individual is included on the return of tax for the 
 taxable year in which the credit under this section is being 
 claimed.
 ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25E the 
following new item:

``Sec. 25F. Expenses for household and elder care services necessary 
 for gainful employment.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 Subtitle H--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 5701. CLARIFICATION SUPPORTING PERMISSIBLE USE OF FUNDS FOR 
 STILLBIRTH PREVENTION ACTIVITIES.

 Section 501(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701(a)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by inserting ``to reduce the 
 incidence of stillbirth,'' after ``among children,''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by inserting after ``follow-up 
 services'' the following: ``, and for evidence-based programs 
 and activities and outcome research to reduce the incidence of 
 stillbirth (including tracking and awareness of fetal 
 movements, improvement of birth timing for pregnancies with 
 risk factors, initiatives that encourage safe sleeping 
 positions during pregnancy, screening and surveillance for 
 fetal growth restriction, efforts to achieve smoking cessation 
 during pregnancy, community-based programs that provide home 
 visits or other types of support, and any other research or 
 evidence-based programming to prevent stillbirths)''.

 TITLE VI--MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS

SEC. 6001. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of the Congress that it is imperative that a 
comprehensive public health approach to addressing trauma and mental 
health care be focused on care delivery that is culturally and 
linguistically appropriate.

 Subtitle A--Access to Care and Funding Streams

SEC. 6101. COVERAGE OF SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER COUNSELOR SERVICES AND 
 PEER SUPPORT SPECIALIST SERVICES UNDER PART B OF THE 
 MEDICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) Coverage of Services.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)), as amended by section 4251(c)(1), 
 is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (JJ), by striking ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (B) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (KK); and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(LL) substance use disorder counselor services (as 
 defined in subsection (qqq)(1)), and peer support specialist 
 services (as defined in subsection (qqq)(3));''.
 (2) Definitions.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by sections 2007(b), 4221(a), and 
 4251(c)(2), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:

 ``Substance Use Disorder Counselor Services; Substance Use Disorder 
 Counselor; Peer Support Specialist Services; Peer Support Specialist

 ``(qqq)(1) The term `substance use disorder counselor services' 
means services performed by a substance use disorder counselor (as 
defined in paragraph (2)) for the diagnosis and treatment of substance 
use disorder and addiction that the substance use disorder counselor is 
legally authorized to perform under State law (or the State regulatory 
mechanism provided by the State law) of the State in which such 
services are performed, as would otherwise be covered if furnished by a 
physician or as incident to a physician's professional service, but 
only if no facility or other provider charges or is paid any amounts 
with respect to the furnishing of such services.
 ``(2) The term `substance use disorder counselor' means an 
individual who--
 ``(A) has performed at least 2 years of supervised 
 substance use disorder counselor practice;
 ``(B) in the case of an individual performing services in a 
 State that provides for licensure or certification of substance 
 use disorder counselors or professional counselors, is licensed 
 or certified as a substance use disorder counselor or 
 professional counselor in such State; or
 ``(C) is a drug and alcohol counselor as defined in section 
 40.281 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.
 ``(3) The term `peer support specialist services' means services 
performed by a peer support specialist (as defined in paragraph (4)) 
for the well-being of individuals needing mental health support that 
the peer support specialist is legally authorized to perform under 
State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by the State law) 
of the State in which such services are performed, as would otherwise 
be covered if furnished by a physician or as incident to a physician's 
professional service, but only if no facility or other provider charges 
or is paid any amounts with respect to the furnishing of such services.
 ``(4) The term `peer support specialist' means an individual who--
 ``(A) is an individual living in recovery with mental 
 illness, addiction, or justice system involvement;
 ``(B) has skills learned in formal training;
 ``(C) uses assets-based framing in speaking about mental 
 health, recovery, and well-being; and
 ``(D) delivers services in behavioral health settings to 
 promote mind-body recovery and resiliency.''.
 (3) Provision for payment under part b.--Section 
 1832(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395k(a)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new clause:
 ``(v) substance use disorder counselor 
 services and peer support specialist 
 services;''.
 (4) Amount of payment.--Section 1833(a)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)), as amended by section 
 4251(c)(3), is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' before ``(II)''; and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
 the following: ``, and (JJ) with respect to substance 
 use disorder counselor services and peer support 
 specialist services under section 1861(s)(2)(LL), the 
 amounts paid shall be 80 percent of the lesser of the 
 actual charge for the services or 75 percent of the 
 amount determined for payment of a psychologist under 
 subparagraph (L)''.
 (5) Exclusion of peer support specialist services from 
 skilled nursing facility prospective payment system.--Section 
 1888(e)(2)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395yy(e)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``peer support 
 specialist services (as defined in section 1861(qqq)(3)),'' 
 after ``mental health counselor services (as defined in section 
 1861(lll)(3))''.
 (6) Inclusion of substance use disorder counselors as 
 practitioners for assignment of claims.--Section 1842(b)(18)(C) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(18)(C)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(ix) A substance use disorder counselor (as defined in 
 section 1861(qqq)(2)).
 ``(x) A peer support specialist (as defined in section 
 1861(qqq)(4)).''.
 (b) Coverage of Certain Mental Health Services Provided in Rural 
Health Clinics and Federally Qualified Health Centers.--Section 
1861(aa)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(1)(B)) 
is amended by striking ``or by a mental health counselor (as defined in 
subsection (lll)(4))'' and inserting ``by a mental health counselor (as 
defined in subsection (lll)(4)), by a substance use disorder counselor 
(as defined in subsection (qqq)(2)), or by a peer support specialist 
(as defined in subsection (qqq)(4))''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to services furnished on or after January 1, 2025.

SEC. 6102. REAUTHORIZATION OF MINORITY FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.

 Section 597(c) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
290ll(c)) is amended by striking ``$25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
2023 through 2027'' and inserting ``$36,700,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029''.

SEC. 6103. ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be 
appropriated to the National Institutes of Health, there is authorized 
to be appropriated to such Institutes $150,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2030--
 (1) to build relations with communities and conduct or 
 support clinical research, including clinical research on 
 racial or ethnic disparities in physical and mental health; and
 (2) to carry out the Strategic Framework For Addressing 
 Youth Mental Health Disparities developed by the National 
 Institute of Mental Health.
 (b) Definition.--In this section, the term ``clinical research'' 
has the meaning given to such term in section 409 of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284d).

SEC. 6104. ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORITY HEALTH 
 AND HEALTH DISPARITIES.

 In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated to 
the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, there 
is authorized to be appropriated to such Institute $750,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2025 through 2030.

SEC. 6105. GRANTS FOR INCREASING RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITY ACCESS TO 
 HIGH-QUALITY TRAUMA SUPPORT SERVICES AND MENTAL HEALTH 
 CARE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the 
Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, shall award 
grants to eligible entities to establish or expand programs for the 
purpose of increasing racial and ethnic minority access to high-quality 
trauma support services and mental health care.
 (b) Eligible Entities.--To seek a grant under this section, an 
entity shall be a community-based program or organization that--
 (1) provides culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 programs and resources that are aligned with evidence-based 
 practices for trauma-informed care; and
 (2) has demonstrated expertise in serving communities of 
 color or can partner with a program that has such demonstrated 
 expertise.
 (c) Use of Funds.--As a condition on receipt of a grant under this 
section, a grantee shall agree to use the grant to increase racial and 
ethnic minority access to high-quality trauma support services and 
mental health care, such as by--
 (1) establishing and maintaining community-based programs 
 providing evidence-based services in trauma-informed care and 
 culturally specific services and other resources;
 (2) developing innovative, culturally specific strategies 
 and projects to enhance access to trauma-informed care and 
 resources for racial and ethnic minorities who face obstacles 
 to using more traditional services and resources (such as 
 obstacles in geographic access to providers, insurance 
 coverage, and access to audio and video technologies);
 (3) working with State and local governments and social 
 service agencies to develop and enhance effective strategies to 
 provide culturally specific services to racial and ethnic 
 minorities;
 (4) increasing communities' capacity to provide culturally 
 specific resources and support for communities of color;
 (5) working in cooperation with the community to develop 
 education and prevention strategies highlighting culturally 
 specific issues and resources regarding racial and ethnic 
 minorities;
 (6) providing culturally specific programs for racial and 
 ethnic minorities exposed to law enforcement violence; and
 (7) examining the dynamics of culture and its impact on 
 victimization and healing.
 (d) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary 
shall give priority to eligible entities proposing to serve communities 
that have faced high rates of community trauma, including from exposure 
to law enforcement violence, intergenerational poverty, civil unrest, 
discrimination, or oppression.
 (e) Grant Period.--The period of a grant under this section shall 
be 4 years.
 (f) Evaluation.--Not later than 6 months after the end of the 
period of all grants under this section, the Secretary shall--
 (1) conduct an evaluation of the programs funded by a grant 
 under this section;
 (2) include in such evaluation an assessment of the 
 outcomes of each such program; and
 (3) submit a report on the results of such evaluation to 
 the Congress.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.

 Subtitle B--Interprofessional Care

SEC. 6201. HEALTH PROFESSIONS COMPETENCIES TO ADDRESS RACIAL AND ETHNIC 
 MENTAL HEALTH INEQUITIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, 
shall award grants to qualified national organizations for the purposes 
of--
 (1) developing, and disseminating to health professional 
 educational programs, culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 curricula or core competencies addressing mental health 
 inequities among racial and ethnic minority groups for use in 
 the training of students in the professions of social work, 
 psychology, psychiatry, marriage and family therapy, mental 
 health counseling, peer support, and substance use disorder 
 counseling; and
 (2) certifying community health workers and peer wellness 
 specialists with respect to such curricula and core 
 competencies and integrating and expanding the use of such 
 workers and specialists into health care and community-based 
 settings to address mental health inequities among racial and 
 ethnic minority groups.
 (b) Curricula; Core Competencies.--Organizations receiving funds 
under subsection (a) may use the funds to engage in the following 
activities related to the development and dissemination of curricula or 
core competencies described in subsection (a)(1):
 (1) Formation of committees or working groups composed of 
 experts from accredited health professions schools to identify 
 core competencies relating to mental health inequities among 
 racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (2) Planning of workshops in collaboration with community-
 based organizations and communities of color in national fora 
 to directly facilitate public input, including input from 
 communities of color with lived experience, into the 
 educational needs associated with mental health inequities 
 among racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (3) Dissemination and promotion of the use of curricula or 
 core competencies in undergraduate and graduate health 
 professions training programs nationwide.
 (4) Establishing external stakeholder advisory boards to 
 provide meaningful input into policy and program development 
 and best practices to reduce mental health inequities among 
 racial and ethnic groups, including participation and 
 leadership from communities of color with lived experience of 
 the impacts of mental health inequities.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Qualified national organization.--The term ``qualified 
 national organization'' means a national organization that 
 focuses on the education of students in programs of social 
 work, occupational therapy, psychology, psychiatry, substance 
 use counseling, and marriage and family therapy.
 (2) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given to such term 
 in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)).
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 6202. INTERPROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE TEAMS FOR BEHAVIORAL HEALTH 
 CARE.

 Part D of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 553. INTERPROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE TEAMS FOR PROVISION OF 
 BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE IN PRIMARY CARE SETTINGS.

 ``(a) Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Assistant 
Secretary, shall award grants to eligible entities for the purpose of 
establishing interprofessional health care teams that provide 
behavioral health care.
 ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be a Federally qualified health center 
(as defined in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act), rural 
health clinic, women's health clinic, or behavioral health program 
(including any such program operated by a community-based organization) 
serving a high proportion of individuals from racial and ethnic 
minority groups (as defined in section 1707(g)).
 ``(c) Loan Forgiveness.--To encourage qualified and diverse allied 
health professionals to enter the mental health field, an eligible 
entity receiving a grant under this section shall agree to use not less 
than $10,000 of the grant funds on a loan forgiveness program for 
practitioners who commit to working in the mental health field for a 
period of 2 years.
 ``(d) Scientifically and Culturally Based.--Integrated health care 
funded through this section shall be scientifically and culturally 
based, taking into consideration the results of the most recent peer-
reviewed research available, including information on language 
accessibility, cultural humility, diversity of practitioners, and 
consideration of social determinants of health.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 6203. INTEGRATED HEALTH CARE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.

 Part D of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd 
et seq.), as amended by section 6202, is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 554. INTERPROFESSIONAL HEALTH CARE TEAMS FOR PROVISION OF 
 BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE IN PRIMARY CARE SETTINGS.

 ``(a) Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities for the purpose of establishing interprofessional health care 
teams that provide behavioral health care.
 ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be a Federally qualified health center 
(as defined in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act), rural 
health clinic, or behavioral health program, serving a high proportion 
of individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups (as defined in 
section 1707(g)).
 ``(c) Scientifically Based.--Integrated health care funded through 
this section shall be scientifically based, taking into consideration 
the results of the most recent peer-reviewed research available.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of the 
first 5 fiscal years following the date of enactment of the Health 
Equity and Accountability Act 2024.''.

 Subtitle C--Workforce Development

SEC. 6301. BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE WORKFORCE IN MENTAL HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in 
coordination with the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and 
Substance Use, the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, the Secretary of Labor, and advocacy and behavioral and 
mental health organizations serving vulnerable populations, including 
youth and young adults, people with low incomes, and people of color, 
shall--
 (1) develop, strengthen, and implement strategies to 
 bolster career pathways for diverse mental health 
 professionals;
 (2) identify the breadth of settings where mental health 
 care and behavioral health care can take place; and
 (3) identify current mental health professional workforce 
 shortages, inclusive of shortages of diverse mental health 
 professionals.
 (b) Contents.--Strategies under subsection (a) shall include--
 (1) the variety of settings where mental health 
 professionals are needed, including community-based 
 organizations, women's centers, shelters, organizations focused 
 on youth development, workforce agencies, job placement and 
 development centers, emergency rooms, the special supplemental 
 nutrition program for women, infants, and children under 
 section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), 
 food banks, legal aid, and benefit issuers (as defined in 
 section 3 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 
 2012));
 (2) defining career pathways in mental and behavioral 
 health, to help diverse communities understand the variety of 
 careers in mental and behavioral health that are available;
 (3) building career pathways in mental and behavioral 
 health as part of the curriculum at the postsecondary education 
 level;
 (4) providing accessible training and certification 
 pathways for diverse lay health workers such as community 
 health workers and other peer support specialists to ensure 
 that careers pay a living wage;
 (5) creating incentives for students in the fields of 
 occupational therapy, social work, psychology, medicine, and 
 nursing to learn more about mental health, and to include a 
 mental health rotation, with a particular focus in racially and 
 ethnically diverse communities, as a part of the health 
 professional curricula;
 (6) including training and education for teachers about the 
 basics of section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
 U.S.C. 794) and individualized education programs (as defined 
 in section 614(d) of the Individuals with Disabilities 
 Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1414(d)));
 (7) researching, developing, and implementing programs for 
 mental and behavioral health professionals to prevent burnout; 
 and
 (8) finding better and increased avenues to ensure equity 
 by providing better loan forgiveness programs, including a 
 focus area within the National Health Service Corps focused on 
 community trauma.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Programs and activities funded under this 
section shall be consistent with subsection (a)(1) and shall include 
the following:
 (1) Subgrants to entities serving youth and young adults 
 which demonstrate a need for an increased mental health 
 workforce, using strategies described in subsection (a)(1).
 (2) Funding towards the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration's Behavioral Health Workforce Education and 
 Training Program.
 (3) Funding towards the development and implementation of a 
 National Health Service Corps program focused on community 
 trauma.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2035.

SEC. 6302. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM TO INCREASE LANGUAGE ACCESS AT 
 ELIGIBLE HEALTH CENTERS.

 (a) Grants.--The Secretary shall carry out a demonstration program 
consisting of awarding grants to eligible health centers to recruit, 
hire, employ, and supervise qualified behavioral health professionals 
who--
 (1) are proficient in speaking and understanding both 
 spoken English and at least one other spoken language, 
 including any necessary specialized vocabulary, terminology, 
 and phraseology;
 (2) are able to effectively, accurately, and impartially 
 communicate directly with limited English proficient 
 individuals in their primary language; and
 (3) are, or will be, employed--
 (A) directly by the eligible health center; or
 (B) through a contract between the eligible health 
 center and the qualified behavioral health professional 
 under which such professional provides services as part 
 of the eligible health center's workforce or under 
 supervision by the health center, in order to provide 
 behavioral health services in another language.
 (b) Preference.--In selecting grant recipients under subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall give preference to eligible health centers at 
which at least 10 percent of the patients are best served in a language 
other than English, as indicated by data in the Uniform Data System of 
the Health Resources and Services Administration (or any successor 
database).
 (c) Outreach.--An eligible health center receiving a grant under 
this section shall use a portion of the grant funds to disseminate 
information about the behavioral health services supported through the 
grant.
 (d) Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than 6 months after the 
 first grants are awarded under subsection (a), the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committee on Appropriations and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives, the Committee on Appropriations and the 
 Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
 Senate, and other appropriate congressional committees, a 
 report on the implementation of the program under this section. 
 Such report shall include--
 (A) the languages spoken by the qualified 
 behavioral health professionals recruited pursuant to a 
 grant under subsection (a);
 (B) the eligible health center at which each such 
 professional was placed;
 (C) how many eligible health centers received 
 grants under subsection (a);
 (D) an analysis, conducted in consultation with the 
 eligible health centers receiving grants under 
 subsection (a), of the effectiveness of such grants at 
 increasing language access to behavioral health 
 services; and
 (E) best practices, developed in consultation with 
 eligible health centers receiving grants under 
 subsection (a), for the recruitment and retention of 
 qualified behavioral health professionals at such 
 health centers.
 (2) Final report.--Not later than the end of fiscal year 
 2026, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
 Appropriations and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
 House of Representatives, the Committee on Appropriations and 
 the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
 Senate, and other appropriate congressional committees, a final 
 report on the implementation of the program under this section, 
 including the information, analysis, and best practices 
 described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) of paragraph (1).
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``eligible health center'' means a health 
 center (as defined in section 330 of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 254b)) that is already receiving assistance 
 pursuant to one or more grants under such section 330 at the 
 time of the award to such health center of a supplemental grant 
 under subsection (a).
 (2) The term ``qualified behavioral health professional'' 
 means--
 (A) a behavioral and mental health professional (as 
 defined in section 331(a)(3)(E)(i) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254d(a)(3)(E)(i)));
 (B) a substance use disorder counselor;
 (C) an occupational therapist; or
 (D) an individual who--
 (i) has not yet been licensed or certified 
 to serve as a professional listed in any of 
 subparagraphs (A) through (C); and
 (ii) will serve at the eligible health 
 center under the supervision of a licensed 
 individual or certified professional so listed.
 (3) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services.
 (f) Funding.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, out of 
amounts otherwise appropriated under section 760(g) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 294k(g)), the Secretary is authorized to 
use up to $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2030 to 
carry out this section.

SEC. 6303. HEALTH PROFESSIONS COMPETENCIES TO ADDRESS RACIAL AND ETHNIC 
 MINORITY MENTAL HEALTH DISPARITIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
award grants to qualified national organizations for the purposes of--
 (1) developing, and disseminating to health professional 
 educational programs, best practices or core competencies 
 addressing mental health disparities among racial and ethnic 
 minority groups for use in the training of students in the 
 professions of social work, psychology, psychiatry, marriage 
 and family therapy, mental health counseling, and substance use 
 disorder counseling; and
 (2) certifying community health workers and peer wellness 
 specialists with respect to such best practices and core 
 competencies and integrating and expanding the use of such 
 workers and specialists into health care to address mental 
 health disparities among racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (b) Best Practices; Core Competencies.--Organizations receiving 
funds under subsection (a) may use the funds to engage in the following 
activities related to the development and dissemination of best 
practices or core competencies described in subsection (a)(1):
 (1) Formation of committees or working groups composed of 
 experts from accredited health professions schools to identify 
 best practices and core competencies relating to mental health 
 disparities among racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (2) Planning of workshops at the national level to allow 
 for public input into the educational needs associated with 
 mental health disparities among racial and ethnic minority 
 groups.
 (3) Dissemination and promotion of the use of best 
 practices or core competencies for culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate mental health services in 
 undergraduate and graduate health professions training programs 
 nationwide.
 (4) Establishing external stakeholder advisory boards to 
 provide meaningful input into policy and program development 
 and best practices to reduce mental health disparities among 
 racial and ethnic minority groups.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Qualified national organization.--The term ``qualified 
 national organization'' means a national organization that 
 focuses on the education of students in one or more of the 
 professions of social work, psychology, psychiatry, marriage 
 and family therapy, mental health counseling, and substance 
 misuse counseling.
 (2) Racial and ethnic minority group.--The term ``racial 
 and ethnic minority group'' has the meaning given to such term 
 in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g)).

 Subtitle D--Children's Mental Health

SEC. 6401. GRANT PROGRAMS TO SUPPORT PEDIATRIC BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE.

 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b et seq.) is amended by inserting after subpart V the following new 
subpart:

 ``Subpart VI--Pediatric Behavioral Health Programs

``SEC. 340A-1. PROGRAM TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO COMMUNITY-BASED PEDIATRIC 
 BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award 
grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to eligible entities for 
the purpose of supporting pediatric behavioral health care integration 
and coordination within communities to meet local community needs.
 ``(b) Eligible Entities.--Entities eligible for grants under 
subsection (a) include--
 ``(1) health care providers, including family physicians, 
 pediatric medical sub-specialists, and surgical specialists;
 ``(2) children's hospitals;
 ``(3) facilities that are eligible to receive funds under 
 section 340E or 340H;
 ``(4) nonprofit medical facilities that predominantly treat 
 individuals under the age of 21;
 ``(5) rural health clinics and Federally qualified health 
 centers (as such terms are defined in section 1861(aa) of the 
 Social Security Act);
 ``(6) pediatric mental health and substance use disorder 
 providers, such as child and adolescent psychiatrists, 
 psychologists, developmental and behavioral pediatricians, 
 general pediatricians, advanced practice nurses, social 
 workers, licensed professional counselors, and other licensed 
 professionals that provide mental health and substance use 
 disorder services to patients under 21 years of age;
 ``(7) children's advocacy centers described in section 
 214(c)(2)(B) of the Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990;
 ``(8) school-based health centers; and
 ``(9) other entities as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(c) Prioritization.--In making awards under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall prioritize--
 ``(1) applicants that provide children and adolescents from 
 high-need, rural, or under-resourced communities with services 
 across the continuum of children's mental health and substance 
 use disorder care; and
 ``(2) applicants that predominantly provide care to 
 children and adolescents that demonstrate plans to utilize 
 funds to expand provision of care to children, adolescents, and 
 youth under age 21.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--Activities that may be funded through an award 
under subsection (a) include--
 ``(1) increasing the capacity of pediatric practices, 
 family medicine practices, and school-based health centers to 
 integrate pediatric mental, emotional, and behavioral health 
 services into their practices including through co-location of 
 mental, emotional, and behavioral health providers;
 ``(2) training for non-clinical pediatric health care 
 workers, including care coordinators and navigators, on child 
 and adolescent mental health and substance use disorder, 
 trauma-informed care, and local resources to support children 
 and caregivers;
 ``(3) expanding evidence-based, integrated models of care 
 for pediatric mental health and substance use disorder 
 services;
 ``(4) pediatric practice integration for the provision of 
 pediatric mental health and substance use disorder services;
 ``(5) addressing surge capacity for pediatric mental health 
 and substance use disorder needs;
 ``(6) providing pediatric mental, emotional, and behavioral 
 health services to children as delivered by mental health and 
 substance use disorder professionals utilizing telehealth 
 services;
 ``(7) establishing or maintaining initiatives to allow more 
 children to access care outside of emergency departments, 
 including partial hospitalization, step down residency 
 programs, and intensive outpatient programs;
 ``(8) supporting, enhancing, or expanding pediatric mental 
 health and substance use disorder preventive and crisis 
 intervention services;
 ``(9) establishing or maintaining pediatric mental health 
 and substance use disorder urgent care or walk-in clinics;
 ``(10) establishing or maintaining community-based 
 pediatric mental health and substance use disorder initiatives, 
 such as partnerships with schools and early childhood education 
 programs;
 ``(11) addressing other access and coordination gaps to 
 pediatric mental health and substance use disorder services in 
 the community for children; and
 ``(12) supporting the collection of data on children and 
 adolescents' mental health needs, service utilization and 
 availability, and demographic data, to capture community needs 
 and identify gaps and barriers in children's access to care, in 
 a manner that protects personal privacy, consistent with 
 applicable Federal and State privacy laws.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 340A-2. PEDIATRIC BEHAVIORAL HEALTH WORKFORCE TRAINING PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award 
grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to eligible entities for 
the purpose of supporting evidence-based pediatric mental health and 
substance use disorder workforce training.
 ``(b) Eligible Entities.--Entities eligible for grants under 
subsection (a) include--
 ``(1) children's hospitals;
 ``(2) facilities that are eligible to receive funds under 
 section 340E or 340H;
 ``(3) nonprofit medical facilities that predominantly treat 
 individuals under the age of 21;
 ``(4) rural health clinics and Federally qualified health 
 centers (as such terms are defined in section 1861(aa) of the 
 Social Security Act);
 ``(5) entities that employ mental health and substance use 
 disorder professionals, such as child and adolescent 
 psychiatrists, psychologists, developmental and behavioral 
 pediatricians, general pediatricians, advanced practice nurses, 
 social workers, licensed professional counselors, or other 
 licensed professionals that provide mental health or substance 
 use disorder services to patients under 21 years of age; and
 ``(6) other pediatric health care providers as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Activities that may be supported through an 
award under subsection (a) include the following:
 ``(1) Training to enhance the capabilities of the existing 
 pediatric workforce, including pediatricians, primary care 
 physicians, advanced practice registered nurses, and other 
 pediatric health care providers, including expanded training in 
 pediatric mental health and substance use disorders, and 
 culturally and developmentally appropriate care for children 
 with mental health conditions.
 ``(2) Training to support multi-disciplinary teams to 
 provide pediatric mental health and substance use disorder 
 treatment, including through integrated care models.
 ``(3) Initiatives to accelerate the time to licensure 
 within the pediatric mental health or substance use disorder 
 workforce.
 ``(4) Activities to expand recruitment and retention, 
 increase workforce diversity, or enhance workforce training for 
 critical pediatric mental health professions, including--
 ``(A) child and adolescent psychiatrists;
 ``(B) psychiatric nurses;
 ``(C) psychologists;
 ``(D) family therapists;
 ``(E) social workers;
 ``(F) mental health counselors;
 ``(G) developmental and behavioral pediatricians;
 ``(H) pediatric substance use disorder specialists; 
 and
 ``(I) other mental health care providers as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.

SEC. 6402. INCREASING FEDERAL INVESTMENT IN PEDIATRIC BEHAVIORAL HEALTH 
 SERVICES.

 The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) (as amended 
by section 2004) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``TITLE XXXV--ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND MODERNIZATION OF 
 CHILDREN'S MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER INFRASTRUCTURE

``SEC. 3501. INCREASING FEDERAL INVESTMENT IN PEDIATRIC BEHAVIORAL 
 HEALTH SERVICES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award 
grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to eligible entities for 
the purpose of improving their ability to provide pediatric behavioral 
health services, including by--
 ``(1) constructing or modernizing sites of care for 
 pediatric behavioral health services;
 ``(2) expanding capacity to provide pediatric behavioral 
 health services, including enhancements to digital 
 infrastructure, telehealth capabilities, or other improvements 
 to patient care infrastructure;
 ``(3) supporting the reallocation of existing resources to 
 accommodate pediatric behavioral health patients, including by 
 converting or adding a sufficient number of beds to establish 
 or increase the hospital's inventory of licensed and 
 operational, short-term psychiatric and substance use inpatient 
 beds; and
 ``(4) addressing gaps in the continuum of care for 
 children, by expanding capacity to provide intermediate levels 
 of care, such as intensive outpatient services, partial 
 hospitalization programs, and day programs that can prevent 
 hospitalizations and support children as they transition back 
 to their homes and communities.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to seek an award under this 
section, an entity shall be a hospital or rural health clinic that 
predominantly treats individuals under the age of 21, including any 
hospital that receives funds under section 340E.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(d) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds provided under this section 
shall be used to supplement, not supplant Federal and non-Federal funds 
available for carrying out the activities described in this section.
 ``(e) Reporting.--
 ``(1) Reports from award recipients.--Not later than 180 
 days after the completion of activities funded by an award 
 under this section, the entity that received such award shall 
 submit a report to the Secretary on the activities conducted 
 using funds from such award, and other information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Reports to congress.--Not later than one year after 
 the completion of activities funded by an award under this 
 section, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy 
 and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
 on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a 
 report on the projects and activities conducted with funds 
 awarded under this section, and the outcome of such projects 
 and activities. Such report shall include--
 ``(A) the number of projects supported by awards 
 made under this section;
 ``(B) an overview of the impact, if any, of such 
 projects on pediatric health care infrastructure, 
 including any impact on access to pediatric mental 
 health and substance use disorder services;
 ``(C) recommendations for improving the investment 
 program under this section; and
 ``(D) any other considerations as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.''.

SEC. 6403. MENTAL HEALTH IN SCHOOLS.

 (a) Technical Amendments.--The second part G (relating to services 
provided through religious organizations) of title V of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290kk et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating such part as part J; and
 (2) by redesignating sections 581 through 584 as sections 
 596 through 596C, respectively.
 (b) School-Based Mental Health and Children.--Section 581 of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290hh) (relating to children and 
violence) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 581. SCHOOL-BASED MENTAL HEALTH; CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Education, shall, through grants, contracts, or 
cooperative agreements awarded to eligible entities described in 
subsection (c), provide comprehensive school-based mental health 
services and supports to assist children in local communities and 
schools (including schools funded by the Bureau of Indian Education) 
dealing with traumatic experiences, grief, bereavement, risk of 
suicide, and violence. Such services and supports shall be--
 ``(1) developmentally, linguistically, and culturally 
 appropriate;
 ``(2) trauma-informed; and
 ``(3) incorporate positive behavioral interventions and 
 supports.
 ``(b) Activities.--Grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements 
awarded under subsection (a), shall, as appropriate, be used for--
 ``(1) implementation of school- and community-based mental 
 health programs that--
 ``(A) build awareness of individual trauma and the 
 intergenerational, continuum of impacts of trauma on 
 populations;
 ``(B) train appropriate staff to identify, and 
 screen for, signs of trauma exposure, mental health 
 disorders, or risk of suicide; and
 ``(C) incorporate positive behavioral 
 interventions, family engagement, student treatment, 
 and multigenerational supports to foster the health and 
 development of children, prevent mental health 
 disorders, and ameliorate the impact of trauma;
 ``(2) technical assistance to local communities with 
 respect to the development of programs described in paragraph 
 (1);
 ``(3) facilitating community partnerships among families, 
 students, law enforcement agencies, education agencies, mental 
 health and substance use disorder service systems, family-based 
 mental health service systems, child welfare agencies, health 
 care providers (including primary care physicians, mental 
 health professionals, and other professionals who specialize in 
 children's mental health such as child and adolescent 
 psychiatrists), institutions of higher education, faith-based 
 programs, trauma networks, and other community-based systems to 
 address child and adolescent trauma, mental health issues, and 
 violence; and
 ``(4) establishing mechanisms for children and adolescents 
 to report incidents of violence or plans by other children, 
 adolescents, or adults to commit violence.
 ``(c) Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--To be eligible for a grant, contract, or 
 cooperative agreement under subsection (a), an entity shall be 
 a partnership that includes--
 ``(A) a State educational agency, as defined in 
 section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
 Act of 1965, in coordination with one or more local 
 educational agencies, as defined in section 8101 of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, or a 
 consortium of any entities described in subparagraph 
 (B), (C), (D), or (E) of section 8101(30) of such Act; 
 and
 ``(B) at least 1 community-based mental health 
 provider, including a public or private mental health 
 entity, health care entity, family-based mental health 
 entity, trauma network, or other community-based 
 entity, as determined by the Secretary (and which may 
 include additional entities such as a human services 
 agency, law enforcement or juvenile justice entity, 
 child welfare agency, agency, an institution of higher 
 education, or another entity, as determined by the 
 Secretary).
 ``(2) Compliance with hipaa.--Any patient records developed 
 by covered entities through activities under the grant shall 
 meet the regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
 ``(3) Compliance with ferpa.--Section 444 of the General 
 Education Provisions Act (commonly known as the `Family 
 Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974') shall apply to any 
 entity that is a member of the partnership in the same manner 
 that such section applies to an educational agency or 
 institution (as that term is defined in such section).
 ``(d) Geographical Distribution.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements under subsection (a) will 
be distributed equitably among the regions of the country and among 
urban and rural areas.
 ``(e) Duration of Awards.--With respect to a grant, contract, or 
cooperative agreement under subsection (a), the period during which 
payments under such an award will be made to the recipient shall be 5 
years, with options for renewal.
 ``(f) Evaluation and Measures of Outcomes.--
 ``(1) Development of process.--The Assistant Secretary 
 shall develop a fiscally appropriate process for evaluating 
 activities carried out under this section. Such process shall 
 include--
 ``(A) the development of guidelines for the 
 submission of program data by grant, contract, or 
 cooperative agreement recipients;
 ``(B) the development of measures of outcomes (in 
 accordance with paragraph (2)) to be applied by such 
 recipients in evaluating programs carried out under 
 this section; and
 ``(C) the submission of annual reports by such 
 recipients concerning the effectiveness of programs 
 carried out under this section.
 ``(2) Measures of outcomes.--The Assistant Secretary shall 
 develop measures of outcomes to be applied by recipients of 
 assistance under this section to evaluate the effectiveness of 
 programs carried out under this section, including outcomes 
 related to the student, family, and local educational systems 
 supported by this Act.
 ``(3) Submission of annual data.--An eligible entity 
 described in subsection (c) that receives a grant, contract, or 
 cooperative agreement under this section shall annually submit 
 to the Assistant Secretary a report that includes data to 
 evaluate the success of the program carried out by the entity 
 based on whether such program is achieving the purposes of the 
 program. Such reports shall utilize the measures of outcomes 
 under paragraph (2) in a reasonable manner to demonstrate the 
 progress of the program in achieving such purposes.
 ``(4) Evaluation by assistant secretary.--Based on the data 
 submitted under paragraph (3), the Assistant Secretary shall 
 annually submit to Congress a report concerning the results and 
 effectiveness of the programs carried out with assistance 
 received under this section.
 ``(5) Limitation.--An eligible entity shall use not more 
 than 20 percent of amounts received under a grant under this 
 section to carry out evaluation activities under this 
 subsection.
 ``(g) Information and Education.--The Secretary shall disseminate 
best practices based on the findings of the knowledge development and 
application under this section.
 ``(h) Amount of Grants and Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) Amount of grants.--A grant under this section shall 
 be in an amount that is not more than $2,000,000 for each of 
 the first 5 fiscal years following the date of enactment of the 
 Health Equity and Accountability Act 2024. The Secretary shall 
 determine the amount of each such grant based on the population 
 of children up to age 21 of the area to be served under the 
 grant.
 ``(2) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this section, $300,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Part G of title V of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290hh et seq.), as amended by subsection (b), is 
amended by striking the part designation and heading and inserting the 
following:

 ``PART G--SCHOOL-BASED MENTAL HEALTH''.

SEC. 6404. ADDITIONAL SUPPORT FOR YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULT MENTAL HEALTH 
 SERVICE PROVISION.

 Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(cc) Youth and Young Adult Intervention Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 1902(a)(1) 
 (relating to Statewideness), section 1902(a)(10)(B) (relating 
 to comparability), section 1902(a)(23)(A) (relating to freedom 
 of choice of providers), or section 1902(a)(27) (relating to 
 provider agreements), a State may, during the 5-year period 
 beginning on the first day of the fiscal year quarter that 
 begins on or after January 1, 2024, provide medical assistance 
 for qualifying youth and young adult mental health and 
 substance use intervention services (as defined in paragraph 
 (2)(C)) under a State plan amendment or waiver approved under 
 section 1115 or 1915(c).
 ``(2) Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection:
 ``(A) Priority service.--The term `priority 
 service' means any of the following if voluntarily 
 received and provided in a manner that maintains the 
 privacy and confidentiality of patient information 
 consistent with Federal and State requirements:
 ``(i) Community-based mobile crisis 
 intervention services, as defined in section 
 1947.
 ``(ii) Telehealth.
 ``(iii) Youth peer support.
 ``(iv) Screening for adverse childhood 
 experiences.
 ``(v) Trauma responsive care.
 ``(vi) Other priority services for youth, 
 as defined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Qualified mental health providers.--The term 
 `qualified mental health providers' means a behavioral 
 health care professional who is capable of conducting 
 an assessment of the individual, in accordance with the 
 professional's permitted scope of practice under State 
 law, and other professionals or paraprofessionals with 
 appropriate expertise in youth and young adult 
 behavioral health or mental health, including social 
 workers, peer support specialists, recovery coaches, 
 community health workers, mental health clinicians, and 
 others, as designated by the State and approved by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(C) Qualifying youth and young adult mental 
 health and substance use intervention services 
 defined.--The term `qualifying youth and young adult 
 mental health and substance use intervention services' 
 means, with respect to a State, items and services for 
 which medical assistance is available under the State 
 plan under this title or a waiver of such plan, that 
 are--
 ``(i) furnished to an individual 16 to 25 
 years of age who is--
 ``(I) experiencing a mental health 
 or substance use disorder crisis;
 ``(II) subject to the juvenile or 
 adult justice system as defined in 
 section 3102 of title 29, United States 
 Code;
 ``(III)(aa) experiencing 
 homelessness (as defined in section 
 41403(6) of the Violence Against Women 
 Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14043e-2(6)));
 ``(bb) a homeless child or youth 
 (as defined in section 725(2) of the 
 McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 11434a(2)));
 ``(cc) a runaway, in foster care, 
 or has aged out of the foster care 
 system;
 ``(dd) a child eligible for 
 assistance under section 477 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 677); or
 ``(ee) in an out-of-home placement;
 ``(IV) pregnant or parenting as 
 defined in section 3102 of title 29, 
 United States Code;
 ``(V) a youth who is an individual 
 with a disability as defined in section 
 3102 of title 29, United States Code;
 ``(VI) a low-income youth requiring 
 additional assistance to enter or 
 complete an educational program or to 
 secure or hold employment as defined in 
 section 3102 of title 29, United States 
 Code; or
 ``(VII) living in a community that 
 has faced acute or long-term exposure 
 to substantial discrimination, 
 historical oppression, 
 intergenerational poverty, civil 
 unrest, or a high rate of violence or 
 drug overdose deaths;
 ``(ii) furnished by qualified mental health 
 providers; and
 ``(iii) a priority service.
 ``(D) Telehealth.--The term `telehealth' means use 
 of electronic information and telecommunications 
 technologies, including voice only audio, text, remote 
 patient monitoring, and mHealth via applications, to 
 support clinical mental health care, patient and 
 professional health-related education, public health, 
 and health administration.
 ``(3) Payments.--Notwithstanding section 1905(b), beginning 
 January 1, 2024, during each of the first 20 fiscal quarters 
 that a State meets the requirements described in paragraph (4), 
 the Federal medical assistance percentage applicable to amounts 
 expended by the State for medical assistance for qualifying 
 youth and young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services furnished during such quarter shall be 
 equal to 100 percent.
 ``(4) Requirements.--The requirements described in this 
 paragraph are the following:
 ``(A) The State demonstrates, to the satisfaction 
 of the Secretary--
 ``(i) that it will be able to support the 
 provision of qualifying youth and young adult 
 mental health and substance use intervention 
 services that meet the conditions specified in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2); and
 ``(ii) how it will support coordination 
 between qualified mental health providers and 
 substance use teams and community partners, 
 including health care providers, to enable the 
 provision of services, needed referrals, and 
 other activities identified by the Secretary.
 ``(B) The State provides assurances satisfactory to 
 the Secretary that--
 ``(i) any additional Federal funds received 
 by the State for qualifying youth and young 
 adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services provided under this 
 subsection that are attributable to the 
 increased Federal medical assistance percentage 
 under paragraph (3)(A) will be used to 
 supplement, and not supplant, the level of 
 State funds expended for such services for 
 fiscal year 2024;
 ``(ii) if the State made qualifying youth 
 and young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services available in a region of 
 the State in fiscal year 2023 the State will 
 continue to make such services available in 
 such region under this subsection at the same 
 level that the State made such services 
 available in such fiscal year; and
 ``(iii) the State will conduct the 
 evaluation and assessment, and submit the 
 report required under paragraph (5).
 ``(5) State evaluation and report.--
 ``(A) State evaluation.--Not later than 4 fiscal 
 quarters after a State begins providing qualifying 
 youth and young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services in accordance with this 
 subsection, the State shall enter into a contract with 
 an independent entity or organization to conduct an 
 evaluation for the purposes of--
 ``(i) determining the effect of the 
 provision of such services on--
 ``(I) emergency room visits;
 ``(II) use of ambulatory services;
 ``(III) hospitalizations;
 ``(IV) the involvement of law 
 enforcement in mental health or 
 substance use disorder crisis events; 
 and
 ``(V) the diversion of individuals 
 from jails or similar settings; and
 ``(ii) assessing--
 ``(I) the types of services 
 provided to individuals;
 ``(II) the types of events 
 responded to;
 ``(III) cost savings or cost-
 effectiveness attributable to such 
 services;
 ``(IV) the experiences of 
 individuals who receive qualifying 
 youth and young adult mental health and 
 substance use intervention services;
 ``(V) the successful connection of 
 individuals with follow-up services; 
 and
 ``(VI) other relevant outcomes 
 identified by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Comparison to historical measures.--The 
 contract described in subparagraph (A) shall specify 
 that the evaluation is based on a comparison of the 
 historical measures of State performance with respect 
 to the outcomes specified under such subparagraph to 
 the State's performance with respect to such outcomes 
 during the period beginning with the first quarter in 
 which the State begins providing qualifying youth and 
 young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services in accordance with this 
 subsection.
 ``(C) Report.--Not later than 2 years after a State 
 begins to provide qualifying youth and young adult 
 mental health and substance use intervention services 
 in accordance with this subsection, the State shall 
 submit a report to the Secretary on the following:
 ``(i) The results of the evaluation carried 
 out under subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) The number of individuals who 
 received qualifying youth and young adult 
 mental health and substance use intervention 
 services.
 ``(iii) Demographic information regarding 
 such individuals when available, including the 
 race and ethnicity, age, sex, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, and geographic 
 location of such individuals.
 ``(iv) The processes and models developed 
 by the State to provide qualifying youth and 
 young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services under such the State plan 
 or waiver, including the processes developed to 
 provide referrals for, or coordination with, 
 follow-up care and services.
 ``(v) Lessons learned regarding the 
 provision of such services.
 ``(D) Public availability.--The State shall make 
 the report required under subparagraph (C) publicly 
 available, including on the website of the appropriate 
 State agency, upon submission of such report to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(6) Best practices report.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 first State begins to provide qualifying youth and 
 young adult mental health and substance use 
 intervention services in accordance with this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
 Congress that--
 ``(i) identifies the States that elected to 
 provide services in accordance with this 
 subsection;
 ``(ii) summarizes the information reported 
 by such States under paragraph (5)(C); and
 ``(iii) identifies best practices for the 
 effective delivery of youth and young adult 
 mental health and substance use intervention 
 services.
 ``(B) Public availability.--The report required 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be made publicly 
 available, including on the website of the Department 
 of Health and Human Services, upon submission to 
 Congress.
 ``(7) Nondiscrimination.--
 ``(A) Federally funded activities.--(i) For the 
 purpose of applying the prohibitions against 
 discrimination on the basis of age under the Age 
 Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), on 
 the basis of handicap under section 504 of the 
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), on the 
 basis of sex under title IX of the Education Amendments 
 of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), or on the basis of 
 race, color, or national origin under title VI of the 
 Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), 
 programs and activities funded in whole or in part with 
 funds made available under this subchapter are 
 considered to be programs and activities receiving 
 Federal financial assistance.
 ``(ii) No person shall on the ground of sex or 
 religion be excluded from participation in, be denied 
 the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination 
 under, any program or activity funded in whole or in 
 part with funds made available under this title.
 ``(B) Compliance.--Whenever the Secretary finds 
 that a State, or an entity that has received a payment 
 from an allotment to a State under section 702(c) of 
 this title, has failed to comply with a provision of 
 law referred to in subsection (a)(1), with subsection 
 (a)(2), or with an applicable regulation (including one 
 prescribed to carry out subsection (a)(2)), he shall 
 notify the chief executive officer of the State and 
 shall request him to secure compliance. If within a 
 reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, the 
 chief executive officer fails or refuses to secure 
 compliance, the Secretary may--
 ``(i) refer the matter to the Attorney 
 General with a recommendation that an 
 appropriate civil action be instituted;
 ``(ii) exercise the powers and functions 
 provided by title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), the Age 
 Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et 
 seq.), or section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
 of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), as may be applicable; 
 or
 ``(iii) take such other action as may be 
 provided by law.
 ``(C) Authority of attorney general; civil 
 actions.--When a matter is referred to the Attorney 
 General pursuant to subsection (b)(1), or whenever he 
 has reason to believe that the entity is engaged in a 
 pattern or practice in violation of a provision of law 
 referred to in subsection (a)(1) or in violation of 
 subsection (a)(2), the Attorney General may bring a 
 civil action in any appropriate district court of the 
 United States for such relief as may be appropriate, 
 including injunctive relief.''.

SEC. 6405. EARLY INTERVENTION AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS FOR TRANSITION-
 AGE YOUTH.

 (a) In General.--Section 1912(b)(1) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-1(b)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F); 
 and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following:
 ``(E) Early intervention and prevention programs 
 for transition-age youth.--The plan shall describe the 
 State's plans to carry out demonstration grants or 
 contracts for early intervention and prevention 
 programs for transition-age youth of 16 to 25 years of 
 age who meet one or more of the criteria specified in 
 section 129(a)(1)(B) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act to be considered out-of-school 
 youth.''.
 (b) Set-Aside.--Section 1920 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300x-9) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Early Intervention and Prevention Programs for Transition-Age 
Youth.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a 
 State shall expend at least 15 percent of the amount of the 
 allotment of the State pursuant to a funding agreement under 
 section 1911 for each fiscal year to support programs described 
 in section 1912(b)(1)(E).
 ``(2) State flexibility.--In lieu of expending 15 percent 
 of the amount of the allotment for a fiscal year as required by 
 paragraph (1), a State may elect to expend not less than 30 
 percent of such amount to support such programs by the end of 
 two consecutive fiscal years.''.

SEC. 6406. STRATEGIES TO INCREASE ACCESS TO TELEHEALTH UNDER MEDICAID 
 AND CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.

 (a) Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
issue and disseminate guidance to States to clarify strategies to 
overcome existing barriers and increase access to telehealth under the 
Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396 et seq.) and the Children's Health Insurance Program under title 
XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.). Such guidance shall include 
technical assistance and best practices regarding--
 (1) telehealth delivery of covered services;
 (2) recommended voluntary billing codes, modifiers, and 
 place-of-service designations for telehealth and other virtual 
 health care services;
 (3) the simplification or alignment (including through 
 reciprocity) of provider licensing, credentialing, and 
 enrollment protocols with respect to telehealth across States, 
 State Medicaid plans under such title XIX, and Medicaid managed 
 care organizations, including during national public health 
 emergencies;
 (4) existing strategies States can use to integrate 
 telehealth and other virtual health care services into value-
 based health care models; and
 (5) examples of States that have used waivers under the 
 Medicaid program to test expanded access to telehealth, 
 including during the emergency period described in section 
 1135(g)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-
 5(g)(1)(B)).
 (b) Studies.--
 (1) Telehealth impact on health care access.--Not later 
 than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission shall conduct a 
 study, with respect to a minimum of 10 States across geographic 
 regions of the United States, and submit to Congress a report, 
 on the impact of telehealth on health care access, utilization, 
 cost, and outcomes, broken down by race, ethnicity, sex, age, 
 disability status, and ZIP Code. Such report shall--
 (A) evaluate cost, access, utilization, outcomes, 
 and patient experience data from across the health care 
 field, including States, Medicaid managed care 
 organizations, provider organizations, and other 
 organizations that provide or pay for telehealth under 
 the Medicaid program and Children's Health Insurance 
 Program;
 (B) identify barriers and potential solutions to 
 provider entry and participation in telehealth that 
 States are experiencing, as well as barriers to 
 providing telehealth across State lines, including 
 during times of public health crisis or public health 
 emergency;
 (C) determine the frequency at which out-of-State 
 telehealth is provided to patients enrolled in the 
 Medicaid program and the potential impact on access to 
 telehealth if State Medicaid policies were more 
 aligned; and
 (D) identify and evaluate opportunities for more 
 alignment among such policies to promote access to 
 telehealth across all States, State Medicaid plans 
 under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396 et seq.), State child health plans under title XXI 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.), and Medicaid 
 managed care organizations, including the potential for 
 regional compacts or reciprocity agreements.
 (2) Federal agency telehealth collaboration.--Not later 
 than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study 
 and submit to Congress a report evaluating collaboration 
 between Federal agencies with respect to telehealth services 
 furnished under the Medicaid or CHIP program to individuals 
 under the age of 18, including such services furnished to such 
 individuals in early care and education settings. Such report 
 shall include recommendations on--
 (A) opportunities for Federal agencies to improve 
 collaboration with respect to such telehealth services; 
 and
 (B) opportunities for collaboration between Federal 
 agencies to expand telehealth access to such 
 individuals enrolled under the Medicaid or CHIP 
 program, including in early care and education 
 settings.

SEC. 6407. YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULT MENTAL HEALTH PROMOTION, PREVENTION, 
 INTERVENTION, AND TREATMENT.

 Part Q of title III of the Public Health Service Act (as amended by 
section 5001) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399Z-4. YOUTH AND YOUNG ADULT MENTAL HEALTH PROMOTION, 
 PREVENTION, INTERVENTION, AND TREATMENT.

 ``(a) Grants.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(1) award grants to eligible entities to develop, 
 maintain, or enhance youth and young adult mental health 
 promotion, prevention, intervention, and treatment programs, 
 including--
 ``(A) programs for youth and young adults who may 
 be likely to develop, are showing early signs of, or 
 have been diagnosed with a mental health condition, 
 including a serious emotional disturbance; and
 ``(B) infrastructure and organization change at a 
 State, tribal, or territorial level to improve cross-
 system collaboration, service capacity, and expertise 
 related to youth and young adults; and
 ``(2) ensure that programs funded through grants under this 
 section use community-driven, evidence-informed, or evidence-
 based models, practices, and methods that are, as appropriate, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate, and can be 
 replicated in other appropriate settings.
 ``(b) Eligible Transition Age Youth and Entities.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) a local educational agency;
 ``(B) a State educational agency;
 ``(C) an institution of higher education (or 
 consortium of such institutions), which may include a 
 recovery program at an institution of higher education;
 ``(D) a local board, or a one-stop operator, as 
 defined in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act;
 ``(E) a nonprofit organization with appropriate 
 expertise in providing services or programs for 
 children, adolescents, or young adults, excluding a 
 school;
 ``(F) a State, political subdivision of a State, 
 Indian tribe, or tribal organization; or
 ``(G) a high school or dormitory serving high 
 school students that receives funding from the Bureau 
 of Indian Education.
 ``(2) Eligible transition age youth.--The term `eligible 
 transition age youth' means a youth or young adult from age 16 
 to not more than 25 years of age who is--
 ``(A) an out-of-school youth as defined in section 
 129(a)(1)(B) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act;
 ``(B) a homeless individual (as defined in section 
 41403(6) of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994), a 
 homeless child or youth (as defined in section 725(2) 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act) a 
 runaway, in foster care or has aged out of the foster 
 care system, a child eligible for assistance under 
 section 477 of the Social Security Act, or in an out-
 of-home placement;
 ``(C) an individual who is pregnant or parenting, 
 as referred to in section 129(a)(1)(B) of the Workforce 
 Innovation and Opportunity Act;
 ``(D) a youth who is an individual with a 
 disability, as referred to in section 129(a)(1)(B) of 
 the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act;
 ``(E) a low-income individual who requires 
 additional assistance to enter or complete an 
 educational program or to secure or hold employment, as 
 referred to in section 129(a)(1)(B) of the Workforce 
 Innovation and Opportunity Act; or
 ``(F) living in a community that has faced acute or 
 long-term exposure to substantial discrimination, 
 historical oppression, intergenerational poverty, civil 
 unrest, a high rate of violence, or drug overdose 
 deaths.
 ``(c) Application.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under 
subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 ``(d) Use of Funds for Mental Health Promotion, Prevention, 
Intervention and Treatment Programs.--An eligible entity may use 
amounts awarded under a grant under subsection (a)(1) to carry out the 
following:
 ``(1) Creation, implementation, and expansion of services 
 and supports that are culturally and linguistically appropriate 
 and youth guided, involve and include family and community 
 members (including business leaders and faith-based 
 organizations), and provide for continuity of care between 
 child- and adult-serving systems to ensure seamless transition.
 ``(2) Infrastructure and organization change at a State, 
 Tribal, or territorial level to improve cross-system 
 collaboration, service capacity, and expertise related to youth 
 and young adults with, or at risk of, mental health conditions 
 and substance use disorders as they transition into adult roles 
 and responsibilities.
 ``(3) Public awareness and cross-system provider training 
 for individuals employed at institutions of higher education 
 and community colleges, behavioral health providers, 
 individuals working in the criminal justice system, primary 
 care providers, vocational service providers, and child welfare 
 workers.
 ``(e) Matching Funds.--The Secretary may not award a grant under 
this section to an eligible entity unless the eligible entity agrees, 
with respect to the costs to be incurred by the eligible entity in 
carrying out the activities described in subsection (d), to make 
available non-Federal contributions (in cash or in kind) toward such 
costs in an amount that is not less than 10 percent of the total amount 
of Federal funds provided in the grant.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2034.''.

 Subtitle E--Community-Based Care

SEC. 6501. MENTAL HEALTH AT THE BORDER.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Immigrants' 
Mental Health Act of 2024''.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Forward operating base.--The term ``forward operating 
 base'' means a permanent facility established by U.S. Customs 
 and Border Protection in forward or remote locations, and 
 designated as such by U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
 (2) U.S. customs and border protection facility.--The term 
 ``U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility'' means any of 
 the following facilities that typically detain migrants on 
 behalf of U.S. Customs and Border Protection:
 (A) U.S. Border Patrol stations.
 (B) Ports of entry.
 (C) Checkpoints.
 (D) Forward operating bases.
 (E) Secondary inspection areas.
 (F) Short-term custody facilities.
 (c) Training for Certain CBP Personnel in Mental Health Issues.--
 (1) Training to identify risk factors and warning signs in 
 immigrants and refugees.--
 (A) In general.--The Commissioner for U.S. Customs 
 and Border Protection, in consultation with the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use 
 of the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
 Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, and nongovernmental experts in the 
 delivery of health care in humanitarian crises and in 
 the delivery of health care to children, shall develop 
 and implement a training curriculum for U.S. Customs 
 and Border Protection agents and officers assigned to 
 U.S. Customs and Border Protection facilities to enable 
 such agents and officers to identify the risk factors 
 and warning signs in immigrants and refugees of mental 
 health issues relating to trauma.
 (B) Requirements.--The training curriculum 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall--
 (i) apply to all U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection agents and officers working at U.S. 
 Customs and Border Protection facilities;
 (ii) provide for crisis intervention using 
 a trauma-informed approach; and
 (iii) provide for mental health screenings 
 for immigrants and refugees arriving at the 
 border in their preferred language or with 
 appropriate language assistance.
 (2) Training to address mental health and wellness of cbp 
 agents and officers.--
 (A) In general.--The Commissioner of U.S. Customs 
 and Border Protection, in consultation with the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use 
 of the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
 Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, and nongovernmental experts in the 
 delivery of mental health care, shall develop and 
 implement a training curriculum for U.S. Customs and 
 Border Protection agents and officers assigned to U.S. 
 Customs and Border Protection facilities to address the 
 mental health and wellness of individuals working at 
 such facilities.
 (B) Requirement.--The training curriculum described 
 in subparagraph (A) shall be designed to help U.S. 
 Customs and Border Protection agents and officers 
 working at U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
 facilities--
 (i) to better manage their own stress and 
 the stress of their coworkers; and
 (ii) to be more aware of the psychological 
 pressures experienced during their jobs.
 (3) Annual review of training.--Beginning in fiscal year 
 2025, the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance 
 Use shall--
 (A) conduct an annual review of the training 
 implemented pursuant to subsections (a) and (b); and
 (B) submit the results of each such review, 
 including any recommendations for improvement of such 
 training, to--
 (i) the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and 
 Border Protection;
 (ii) the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 Senate;
 (iii) the Committee on Health, Education, 
 Labor, and Pensions of the Senate;
 (iv) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
 (v) the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives;
 (vi) the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
 of the House of Representatives;
 (vii) the Committee on Homeland Security of 
 the House of Representatives; and
 (viii) the Committee on the Judiciary of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 section, there is authorized to be appropriated--
 (A) for fiscal year 2025, $50,000 to develop the 
 training described in paragraphs (1) and (2); and
 (B) for each of the fiscal years 2026 through 
 2030--
 (i) $20,000 to implement such training; and
 (ii) such additional sums as may be 
 necessary to review and make recommendations 
 for such training pursuant to paragraph (3).
 (d) Staffing Border Facilities and Detention Centers.--
 (1) In general.--To adequately evaluate the mental health 
 needs of immigrants, refugees, border patrol agents, and staff, 
 the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall 
 assign not fewer than 1 qualified mental or behavioral health 
 expert to each U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility.
 (2) Qualifications.--Each mental or behavioral health 
 expert assigned pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) bilingual;
 (B) well-versed in culturally appropriate and 
 trauma-informed interventions; and
 (C) have particular expertise in child or 
 adolescent mental health or family mental health.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 
 for each of the fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (e) No Sharing of Department of Health and Human Services Mental 
Health Information for Asylum Determinations, Immigration Hearings, or 
Deportation Proceedings.--The officers, employees, and agents of the 
Department of Health and Human Services, including the Office of 
Refugee Resettlement, may not share with the Department of Homeland 
Security, and the officers, employees, and agents of the Department of 
Homeland Security may not request or receive from the Department of 
Health and Human Services, for the purposes of an asylum determination, 
immigration hearing, or deportation proceeding, any information or 
record that--
 (1) concerns the mental health of an alien; and
 (2) was obtained or produced by a mental or behavioral 
 health professional while the alien was in a shelter or 
 otherwise in the custody of the Federal Government.

SEC. 6502. ASIAN AMERICAN, AFRICAN AMERICAN, NATIVE HAWAIIAN, PACIFIC 
 ISLANDER, INDIGENOUS, MIDDLE EASTERN AND NORTH AFRICAN, 
 AND HISPANIC AND LATINO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH OUTREACH AND 
 EDUCATION STRATEGY.

 Part D of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290dd 
et seq.), as amended by section 6203, is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 555. BEHAVIORAL OUTREACH AND EDUCATION STRATEGY.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Assistant 
Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, shall, in coordination 
with advocacy and behavioral organizations serving populations of Asian 
American, African American, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, 
Indigenous, Middle Eastern and North African (in this section referred 
to as `MENA'), and Hispanic and Latino/a/x individuals or communities, 
develop and implement an outreach and education strategy to promote 
behavioral health, emphasize that behavioral health conditions are 
treatable and that reasonable accommodations under section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and titles II and III of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990 are necessary and may help, as well as reduce 
stigma associated with mental health conditions and substance use 
disorder among the Asian American, African American, Native Hawaiian, 
Pacific Islander, Indigenous, MENA, and Hispanic and Latino/a/x 
populations. Such strategy shall--
 ``(1) be designed to--
 ``(A) meet the diverse cultural and language needs 
 of the various Asian American, African American, 
 Indigenous, MENA, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, 
 and Hispanic and Latino/a/x populations; and
 ``(B) ensure that approaches recommended in the 
 strategy are developmentally (with respect to the 
 beneficiary's relative age and experience) and age 
 appropriate, as well as cognitively accessible to 
 persons with cognitive disabilities;
 ``(2) increase awareness of symptoms of mental illnesses 
 common among such populations, taking into account differences 
 within subgroups (such as gender, gender identity, age, sexual 
 orientation, disability, and ethnicity) of such populations;
 ``(3) provide information on evidence-based, culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate and adapted interventions and 
 treatments;
 ``(4) ensure full participation of, and engage, both 
 consumers and community members representing the communities of 
 focus in the development and implementation of materials; and
 ``(5) seek to broaden the perspective among both 
 individuals in such communities and stakeholders serving such 
 communities to use a comprehensive public health approach to 
 promoting behavioral health that addresses a holistic view of 
 health by focusing on the intersection between behavioral and 
 physical health.
 ``(b) Reports.--Beginning not later than 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of this section and annually thereafter, the Secretary, 
acting through the Assistant Secretary, shall submit to the Congress, 
and make publicly available, a report on the extent to which the 
strategy developed and implemented under subsection (a) increased 
behavioral health outcomes associated with mental health conditions and 
substance use disorder among Asian American, African American, Native 
Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, Indigenous, MENA, and Hispanic and Latino/
a/x populations.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $15,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2030.''.

 Subtitle F--Reports

SEC. 6601. ADDRESSING RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITY MENTAL HEALTH 
 DISPARITIES RESEARCH GAPS.

 Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Director of the National Institutes of Health, in consultation 
with the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health and the 
Assistant Secretary of Substance Use and Mental Health, shall enter 
into an arrangement with the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine (or, if the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine decline to enter into such an arrangement, 
the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, or another appropriate entity)--
 (1) to conduct a study with respect to mental health 
 disparities research gaps in racial and ethnic minority groups 
 (as defined in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(g))); and
 (2) to submit to the Congress a report on the results of 
 such study, including--
 (A) a compilation of information on the prevalence 
 of mental health outcomes in such racial and ethnic 
 minority groups; and
 (B) an assessment of information on the impact of 
 exposure to community violence, adverse childhood 
 experiences, structural bias, and other psychological 
 traumas on mental health outcomes in such racial and 
 minority groups.

SEC. 6602. RESEARCH ON ADVERSE HEALTH EFFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH 
 INTERACTIONS WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Director of the Office of Minority Health of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (established pursuant to section 
1707A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6a)) (in this 
section referred to as the ``Secretary''), shall conduct research on 
the adverse health effects associated with interactions with law 
enforcement.
 (b) Effects Among Racial and Ethnic Minorities.--The research under 
subsection (a) shall include research on--
 (1) the health consequences, both individual and community-
 wide, of trauma related to violence committed by law 
 enforcement among racial and ethnic minorities; and
 (2) the disproportionate burden of morbidity and mortality 
 associated with such trauma.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (1) complete the research under this section; and
 (2) submit to the Congress a report on the findings, 
 conclusions, and recommendations resulting from such research.

SEC. 6603. GEOACCESS STUDY.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use shall--
 (1) conduct a study to--
 (A) determine which geographic areas of the United 
 States have shortages of racially and ethnically 
 diverse mental health providers, as well as mental 
 health providers trained to work with racially and 
 ethnically diverse clients and clients with multiple 
 mental health, cognitive, and developmental 
 disabilities; and
 (B) assess the preparedness of mental health 
 providers to deliver culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate, affordable, and accessible services; and
 (2) submit a report to Congress on the results of such 
 study.

SEC. 6604. CO-OCCURRING CONDITIONS.

 (a) GAO Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit 
to Congress a report on barriers to care for persons with co-occurring 
conditions and access to care in the United States. Such report shall 
include the information and recommendations described in subsection 
(b).
 (b) Content of Report.--The report under subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) an assessment of current barriers to behavioral health 
 and substance use disorder treatment for low-income, uninsured, 
 and Medicaid-enrolled adults, and recommendations for 
 addressing such barriers, particularly for women and diverse 
 racial and ethnic groups;
 (2) an assessment of--
 (A) how many adults have a behavioral health 
 condition and options for adults to receive behavioral 
 health and substance use disorder treatment in 
 nonexpansion States;
 (B) Medicaid expansion States who provide 
 behavioral health coverage for newly eligible 
 enrollees;
 (C) how enrollment in coverage affects treatment 
 availability; and
 (D) the impacts of COVID-19 to receiving and 
 accessing treatment for behavioral health, substance 
 use disorders, and diverse racial and ethnic groups, 
 and recommendations for addressing such barriers;
 (3) an assessment of current barriers, inclusive of social 
 determinants of health and cultural barriers, that prevent 
 adults from receiving behavioral health and substance use 
 disorder treatment, and recommendations for addressing such 
 barriers, particularly for low-income women and adults from 
 racial and ethnic groups;
 (4) an assessment of disparities in access to addiction 
 counselors and mental or behavioral health care providers 
 acting in accordance with State law, stratified by race, 
 ethnicity, gender identity, geographic location, and insurance 
 type, and recommendations to promote greater access equity; and
 (5) recommendations to promote greater equity in access to 
 care for behavioral services and substance use disorders, 
 particularly for low-income women and adults from diverse 
 racial and ethnic groups.

SEC. 6605. STUDY AND REPORT ON THE AANHPI YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS.

 (a) Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), in 
 coordination with the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, and the Director of the Office of Minority Health, 
 shall conduct a study on behavioral health among AANHPI youth.
 (2) Elements.--Such study required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include an assessment of--
 (A) the prevalence, risk factors, and root causes 
 of mental health challenges, substance misuse, and 
 mental health and substance use disorders among AANHPI 
 youth;
 (B) the prevalence among AANHPI youth of attempted 
 suicide, nonfatal substance use overdose, and death by 
 suicide or substance use overdose; and
 (C) AANHPI youth that received treatment for mental 
 health and substance use disorders.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and make publicly 
available, a report on the findings of the study conducted under 
subsection (a), including--
 (1) identification of the barriers to accessing behavioral 
 health services for AANHPI youth;
 (2) identification of root causes of mental health 
 challenges and substance misuse among AANHPI youth;
 (3) recommendations for actions to be taken by the 
 Secretary to improve behavioral health among AANHPI youth;
 (4) recommendations for legislative or administrative 
 action to improve the behavioral health of AANHPI youth 
 experiencing depression, suicide, and overdose, and to reduce 
 the prevalence of depression, suicide, and overdose among 
 AANHPI youth; and
 (5) such other recommendations as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Data.--Any data included in the study or report under this 
section shall be disaggregated by race, ethnicity, age, sex, gender 
identity, sexual orientation, geographic region, disability status, and 
other relevant factors, in a manner that protects personal privacy and 
that is consistent with applicable Federal and State privacy law.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying out 
this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 for 
fiscal year 2025.

SEC. 6606. STUDY AND REPORT ON STRATEGIES ON THE AANHPI BEHAVIORAL 
 HEALTH WORKFORCE SHORTAGE.

 (a) Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), in 
 coordination with the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration, the Secretary of Labor, and the 
 Director of the Office of Minority Health, shall conduct a 
 study on strategies for increasing the behavioral health 
 professional workforce that identify as AANHPI.
 (2) Elements.--Such study required under paragraph (1) 
 shall consider--
 (A) the total number of licensed behavioral health 
 providers in the United States who identify as AANHPI;
 (B) with respect to each such provider, information 
 regarding the current type of license, geographic area 
 of practice, and type of employer (such as hospital, 
 Federally-qualified health center, school, or private 
 practice);
 (C) information regarding the cultural and 
 linguistic capabilities of such providers, including 
 languages spoken proficiently; and
 (D) the relevant barriers to enrollment in 
 behavioral health professional education programs and 
 entering the behavioral workforce for AANHPI 
 individuals.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and make publicly 
available, a report on the findings of the study conducted under 
subsection (a), including--
 (1) identification of AANHPI licensed behavioral health 
 providers' knowledge and awareness of the barriers to quality 
 behavioral health care services faced by AANHPI individuals, 
 including stigma, limited English proficiency, and lack of 
 health insurance coverage;
 (2) recommendations for actions to be taken by the 
 Secretary to increase the number of AANHPI licensed behavioral 
 health professionals;
 (3) recommendations for legislative or administrative 
 action to improve the enrollment of AANHPI individuals in 
 behavioral health professional education programs; and
 (4) such other recommendations as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Data.--Any data included in the study or report under this 
section shall be disaggregated by race, ethnicity, age, sex, gender 
identity, sexual orientation, geographic region, disability status, and 
other relevant factors, in a manner that protects personal privacy and 
that is consistent with applicable Federal and State privacy law.
 (d) Definition.--In this section the term ``licensed behavioral 
health provider'' means any individual licensed to provide mental 
health or substance use disorder services, including in the professions 
of social work, psychology, psychiatry, marriage and family therapy, 
mental health counseling, and substance use disorder counseling.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying out 
this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 for 
fiscal year 2025.

 Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 6701. STRENGTHENING MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR BIPOC COMMUNITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1942(a) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300x-52(a)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs 
 (5) and (6), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) services provided by the State to adults with a 
 serious mental illness and children with a serious emotional 
 disturbance who are members of racial and ethnic minority 
 groups, including--
 ``(A) the extent to which such services are 
 provided to such adults and children; and
 ``(B) the outcomes experienced by such adults and 
 children as a result of the provision of such services, 
 including with respect to--
 ``(i) diversions from hospitalization and 
 criminal justice system involvement;
 ``(ii) treatment for first episode 
 psychosis or undefined psychosis;
 ``(iii) reductions in suicide and increased 
 utilization of appropriate treatments and 
 interventions for suicidal ideation;
 ``(iv) response through crisis services, 
 including mobile crisis services;
 ``(v) treatment of individuals who are 
 experiencing homelessness or housing insecurity 
 and individuals residing in rural communities; 
 and
 ``(vi) increased patient family and 
 caregiver engagement and education on serious 
 mental illness to reduce social stigma and 
 promote healthy social support for patients;
 ``(3) any outreach by the State to, and the hiring of, 
 providers of mental health services from multiple disciplines 
 (such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, peer support provider, 
 or social worker) who are members of racial and ethnic minority 
 groups;
 ``(4) any outreach by the State to providers from multiple 
 disciplines of mental health services--
 ``(A) to provide training on culturally effective, 
 culturally affirming, and linguistically competent 
 services; and
 ``(B) to increase awareness of community-defined 
 practices by practitioners of racial and ethnic 
 minority groups;''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to funding agreements entered into under section 
1911 or 1921 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x; 42 
U.S.C. 300x-21) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 6702. STRONG SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN.

 (a) Data Analysis and Strategy Implementation To Prevent and 
Mitigate Childhood Trauma.--Title XXXI of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300kk) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 3102. DATA ANALYSIS AND STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION TO PREVENT AND 
 MITIGATE CHILDHOOD TRAUMA.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program--
 ``(1) to support the development and implementation of 
 programs that use data analysis methods to identify and 
 facilitate strategies for early intervention and prevention, in 
 order to prevent and mitigate childhood trauma and support 
 communities and families, including--
 ``(A) improving connections through care 
 coordination;
 ``(B) aligning community initiatives in targeted 
 areas of need; and
 ``(C) expanding community capacity through cross-
 sector collaboration; and
 ``(2) to evaluate the effectiveness of these programs in 
 improving outcomes for children.
 ``(b) Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants to up to 5 eligible 
entities to carry out the activities described in subsection (a).
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--A grant for activities under this section 
shall be used to support the development and implementation of programs 
that use data analysis methods to identify and facilitate strategies 
for early intervention and prevention, in order to prevent and mitigate 
childhood trauma and support communities and families, including as 
follows:
 ``(1) Utilize data analysis methods to--
 ``(A) identify specific geographic areas, such as 
 census tracts, with a high prevalence of adverse 
 childhood experiences and significant risk factors for 
 poor outcomes for children (such as increased risk of 
 experiencing adverse childhood experiences), including 
 areas with high rates of--
 ``(i) poor public health outcomes including 
 illness, disease, suicide, and mortality;
 ``(ii) exclusionary discipline practices, 
 including suspensions, expulsions, and 
 referrals to law enforcement, as well as low 
 graduation rates;
 ``(iii) substance use disorders;
 ``(iv) poverty;
 ``(v) foster system involvement or 
 referrals;
 ``(vi) housing instability and 
 homelessness;
 ``(vii) food insecurity;
 ``(viii) inequity, including disparities in 
 income, wealth, employment, educational 
 attainment, health care access, and public 
 health outcomes, along lines of race, sex, 
 sexuality and gender identity, ethnicity, or 
 nationality;
 ``(ix) incarceration rates; or
 ``(x) other indicators of adversity as 
 defined by the Secretary; and
 ``(B) identify strategies to improve outcomes for 
 children aged 0 through 17 that build on strengths in 
 communities that could be further supported, 
 including--
 ``(i) existing support networks for 
 families; and
 ``(ii) enhanced connections to community-
 based organizations.
 ``(2) Implement strategies identified pursuant to paragraph 
 (1)(B) to facilitate outreach and involvement of children and 
 their caregivers in Federal, State, or local programs that 
 provide reparative, gender-responsive, culturally specific, and 
 trauma-informed prevention services, and for which children and 
 their caregivers are eligible, including--
 ``(A) home visiting programs;
 ``(B) training and education on parenting skills;
 ``(C) substance use disorder prevention and 
 treatment that is voluntary and noncoercive;
 ``(D) mental health supports and care that is 
 voluntary and noncoercive;
 ``(E) family and intimate partner violence 
 prevention services;
 ``(F) child advocacy center programming;
 ``(G) economic and nutrition support services;
 ``(H) housing support services, including emergency 
 and temporary shelter for those experiencing 
 homelessness and housing insecurity, as well as stable, 
 long-term housing;
 ``(I) voluntary, noncoercive, gender-responsive, 
 and culturally specific mental health supports in 
 school and early childhood education center-based 
 settings;
 ``(J) wraparound programs for transitioning youth 
 and youth currently in the foster system;
 ``(K) programming to support the health and well-
 being of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and 
 intersex children and their families; and
 ``(L) family resource center services.
 ``(d) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Primary payer restriction.--The Secretary may not 
 award a grant under this section to an eligible entity for a 
 service if the service to be provided is available pursuant to 
 the State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act for the State in which the program funded by the grant is 
 being conducted unless the State and all eligible subdivisions 
 involved--
 ``(A) will enter into agreements with public or 
 nonprofit private entities under which the entities 
 will provide the service; and
 ``(B) demonstrate that the State and all eligible 
 subdivisions will ensure that the entities providing 
 the service--
 ``(i) will seek payment for each such 
 service rendered in accordance with the usual 
 payment schedule under the State plan; and
 ``(ii) the entities have entered into a 
 participation agreement and are qualified to 
 receive payments under such plan.
 ``(2) Implementation.--An eligible entity that receives a 
 grant under this section may use--
 ``(A) not more than 25 percent of the amounts made 
 available through the grant for the first 24 months of 
 the grant period to utilize data analysis methods to--
 ``(i) identify specific geographic areas 
 where care coordination, prevention and early 
 intervention, and facilitation services will be 
 provided; and
 ``(ii) identify support and intervention 
 services to improve outcomes for children 
 located in a geographic area identified under 
 subsection (c)(1)(A); and
 ``(B) not more than 10 percent of the grant in each 
 subsequent year to continue data analysis activities.
 ``(3) Administration.--An eligible entity that receives a 
 grant under this section may not use more than 5 percent of 
 amounts received through the grant for administration, 
 reporting, and program oversight functions, including the 
 development of systems to improve data collection and data 
 sharing for the purposes of improving services and the 
 provision of care.
 ``(4) Priority.--
 ``(A) In general.--In awarding grants under this 
 section, the Secretary shall give priority, to the 
 extent practical, to eligible entities that use 
 community-based system dynamic modeling as the primary 
 data analysis method.
 ``(B) System dynamic modeling defined.--The term 
 `system dynamic modeling' means a method of data 
 analysis and predictive modeling that includes--
 ``(i) utilization of community-based 
 participatory research methods for involving 
 community in the process of understanding and 
 changing systems and evaluating outcomes of 
 grants;
 ``(ii) consideration of a multitude of 
 environmental risk factors and ascertainment of 
 the significance of contributing community risk 
 factors for purposes of identifying strategies 
 to reduce adverse child outcomes, including--
 ``(I) maltreatment cases;
 ``(II) involvement with the 
 juvenile criminal legal system or 
 foster system;
 ``(III) exclusionary school 
 discipline; or
 ``(IV) exposure to violence; and
 ``(iii) identification of cross-sector 
 responses involving reparative, trauma-
 informed, culturally specific, gender-
 responsive, and community-based organizations 
 to reduce adverse child outcomes.
 ``(5) Subgrant.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible entity that receives 
 a grant under this section shall use at least 25 
 percent of the total amount of the grant to make 
 subgrants to organizations that aid in implementing the 
 strategy identified under subsection (c)(1)(B) for 
 preventing and mitigating childhood trauma and 
 supporting communities and families.
 ``(B) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a 
 subgrant under this paragraph, an organization shall 
 prepare and submit to the eligible entity an 
 application in such form, and containing such 
 information, as the eligible entity may require, 
 including evidence that the--
 ``(i) needs of the population to be served 
 are urgent and are not met by the services 
 currently available in the geographic area; and
 ``(ii) organization has the capacity to 
 provide the services listed in subsection 
 (c)(2).
 ``(C) Supplement, not supplant.--Subgrant funds 
 received pursuant to this paragraph by an organization 
 shall be used to supplement and not supplant State or 
 local funds provided to the partnership organization 
 for services listed in subsection (c)(2).
 ``(e) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an eligible entity shall submit to the Secretary an 
application in such form, and containing such information, as the 
Secretary may require, to include the following:
 ``(1) A demonstration that--
 ``(A) the applicant utilizes trauma-informed, 
 culturally specific, and gender-responsive practices, 
 including a demonstration of the extent to which the 
 applicant has trained staff in these practices;
 ``(B) the applicant has the capacity to administer 
 the grant, including conducting all required data 
 analysis activities; and
 ``(C) services will be provided to children and 
 families in an accessible, culturally relevant, and 
 linguistically specific manner consistent with local 
 needs.
 ``(2) A preliminary analysis of how the applicant will use 
 the grant to--
 ``(A) identify the geographic area or areas to be 
 served using data analysis methods;
 ``(B) utilize data analysis methods to identify 
 strategies to improve outcomes for children in the 
 geographic area;
 ``(C) facilitate strategies identified through care 
 coordination efforts; and
 ``(D) track data for evaluation of outcomes.
 ``(3) A detailed project plan for the use of the grant that 
 includes anticipated technical assistance needs.
 ``(4) Additional funding sources, including State and local 
 funds, supporting the prevention and mitigation of adverse 
 childhood experiences.
 ``(f) Grant Amount.--The amount of a grant under this section shall 
not exceed $9,500,000.
 ``(g) Period of a Grant.--The period of a grant under this section 
shall not exceed 7 years.
 ``(h) Service Provision Without Regard to Ability To Pay.--As a 
condition on receipt of a grant under this section, an eligible entity 
shall agree that any assistance provided to an individual through the 
grant will be provided without regard to--
 ``(1) the ability of the individual to pay for such 
 services;
 ``(2) the current or past health condition of the 
 individual to be served;
 ``(3) the immigration status of the individual to be 
 served;
 ``(4) the sexual orientation and gender identity of the 
 individual to be served; and
 ``(5) any prior involvement of the individual in the 
 criminal legal system.
 ``(i) Prohibitions.--In addition to any other prohibitions 
determined by the Secretary, an eligible entity may not use a grant 
under this section to--
 ``(1) use data analysis methods to inform individual case 
 decisions, including child removal or placement decisions, or 
 to target services at certain individuals or families;
 ``(2) require any individual or family to participate in 
 any service or program as a condition of receipt of a benefit 
 to which the individual or family is otherwise eligible;
 ``(3) increase the presence or funding of law enforcement 
 surveillance, involvement, or activity in implementing the 
 strategies identified under subsection (c)(1)(B); or
 ``(4) enable the practice of conversion therapy.
 ``(j) Evaluation.--
 ``(1) Data model evaluation.--Not later than 36 months 
 after the date of enactment of this section, the Assistant 
 Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services, in coordination with the grantees 
 receiving a grant under this section, shall complete an 
 evaluation of the effectiveness of the data model accuracy of 
 the grant program under this section to address each of the 
 following:
 ``(A) Determining the effectiveness of the 
 grantees' use of data analysis methods to identify 
 geographic areas pursuant to subsection (c)(1).
 ``(B) Examining the grantees' development and 
 utilization of data analysis methods.
 ``(C) Examining the grantees' ability to 
 effectively utilize data analysis methods in future 
 prevention work.
 ``(D) Establishing a method for rigorously 
 evaluating the activities of grantees and comparing the 
 reduction of child and family exposure to adverse 
 experiences in other communities with similar 
 demographics.
 ``(E) Examining the grantees' utilization of 
 community-based system dynamics modeling methods and 
 other community engagement methods.
 ``(2) Program evaluation.--Not later than 6 years after the 
 date of enactment of this section, the Assistant Secretary for 
 Planning and Evaluation of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, in coordination with eligible entities receiving 
 grants under this section, shall complete an evaluation of the 
 effectiveness of the grant program under this section.
 ``(3) Data collection.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Assistant Secretary for 
 Planning and Evaluation of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services and each eligible entity receiving a 
 grant under this section shall collect any relevant 
 data necessary to complete the evaluations required by 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) to include--
 ``(i) the activities funded by the grant 
 under this section, including development and 
 implementation data analysis methods;
 ``(ii) the number of children and of 
 families receiving coordination and 
 facilitation of care and services; and
 ``(iii) the effect of activities supported 
 by the grant under this section on the local 
 area serviced by the program, including such 
 effects on--
 ``(I) children and adolescents' 
 health and well-being;
 ``(II) the number of children who 
 enter into or depart from foster 
 services; and
 ``(III) homelessness and housing 
 insecurity.
 ``(B) Study.--
 ``(i) In general.--Not later than 7 years 
 after the date of enactment of this section, 
 the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
 Evaluation of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services shall--
 ``(I) complete a study on the 
 results of the grant program under this 
 section using the community-based 
 participatory action research method, 
 which focuses on social, structural, 
 and physical environmental inequities 
 through active involvement of community 
 members, clients, organizational 
 representatives, and researchers in all 
 aspects of the research process; and
 ``(II) submit a report on the 
 results of the study to the Congress.
 ``(ii) Partners.--In conducting the study 
 under clause (i), the Assistant Secretary for 
 Planning and Evaluation of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services shall ensure that 
 partners and persons that have participated in 
 the grant program under this section on every 
 level, especially those such partners or 
 persons receiving services and support through 
 the program, have an opportunity to contribute 
 their expertise to evaluating the strategy and 
 outcomes.
 ``(k) Report.--Not later than three months after the completion of 
the evaluation required by subsection (j)(2), the Assistant Secretary 
for Planning and Evaluation of the Department of Health and Human 
Services shall submit to Congress and make available to the public on 
the internet website of the Department of Health and Human Services a 
report based upon the evaluation under subsection (j)(2), to include--
 ``(1) the impact of the program under this section on 
 homelessness and housing insecurity, substance use disorder and 
 drug deaths, incarceration, foster system involvement, and 
 other child and family outcomes as identified by the Assistant 
 Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services;
 ``(2) an analysis of which elements of the program should 
 be replicated and scaled by governmental or non-governmental 
 entities; and
 ``(3) such recommendations for legislation and 
 administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(l) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `adverse childhood experience' means a 
 potentially traumatic experience that occurs in childhood and 
 can have a tremendous impact on the child's lifelong health and 
 opportunity outcomes, such as any of the following:
 ``(A) Abuse, such as any of the following:
 ``(i) Emotional and psychological abuse.
 ``(ii) Physical abuse.
 ``(iii) Sexual abuse.
 ``(B) Household challenges such as any of the 
 following:
 ``(i) A household member is treated 
 violently.
 ``(ii) A household member has a substance 
 use disorder.
 ``(iii) A household member has a mental 
 health condition.
 ``(iv) Parental separation or divorce.
 ``(v) A household member is incarcerated, 
 is placed in immigrant detention, or has been 
 deported.
 ``(vi) A household member has a life-
 threatening illness such as COVID-19.
 ``(C) Neglect.
 ``(D) Living in--
 ``(i) impoverished communities that lack 
 access to human services;
 ``(ii) areas of high unemployment 
 neighborhoods; or
 ``(iii) communities experiencing de facto 
 segregation.
 ``(E) Experiencing food insecurity and poor 
 nutrition.
 ``(F) Witnessing violence.
 ``(G) Involvement with the foster system.
 ``(H) Experiencing discrimination.
 ``(I) Dealing with historical and ongoing traumas 
 due to systemic and interpersonal racism.
 ``(J) Dealing with historical and ongoing traumas 
 regarding systemic and interpersonal sexism, 
 homophobia, biphobia, and transphobia.
 ``(K) Dealing with the threat of deportation or 
 detention as a result of immigration status.
 ``(L) The impacts of multigenerational poverty 
 resulting from limited educational and economic 
 opportunities.
 ``(M) Living through natural disasters such as 
 earthquakes, forest fires, floods, or hurricanes.
 ``(2) The term `eligible entity' means a State or local 
 health department.
 ``(3) The term `practice of conversion therapy'--
 ``(A) means any practice or treatment by any person 
 that seeks to change another individual's sexual 
 orientation or gender identity, including efforts to 
 change behaviors or gender expressions, or to eliminate 
 or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings 
 toward individuals of the same gender, if such person 
 receives monetary compensation in exchange for any such 
 practice or treatment; and
 ``(B) does not include any practice or treatment 
 that does not seek to change sexual orientation or 
 gender identity and--
 ``(i) provides assistance to an individual 
 undergoing a gender transition; or
 ``(ii) provides acceptance, support, and 
 understanding of a client or facilitation of a 
 client's coping, social support, and identity 
 exploration and development.
 ``(m) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section for the period of fiscal years 
2025 through 2031--
 ``(1) to carry out subsection (a)(1) through the award of 
 grants under subsection (b)--
 ``(A) $47,500,000 for grants; and
 ``(B) such sums as may be necessary for the 
 administrative costs of carrying out such subsection; 
 and
 ``(2) $7,500,000 to carry out the evaluation under 
 subsection (a)(2).''.
 (b) Care Coordination Grants.--Part E of title XII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-51 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new section:

``SEC. 1255. CARE COORDINATION GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities to establish or expand trauma-informed care coordination 
services to support--
 ``(1) children aged 0 through 5 at risk of adverse 
 childhood experiences; and
 ``(2) their caregivers, including prenatal people of any 
 age.
 ``(b) Number of Grants.--Subject to the availability of 
appropriations, the Secretary shall award not fewer than 9 and not more 
than 40 grants under this section.
 ``(c) Amount of Grants.--Subject to the availability of 
appropriations, the amount of a grant under this section for a fiscal 
year shall be--
 ``(1) not less than $250,000; and
 ``(2) not more than $1,000,000.
 ``(d) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be a local government or Indian Tribe, 
acting through the public health department thereof if such government 
or Tribe has a public health department.
 ``(e) Priority.--
 ``(1) In general.--In awarding grants under this section, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities 
 proposing to serve communities with a high need for trauma-
 informed care coordination services, as demonstrated by 
 indicators such as--
 ``(A) pregnant people who face barriers to prenatal 
 care;
 ``(B) mortality or morbidity of people giving birth 
 or infants;
 ``(C) caretakers and parents who are living with a 
 mental health condition or substance use disorder;
 ``(D) a high prevalence of community violence, 
 including domestic violence, as demonstrated by 
 instances of homicide and public health statistics, 
 including treatment of injury or trauma;
 ``(E) high proportions of low-income children;
 ``(F) a high prevalence of child fatalities or near 
 fatalities related to child abuse and neglect;
 ``(G) significant disparities in health outcomes 
 for people giving birth and infants;
 ``(H) a high rate of exclusionary discipline and 
 referrals to law enforcement; and
 ``(I) a high rate of homelessness and housing 
 instability.
 ``(2) Data from tribal areas.--The Secretary, acting 
 through the Director of the Indian Health Service, shall 
 consult with Indian Tribes to establish criteria to measure 
 indicators of need, for purposes of paragraph (1), with respect 
 to Tribal areas.
 ``(f) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Required uses.--
 ``(A) In general.--A grant received under this 
 section shall be used to establish or expand gender-
 responsive, culturally specific, trauma-informed care 
 coordination services, including by instituting and 
 conducting risk and needs assessments including--
 ``(i) using strengths-based approaches 
 focused on protective factors for children and 
 their caregivers, including prenatal people of 
 any age; and
 ``(ii) inputting screening results into a 
 centralized intake system to promote a single 
 point of access system across providers and 
 services.
 ``(B) Training.--A grant received under this 
 section shall be used to ensure that individuals 
 employed through the grant funds, in whole or in part, 
 have received sufficient and up-to-date training on 
 trauma-informed care and strategies that are 
 reparative, culturally sensitive, gender responsive, 
 and healing centered.
 ``(2) Permissible uses.--A grant received under this 
 section may be used for any of the following:
 ``(A) Employing care coordinators, case managers, 
 community health workers, certified infant mental 
 health specialists, and outreach and engagement 
 specialists to work with children and their caregivers, 
 including prenatal individuals, to prevent and respond 
 to adverse childhood experiences by connecting clients 
 with culturally specific, trauma-informed care 
 treatment services, including economic, social, food, 
 and housing supports.
 ``(B) Providing training described in paragraph 
 (1)(B) to community health providers and community 
 partners.
 ``(C) Expanding, enhancing, modifying, and 
 connecting the existing network of community programs 
 and services to achieve a more comprehensive and 
 coordinated system of care approach, including--
 ``(i) developing local infrastructure to 
 bolster and shape community support systems and 
 map and build access to services in a 
 coordinated and comprehensive way; and
 ``(ii) creating infrastructure to conduct 
 outreach to children and families, including 
 those experiencing homelessness and housing 
 instability, so they acquire access to the 
 services and supports they need and the 
 benefits to which they are entitled.
 ``(D) Compiling information on resources (including 
 any referral services) available through community-
 based organizations and local, State, and Federal 
 agencies, such as--
 ``(i) programs addressing social 
 determinants of health, including--
 ``(I) emergency, temporary, and 
 long-term housing;
 ``(II) programs that offer free or 
 affordable and nutritious food;
 ``(III) vocational and workforce 
 development; and
 ``(IV) transportation supports;
 ``(ii) home visiting programs for new 
 parents and their infants;
 ``(iii) workforce development programs to 
 support caregivers in skill building;
 ``(iv) trauma-responsive, parenting skills-
 building programs;
 ``(v) the continuum of substance use 
 prevention, intervention, and treatment 
 programs and mental health support programs, 
 including programs with trauma-informed, 
 gender-responsive, and culturally specific 
 counseling; and
 ``(vi) childcare support and early 
 childhood education, including Head Start and 
 Early Head Start programs.
 ``(E) Subject to subsection (g)(1), establishing or 
 updating a database that compiles data used to track 
 the effectiveness of the care coordination services 
 funded through the grant.
 ``(F) Developing and implementing referral 
 partnership agreements with community-based 
 organizations, parent organizations, substance use 
 disorder treatment providers and facilities, housing 
 and shelter providers, health care providers, mental 
 health care providers, and Federal and State offices 
 and programs that implement practices to support 
 children ages 0 through 5 who are at risk of adverse 
 childhood experiences and their caregivers, including 
 prenatal people. Such practices shall include--
 ``(i) a bilateral `warm handoff' system 
 whereby a grantee understands the needs of the 
 children and their families, and families are 
 involved in addressing these needs; and
 ``(ii) an active service connection whereby 
 the children and families are each actively 
 connected with a resource in a well-coordinated 
 way that ensures availability and direct 
 contact.
 ``(G) Supporting cross-system planning and 
 collaboration among employees who may work in emergency 
 medical services, health care services, public health, 
 early childhood education, and substance use disorder 
 treatment and recovery support.
 ``(H) Providing or subsidizing services to address 
 barriers that children, prenatal individuals, and 
 caregivers face to utilizing community resources and 
 services, such as by providing or subsidizing 
 transportation or childcare costs as applicable and 
 within reasonable amounts.
 ``(I) Creating or expanding infrastructure and 
 investing in technology, including the provision of 
 communications technology and internet service to 
 children and their caregivers, to enable increased 
 telemedicine capabilities to reach participants.
 ``(3) Indian tribes.--In the case of an eligible entity 
 that is an Indian Tribe, the Secretary may waive such 
 provisions of this subsection as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(4) Prohibitions.--In addition to any other prohibitions 
 determined by the Secretary, an eligible entity may not use a 
 grant under this section to--
 ``(A) use data analysis methods to inform 
 individual case decisions, including child removal or 
 placement decisions, or to target services at certain 
 individuals or families;
 ``(B) require any individual or family to 
 participate in any service or program as a condition of 
 receipt of a benefit to which the individual or family 
 is otherwise eligible; or
 ``(C) increase the presence or funding of law 
 enforcement surveillance, involvement, or activity in 
 connection with trauma-informed care coordination 
 services supported pursuant to this section.
 ``(g) Requirements.--As a condition on receipt of a grant under 
this section, an eligible entity shall agree to each of the following 
funding conditions:
 ``(1) Restriction of funding allocation.--The eligible 
 entity will not use more than 30 percent of the funds made 
 available to the entity through the grant (for the total grant 
 period) to establish or update a database pursuant to 
 subsection (f)(2)(E).
 ``(2) Accessible setting.--
 ``(A) In general.--The eligible entity will ensure 
 that all care coordination services provided through 
 the grant are provided in a setting that is accessible, 
 including through mobile settings, to--
 ``(i) low-income or no-income individuals, 
 including individuals experiencing homelessness 
 or housing instability; and
 ``(ii) individuals in rural areas.
 ``(B) Community outreach.--In complying with 
 subparagraph (A), the eligible entity will ensure that 
 at least 50 percent of the care coordination services 
 provided through the grant occur in community settings 
 that are convenient to the children and caregivers who 
 are being served, such as homes, schools, and shelters, 
 whether for initial outreach or as part of long-term 
 care.
 ``(3) Supplement, not supplant.--The grant will be used to 
 supplement, not supplant other Federal, State, or local funds 
 available for care coordination services.
 ``(4) Confidentiality.--The eligible entity will maintain 
 the confidentiality of individuals receiving services through 
 the grant in a manner consistent with applicable law.
 ``(5) Partnering; risk stratification.--In providing care 
 coordination services through the grant, the eligible entity 
 will--
 ``(A) partner with community-based organizations 
 with experience serving child populations prenatally 
 through age 5;
 ``(B) coordinate with the local agency responsible 
 for administering the State plan approved under title 
 XIX of the Social Security Act; and
 ``(C) employ risk stratification to develop 
 different effective models of care for different 
 populations based on their needs.
 ``(h) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--To seek a grant under this section, an 
 eligible entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information, as 
 the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Contents.--An application under paragraph (1) shall, 
 at a minimum, contain each of the following:
 ``(A) Goals to be achieved through the grant, 
 including the activities that will be undertaken to 
 achieve those goals.
 ``(B) The number of individuals likely to be served 
 through the grant, including demographic data on the 
 populations to be served.
 ``(C) Existing programs and services that can be 
 used to significantly increase the proportion of 
 children and families who receive needed supports and 
 services.
 ``(D) A plan for expanding, coordinating, or 
 modifying the existing network of programs and services 
 to meet the needs of children and families for 
 preventing and mitigating the traumatic impact of 
 adverse childhood experiences.
 ``(E) A demonstration of the ability of the 
 eligible entity to reach the individuals to be served, 
 including by partnering with local stakeholders.
 ``(F) An indication of how the personnel involved 
 are reflective of the communities to be served.
 ``(G) A list of stakeholders with whom the entity 
 plans to partner or consult.
 ``(i) Reporting by Grantees.--Not later than 4 years after the date 
of enactment of this section, an eligible entity receiving a grant 
under this section shall submit to the Secretary a report on the 
activities funded through the grant. Such report shall include, at a 
minimum, a description of--
 ``(1) the number of individuals served through activities 
 funded through the grant, including demographics as applicable;
 ``(2) the number of referrals made through the grant and 
 the rate of such referrals successfully linked or closed;
 ``(3) a qualitative analysis or number of collaborative 
 partnerships with other organizations in carrying out the 
 activities funded through the grant;
 ``(4) the number of services provided to individuals 
 through the grant;
 ``(5) aggregated and de-identified outcomes experienced by 
 individuals served through the grant such as--
 ``(A) the rate of successful service connections;
 ``(B) any increases in development of protective 
 factors for children;
 ``(C) any increase in development of protective 
 factors for the caregivers;
 ``(D) any mitigation of the negative outcomes 
 associated with adverse childhood experiences or 
 decreased likelihood of children experiencing an 
 adverse childhood experience as evidenced by--
 ``(i) decreased presence of law enforcement 
 or other punitive State surveillance in the 
 community;
 ``(ii) a parent completing substance use 
 treatment;
 ``(iii) a parent receiving voluntary 
 treatment for mental health-related conditions;
 ``(iv) a family entering into or 
 maintaining a stable housing situation;
 ``(v) a family achieving or maintaining 
 economic security;
 ``(vi) a parent achieving or maintaining 
 job stability; or
 ``(vii) a child meeting developmental 
 markers for school readiness; and
 ``(E) reports of satisfaction with the coordination 
 of care by people served; and
 ``(6) any other information required by the Secretary.
 ``(j) Convening Participants for Sharing Lessons Learned.--After 
the period of all grants awarded under this section has concluded, the 
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the Department of 
Health and Human Services shall provide an in-person or online 
opportunity for persons participating in the programs funded through 
this section to share with each other--
 ``(1) lessons learned;
 ``(2) challenges experienced; and
 ``(3) ideas for next steps and solutions.
 ``(k) Compiling Findings and Conclusions.--After providing the 
opportunity required by subsection (j), the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) compile the findings and conclusions of grantees 
 under this section on the provision of care coordination 
 services described in subsection (a);
 ``(2) submit a report on such findings and conclusions to 
 the appropriate congressional committees; and
 ``(3) make such report publicly available.
 ``(l) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Adverse childhood experience.--The term `adverse 
 childhood experience' means a potentially traumatic experience 
 that occurs in childhood and can have a tremendous impact on 
 the child's lifelong health and opportunity outcomes, such as 
 any of the following:
 ``(A) Abuse, such as any of the following:
 ``(i) Emotional and psychological abuse.
 ``(ii) Physical abuse.
 ``(iii) Sexual abuse.
 ``(B) Household challenges such as any of the 
 following:
 ``(i) A household member is treated 
 violently.
 ``(ii) A household member has a substance 
 use disorder.
 ``(iii) A household member has a mental 
 health condition.
 ``(iv) Parental separation or divorce.
 ``(v) A household member is incarcerated, 
 is placed in immigrant detention, or has been 
 deported.
 ``(vi) A household member has a life-
 threatening illness such as COVID-19.
 ``(C) Neglect.
 ``(D) Living in--
 ``(i) impoverished communities that lack 
 access to human services;
 ``(ii) areas of high unemployment 
 neighborhoods; or
 ``(iii) communities experiencing de facto 
 segregation.
 ``(E) Experiencing food insecurity and poor 
 nutrition.
 ``(F) Witnessing violence.
 ``(G) Involvement with the foster system.
 ``(H) Experiencing discrimination.
 ``(I) Dealing with historical and ongoing traumas 
 due to systemic and interpersonal racism.
 ``(J) Dealing with historical and ongoing traumas 
 regarding systemic and interpersonal sexism, 
 homophobia, biphobia, and transphobia.
 ``(K) Dealing with the threat of deportation or 
 detention as a result of immigration status.
 ``(L) The impacts of multigenerational poverty 
 resulting from limited educational and economic 
 opportunities.
 ``(M) Living through natural disasters such as 
 earthquakes, forest fires, floods, or hurricanes.
 ``(2) Care coordination.--The term `care coordination' 
 means an active, ongoing process that--
 ``(A) assists children ages 0 through 5 at risk of, 
 or who have experienced, an adverse childhood 
 experience, and their caregivers, including prenatal 
 people of any age, to identify, access, and use 
 community resources and services;
 ``(B) is client centered and comprehensive of the 
 services a child or caregiver may need;
 ``(C) ensures a closed loop referral by obtaining 
 feedback from the families served; and
 ``(D) works across systems and services to promote 
 collaboration to effectively meet the needs of 
 community members.
 ``(3) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian Tribe' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian Self-
 Determination and Education Assistance Act.
 ``(4) Protective factors.--The term `protective factors' 
 refers to any supportive element in a child or caretaker's life 
 that helps the child or caretaker to withstand trauma such as a 
 stable school environment or supportive peer relationships.
 ``(m) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--To carry out this section, there is 
 authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for each of the 5 
 fiscal years following the fiscal year in which this section is 
 enacted.
 ``(2) Grants to indian tribes.--Of the amount made 
 available to carry out this section for a fiscal year, the 
 Secretary shall use not less than 10 percent of such amount for 
 grants to eligible entities that are Indian Tribes.
 ``(3) Administrative expenses.--Of the amount made 
 available to carry out this section for a fiscal year, the 
 Secretary may use not more than 15 percent of such amount for 
 administrative expenses, including the expenses of the 
 Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services for compiling and 
 reporting information.
 ``(4) Technical assistance.--Of the amount made available 
 to carry out this section for a fiscal year, the Secretary may 
 reserve up to 5 percent of such amount to provide technical 
 assistance to eligible entities in preparing and submitting 
 applications under this section.''.

SEC. 6703. IMPROVING ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH.

 (a) Access to Clinical Social Workers.--Section 1833(a)(1) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``such negotiated 
 rate,,'' and inserting ``such negotiated rate,''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (F)(ii) by striking ``75 percent of the 
 amount determined for payment of a psychologist under clause 
 (L)'' and inserting ``85 percent of the fee schedule amount 
 provided under section 1848''.
 (b) Access to Clinical Social Worker Services Provided to Residents 
of Skilled Nursing Facilities.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1888(e)(2)(A)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(e)(2)(A)(ii)), as amended by 
 section 6101(a)(5), is amended by inserting ``clinical social 
 worker services,'' after ``peer support specialist services (as 
 defined in section 1861(qqq)(3)),''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1861(hh)(2) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(hh)(2)) is amended by 
 striking ``and other than services furnished to an inpatient of 
 a skilled nursing facility which the facility is required to 
 provide as a requirement for participation''.
 (c) Access to the Complete Set of Clinical Social Worker 
Services.--Section 1861(hh)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(hh)(2)) is further amended by striking ``for the diagnosis and 
treatment of mental illnesses (other than services'' and inserting 
``(including services for the diagnosis and treatment of mental 
illnesses or services for health and behavior assessment and 
intervention (identified as of January 1, 2022, by HCPCS codes 96150 
through 96161 (and any succeeding codes)), but not including 
services''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2025.

SEC. 6704. PROGRAM TO ESTABLISH PUBLIC-PRIVATE CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
 INCREASE THE AVAILABLE WORKFORCE OF SCHOOL-BASED MENTAL 
 HEALTH SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 (a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall carry out a program 
under which eligible graduate institutions may enter into an agreement 
with the Secretary to cover a portion of the cost of attendance of a 
participating student, which contributions shall be matched by 
equivalent contributions towards such cost of attendance by the 
Secretary.
 (b) Designation of Program.--The program under this section shall 
be known as the ``Mental Health Excellence in Schools Program''.
 (c) Agreements.--The Secretary shall enter into an agreement with 
each eligible graduate institution seeking to participate in the 
program under this section. Each agreement shall specify the following:
 (1) The manner (whether by direct grant, scholarship, or 
 otherwise) in which the eligible graduate institution will 
 contribute to the cost of attendance of a participating 
 student.
 (2) The maximum amount of the contribution to be made by 
 the eligible graduate institution with respect to any 
 particular participating student in any given academic year.
 (3) The maximum number of individuals for whom the eligible 
 graduate institution will make contributions in any given 
 academic year.
 (4) That the eligible graduate institution, in selecting 
 participating students to receive assistance under the program, 
 shall prioritize the participating students described in 
 subsection (d)(2).
 (5) Such other matters as the Secretary and the eligible 
 graduate institution determine appropriate.
 (d) Outreach.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) make publicly available and periodically update on the 
 internet website of the Department of Education a list of the 
 eligible graduate institutions participating in the program 
 under this section that shall specify, for each such graduate 
 institution, appropriate information on the agreement between 
 the Secretary and such eligible graduate institution under 
 subsection (c); and
 (2) conduct outreach about the program under this section 
 to participating students who, as undergraduates--
 (A) received a Federal Pell Grant under section 401 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a); 
 or
 (B) attended an institution listed in section 
 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1067q(a)).
 (e) Matching Contributions.--The Secretary may provide a 
contribution of not more than 50 percent of the cost of attendance of a 
participating student if the eligible graduate institution at which 
such student is enrolled enters into an agreement under subsection (c) 
with the Secretary to match such contribution.
 (f) Monitoring and Evaluation.--As a condition of participation in 
the program under this section, each eligible graduate institution 
shall agree to submit an annual report to the Secretary describing--
 (1) the number of students served by the program;
 (2) the percentage of tuition cost covered by the program;
 (3) the number of participating students who were also 
 recipients of a Federal Pell Grant; and
 (4) as applicable, the graduation rates and post-graduate 
 employment of participating students.
 (g) Interim Report.--Not later than 2 years after the first 
contributions are provided under this section, the Secretary shall 
submit an interim report to Congress based on the annual reports 
required by subsection (f).
 (h) Independent National Evaluation.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 4 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide for the 
 commencement of an independent national evaluation of the 
 outcomes and effectiveness of the program under this section.
 (2) Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days after 
 receiving the results of such independent national evaluation, 
 the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress containing the 
 findings of the evaluation and the Secretary's recommendations 
 for improvements to the program.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Cost of attendance.--The term ``cost of attendance'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 472 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087ll).
 (2) Eligible graduate institution.--The term ``eligible 
 graduate institution'' means an institution of higher education 
 that offers a program of study that leads to a graduate 
 degree--
 (A) in school psychology that is accredited or 
 approved by the National Association of School 
 Psychologists' Program Accreditation Board or the 
 Commission on Accreditation of the American 
 Psychological Association and that prepares students in 
 such program for the State licensing or certification 
 examination in school psychology at the specialist 
 level;
 (B) in an accredited school counseling program that 
 prepares students in such program for the State 
 licensing or certification examination in school 
 counseling;
 (C) in school social work that is accredited by the 
 Council on Social Work Education and that prepares 
 students in such program for the State licensing or 
 certification examination in school social work;
 (D) in another school-based mental health field 
 that prepares students in such program for the State 
 licensing or certification examination in such field, 
 if applicable; or
 (E) in any combination of study described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (D).
 (3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (4) Participating student.--The term ``participating 
 student'' means an individual who is enrolled in a graduate 
 degree program in a school-based mental health field at a 
 participating eligible graduate institution.
 (5) School-based mental health field.--The term ``school-
 based mental health field'' means any of the following fields:
 (A) School counseling.
 (B) School social work.
 (C) School psychology.
 (D) Any other field of study that leads to 
 employment as a school-based mental health services 
 provider, as determined by the Secretary.
 (6) School-based mental health services provider.--The term 
 ``school-based mental health services provider'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 4102 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7112).
 (7) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.
 (j) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section--
 (1) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 (2) $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2026; and
 (3) $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2027 through 2029.

SEC. 6705. SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKERS IMPROVING STUDENT SUCCESS.

 (a) School Social Worker Grants.--
 (1) Purposes.--The purpose of this section is to assist 
 States and local educational agencies in hiring additional 
 school social workers in order to increase access to mental 
 health and other student support services to students in 
 elementary schools and secondary schools in the United States 
 to the minimum ratios recommended by the National Association 
 of Social Workers, the School Social Work Association of 
 America, and the American Council for School Social Work of 1 
 school social worker for every 250 students, and 1 school 
 social worker for every 50 students when a social worker is 
 providing services to students with intensive needs.
 (2) ESEA amendments.--
 (A) In general.--Subpart 4 of part F of title IV of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7291 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:

``SEC. 4645. GRANTS FOR SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKERS.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amounts appropriated under 
 subsection (g), the Secretary shall award grants to high-need 
 local educational agencies to enable such agencies to retain 
 school social workers employed by such agencies or to hire 
 additional school social workers.
 ``(2) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section shall 
 be awarded for a period not to exceed 4 years.
 ``(3) Supplement, not supplant.--Funds made available under 
 this section shall be used to supplement, and not to supplant, 
 other Federal, State, or local funds used for hiring and 
 retaining school social workers.
 ``(b) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this section, a high-need local educational agency shall submit 
 to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph 
 (1) shall include an assurance that each school social worker 
 who receives assistance under the grant will provide the 
 services described in subsection (d), and a description of the 
 specific services to be provided by such social worker.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--A high-need local educational agency receiving 
a grant under this section--
 ``(1) shall use the grant--
 ``(A) to achieve a ratio of not less than 1 school 
 social worker for every 250 students served by the 
 agency, by--
 ``(i) retaining school social workers 
 employed by such agency; or
 ``(ii)(I) employing additional school 
 social workers; or
 ``(II) hiring contractors to serve as 
 school social workers only in a case in which--
 ``(aa) the local educational agency 
 demonstrates to the Secretary that the 
 agency--
 ``(AA) has not been able to 
 employ a sufficient number of 
 school social workers under 
 subclause (I) to achieve such 
 ratio despite strong and 
 continuing efforts to recruit 
 and employ school social 
 workers; and
 ``(BB) hiring contractors 
 is the only viable option to 
 ensure students have adequate 
 access to school social work 
 services; and
 ``(bb) each such contractor meets 
 the requirements of subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B) of subsection (h)(2); and
 ``(B) to ensure that each school social worker who 
 receives assistance under such grant provides the 
 services described in subsection (d); and
 ``(2) may use the grant to reimburse school social workers 
 who receive assistance under such grant for--
 ``(A) in the case of a school served by the agency 
 in which the majority of students are higher risk 
 students, to hire or retain additional school social 
 workers in accordance with clauses (i) and (ii) of 
 paragraph (1)(A) to achieve a ratio of not less than 1 
 school social worker for every 50 students;
 ``(B) travel expenses incurred during home visits 
 and other school-related trips;
 ``(C) any additional expenses incurred by such 
 social workers in rendering any service described in 
 subsection (d); and
 ``(D) the cost of clinical social work supervision 
 for such social workers.
 ``(d) Responsibilities of a School Social Worker.--A school social 
worker who receives assistance under a grant under this section shall 
provide the following services:
 ``(1) Identifying high-need students in each school that 
 the social worker serves, and targeting services provided at 
 the school to such students.
 ``(2) Providing students in each school that the school 
 social worker serves, social work services to promote school 
 engagement and improve academic outcomes, including--
 ``(A) counseling and crisis intervention;
 ``(B) trauma-informed services;
 ``(C) evidence-based educational, behavioral, and 
 mental health services (such as implementing multi-
 tiered programs and practices, monitoring progress, and 
 evaluating service effectiveness);
 ``(D) addressing the social and emotional learning 
 needs of students;
 ``(E) promoting a school climate and culture 
 conducive to student learning and teaching excellence 
 (such as promoting effective school policies and 
 administrative procedures, enhancing the professional 
 capacity of school personnel, and facilitating 
 engagement between student, family, school, and 
 community);
 ``(F) providing access to school-based and 
 community based resources (such as promoting a 
 continuum of services, mobilizing resources and 
 promoting assets, and providing leadership, 
 interdisciplinary collaboration, systems coordination, 
 professional consultation, and connecting students and 
 families to resource systems);
 ``(G) working with students, families, schools, and 
 communities to address barriers to educational 
 attainment (such as homelessness and housing 
 insecurity, lack of transportation, food insecurity, 
 equity, social justice issues, access to quality 
 education, and school, family, and community risk 
 factors);
 ``(H) providing assistance to schools and teachers 
 to design social-emotional, educational, behavioral, 
 and mental health interventions;
 ``(I) case management activities to coordinate the 
 delivery of and access to the appropriate social work 
 services to the highest-need students;
 ``(J) home visits to meet the family of students in 
 need of social work services in the home environment;
 ``(K) supervising or coordinating district level 
 school social work services; and
 ``(L) other services the Secretary determines, in 
 partnership with students, educators, and community 
 member voices are necessary to be carried out by such a 
 social worker.
 ``(e) Grant Renewal.--
 ``(1) In general.--A grant awarded under this section may 
 be renewed for additional periods with the same duration as the 
 original grant period.
 ``(2) Continuing eligibility application.--To be eligible 
 for a renewal under this section a high-need local educational 
 agency shall submit to the Secretary, for each renewal, a 
 report on the progress of such agency in retaining and hiring 
 school social workers to achieve the ratio of not less than 1 
 school social worker for every 250 students served by the 
 agency, and shall include--
 ``(A) a description of the staffing expansion of 
 school social workers funded through the original grant 
 received under this section; and
 ``(B) a description of the work conducted by such 
 social workers for higher risk students.
 ``(f) Technical Assistance.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
 assistance to high-need local educational agencies, including 
 such agencies that do not have adequate staff, in applying for 
 grants under this section.
 ``(2) Extension of application period.--The Secretary shall 
 extend any application period for a grant under this section 
 for any high-need local educational agency that--
 ``(A) submits to the Secretary a written 
 notification of the intent to apply for a grant under 
 this section before requesting technical assistance 
 under paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) after submitting the notification under 
 paragraph (1), requests such technical assistance.
 ``(g) Authorization for Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.
 ``(h) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) High-need local educational agency.--The term `high-
 need local educational agency' has the meaning given the term 
 in section 200 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1021).
 ``(2) School social worker.--The term `school social 
 worker' means an individual who--
 ``(A) has a graduate degree in social work from a 
 social work program that is accredited by the Council 
 on Social Work Education; and
 ``(B) meets all other State and local credentialing 
 requirements for practicing as a social worker in an 
 elementary school or secondary school.''.
 (B) Table of contents.--The table of contents in 
 section 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965 is amended by inserting after the item relating 
 to section 4644 the following:

``Sec. 4645. Grants for school social workers.''.
 (b) National Technical Assistance Center for School Social Work.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education, acting through 
 the Assistant Secretary, shall establish an evaluation, 
 documentation, dissemination, and technical assistance resource 
 center to provide appropriate information, training, and 
 technical assistance to States, political subdivisions of 
 States, federally recognized Indian tribes, Tribal 
 organizations, institutions of higher education, State and 
 local educational agencies, and individual students and 
 educators with respect to hiring and retaining school social 
 workers at elementary schools and secondary schools served by 
 local educational agencies.
 (2) Responsibilities of the center.--The center established 
 under paragraph (1) shall conduct activities for the purpose 
 of--
 (A) developing and continuing statewide or Tribal 
 strategies for improving the effectiveness of the 
 school social work workforce;
 (B) studying the costs and effectiveness of school 
 social work programs at institutions of higher 
 education to identify areas of improvement and provide 
 information on relevant issues of importance to State, 
 Tribal, and national policymakers;
 (C) working with Federal agencies and other State, 
 Tribal, and national stakeholders to collect, evaluate, 
 and disseminate data regarding school social work 
 ratios, outcomes and best practices of school-based 
 mental health services, and the impact of expanding the 
 number of school social workers within elementary 
 schools and secondary schools;
 (D) establishing partnerships among national, 
 State, Tribal, and local governments, and local 
 educational agencies, institutions of higher education, 
 non-profit organizations, and State and national trade 
 associations for the purposes of--
 (i) data collection and dissemination;
 (ii) establishing a school social work 
 workforce development program;
 (iii) documenting the success of school 
 social work methods on a national level; and
 (iv) conducting other activities determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) ESEA terms.--Except as otherwise provided, any 
 term used in this subsection that is defined in section 
 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801) shall have the meaning given that 
 term in such section.
 (B) School social worker.--The term ``school social 
 worker'' has the meaning given the term in section 
 4645(h) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965.

SEC. 6706. OPIOID GRANTS TO SUPPORT CAREGIVERS, KINSHIP CARE FAMILIES, 
 AND KINSHIP CAREGIVERS.

 (a) Opioid Grants.--Section 1003(b)(4) of the 21st Century Cures 
Act (42 U.S.C. 290ee-3a(b)(4)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G); 
 and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following:
 ``(F) Supporting opioid abuse prevention and 
 treatment services within a State provided by State and 
 local agencies for children and caregivers, kinship 
 care families, and kinship caregivers through--
 ``(i) workforce recruitment and training;
 ``(ii) health care services (including such 
 services described in subparagraph (D)); and
 ``(iii) foster and adoptive parent 
 recruitment and training.''.
 (b) Definitions.--Section 1003(h) of the 21st Century Cures Act (42 
U.S.C. 290ee-3a(h)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as 
 paragraphs (4) through (6), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Kinship care family.--The term `kinship care family' 
 means a family with a kinship caregiver.
 ``(3) Kinship caregiver.--The term `kinship caregiver' 
 means a relative of a child by blood, marriage, or adoption, 
 who--
 ``(A) lives with the child;
 ``(B) is the primary caregiver of the child because 
 the biological or adoptive parent of the child is 
 unable or unwilling to serve as the primary caregiver 
 of the child; and
 ``(C) has a legal relationship to the child or is 
 raising the child informally.''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1003(i)(1) of the 
21st Century Cures Act (42 U.S.C. 290ee-3a(i)(1)) is amended by 
striking ``2023 through 2027'' and inserting ``2025 through 2029''.
 (d) Set Aside.--Section 1003(i)(3) of the 21st Century Cures Act 
(42 U.S.C. 290ee-3a(i)(3)) is amended by inserting before the period at 
the end ``, and set aside 1 percent to carry out subsection 
(b)(4)(F)''.

SEC. 6707. SUBSTANCE USE AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION AND 
 SUBAGENCIES.

 (a) Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration.--The 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 464H(c) (42 U.S.C. 285n(c)), section 464R(c) 
 (42 U.S.C. 285p(c)), and subsections (b) and (c)(1) of section 
 2303 (42 U.S.C. 300cc-2), by striking ``Administrator of the 
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``Assistant Secretary for 
 Mental Health and Substance Use'';
 (2) in title V (42 U.S.C. 290aa et seq.)--
 (A) in the title heading, by striking ``ABUSE'' and 
 inserting ``USE'';
 (B) in section 501 (42 U.S.C. 290aa)--
 (i) in the section heading, by striking 
 ``abuse'' and inserting ``use''; and
 (ii) in subsection (f)(4), by striking 
 ``Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
 Administration'' and inserting ``Substance Use 
 and Mental Health Services Administration''; 
 and
 (3) by striking ``Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
 Services Administration'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration''.
 (b) Center for Substance Use Services; Center for Substance Use 
Prevention Services.--
 (1) In general.--The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 201 et seq.) is amended--
 (A) in part B of title V (42 U.S.C. 290bb et 
 seq.)--
 (i) in subpart 1, in the subpart heading, 
 by striking ``Abuse Treatment'' and inserting 
 ``Use Services'';
 (ii) in subpart 2, in the subpart heading, 
 by striking ``Abuse Prevention'' and inserting 
 ``Use Prevention Services'';
 (iii) in section 507 (42 U.S.C. 290bb), in 
 the section heading, by striking ``abuse 
 treatment'' and inserting ``use services'';
 (iv) in section 513(a) (42 U.S.C. 290bb-
 6(a)), in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``Abuse Treatment'' and inserting ``Use 
 Services''; and
 (v) in section 515 (42 U.S.C. 290bb-21), in 
 the section heading, by striking ``abuse 
 prevention'' and inserting ``use prevention 
 services'';
 (B) in section 1932(b)(3) (42 U.S.C. 300x-
 32(b)(3)), in the paragraph heading, by striking 
 ``abuse prevention'' and inserting ``use prevention 
 services'';
 (C) in section 1935(b)(2) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-35(b)(2)), in the paragraph 
 heading, by striking ``abuse prevention'' and inserting 
 ``use prevention services'';
 (D) by striking ``Center for Substance Abuse 
 Treatment'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``Center for Substance Use Services''; and
 (E) by striking ``Center for Substance Abuse 
 Prevention'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``Center for Substance Use Prevention Services''.
 (c) Authorities.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
delegate to the Substance Use and Mental Health Services 
Administration, the Center for Substance Use Services, and the Center 
for Substance Use Prevention Services all duties and authorities that, 
as of the date of enactment of this Act, were vested in the Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Center for 
Substance Abuse Treatment, and the Center for Substance Abuse 
Prevention, respectively.
 (d) References.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), any 
 reference in any law, regulation, map, document, paper, or 
 other record of the United States--
 (A) to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
 Services Administration shall be deemed to be a 
 reference to the Substance Use and Mental Health 
 Services Administration;
 (B) to the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment of 
 such Administration shall be deemed to be a reference 
 to the Center for Substance Use Services of such 
 Administration; and
 (C) to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention of 
 such Administration shall be deemed to be a reference 
 to the Center for Substance Use Prevention Services of 
 such Administration.
 (2) Effect.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to alter 
 or affect section 6001(d) of the 21st Century Cures Act (42 
 U.S.C. 290aa note), providing that a reference to the 
 Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration shall be construed to be a reference to the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use.
 (3) References to samhsa.--Notwithstanding this section or 
 the amendments made by this section, the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services may continue to use the acronym ``SAMHSA'' 
 to refer to the Substance Use and Mental Health Services 
 Administration in regulations, maps, documents, papers, and 
 other records of the United States.

 TITLE VII--ADDRESSING HIGH-IMPACT MINORITY DISEASES

 Subtitle A--Cancer

SEC. 7001. LUNG CANCER MORTALITY REDUCTION.

 (a) Sense of Congress Concerning Investment in Lung Cancer 
Research.--It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) lung cancer mortality reduction should be made a 
 national public health priority; and
 (2) a comprehensive mortality reduction program coordinated 
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services is justified and 
 necessary to adequately address and reduce lung cancer 
 mortality.
 (b) Lung Cancer Mortality Reduction Program.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart 1 of part C of title IV of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285 et seq.) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 417H. LUNG CANCER MORTALITY REDUCTION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, the 
Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary 
of Veterans Affairs, the Director of the National Institutes of Health, 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, the Administrator of the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Director of the National Institute on 
Minority Health and Health Disparities, the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, and other members of the Lung Cancer 
Advisory Board established under section 7001(d) of the Health Equity 
and Accountability Act of 2024, shall implement a comprehensive 
program, to be known as the Lung Cancer Mortality Reduction Program, to 
achieve a reduction of at least 25 percent in the mortality rate of 
lung cancer by 2028.
 ``(b) Requirements.--The Program shall include at least the 
following:
 ``(1) With respect to the National Institutes of Health--
 ``(A) a strategic review and prioritization by the 
 National Cancer Institute of research grants to achieve 
 the goal specified in subsection (a);
 ``(B) the provision of funds to enable the Airway 
 Biology and Disease Branch of the National Heart, Lung, 
 and Blood Institute to expand its research programs to 
 include predispositions to lung cancer, the 
 interrelationship between lung cancer and other 
 pulmonary and cardiac disease, and the diagnosis and 
 treatment of such diseases;
 ``(C) the provision of funds to enable the National 
 Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering to 
 expedite the development of computer-assisted 
 diagnostic, surgical, treatment, and drug-testing 
 innovations to reduce lung cancer mortality, such as 
 through expansion of the Institute's Quantum Grant 
 Program and Image-Guided Interventions program; and
 ``(D) the provision of funds to enable the National 
 Institute of Environmental Health Sciences to implement 
 research programs relative to the lung cancer 
 incidence.
 ``(2) With respect to the Food and Drug Administration--
 ``(A) activities under section 529B of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; and
 ``(B) activities under section 561 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to expand access to 
 investigational drugs and devices for the diagnosis, 
 monitoring, or treatment of lung cancer.
 ``(3) With respect to the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, the establishment of an early disease research and 
 management program under section 1511.
 ``(4) With respect to the Agency for Healthcare Research 
 and Quality, the conduct of a biannual review of lung cancer 
 screening, diagnostic, and treatment protocols, and the 
 issuance of updated guidelines.
 ``(5) The promotion (including education) of lung cancer 
 screening within minority and rural populations and the study 
 of the effectiveness of efforts to increase such screening.
 ``(6) The cooperation and coordination of all minority and 
 health disparity programs within the Department of Health and 
 Human Services to ensure that all aspects of the Lung Cancer 
 Mortality Reduction Program under this section adequately 
 address the burden of lung cancer on minority and rural 
 populations.
 ``(7) The cooperation and coordination of all tobacco 
 control and cessation programs within agencies of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services to achieve the goals of 
 the Lung Cancer Mortality Reduction Program under this section 
 with particular emphasis on the coordination of drug and other 
 cessation treatments with early detection protocols.''.
 (2) Federal food, drug, and cosmetic act.--Subchapter B of 
 chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 360aaa et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

``SEC. 529B. DRUGS RELATING TO LUNG CANCER.

 ``(a) In General.--The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to 
a drug described in subsection (b) to the same extent and in the same 
manner as such provisions apply to a drug for a rare disease or 
condition (as defined in section 526).
 ``(b) Qualified Drugs.--A drug described in this subsection is--
 ``(1) a chemoprevention drug for precancerous conditions of 
 the lung;
 ``(2) a drug for targeted therapeutic treatments, including 
 any vaccine, for lung cancer; or
 ``(3) a drug to curtail or prevent nicotine addiction.
 ``(c) Board.--The Board established under section 7001(d) of the 
Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024 shall monitor the program 
implemented under this section.''.
 (3) Access to unapproved therapies.--Section 561(e) of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360bbb(e)) is 
 amended by inserting before the period the following: ``and 
 shall include expanding access to drugs under section 529B, 
 with substantial consideration being given to whether the 
 totality of information available to the Secretary regarding 
 the safety and effectiveness of an investigational drug, as 
 compared to the risk of morbidity and death from the disease, 
 indicates that a patient may obtain more benefit than risk if 
 treated with the drug''.
 (4) CDC.--Title XV of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300k et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

``SEC. 1511. EARLY DISEASE RESEARCH AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.

 ``The Secretary shall establish and implement an early disease 
research and management program targeted at the high incidence and 
mortality rates of lung cancer among minority and low-income 
populations.''.
 (c) Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs.--The 
Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, each in 
coordination with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
engage--
 (1) in the implementation within the Department of Defense 
 and the Department of Veterans Affairs, as the case may be, of 
 an early detection and disease management research program for 
 members of the Armed Forces and veterans whose smoking history 
 and exposure to carcinogens during service on active duty in 
 the Armed Forces has increased their risk for lung cancer; and
 (2) in the implementation of coordinated care programs for 
 members of the Armed Forces and veterans diagnosed with lung 
 cancer.
 (d) Lung Cancer Advisory Board.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall convene a Lung Cancer Advisory Board (referred to in this 
 section as the ``Board'')--
 (A) to monitor the programs established under this 
 section (and the amendments made by this section); and
 (B) to provide annual reports to the Congress 
 concerning benchmarks, expenditures, lung cancer 
 statistics, and the public health impact of such 
 programs.
 (2) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of--
 (A) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
 (B) the Secretary of Defense;
 (C) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; and
 (D) 2 representatives each from the fields of 
 clinical medicine focused on lung cancer, lung cancer 
 research, imaging, drug development, and lung cancer 
 advocacy, to be appointed by the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--To carry out this section (and the 
 amendments made by this section), there are authorized to be 
 appropriated $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2025 and such sums as 
 may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2028.
 (2) Lung cancer mortality reduction program.--The amounts 
 appropriated under paragraph (1) shall be allocated as follows:
 (A) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and such sums 
 as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2026 
 through 2028, for the activities described in section 
 417H(b)(1)(B) of the Public Health Service Act, as 
 added by subsection (b);
 (B) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and such sums 
 as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2026 
 through 2028, for the activities described in section 
 417H(b)(1)(C) of the Public Health Service Act;
 (C) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and such sums 
 as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2026 
 through 2028, for the activities described in section 
 417H(b)(1)(D) of the Public Health Service Act; and
 (D) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and such sums 
 as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2026 
 through 2028, for the activities described in section 
 417H(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.

SEC. 7002. EXPANSION OF PROSTATE CANCER RESEARCH, OUTREACH, SCREENING, 
 TESTING, ACCESS, AND TREATMENT EFFECTIVENESS.

 (a) Prostate Cancer Coordination and Education.--
 (1) Interagency prostate cancer coordination and education 
 task force.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in 
 cooperation with the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, shall establish an Interagency 
 Prostate Cancer Coordination and Education Task Force (in this 
 section referred to as the ``Prostate Cancer Task Force'').
 (2) Duties.--The Prostate Cancer Task Force shall--
 (A) develop a summary of advances in prostate 
 cancer research supported or conducted by Federal 
 agencies relevant to the diagnosis, prevention, and 
 treatment of prostate cancer, including psychosocial 
 impairments related to prostate cancer treatment, and 
 compile a list of best practices that warrant broader 
 adoption in health care programs;
 (B) consider establishing, and advocating for, a 
 guidance to enable physicians to allow screening of men 
 who are age 74 or older, on a case-by-case basis, 
 taking into account quality of life and family history 
 of prostate cancer;
 (C) share and coordinate information on research 
 and health care program activities by the Federal 
 Government, including activities related to--
 (i) determining how to improve research and 
 health care programs, including psychosocial 
 impairments related to prostate cancer 
 treatment;
 (ii) identifying any gaps in the overall 
 research inventory and in health care programs;
 (iii) identifying opportunities to promote 
 translation of research into practice; and
 (iv) maximizing the effects of Federal 
 Government efforts by identifying opportunities 
 for collaboration and leveraging of resources 
 in research and health care programs that serve 
 individuals who are susceptible to or diagnosed 
 with prostate cancer;
 (D) develop a comprehensive interagency strategy 
 and advise relevant Federal agencies in the 
 solicitation of proposals for collaborative, 
 multidisciplinary research and health care programs, 
 including proposals to evaluate factors that may be 
 related to the etiology of prostate cancer, that 
 would--
 (i) result in innovative approaches to 
 study emerging scientific opportunities or 
 eliminate knowledge gaps in research to improve 
 the prostate cancer research portfolio of the 
 Federal Government; and
 (ii) outline key research questions, 
 methodologies, and knowledge gaps;
 (E) develop a coordinated message related to 
 screening and treatment for prostate cancer to be 
 reflected in educational and beneficiary materials for 
 Federal health programs as such materials are updated; 
 and
 (F) not later than two years after the date of the 
 establishment of the Prostate Cancer Task Force, submit 
 to the expert advisory panels appointed under paragraph 
 (4) to be reviewed and returned within 30 days, and 
 then within 90 days submitted to Congress, 
 recommendations--
 (i) regarding any appropriate changes to 
 research and health care programs, including 
 recommendations to improve the research 
 portfolio of the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs, the Department of Defense, the 
 National Institutes of Health, and other 
 Federal agencies to ensure that scientifically 
 based strategic planning is implemented in 
 support of research and health care program 
 priorities;
 (ii) designed to ensure that the research 
 and health care programs and activities of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department 
 of Defense, the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, and other Federal agencies are free 
 of unnecessary duplication;
 (iii) regarding public participation in 
 decisions relating to prostate cancer research 
 and health care programs to increase the 
 involvement of patient advocates, community 
 organizations, and medical associations 
 representing a broad geographical area;
 (iv) on how to best disseminate information 
 on prostate cancer research and progress 
 achieved by health care programs;
 (v) on how to expand partnerships between 
 public entities, including Federal agencies, 
 and private entities to encourage 
 collaborative, cross-cutting research and 
 health care delivery;
 (vi) assessing any cost savings and 
 efficiencies realized through the efforts 
 identified in, and supported through, this 
 subsection and recommending expansion of those 
 efforts that have proved most promising while 
 also ensuring against any conflicts in 
 directives in law;
 (vii) identifying key priority action items 
 from among the recommendations specified in 
 clauses (i) through (vi); and
 (viii) with respect to the level of funding 
 needed by each agency to implement such 
 recommendations.
 (3) Members of the prostate cancer task force.--The 
 Prostate Cancer Task Force shall be composed of representatives 
 from such Federal agencies as the head of each such applicable 
 agency determines necessary, so as to coordinate a uniform 
 message relating to prostate cancer screening and treatment 
 where appropriate, including representatives of each of the 
 following:
 (A) The Department of Veterans Affairs, including 
 representatives of each relevant program area of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs.
 (B) The Prostate Cancer Research Program of the 
 Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program of 
 the Department of Defense.
 (C) The Department of Health and Human Services, 
 including, at a minimum, representatives of each of the 
 following:
 (i) The National Institutes of Health.
 (ii) National research institutes and 
 centers, including the National Cancer 
 Institute, the National Institute of Allergy 
 and Infectious Diseases, and the Office of 
 Minority Health.
 (iii) The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services.
 (iv) The Food and Drug Administration.
 (v) The Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention.
 (vi) The Agency for Healthcare Research and 
 Quality.
 (vii) The Health Resources and Services 
 Administration.
 (4) Appointing expert advisory panels.--The Prostate Cancer 
 Task Force shall appoint expert advisory panels, as the task 
 force determines appropriate, to provide input and concurrence 
 from--
 (A) individuals and organizations from the medical, 
 prostate cancer patient and advocate, research, and 
 delivery communities with expertise in prostate cancer 
 diagnosis, treatment, and research, including 
 practicing urologists, primary care providers, and 
 others; and
 (B) individuals with expertise in education and 
 outreach to underserved populations affected by 
 prostate cancer.
 (5) Meetings.--The Prostate Cancer Task Force shall convene 
 not less frequently than twice each year, or more frequently as 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs determines to be appropriate.
 (6) Federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory 
 Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall apply to the Prostate 
 Cancer Task Force.
 (7) Sunset date.--The Prostate Cancer Task Force shall 
 terminate on September 30, 2026.
 (b) Prostate Cancer Research.--
 (1) Research coordination program.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
 in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall establish 
 and carry out a program to coordinate and intensify 
 prostate cancer research.
 (B) Elements.--The program established under 
 subparagraph (A) shall--
 (i) develop advances in diagnostic and 
 prognostic methods and tests, including 
 biomarkers and an improved prostate cancer 
 screening blood test, including improvements or 
 alternatives to the prostate specific antigen 
 test and additional tests to distinguish 
 indolent from aggressive disease;
 (ii) develop a better understanding of the 
 etiology of the disease (including an analysis 
 of lifestyle factors proven to be involved in 
 higher rates of prostate cancer, such as 
 obesity and diet, and in different ethnic, 
 racial, and socioeconomic groups, such as the 
 African-American, Latino or Hispanic, and 
 American Indian populations and men with a 
 family history of prostate cancer) to improve 
 prevention efforts;
 (iii) expand basic research into prostate 
 cancer, including studies of fundamental 
 molecular and cellular mechanisms;
 (iv) identify and provide clinical testing 
 of novel agents for the prevention and 
 treatment of prostate cancer;
 (v) establish clinical registries for 
 prostate cancer;
 (vi) use the National Institute of 
 Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering and the 
 National Cancer Institute for assessment of 
 appropriate imaging modalities; and
 (vii) address such other matters relating 
 to prostate cancer research as may be 
 identified by the Federal agencies 
 participating in such program.
 (C) Underserved minority grant program.--
 (i) In general.--In carrying out the 
 program established under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
 entities--
 (I) to carry out components of the 
 research outlined in subparagraph (B);
 (II) to integrate and build upon 
 existing knowledge gained from 
 comparative effectiveness research; and
 (III) to recognize and address--
 (aa) the racial and ethnic 
 disparities in the incidence 
 and mortality rates of prostate 
 cancer and men with a family 
 history of prostate cancer;
 (bb) any barriers in access 
 to care and participation in 
 clinical trials that are 
 specific to racial, ethnic, and 
 other underserved minorities 
 and men with a family history 
 of prostate cancer;
 (cc) outreach and 
 educational efforts to raise 
 awareness among the populations 
 described in item (bb); and
 (dd) appropriate access and 
 utilization of imaging 
 modalities.
 (ii) Eligible entity defined.--In this 
 subparagraph, the term ``eligible entity'' 
 means any public, private, nonprofit, or for-
 profit organization that the Secretary 
 determines would be capable to conduct medical 
 research and other requirements under this 
 paragraph and is otherwise eligible for 
 research funding from the Federal Government.
 (2) Prostate cancer advisory board.--
 (A) In general.--There is established in the Office 
 of the Chief Scientist of the Food and Drug 
 Administration a Prostate Cancer Scientific Advisory 
 Board.
 (B) Duties.--The board established under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be responsible for accelerating 
 real-time sharing of the latest research data and 
 accelerating movement of new medicines for the 
 treatment of prostate cancer to patients.
 (c) Telehealth and Rural Access Pilot Projects.--
 (1) Establishment of pilot projects.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
 in cooperation with the Secretary of Defense and the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in 
 this subsection collectively as the ``Secretaries'') 
 shall establish four-year telehealth pilot projects for 
 the purpose of analyzing the clinical outcomes and 
 cost-effectiveness associated with telehealth services 
 in a variety of geographic areas that contain high 
 proportions of medically underserved populations, 
 including African Americans, Latinos or Hispanics, 
 American Indians or Alaska Natives, and those in rural 
 areas.
 (B) Efficient and effective care.--Pilot projects 
 established under subparagraph (A) shall promote 
 efficient use of specialist care through better 
 coordination of primary care and physician extender 
 teams in underserved areas and more effectively employ 
 tumor boards to better counsel patients.
 (2) Eligible entities.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretaries shall select 
 eligible entities to participate in the pilot projects 
 established under this subsection.
 (B) Priority.--In selecting eligible entities to 
 participate in the pilot projects under this 
 subsection, the Secretaries shall give priority to 
 entities located in medically underserved areas, 
 particularly those that include African Americans, 
 Latinos and Hispanics, and facilities of the Indian 
 Health Service, including facilities operated by the 
 Indian Health Service, tribally operated facilities, 
 and facilities administered by an Urban Indian 
 organization (as defined in section 4 of the Indian 
 Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) pursuant 
 to title V of that Act (25 U.S.C. 1651 et seq.), and 
 those in rural areas.
 (3) Evaluation.--The Secretaries shall, through the pilot 
 projects established under this subsection, evaluate--
 (A) the effective and economic delivery of care in 
 diagnosing and treating prostate cancer with the use of 
 telehealth services in medically underserved and Tribal 
 areas including collaborative uses of health 
 professionals and integration of the range of 
 telehealth and other technologies;
 (B) the effectiveness of improving the capacity of 
 nonmedical providers and nonspecialized medical 
 providers to provide health services for prostate 
 cancer in medically underserved and Tribal areas, 
 including the exploration of innovative medical home 
 models with collaboration between urologists, other 
 relevant medical specialists, including oncologists, 
 radiologists, and primary care teams, and coordination 
 of care through the efficient use of primary care teams 
 and physician extenders; and
 (C) the effectiveness of using telehealth services 
 to provide prostate cancer treatment in medically 
 underserved areas, including the use of tumor boards to 
 facilitate better patient counseling.
 (4) Report.--Not later than one year after the completion 
 of the pilot projects under this subsection, the Secretaries 
 shall submit to Congress a report describing the outcomes of 
 such pilot projects, including any cost savings and 
 efficiencies realized, and providing recommendations, if any, 
 for expanding the use of telehealth services.
 (d) Education and Awareness.--
 (1) Campaign.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
 shall develop a national education campaign for 
 prostate cancer.
 (B) Elements.--The campaign developed under 
 subparagraph (A) shall involve the use of written 
 educational materials and public service announcements 
 consistent with the findings of the Prostate Cancer 
 Task Force under subsection (a) that are intended to 
 encourage men to seek prostate cancer screening when 
 appropriate.
 (2) Racial disparities and the population of men with a 
 family history of prostate cancer.--In developing the campaign 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall 
 ensure that educational materials and public service 
 announcements used in the campaign are more readily available 
 in communities experiencing racial disparities in the incidence 
 and mortality rates of prostate cancer and to men of any race 
 classification with a family history of prostate cancer.
 (3) Grants.--In carrying out the campaign under this 
 subsection, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall award 
 grants to nonprofit private entities to enable such entities to 
 test alternative outreach and education strategies.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section for the period of fiscal years 
2025 through 2029 an amount equal to the amount of savings for the 
Federal Government projected to be achieved over such period by 
implementation of this section.

SEC. 7003. PROSTATE RESEARCH, IMAGING, AND MEN'S EDUCATION.

 (a) Research and Development of Prostate Cancer Imaging 
Technologies.--
 (1) Expansion of research.--The Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services (referred to in this section as the 
 ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health and the Administrator of the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, and in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Defense, shall carry out a program to expand 
 and intensify research to develop innovative advanced imaging 
 technologies for prostate cancer detection, diagnosis, and 
 treatment comparable to state-of-the-art mammography 
 technologies.
 (2) Early stage research.--In implementing the program 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary, acting through the 
 Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration, shall carry out a grant program to encourage 
 the early stages of research in prostate imaging to develop and 
 implement new ideas, proof of concepts, and pilot studies for 
 high-risk technologic innovation in prostate cancer imaging 
 that would have a high potential impact for improving patient 
 care, including individualized care, quality of life, and cost-
 effectiveness.
 (3) Large scale later stage research.--In implementing the 
 program under paragraph (1), the Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall utilize 
 the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering 
 and the National Cancer Institute for advanced stages of 
 research in prostate imaging, including technology development 
 and clinical trials for projects determined by the Secretary to 
 have demonstrated promising preliminary results and proof of 
 concept.
 (4) Interdisciplinary private-public partnerships.--In 
 developing the program under paragraph (1), the Secretary, 
 acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration, shall establish interdisciplinary 
 private-public partnerships to develop and implement research 
 strategies for expedited innovation in imaging and image-guided 
 treatment and to conduct such research.
 (5) Racial disparities.--In developing the program under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall recognize and address--
 (A) the racial disparities in the incidences of 
 prostate cancer and mortality rates with respect to 
 such disease; and
 (B) any barriers in access to care and 
 participation in clinical trials that are specific to 
 racial minorities.
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), there 
 is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
 subsection, $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 
 through 2029.
 (B) Specific allocations.--Of the amount authorized 
 to be appropriated under subparagraph (A) for each of 
 the fiscal years described in such subparagraph--
 (i) no less than 10 percent may be used to 
 carry out the grant program under paragraph 
 (2); and
 (ii) no more than 1 percent may be used to 
 carry out paragraph (4).
 (b) Public Awareness and Education Campaign.--
 (1) National campaign.--The Secretary shall carry out a 
 national campaign to increase the awareness and knowledge of 
 individuals in the United States with respect to the need for 
 prostate cancer screening and for improved detection 
 technologies.
 (2) Requirements.--The national campaign conducted under 
 this subsection shall include--
 (A) roles for the Health Resources Services 
 Administration, the Office of Minority Health of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Office of 
 Minority Health and Health Equity of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention; and
 (B) the development and distribution of written 
 educational materials, and the development and placing 
 of public service announcements, that are intended to 
 encourage men to seek prostate cancer screening and to 
 create awareness of the need for improved imaging 
 technologies for prostate cancer screening and 
 diagnosis, including in-vitro blood testing and imaging 
 technologies.
 (3) Racial disparities.--In developing the national 
 campaign under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall recognize and 
 address--
 (A) the racial disparities in the incidences of 
 prostate cancer and mortality rates with respect to 
 such disease; and
 (B) any barriers in access to care and 
 participation in clinical trials that are specific to 
 racial minorities.
 (4) Grants.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
 award grants to nonprofit private entities to enable such 
 entities to test alternative outreach and education strategies 
 to increase the awareness and knowledge of individuals in the 
 United States with respect to the need for prostate cancer 
 screening and improved imaging technologies.
 (5) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (c) Improving Prostate Cancer Screening Blood Tests.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Secretary of Defense, shall support research to develop an 
 improved prostate cancer screening blood test using in-vitro 
 detection.
 (2) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, $20,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (d) Reporting and Compliance.--
 (1) Report and strategy.--Not later than 12 months after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 submit to Congress a report that details the strategy of the 
 Secretary for implementing the requirements of this section and 
 the status of such efforts.
 (2) Full compliance.--Not later than 36 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that--
 (A) describes the research and development and 
 public awareness and education campaigns funded under 
 this section;
 (B) provides evidence that projects involving high-
 risk, high-impact technologic innovation, proof of 
 concept, and pilot studies are prioritized;
 (C) provides evidence that the Secretary recognizes 
 and addresses any barriers in access to care and 
 participation in clinical trials that are specific to 
 racial minorities in the implementation of this 
 section;
 (D) contains assurances that all the other 
 provisions of this section are fully implemented; and
 (E) certifies compliance with the provisions of 
 this section, or in the case of a Federal agency that 
 has not complied with any of such provisions, an 
 explanation as to such failure to comply.

SEC. 7004. PROSTATE CANCER DETECTION RESEARCH AND EDUCATION.

 (a) Plan To Develop and Validate a Test or Tests for Prostate 
Cancer.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), acting 
 through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, 
 shall establish an advisory council on prostate cancer 
 (referred to in this section as the ``advisory council'') to 
 draft a plan for the development and validation of an accurate 
 test or tests, such as biomarkers or imaging, to detect and 
 diagnose prostate cancer.
 (2) Advisory council.--
 (A) Membership.--
 (i) Federal members.--The advisory council 
 shall be composed of the following experts:
 (I) A designee of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention.
 (II) A designee of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 (III) A designee of the Office of 
 the Director of the National Cancer 
 Institute.
 (IV) A designee of the Director of 
 the Department of Defense 
 Congressionally Directed Medical 
 Research Programs.
 (V) A designee of the Director of 
 the National Institute of Biomedical 
 Imaging and Bioengineering.
 (VI) A designee of the Director of 
 the National Institute of General 
 Medical Sciences.
 (VII) A designee of the Director of 
 the National Institute on Minority 
 Health and Health Disparities.
 (VIII) A designee of the Director 
 of the National Institutes of Health.
 (IX) A designee of the Commissioner 
 of Food and Drugs.
 (X) A designee of the Director of 
 the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
 Quality.
 (XI) A designee of the Director of 
 the Telemedicine and Advanced 
 Technology Research Center of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (ii) Non-federal members.--In addition to 
 the members described in clause (i), the 
 advisory council shall include 8 expert members 
 from outside the Federal Government to be 
 appointed by the Secretary, which shall 
 include--
 (I) 2 prostate cancer patient 
 advocates;
 (II) 2 health care providers with a 
 range of expertise and experience in 
 prostate cancer; and
 (III) 4 leading researchers with 
 prostate cancer-related expertise in a 
 range of clinical disciplines.
 (B) Meetings.--The advisory council shall meet 
 quarterly and such meetings shall be open to the 
 public.
 (C) Advice.--The advisory council shall advise the 
 Secretary, or the Secretary's designee.
 (D) Annual report.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the advisory council 
 shall provide to the Secretary, or the Secretary's 
 designee, and Congress--
 (i) an initial evaluation of all federally 
 funded efforts in prostate cancer research 
 relating to the development and validation of 
 an accurate test or tests to detect and 
 diagnose prostate cancer;
 (ii) a plan for the development and 
 validation of a reliable test or tests for the 
 detection and accurate diagnosis of prostate 
 cancer; and
 (iii) a set of standards for prostate 
 cancer screening, developed in coordination 
 with the United States Preventive Services Task 
 Force, to ensure that any tools for screening, 
 detection, and diagnosis developed in 
 accordance with the plan under clause (ii) will 
 meet the requirements of the Task Force for 
 recommendation as a proven preventive or 
 diagnostic service.
 (E) Termination.--The advisory council shall 
 terminate on December 31, 2028.
 (3) Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
 the Secretary may make available $1,000,000, from any 
 unobligated amounts appropriated to the National Institutes of 
 Health, for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029 to carry out 
 this subsection.
 (b) Coordination and Intensification of Prostate Cancer Research.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, shall 
 coordinate and intensify research in accordance with the plan 
 provided under subsection (a)(2)(D)(ii), with particular 
 attention provided to leveraging existing research to develop 
 and validate a test or tests, such as biomarkers or imaging, to 
 detect and accurately diagnose prostate cancer in order to 
 improve quality of life for millions of individuals in the 
 United States, and decrease health care system costs.
 (2) Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
 the Secretary may make available $30,000,000, from any 
 unobligated amounts appropriated to the National Institutes of 
 Health, for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029 to carry out 
 this subsection.

SEC. 7005. NATIONAL PROSTATE CANCER COUNCIL.

 (a) National Prostate Cancer Council.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Office of 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this 
 section as the ``Secretary'') the National Prostate Cancer 
 Council on Screening, Early Detection, Assessment, and 
 Monitoring of Prostate Cancer (referred to in this section as 
 the ``Council'').
 (2) Purpose of the council.--The Council shall--
 (A) develop and implement a national strategic plan 
 for the accelerated creation, advancement, and testing 
 of diagnostic tools to improve screening, early 
 detection, assessment, and monitoring of prostate 
 cancer, including--
 (i) early detection of aggressive prostate 
 cancer to save lives;
 (ii) monitoring of tumor response to 
 treatment, including recurrence and 
 progression; and
 (iii) accurate assessment and surveillance 
 of indolent disease to reduce unnecessary 
 biopsies and treatment;
 (B) provide information and coordination of 
 prostate cancer research and services across all 
 Federal agencies;
 (C) review diagnostic tools and their overall 
 effectiveness at screening, detecting, assessing, and 
 monitoring of prostate cancer;
 (D) evaluate all programs in prostate cancer that 
 are in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, 
 including Federal budget requests and approvals and 
 public-private partnerships;
 (E) submit an annual report to the Secretary and 
 Congress on the creation and implementation of the 
 national strategic plan under subparagraph (A); and
 (F) ensure the inclusion of men at high risk for 
 prostate cancer, including men from minority ethnic and 
 racial populations and men who are least likely to 
 receive care, in clinical, research, and service 
 efforts, with the purpose of decreasing health 
 disparities.
 (3) Membership.--
 (A) Federal members.--The Council shall be led by 
 the Secretary or the Secretary's designee and composed 
 of the following experts:
 (i) Two representatives of the National 
 Institutes of Health, including 1 
 representative of the National Institute of 
 Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering and 1 
 representative of the National Cancer 
 Institute.
 (ii) A representative of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention.
 (iii) A representative of the Centers for 
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 (iv) A designee of the Director of the 
 Department of Defense Congressionally Directed 
 Medical Research Programs.
 (v) A designee of the Director of the 
 Office of Minority Health.
 (vi) A representative of the Food and Drug 
 Administration.
 (vii) A representative of the Agency for 
 Healthcare Research and Quality.
 (B) Non-federal members.--In addition to the 
 members described in subparagraph (A), the Council 
 shall include 14 expert members from outside the 
 Federal Government, which shall include--
 (i) 6 prostate cancer patient advocates, 
 including--
 (I) 2 patient-survivors;
 (II) 2 caregivers of prostate 
 cancer patients; and
 (III) 2 representatives from 
 national prostate cancer disease 
 organizations that fund research or 
 have demonstrated experience in 
 providing assistance to patients, 
 families, and medical professionals, 
 including information on health care 
 options, education, and referral; and
 (ii) 8 health care stakeholders with 
 specific expertise in prostate cancer research 
 in the critical areas of clinical expertise, 
 including medical oncology, radiology, 
 radiation oncology, urology, and pathology.
 (4) Meetings.--The Council shall meet quarterly and 
 meetings shall be open to the public.
 (5) Advice.--The Council shall advise the Secretary, or the 
 Secretary's designee.
 (6) Annual report.--The Council shall submit annual 
 reports, beginning not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, to the Secretary or the Secretary's 
 designee and to Congress. The annual report shall include--
 (A) in the first year--
 (i) an evaluation of all federally funded 
 efforts in prostate cancer research and gaps 
 relating to the development and validation of 
 diagnostic tools for prostate cancer; and
 (ii) recommendations for priority actions 
 to expand, eliminate, coordinate, or condense 
 programs based on the performance, mission, and 
 purpose of the programs; and
 (B) annually thereafter for 5 years--
 (i) an outline for the development and 
 implementation of a national research plan for 
 creation and validation of accurate diagnostic 
 tools to improve prostate cancer care in 
 accordance with paragraph (1);
 (ii) roles for the National Cancer 
 Institute, National Institute on Minority 
 Health and Health Disparities, and the Office 
 of Minority Health of the Department of Health 
 and Human Services;
 (iii) an analysis of the disparities in the 
 incidence and mortality rates of prostate 
 cancer in men at high risk of the disease, 
 including individuals with family history, 
 increasing age, or African-American heritage; 
 and
 (iv) a review of the progress towards the 
 realization of the proposed strategic plan.
 (7) Termination.--The Council shall terminate on December 
 31, 2027.

SEC. 7006. IMPROVED MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR CERTAIN BREAST AND CERVICAL 
 CANCER PATIENTS IN THE TERRITORIES.

 (a) Elimination of Funding Limitations.--Section 1108(g)(4) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)(4)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of''; 
 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following: ``With respect to 
 fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 2024, payment for 
 medical assistance for individuals who are eligible for such 
 assistance only on the basis of section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) shall not be taken into account in 
 applying subsection (f) (as increased in accordance with this 
 subsection) to Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, or American Samoa for such fiscal 
 year.''.
 (b) Application of Enhanced FMAP for Highest State.--Section 
1905(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: ``Notwithstanding the first sentence of this 
subsection, with respect to medical assistance described in clause (4) 
of such sentence that is furnished in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, or American Samoa in a fiscal year, 
the Federal medical assistance percentage is equal to the highest such 
percentage applied under such clause for such fiscal year for any of 
the 50 States or the District of Columbia that provides such medical 
assistance for any portion of such fiscal year.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to payment for medical assistance for items and services 
furnished on or after October 1, 2024.

SEC. 7007. CANCER PREVENTION AND TREATMENT DEMONSTRATION FOR ETHNIC AND 
 RACIAL MINORITIES.

 (a) Demonstration.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall, 
 consistent with subsection (b), conduct demonstration projects 
 for the purpose of developing models and evaluating methods 
 that--
 (A) improve the quality of items and services 
 provided to target individuals in order to facilitate 
 reduced disparities in early detection and treatment of 
 cancer;
 (B) improve clinical outcomes, satisfaction, 
 quality of life, appropriate use of items and services 
 covered under the Medicare program under title XVIII of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), and 
 referral patterns with respect to target individuals 
 with cancer;
 (C) eliminate disparities in the rate of preventive 
 cancer screening measures, such as Pap smears, prostate 
 cancer screenings, colon and colorectal cancer 
 screenings, breast cancer screenings, and computed 
 tomography scans, for lung cancer among target 
 individuals;
 (D) promote collaboration with community-based 
 organizations to ensure cultural competency of health 
 care professionals and linguistic access for target 
 individuals with limited English proficiency; and
 (E) encourage the incorporation of community health 
 workers to increase the efficiency and appropriateness 
 of cancer screening programs.
 (2) Community health worker defined.--In this section, the 
 term ``community health worker'' includes a community health 
 advocate, a lay health worker, a community health 
 representative, a peer health promoter, a community health 
 outreach worker, and a promotore de salud, who promotes health 
 or nutrition within the community in which the individual 
 resides.
 (3) Target individual defined.--In this section, the term 
 ``target individual'' means an individual of a racial and 
 ethnic minority group, as defined in section 1707(g)(1) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)(1)), who is 
 entitled to benefits under part A, and enrolled under part B, 
 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (b) Program Design.--
 (1) Initial design.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall evaluate best 
 practices in the private sector, community programs, and 
 academic research of methods that reduce disparities among 
 individuals of racial and ethnic minority groups in the 
 prevention and treatment of cancer and shall design the 
 demonstration projects based on such evaluation.
 (2) Number and project areas.--Not later than 2 years after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 implement at least 9 demonstration projects, including the 
 following:
 (A) Two projects, each of which shall target 
 different ethnic subpopulations, for each racial and 
 ethnic minority group described in clauses (i) through 
 (vi) of section 1707(g)(1)(A) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)(1)(A)).
 (B) One project within the Pacific Islands or 
 United States insular areas.
 (C) At least 1 project in a rural area.
 (D) At least 1 project in an inner-city area.
 (3) Expansion of projects; implementation of demonstration 
 project results.--The Secretary shall continue the 
 demonstration projects and may expand the number of 
 demonstration projects if the initial report under subsection 
 (c) contains an evaluation that the demonstration projects--
 (A) reduce expenditures under the Medicare program 
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395 et seq.); or
 (B) do not increase expenditures under such 
 Medicare program and reduce racial and ethnic health 
 disparities in the quality of health care services 
 provided to target individuals and increase 
 satisfaction of Medicare beneficiaries and health care 
 providers.
 (c) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date the 
 Secretary implements the initial demonstration projects under 
 this section, and biannually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
 submit to Congress a report regarding the demonstration 
 projects.
 (2) Content of report.--Each report under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) A description of the demonstration projects.
 (B) An evaluation of--
 (i) the cost-effectiveness of the 
 demonstration projects;
 (ii) the quality of the health care 
 services provided to target individuals under 
 the demonstration projects; and
 (iii) beneficiary and health care provider 
 satisfaction under the demonstration projects.
 (C) Any other information regarding the 
 demonstration projects that the Secretary determines to 
 be appropriate.
 (d) Waiver Authority.--The Secretary shall waive compliance with 
the requirements of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395 et seq.) to such extent and for such period as the Secretary 
determines is necessary to conduct the demonstration projects under 
this section.

SEC. 7008. REDUCING CANCER DISPARITIES WITHIN MEDICARE.

 (a) Development of Measures of Disparities in Quality of Cancer 
Care.--
 (1) Development of measures.--The Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall enter into an agreement with an entity 
 that specializes in developing quality measures for cancer care 
 under which the entity shall develop a uniform set of measures 
 to evaluate disparities in the quality of cancer care and 
 annually update such set of measures.
 (2) Measures to be included.--Such set of measures shall 
 include, with respect to the treatment of cancer, measures of 
 patient outcomes, the process for delivering medical care 
 related to such treatment, patient counseling and engagement in 
 decision making, patient experience of care, resource use, and 
 practice capabilities, such as care coordination.
 (b) Establishment of Reporting Process.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a reporting 
 process that requires and provides for a method for health care 
 providers specified under paragraph (2) to submit to the 
 Secretary and make public data on the performance of such 
 providers during each reporting period through use of the 
 measures developed pursuant to subsection (a). Such data shall 
 be submitted in a form and manner and at a time specified by 
 the Secretary.
 (2) Specification of providers to report on measures.--The 
 Secretary shall specify the classes of Medicare providers of 
 services and suppliers, including hospitals, cancer centers, 
 physicians, primary care providers, and specialty providers, 
 that will be required under such process to publicly report on 
 the measures specified under subsection (a).
 (3) Assessment of changes.--Under such reporting process, 
 the Secretary shall establish a format that assesses changes in 
 both the absolute and relative disparities in cancer care over 
 time. These measures shall be presented in an easily 
 comprehensible format, such as those presented in the final 
 publications relating to Healthy People 2010 or the National 
 Healthcare Disparities Report.
 (4) Initial implementation.--The Secretary shall implement 
 the reporting process under this subsection for reporting 
 periods beginning not later than 6 months after the date that 
 measures are first established under subsection (a).

 Subtitle B--Viral Hepatitis and Liver Cancer Control and Prevention

SEC. 7101. BIENNIAL ASSESSMENT OF HHS HEPATITIS B AND HEPATITIS C 
 PREVENTION, EDUCATION, RESEARCH, AND MEDICAL MANAGEMENT 
 PLAN.

 Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking section 317N (42 U.S.C. 247b-15); and
 (2) by adding after part V the following:

 ``PART W--BIENNIAL ASSESSMENT OF HHS HEPATITIS B AND HEPATITIS C 
 PREVENTION, EDUCATION, RESEARCH, AND MEDICAL MANAGEMENT PLAN

``SEC. 399OO. BIENNIAL UPDATE OF THE PLAN.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall conduct a biennial 
assessment of the Secretary's plan for the prevention, control, and 
medical management of, and education and research relating to, 
hepatitis B and hepatitis C, for the purposes of--
 ``(1) incorporating into such plan new knowledge or 
 observations relating to hepatitis B and hepatitis C (such as 
 knowledge and observations that may be derived from clinical, 
 laboratory, and epidemiological research and disease detection, 
 prevention, and surveillance outcomes);
 ``(2) addressing gaps in the coverage or effectiveness of 
 the plan; and
 ``(3) evaluating and, if appropriate, updating 
 recommendations, guidelines, or educational materials of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the National 
 Institutes of Health for health care providers or the public on 
 viral hepatitis in order to be consistent with the plan.
 ``(b) Publication of Notice of Assessments.--Not later than October 
1 of the first even-numbered year beginning after the date of the 
enactment of this part, and October 1 of each even-numbered year 
thereafter, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a 
notice of the results of the assessments conducted under subsection 
(a). Such notice shall include--
 ``(1) a description of any revisions to the plan referred 
 to in subsection (a) as a result of the assessment;
 ``(2) an explanation of the basis for any such revisions, 
 including the ways in which such revisions can reasonably be 
 expected to further promote the original goals and objectives 
 of the plan; and
 ``(3) in the case of a determination by the Secretary that 
 the plan does not need revision, an explanation of the basis 
 for such determination.

``SEC. 399OO-1. ELEMENTS OF PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Education and Awareness Programs.--The Secretary, acting 
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
and the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, and in 
accordance with the plan referred to in section 399OO(a), shall 
implement programs to increase awareness and enhance knowledge and 
understanding of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. Such programs shall 
include--
 ``(1) the conduct of culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate health education in primary and secondary schools, 
 college campuses, public awareness campaigns, and community 
 outreach activities (especially to the ethnic communities with 
 high rates of chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C and 
 other high-risk groups) to promote public awareness and 
 knowledge about--
 ``(A) the value of hepatitis A and hepatitis B 
 immunization;
 ``(B) risk factors, transmission, and prevention of 
 hepatitis B and hepatitis C;
 ``(C) the value of screening for the early 
 detection of hepatitis B and hepatitis C; and
 ``(D) options available for the treatment of 
 chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C;
 ``(2) the promotion of immunization programs that increase 
 awareness and access to hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccines 
 for susceptible adults and children;
 ``(3) the training of health care professionals regarding 
 the importance of vaccinating individuals infected with 
 hepatitis C and individuals who are at risk for hepatitis C 
 infection against hepatitis A and hepatitis B;
 ``(4) the training of health care professionals regarding 
 the importance of vaccinating individuals chronically infected 
 with hepatitis B and individuals who are at risk for chronic 
 hepatitis B infection against the hepatitis A virus;
 ``(5) the training of health care professionals and health 
 educators to make them aware of the high rates of chronic 
 hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C in certain adult ethnic 
 populations, and the importance of prevention, detection, and 
 medical management of hepatitis B and hepatitis C and of liver 
 cancer screening;
 ``(6) the development and distribution of health education 
 curricula (including information relating to the special needs 
 of individuals infected with or at risk of hepatitis B and 
 hepatitis C, such as the importance of prevention and early 
 intervention, regular monitoring, the recognition of 
 psychosocial needs, appropriate treatment, and liver cancer 
 screening) for individuals providing hepatitis B and hepatitis 
 C counseling; and
 ``(7) support for the implementation of the curricula 
 described in paragraph (6) by State and local public health 
 agencies.
 ``(b) Immunization, Prevention, and Control Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall support the integration of activities described in 
 paragraph (3) into existing clinical and public health programs 
 at State, local, territorial, and Tribal levels (including 
 community health clinics, programs for the prevention and 
 treatment of HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted infections, and 
 substance use disorder, and programs for individuals in 
 correctional settings).
 ``(2) Coordination of development of federal screening 
 guidelines.--
 ``(A) References.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 the term `CDC Director' means the Director of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the 
 term `AHRQ Director' means the Director of the Agency 
 for Healthcare Research and Quality.
 ``(B) Agency for healthcare research and quality.--
 Due to the rapidly evolving standard of care associated 
 with diagnosing and treating viral hepatitis infection, 
 the AHRQ Director shall convene the Preventive Services 
 Task Force under section 915(a) to review its 
 recommendation for screening for HBV and HCV infection 
 every 3 years.
 ``(3) Activities.--
 ``(A) Voluntary testing programs.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a mechanism by which to support and 
 promote the development of State, local, 
 territorial, and Tribal voluntary hepatitis B 
 and hepatitis C testing programs to screen the 
 high-prevalence populations to aid in the early 
 identification of chronically infected 
 individuals.
 ``(ii) Confidentiality of the test 
 results.--The Secretary shall prohibit the use 
 of the results of a hepatitis B or hepatitis C 
 test conducted by a testing program developed 
 or supported under this subparagraph for any of 
 the following:
 ``(I) Issues relating to health 
 insurance.
 ``(II) To screen or determine 
 suitability for employment.
 ``(III) To discharge a person from 
 employment.
 ``(B) Counseling regarding viral hepatitis.--The 
 Secretary shall support State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal programs in a wide variety of settings, 
 including those providing primary and specialty health 
 care services in nonprofit private and public sectors, 
 to--
 ``(i) provide individuals with ongoing risk 
 factors for hepatitis B and hepatitis C 
 infection with client-centered education and 
 counseling which concentrates on--
 ``(I) promoting testing of 
 individuals that have been exposed to 
 their blood, family members, and their 
 sexual partners; and
 ``(II) changing behaviors that 
 place individuals at risk for 
 infection;
 ``(ii) provide individuals chronically 
 infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C with 
 education, health information, and counseling 
 to reduce their risk of--
 ``(I) dying from end-stage liver 
 disease and liver cancer; and
 ``(II) transmitting viral hepatitis 
 to others; and
 ``(iii) provide people chronically infected 
 with hepatitis B or hepatitis C who are 
 pregnant or of childbearing age with culturally 
 and linguistically appropriate health 
 information, such as how to prevent hepatitis B 
 perinatal infection, and to alleviate fears 
 associated with pregnancy or raising a family.
 ``(C) Immunization.--The Secretary shall support 
 State, local, territorial, and Tribal efforts to expand 
 the current vaccination programs to protect every child 
 in the Nation and all susceptible adults, particularly 
 those infected with hepatitis C and high-prevalence 
 ethnic populations and other high-risk groups, from the 
 risks of acute and chronic hepatitis B infection by--
 ``(i) ensuring continued funding for 
 hepatitis B vaccination for all children 18 
 years of age or younger through the Vaccines 
 for Children program;
 ``(ii) ensuring that the recommendations of 
 the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
 Practices of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention are followed regarding hepatitis 
 B vaccination for infants, children, and 
 adults;
 ``(iii) requiring proof of hepatitis B 
 vaccination for entry into public or private 
 daycare, preschool, elementary school, 
 secondary school, and institutions of higher 
 education;
 ``(iv) expanding the availability of 
 hepatitis B vaccination for all adults to 
 protect them from becoming acutely or 
 chronically infected, including ethnic and 
 other populations with high prevalence rates of 
 chronic hepatitis B infection;
 ``(v) expanding the availability of 
 hepatitis B vaccination for all adults, 
 particularly those of reproductive age (women 
 and men less than 45 years of age), to protect 
 them from the risk of hepatitis B infection;
 ``(vi) ensuring the vaccination of 
 individuals infected, or at risk for infection, 
 with hepatitis C against hepatitis A, hepatitis 
 B, and other infectious diseases, as 
 appropriate, for which such individuals may be 
 at increased risk; and
 ``(vii) ensuring the vaccination of 
 individuals infected, or at risk for infection, 
 with hepatitis B against hepatitis A virus and 
 other infectious diseases, as appropriate, for 
 which such individuals may be at increased 
 risk.
 ``(D) Medical referral.--The Secretary shall 
 support State, local, territorial, and Tribal programs 
 that support--
 ``(i) referral of persons chronically 
 infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C--
 ``(I) for medical evaluation to 
 determine the appropriateness for 
 antiviral treatment to reduce the risk 
 of progression to cirrhosis and liver 
 cancer; and
 ``(II) for ongoing medical 
 management including regular monitoring 
 of liver function and screening for 
 liver cancer; and
 ``(ii) referral of persons infected with 
 acute or chronic hepatitis B infection or acute 
 or chronic hepatitis C infection for drug and 
 alcohol abuse treatment where appropriate.
 ``(4) Increased support for adult viral hepatitis 
 prevention coordinators.--The Secretary, acting through the CDC 
 Director, shall provide increased support to adult viral 
 hepatitis prevention coordinators in State, local, territorial, 
 and Tribal health departments in order to enhance the 
 additional management, networking, and technical expertise 
 needed to ensure successful integration of hepatitis B and 
 hepatitis C prevention and control activities into existing 
 public health programs.
 ``(c) Epidemiological Surveillance.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall support the establishment and maintenance of a national 
 chronic and acute hepatitis B and hepatitis C surveillance 
 program, in order to identify--
 ``(A) trends in the incidence of acute and chronic 
 hepatitis B and acute and chronic hepatitis C;
 ``(B) trends in the prevalence of acute and chronic 
 hepatitis B and acute and chronic hepatitis C infection 
 among groups that may be disproportionately affected; 
 and
 ``(C) trends in liver cancer and end-stage liver 
 disease incidence and deaths, caused by chronic 
 hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C in the high-risk 
 ethnic populations.
 ``(2) Seroprevalence and liver cancer studies.--The 
 Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention, shall prepare a report 
 outlining the population-based seroprevalence studies currently 
 underway, future planned studies, the criteria involved in 
 determining which seroprevalence studies to conduct, defer, or 
 suspend, and the scope of those studies, the economic and 
 clinical impact of hepatitis B and hepatitis C, and the impact 
 of chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C infections on 
 the quality of life. Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this part, the Secretary shall submit the 
 report to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
 of the House of Representatives.
 ``(3) Confidentiality.--The Secretary shall not disclose 
 any individually identifiable information identified under 
 paragraph (1) or derived through studies under paragraph (2).
 ``(d) Research.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the 
National Cancer Institute, and the Director of the National Institutes 
of Health, shall--
 ``(1) conduct epidemiologic and community-based research to 
 develop, implement, and evaluate best practices for hepatitis B 
 and hepatitis C prevention especially in the ethnic populations 
 with high rates of chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C 
 and other high-risk groups;
 ``(2) conduct research on hepatitis B and hepatitis C 
 natural history, pathophysiology, improved treatments and 
 prevention (such as the hepatitis C vaccine), and noninvasive 
 tests that help to predict the risk of progression to liver 
 cirrhosis and liver cancer;
 ``(3) conduct research that will lead to better noninvasive 
 or blood tests to screen for liver cancer, and more effective 
 treatments of liver cancer caused by chronic hepatitis B and 
 chronic hepatitis C; and
 ``(4) conduct research comparing the effectiveness of 
 screening, diagnostic, management, and treatment approaches for 
 chronic hepatitis B, chronic hepatitis C, and liver cancer in 
 the affected communities.
 ``(e) Underserved and Disproportionately Affected Populations.--In 
carrying out this section, the Secretary shall provide expanded support 
for individuals with limited access to health education, testing, and 
health care services and groups that may be disproportionately affected 
by hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
 ``(f) Evaluation of Program.--The Secretary shall develop 
benchmarks for evaluating the effectiveness of the programs and 
activities conducted under this section and make determinations as to 
whether such benchmarks have been achieved.

``SEC. 399OO-2. GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants to, or enter into 
contracts or cooperative agreements with, States, political 
subdivisions of States, territories, Indian Tribes, or nonprofit 
entities that have special expertise relating to hepatitis B, hepatitis 
C, or both, to carry out activities under this part.
 ``(b) Application.--To be eligible for a grant, contract, or 
cooperative agreement under subsection (a), an entity shall prepare and 
submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, 
and containing such information as the Secretary may require.

``SEC. 399OO-3. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
$90,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, $110,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, 
$130,000,000 for fiscal year 2027, and $150,000,000 for fiscal year 
2028.''.

SEC. 7102. LIVER CANCER AND DISEASE PREVENTION, AWARENESS, AND PATIENT 
 TRACKING GRANTS.

 Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 254b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 330Q. LIVER CANCER AND DISEASE PREVENTION, AWARENESS, AND 
 PATIENT TRACKING GRANTS.

 ``(a) Prevention Initiative Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may 
 award grants and enter into cooperative agreements with 
 entities for the purpose of expanding and supporting--
 ``(A) prevention activities (including providing 
 screenings, vaccinations, or other preventative 
 interventions) for conditions known to increase an 
 individual's risk of developing a major liver disease, 
 such as liver cancer, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, 
 nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic 
 steatohepatitis, and cirrhosis of the liver;
 ``(B) activities relating to detection and 
 provision of guidance for individuals at high risk for 
 contracting liver cancer and other liver diseases; and
 ``(C) viral hepatitis surveillance to provide for 
 timely and accurate information regarding progress to 
 eliminate viral hepatitis.
 ``(2) Report.--An entity that receives a grant or 
 cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) shall submit to the 
 Secretary, at a time specified by the Secretary, a report 
 describing each activity carried out pursuant to such paragraph 
 and evaluating the effectiveness of such activity in promoting 
 prevention and treatment of liver cancer and other liver 
 diseases.
 ``(3) Authorization of appropriations.--For purposes of 
 carrying out this subsection, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated $90,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2024 through 
 2028.
 ``(b) Awareness Initiative Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may 
 award grants to eligible entities for the purpose of raising 
 awareness for liver cancer and other liver diseases, which may 
 include the production, dissemination, and distribution of 
 informational materials targeted towards communities and 
 populations with a higher risk for developing liver cancer and 
 other liver diseases.
 ``(2) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under paragraph (1), an entity shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application, at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require, including a 
 description of how the entity, in disseminating information on 
 liver cancer and other liver diseases pursuant to paragraph 
 (1), will--
 ``(A) with respect to any community or population, 
 consult with members of such community or population 
 and provide such information in a manner that is 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate for such 
 community or population;
 ``(B) highlight the range of preventative measures 
 and treatments available for liver cancer and other 
 liver diseases;
 ``(C) integrate information on available hepatitis 
 B and hepatitis C testing programs into any liver 
 cancer presentations carried out by the entity; and
 ``(D) address communities and populations with a 
 higher risk for contracting liver cancer and other 
 liver diseases.
 ``(3) Preference.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), 
 the Secretary shall give preference to entities that--
 ``(A) work with a Federally qualified health 
 center;
 ``(B) are community-based organizations; or
 ``(C) serve communities and populations with a 
 higher risk for contracting liver cancer and other 
 liver diseases.
 ``(4) Report.--An entity that receives a grant under 
 paragraph (1) shall submit to the Secretary, at a time 
 specified by the Secretary, a report describing each activity 
 carried out pursuant to such paragraph and evaluating the 
 effectiveness of such activity in raising awareness for liver 
 cancer and other liver diseases.
 ``(5) Authorization of appropriations.--For purposes of 
 carrying out this subsection, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 
 2029.''.

 Subtitle C--Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Diseases

SEC. 7201. ACQUIRED BONE MARROW FAILURE DISEASES.

 (a) National Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Disease Registry.--Title 
III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) is amended 
by inserting after section 317W, as added by section 1009, the 
following:

``SEC. 317X. NATIONAL ACQUIRED BONE MARROW FAILURE DISEASE REGISTRY.

 ``(a) Establishment of Registry.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall--
 ``(A) develop a system to collect data on acquired 
 bone marrow failure diseases; and
 ``(B) establish and maintain a national and 
 publicly available registry, to be known as the 
 National Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Disease Registry, 
 in accordance with paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Recommendations of advisory committee.--In carrying 
 out this subsection, the Secretary shall take into 
 consideration the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
 Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Diseases established under 
 subsection (b).
 ``(3) Purposes of registry.--The National Acquired Bone 
 Marrow Failure Disease Registry shall--
 ``(A) identify the incidence and prevalence of 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases in the United 
 States;
 ``(B) be used to collect and store data on acquired 
 bone marrow failure diseases, including data 
 concerning--
 ``(i) the age, race or ethnicity, general 
 geographic location, sex, and family history of 
 individuals who are diagnosed with acquired 
 bone marrow failure diseases, and any other 
 characteristics of such individuals determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary;
 ``(ii) the genetic and environmental 
 factors that may be associated with developing 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases;
 ``(iii) treatment approaches for dealing 
 with acquired bone marrow failure diseases;
 ``(iv) outcomes for individuals treated for 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases, 
 including outcomes for recipients of stem cell 
 therapeutic products as contained in the 
 database established pursuant to section 379A; 
 and
 ``(v) any other factors pertaining to 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary; and
 ``(C) be made available--
 ``(i) to the general public; and
 ``(ii) to researchers to facilitate further 
 research into the causes of, and treatments 
 for, acquired bone marrow failure diseases in 
 accordance with standard practices of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 ``(b) Advisory Committee.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than 6 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting 
 through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, shall establish an advisory committee, to be known 
 as the Advisory Committee on Acquired Bone Marrow Failure 
 Diseases.
 ``(2) Members.--The members of the Advisory Committee on 
 Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Diseases shall be appointed by the 
 Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention, and shall include at least one 
 representative from each of the following:
 ``(A) A national patient advocacy organization with 
 experience advocating on behalf of patients suffering 
 from acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 ``(B) The National Institutes of Health, including 
 at least one representative from each of--
 ``(i) the National Cancer Institute;
 ``(ii) the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
 Institute; and
 ``(iii) the Office of Rare Diseases.
 ``(C) The Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention.
 ``(D) Clinicians with experience in--
 ``(i) diagnosing or treating acquired bone 
 marrow failure diseases; or
 ``(ii) medical data registries.
 ``(E) Epidemiologists who have experience with data 
 registries.
 ``(F) Publicly or privately funded researchers who 
 have experience researching acquired bone marrow 
 failure diseases.
 ``(G) The entity operating the C.W. Bill Young Cell 
 Transplantation Program established pursuant to section 
 379 and the entity operating the C.W. Bill Young Cell 
 Transplantation Program Outcomes Database.
 ``(3) Responsibilities.--The Advisory Committee on Acquired 
 Bone Marrow Failure Diseases shall provide recommendations to 
 the Secretary on the establishment and maintenance of the 
 National Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Disease Registry, 
 including recommendations on the collection, maintenance, and 
 dissemination of data.
 ``(4) Public availability.--The Secretary shall make the 
 recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Acquired Bone 
 Marrow Failure Disease publicly available.
 ``(c) Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may award grants to, and 
enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with, public or private 
nonprofit entities for the management of, as well as the collection, 
analysis, and reporting of data to be included in, the National 
Acquired Bone Marrow Failure Disease Registry.
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `acquired bone marrow 
failure disease' means--
 ``(1) myelodysplastic syndromes;
 ``(2) aplastic anemia;
 ``(3) paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria;
 ``(4) pure red cell aplasia;
 ``(5) acute myeloid leukemia that has progressed from 
 myelodysplastic syndromes; or
 ``(6) large granular lymphocytic leukemia.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $3,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (b) Pilot Studies Through the Agency for Toxic Substances and 
Disease Registry.--
 (1) Pilot studies.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Director of the Agency for Toxic 
 Substances and Disease Registry, shall conduct pilot studies to 
 determine which environmental factors, including exposure to 
 toxins, may cause acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 (2) Collaboration with the radiation injury treatment 
 network.--In carrying out the directives of this section, the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services may collaborate with the 
 Radiation Injury Treatment Network of the C.W. Bill Young Cell 
 Transplantation Program established pursuant to section 379 of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 274k) to--
 (A) augment data for the pilot studies authorized 
 by this section;
 (B) access technical assistance that may be 
 provided by the Radiation Injury Treatment Network; or
 (C) perform joint research projects.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $1,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (c) Minority-Focused Programs on Acquired Bone Marrow Failure 
Diseases.--Title XVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1707A the following:

``SEC. 1707B. MINORITY-FOCUSED PROGRAMS ON ACQUIRED BONE MARROW FAILURE 
 DISEASE.

 ``(a) Information and Referral Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall 
 establish and coordinate outreach and informational programs 
 targeted to minority populations affected by acquired bone 
 marrow failure diseases.
 ``(2) Program requirements.--Minority-focused outreach and 
 informational programs authorized by this section at the 
 National Minority Health Resource Center supported under 
 section 1707(b)(8) (including by means of the Center's website, 
 through appropriate locations such as the Center's knowledge 
 center, and through appropriate programs such as the Center's 
 resource persons network) and through minority health 
 consultants located at each Department of Health and Human 
 Services regional office--
 ``(A) shall make information about treatment 
 options and clinical trials for acquired bone marrow 
 failure diseases publicly available; and
 ``(B) shall provide referral services for treatment 
 options and clinical trials.
 ``(b) Hispanic and Asian-American and Pacific Islander Outreach.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Deputy 
 Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall undertake a 
 coordinated outreach effort to connect Hispanic, Asian-
 American, and Pacific Islander communities with comprehensive 
 services focused on treatment of, and information about, 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 ``(2) Collaboration.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
 Secretary may collaborate with public health agencies, 
 nonprofit organizations, community groups, and online entities 
 to disseminate information about treatment options and clinical 
 trials for acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 ``(c) Grants and Cooperative Agreements.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall award 
 grants to, or enter into cooperative agreements with, entities 
 to perform research on acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 ``(2) Requirement.--Grants and cooperative agreements 
 authorized by this subsection shall be awarded or entered into 
 on a competitive, peer-reviewed basis.
 ``(3) Scope of research.--Research funded under this 
 subsection shall examine factors affecting the incidence of 
 acquired bone marrow failure diseases in minority populations.
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `acquired bone marrow 
failure disease' has the meaning given to such term in section 317X(d).
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $2,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (d) Diagnosis and Quality of Care for Acquired Bone Marrow Failure 
Diseases.--
 (1) Grants.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 acting through the Director of the Agency for Healthcare 
 Research and Quality, shall award grants to entities to improve 
 diagnostic practices and quality of care with respect to 
 patients with acquired bone marrow failure diseases.
 (2) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $2,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (e) Definition.--In this section, the term ``acquired bone marrow 
failure disease'' has the meaning given such term in section 317X(d) of 
the Public Health Service Act, as added by subsection (a).

Subtitle D--Cardiovascular Disease, Chronic Disease, Obesity, and Other 
 Disease Issues

SEC. 7301. GUIDELINES FOR DISEASE SCREENING FOR MINORITY PATIENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the 
Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall 
convene a series of meetings to develop guidelines for disease 
screening for minority patient populations that have a higher than 
average risk for many chronic diseases and cancers.
 (b) Participants.--In convening meetings under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall ensure that meeting participants include 
representatives of--
 (1) professional societies and associations;
 (2) minority health organizations;
 (3) health care researchers and providers, including those 
 with expertise in minority health;
 (4) Federal health agencies, including the Office of 
 Minority Health, the National Institute on Minority Health and 
 Health Disparities, and the National Institutes of Health; and
 (5) other experts as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (c) Diseases.--Screening guidelines for minority populations shall 
be developed as appropriate under subsection (a) for--
 (1) hypertension;
 (2) hypercholesterolemia;
 (3) diabetes;
 (4) cardiovascular disease;
 (5) cancers, including breast, prostate, colon, cervical, 
 and lung cancer;
 (6) other pulmonary problems including sleep apnea;
 (7) asthma;
 (8) kidney diseases;
 (9) eye diseases and disorders, including glaucoma;
 (10) HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections;
 (11) uterine fibroids;
 (12) autoimmune diseases, including lupus;
 (13) mental health conditions;
 (14) dental health conditions and oral diseases, including 
 oral cancer;
 (15) environmental and related health illnesses and 
 conditions;
 (16) sickle cell disease and sickle cell trait;
 (17) violence and injury prevention and control;
 (18) genetic and related conditions;
 (19) heart disease and stroke;
 (20) tuberculosis;
 (21) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
 (22) musculoskeletal diseases, arthritis, and obesity; and
 (23) other diseases determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 (d) Dissemination.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish and disseminate to 
health care provider organizations the guidelines developed under 
subsection (a).
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 7302. CDC WISEWOMAN SCREENING PROGRAM.

 Section 1509 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300n-4a) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking the heading and inserting ``In 
 General.--''; and
 (B) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``may make grants'' and all that follows 
 through ``purpose'' and inserting the following: ``may 
 make grants to such States for the purpose''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``there are 
 authorized'' and all that follows through the period and 
 inserting ``there are authorized to be appropriated $23,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2025, $25,300,000 for fiscal year 2026, 
 $27,800,000 for fiscal year 2027, $30,800,000 for fiscal year 
 2028, and $34,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.''.

SEC. 7303. REPORT ON CARDIOVASCULAR CARE FOR WOMEN AND MINORITIES.

 Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 5201(c)(3), is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-10. REPORT ON CARDIOVASCULAR CARE FOR WOMEN AND MINORITIES.

 ``Not later than September 30, 2024, and annually thereafter, the 
Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the quality 
of and access to care for women and minorities with heart disease, 
stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases. The report shall contain 
recommendations for eliminating disparities in, and improving the 
treatment of, heart disease, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases 
in women, racial and ethnic minorities, those for whom English is not 
their primary language, and individuals with disabilities.''.

SEC. 7304. GAO REPORT ON STRUCTURAL AND SYSTEMIC FACTORS THAT 
 PERPETUATE CARDIOVASCULAR DISPARITIES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than September 30, 2025, the Government 
Accountability Office shall prepare and submit a report to Congress 
that contains the results of an investigation of--
 (1) the structural and systemic factors that perpetuate 
 disparities in access to screenings, care, and treatment of 
 cardiovascular disease; and
 (2) how care navigation, including community-based health 
 workers, can improve cardiovascular disease management and 
 improve health outcomes.
 (b) Contents.--The report shall--
 (1) identify the challenges and barriers facing healthcare 
 providers and patients, which contribute to postponed, delayed, 
 or suboptimal treatments for cardiovascular disease;
 (2) examine efforts by Federal agencies and Federal 
 programs to improve screening and management of patients with 
 cardiovascular disease;
 (3) identify and examine existing quality measures from the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services related to cholesterol 
 management and whether these measures encourage providers and 
 health systems to--
 (A) perform appropriate and timely low-density-
 lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) testing on patients at 
 risk of a cardiovascular event; and
 (B) better manage patients' elevated LDL-C levels 
 in concordance with clinical guidelines prescribing 
 directives to ensure patients are progressing towards 
 guideline-recommended LDL-C levels;
 (4) identify actions the Federal government could take to 
 promote collaboration with community-based organizations to 
 ensure improvement in clinical outcomes for patients with 
 cardiovascular disease, including by building on 
 recommendations from the Institutes of Medicine and the Centers 
 for Disease Control to include community health workers to 
 improve health care delivery for underserved and high-risk 
 communities; and
 (5) assess whether racial and ethnic minority groups, as 
 defined in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300g-6(g)), have higher prior authorization rejection 
 rates of prescription drugs to treat or prevent cardiovascular 
 disease by health insurance providers and, if so, identify the 
 resulting impacts on cardiovascular disease medication 
 adherence, morbidity, and mortality, as well as resulting 
 postponed, delayed, or suboptimal treatment prescribing for 
 cardiovascular disease among racial and ethnic minorities.

SEC. 7305. COVERAGE OF COMPREHENSIVE TOBACCO CESSATION SERVICES IN 
 MEDICAID, CHIP, AND PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE.

 (a) Requiring Medicaid Coverage of Counseling and Pharmacotherapy 
for Cessation of Tobacco Use and Temporary Enhanced FMAP for Coverage 
of Tobacco Cessation Services.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(4), by striking ``and (D)'' and all 
 that follows through ``subsection (bb))'' and inserting the 
 following: ``(D) counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation 
 of tobacco use by individuals who are eligible under the State 
 plan (as defined in subsection (bb))'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting ``(bb)(2),'' after 
 ``(aa),''; and
 (3) by striking subsection (bb) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(bb) Counseling and Pharmacotherapy for Cessation of Tobacco 
Use.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the term 
 `counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by 
 individuals who are eligible under the State plan' means 
 diagnostic, therapy, and counseling services and 
 pharmacotherapy (including the coverage of prescription and 
 nonprescription tobacco cessation agents approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration) for the cessation of tobacco use by 
 individuals who use tobacco products or who are being treated 
 for tobacco use that is furnished--
 ``(A) by or under the supervision of a physician; 
 or
 ``(B) by any other health care professional who--
 ``(i) is legally authorized to furnish such 
 services under State law (or the State 
 regulatory mechanism provided by State law) of 
 the State in which the services are furnished; 
 and
 ``(ii) is authorized to receive payment for 
 other services under this title or is 
 designated by the Secretary for this purpose,
 which is recommended in the guideline entitled, 
 `Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: A 
 Clinical Practice Guideline' published by the Public 
 Health Service in May 2008 (or any subsequent 
 modification of such guideline) or is recommended for 
 the cessation of tobacco use by the United States 
 Preventive Services Task Force or any additional 
 intervention approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration as safe and effective in helping smokers 
 quit.
 ``(2) Temporary enhanced fmap for coverage of tobacco 
 cessation services.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), for 
 calendar quarters occurring during the period beginning on the 
 date of the enactment of this paragraph and ending 5 years 
 after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage with respect to amounts expended 
 by a State for medical assistance for counseling and 
 pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by individuals who 
 are eligible under the State plan (as defined in paragraph (1)) 
 shall be equal to 90 percent.''.
 (b) No Cost Sharing.--
 (1) In general.--Subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2) of section 
 1916 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o), as amended 
 by section 2007(d)(4), are each amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``, and 
 counseling'' and all that follows through ``section 
 1905(bb)(2)(A)'';
 (B) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``or'' after 
 the comma;
 (C) in subparagraph (K), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting ``, or''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(L) counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation 
 of tobacco use by individuals who are eligible under 
 the State plan (as defined in section 1905(bb)) and 
 covered outpatient drugs (as defined in subsection 
 (k)(2) of section 1927 and including nonprescription 
 drugs described in subsection (d)(2) of such section) 
 that are prescribed for purposes of promoting tobacco 
 cessation in accordance with the guideline specified in 
 section 1905(bb); and''.
 (2) Application to alternative cost sharing.--Section 
 1916A(b)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o-
 1(b)(3)(B)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (iii), by striking ``, and counseling 
 and pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use by 
 pregnant women (as defined in section 1905(bb))''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(xv) Counseling and pharmacotherapy for 
 cessation of tobacco use by individuals who are 
 eligible under the State plan (as defined in 
 section 1905(bb)) and covered outpatient drugs 
 (as defined in subsection (k)(2) of section 
 1927 and including nonprescription drugs 
 described in subsection (d)(2) of such section) 
 that are prescribed for purposes of promoting 
 tobacco cessation in accordance with the 
 guideline specified in section 1905(bb).''.
 (c) Exception From Optional Restriction Under Medicaid Prescription 
Drug Coverage.--Section 1927(d)(2)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-8(d)(2)(F)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(F) Nonprescription drugs, except, when 
 recommended in accordance with the guideline referred 
 to in section 1905(bb), agents approved by the Food and 
 Drug Administration under the over-the-counter 
 monograph process for purposes of promoting tobacco 
 cessation.''.
 (d) State Monitoring and Promoting of Comprehensive Tobacco 
Cessation Services Under Medicaid.--Section 1902(a) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 5201(c)(2)(B), 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (87), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (88), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (88) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(89) provide that the State will monitor and promote the 
 use of comprehensive tobacco cessation services under the State 
 plan (including conducting an outreach campaign to increase 
 awareness of the benefits of using such services) among--
 ``(A) individuals entitled to medical assistance 
 under the State plan who use tobacco products; and
 ``(B) clinicians and others who provide services to 
 individuals entitled to medical assistance under the 
 State plan.''.
 (e) Federal Reimbursement for Outreach Campaign.--Section 1903(a) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6)(B), by striking ``plus'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; plus''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(8) with respect to the development, implementation, and 
 evaluation of an outreach campaign to--
 ``(A) increase awareness of comprehensive tobacco 
 cessation services covered in the State plan among--
 ``(i) individuals who are likely to be 
 eligible for medical assistance under the State 
 plan; and
 ``(ii) clinicians and others who provide 
 services to individuals who are likely to be 
 eligible for medical assistance under the State 
 plan; and
 ``(B) increase awareness of the benefits of using 
 comprehensive tobacco cessation services covered in the 
 State plan among--
 ``(i) individuals who are likely to be 
 eligible for medical assistance under the State 
 plan; and
 ``(ii) clinicians and others who provide 
 services to individuals who are likely to be 
 eligible for medical assistance under the State 
 plan about the benefits of using comprehensive 
 tobacco cessation services,
 for calendar quarters occurring during the period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph and ending on the date that is 5 years after 
 the date of enactment of this paragraph, an amount 
 equal to 90 percent of the sums expended during each 
 quarter which are attributable to such development, 
 implementation, and evaluation, and for calendar 
 quarters succeeding such period, an amount equal to 
 Federal medical assistance percentage determined under 
 section 1905(b) of the sums expended during each 
 quarter which are so attributable.''.
 (f) No Prior Authorization for Tobacco Cessation Drugs Under 
Medicaid.--Section 1927(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
8(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``A State'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to paragraph (8), a State''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(8) No prior authorization programs for tobacco cessation 
 drugs.--A State plan may not require, as a condition of 
 coverage or payment for a covered outpatient drug, the approval 
 of an agent to promote smoking cessation (including agents 
 approved by the Food and Drug Administration) or tobacco 
 cessation.''.
 (g) Exclusion of Enhanced Payments From Territorial Caps.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for purposes of section 
1108 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308), with respect to any 
additional amount paid to a territory as a result of the application of 
section 1905(bb)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(bb)(2))--
 (1) the limitation on payments to territories under 
 subsections (f) and (g) of such section 1108 shall not apply to 
 such additional amounts; and
 (2) such additional amounts shall be disregarded in 
 applying such subsections.
 (h) Requiring CHIP Coverage of Counseling and Pharmacotherapy for 
Cessation of Tobacco Use.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2103(c)(2) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation 
 of tobacco use by individuals who are eligible under 
 the State child health plan.''.
 (2) Counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco 
 use defined.--Section 2110(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1397jj(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(10) Counseling and pharmacotherapy for cessation of 
 tobacco use.--The term `counseling and pharmacotherapy for 
 cessation of tobacco use' means diagnostic, therapy, and 
 counseling services and pharmacotherapy (including the coverage 
 of prescription and nonprescription tobacco cessation agents 
 approved by the Food and Drug Administration) for the cessation 
 of tobacco use by individuals who use tobacco products or who 
 are being treated for tobacco use that are furnished--
 ``(A) by or under the supervision of a physician; 
 or
 ``(B) by any other health care professional who--
 ``(i) is legally authorized to furnish such 
 services under State law (or the State 
 regulatory mechanism provided by State law) of 
 the State in which the services are furnished; 
 and
 ``(ii) is authorized to receive payment for 
 other services under this title or is 
 designated by the Secretary for this purpose,
 which is recommended in the guideline entitled, 
 `Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: A 
 Clinical Practice Guideline' published by the Public 
 Health Service in May 2008 (or any subsequent 
 modification of such guideline) or is recommended for 
 the cessation of tobacco use by the United States 
 Preventive Services Task Force or any additional 
 intervention approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration as safe and effective in helping smokers 
 quit.''.
 (i) No Cost Sharing.--Section 2103(e) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1397cc(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(5) No cost sharing on benefits for counseling and 
 pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use.--The State child 
 health plan may not impose deductibles, coinsurance, or other 
 cost sharing with respect to benefits for counseling and 
 pharmacotherapy for cessation of tobacco use (as defined in 
 section 2110(c)(10)) and prescription drugs that are covered 
 under a State child health plan that are prescribed for 
 purposes of promoting tobacco cessation in accordance with the 
 guideline specified in section 2110(c)(10)(B).''.
 (j) Exception From Optional Restriction Under CHIP Prescription 
Drug Coverage.--Section 2103 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397cc) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Exception From Optional Restriction Under CHIP Prescription 
Drug Coverage.--The State child health plan may exclude or otherwise 
restrict nonprescription drugs, except, in the case of--
 ``(1) pregnant women when recommended in accordance with 
 the guideline specified in section 2110(c)(10)(B), agents 
 approved by the Food and Drug Administration under the over-
 the-counter monograph process for purposes of promoting tobacco 
 cessation; and
 ``(2) individuals who are eligible under the State child 
 health plan when recommended in accordance with the Guideline 
 referred to in section 2110(c)(10)(B), agents approved by the 
 Food and Drug Administration under the over-the-counter 
 monograph process for purposes of promoting tobacco 
 cessation.''.
 (k) State Monitoring and Promoting of Comprehensive Tobacco 
Cessation Services Under CHIP.--Section 2102 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1397bb) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(d) State Monitoring and Promoting of Comprehensive Tobacco 
Cessation Services Under CHIP.--A State child health plan shall include 
a description of the procedures to be used by the State to monitor and 
promote the use of comprehensive tobacco cessation services under the 
State plan (including conducting an outreach campaign to increase 
awareness of the benefits of using such services) among--
 ``(1) individuals entitled to medical assistance under the 
 State child health plan who use tobacco products; and
 ``(2) clinicians and others who provide services to 
 individuals entitled to medical assistance under the State 
 child health plan.''.
 (l) Federal Reimbursement for CHIP Coverage and Outreach 
Campaign.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2105(a) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Federal reimbursement for chip coverage of 
 comprehensive tobacco cessation services and outreach 
 campaign.--In addition to the payments made under paragraph (1) 
 for calendar quarters occurring during the period beginning on 
 the date of the enactment of this paragraph and ending 5 years 
 after such date, the Secretary shall pay--
 ``(A) an amount equal to 90 percent of the sums 
 expended during each quarter which are attributable to 
 the cost of furnishing counseling and pharmacotherapy 
 for cessation of tobacco use by individuals who are 
 eligible under the State child health plan (net of any 
 payments made to the State under paragraph (1) with 
 respect to such counseling and pharmacotherapy); plus
 ``(B) an amount equal to 90 percent of the sums 
 expended during each quarter which are attributable to 
 the development, implementation, and evaluation of an 
 outreach campaign to--
 ``(i) increase awareness of comprehensive 
 tobacco cessation services covered in the State 
 child health plan among--
 ``(I) individuals who are likely to 
 be eligible for medical assistance 
 under the State child health plan; and
 ``(II) clinicians and others who 
 provide services to individuals who are 
 likely to be eligible for medical 
 assistance under the State child health 
 plan; and
 ``(ii) increase awareness of the benefits 
 of using comprehensive tobacco cessation 
 services covered in the State child health plan 
 among--
 ``(I) individuals who are likely to 
 be eligible for medical assistance 
 under the State child health plan; and
 ``(II) clinicians and others who 
 provide services to individuals who are 
 likely to be eligible for medical 
 assistance under the State child health 
 plan about the benefits of using 
 comprehensive tobacco cessation 
 services.''.
 (2) Adjustment of chip allotments.--Section 2104(m) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(m)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``and (12)'' 
 and inserting ``(12), and (13)''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(13) Adjusting allotments to account for federal payments 
 for chip coverage of comprehensive tobacco cessation services 
 and outreach campaign.--If a State (including the District of 
 Columbia and each commonwealth and territory) receives a 
 payment for a fiscal year under section 2105(a)(5), the 
 allotment determined for the State for such fiscal year shall 
 be increased by the amount of such payment.''.
 (m) No Prior Authorization for Tobacco Cessation Drugs Under 
CHIP.--Section 2103 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc), as 
amended by subsection (h), is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2)(A), by inserting ``(in accordance 
 with subsection (h))'' after ``Coverage of prescription 
 drugs''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) No Prior Authorization Programs for Tobacco Cessation 
Drugs.--A State child health plan may not require, as a condition of 
coverage or payment for prescription drugs, the approval of an agent to 
promote smoking cessation (including agents approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration) or tobacco cessation.''.
 (n) Comprehensive Coverage of Tobacco Cessation Coverage in Private 
Health Insurance.--Section 2713 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-13) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) No Prior Authorization.--A group health plan and a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
shall not impose any prior authorization requirement for tobacco 
cessation counseling and pharmacotherapy that has in effect a rating of 
`A' or `B' in the current recommendations of the United States 
Preventive Services Task Force.''.
 (o) Rule of Construction.--None of the amendments made by this 
section shall be construed to limit coverage of any counseling or 
pharmacotherapy for individuals under 18 years of age.
 (p) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the first day of the first fiscal year that begins on or 
after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 7306. CLINICAL RESEARCH FUNDING FOR ORAL HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
expand and intensify the conduct and support of the research activities 
of the National Institutes of Health and the National Institute of 
Dental and Craniofacial Research to improve the oral health of the 
population through the prevention and management of oral diseases and 
conditions.
 (b) Included Research Activities.--Research activities under 
subsection (a) shall include--
 (1) comparative effectiveness research and clinical disease 
 management research addressing early childhood cancer and oral 
 cancer; and
 (2) awarding of grants and contracts to support the 
 training and development of health services researchers, 
 comparative effectiveness researchers, and clinical researchers 
 whose research improves the oral health of the population.

SEC. 7307. GUIDE ON EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES FOR PUBLIC HEALTH 
 DEPARTMENT OBESITY PREVENTION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Development and Dissemination of an Evidence-Based Strategies 
Guide.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this 
section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, not later than 2 years 
after the date of enactment of this Act, shall--
 (1) develop a guide on evidence-based strategies for State, 
 territorial, and local health departments to use to build and 
 maintain effective obesity prevention and reduction programs, 
 and, in consultation with stakeholders that have expertise in 
 Tribal health, a guide on such evidence-based strategies with 
 respect to Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations for such 
 Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations to use for such purpose, 
 both of which guides shall--
 (A) describe an integrated program structure for 
 implementing interventions proven to be effective in 
 preventing and reducing the incidence of obesity; and
 (B) recommend--
 (i) optimal resources, including staffing 
 and infrastructure, for promoting nutrition and 
 obesity prevention and reduction; and
 (ii) strategies for effective obesity 
 prevention programs for State and local health 
 departments, Indian Tribes, and Tribal 
 organizations, including strategies related 
 to--
 (I) the application of evidence-
 based and evidence-informed practices 
 to prevent and reduce obesity rates;
 (II) the development, 
 implementation, and evaluation of 
 obesity prevention and reduction 
 strategies for specific communities and 
 populations;
 (III) demonstrated knowledge of 
 obesity prevention practices that 
 reduce associated preventable diseases, 
 health conditions, death, and health 
 care costs;
 (IV) best practices for the 
 coordination of efforts to prevent and 
 reduce obesity and related chronic 
 diseases;
 (V) addressing the underlying risk 
 factors and social determinants of 
 health that impact obesity rates; and
 (VI) interdisciplinary coordination 
 between relevant public health 
 officials specializing in fields such 
 as nutrition, physical activity, 
 epidemiology, communications, and 
 policy implementation, and 
 collaboration between public health 
 officials and community-based 
 organizations; and
 (2) disseminate the guides and current research, evidence-
 based practices, tools, and educational materials related to 
 obesity prevention, consistent with the guides, to State and 
 local health departments, Indian Tribes, and Tribal 
 organizations.
 (b) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
provide technical assistance to State and local health departments, 
Indian Tribes, and Tribal organizations to support such health 
departments in implementing the guides developed under subsection 
(a)(1).
 (c) Indian Tribes; Tribal Organizations.--In this section, the 
terms ``Indian Tribe'' and ``Tribal organization'' have the meanings 
given the terms in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304).

SEC. 7308. STEPHANIE TUBBS JONES UTERINE FIBROID RESEARCH AND EDUCATION 
 ACT.

 (a) Research With Respect to Uterine Fibroids.--
 (1) Research.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 expand, intensify, and coordinate programs for the conduct and 
 support of research with respect to uterine fibroids.
 (2) Administration and coordination.--The Secretary shall 
 carry out the conduct and support of research pursuant to 
 paragraph (1), in coordination with the appropriate institutes, 
 offices, and centers of the National Institutes of Health and 
 any other relevant Federal agency, as determined by the 
 Director of the National Institutes of Health.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 
 2029.
 (b) Research With Respect to Medicaid Coverage of Uterine Fibroids 
Treatment.--
 (1) Research.--The Secretary (or the Secretary's designee) 
 shall establish a research database, or expand an existing 
 research database, to collect data on services furnished to 
 individuals diagnosed with uterine fibroids under a State plan 
 (or a waiver of such a plan) under the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) 
 or under a State child health plan (or a waiver of such a plan) 
 under the Children's Health Insurance Program under title XXI 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) for the treatment of 
 such fibroids for purposes of assessing the frequency at which 
 such individuals are furnished such services.
 (2) Report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 submit to Congress a report on the amount of Federal 
 and State expenditures with respect to services 
 furnished for the treatment of uterine fibroids under 
 State plans (or waivers of such plans) under the 
 Medicaid program under such title XIX and State child 
 health plans (or waivers of such plans) under the 
 Children's Health Insurance Program under such title 
 XXI.
 (B) Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate 
 the development and submission of the report required 
 under paragraph (1) with any other relevant Federal 
 agency, as determined by the Secretary.
 (c) Education and Dissemination of Information With Respect to 
Uterine Fibroids.--
 (1) Uterine fibroids public education program.--The 
 Secretary shall develop and disseminate to the public 
 information regarding uterine fibroids, including information 
 on--
 (A) the awareness, incidence, and prevalence of 
 uterine fibroids among individuals, including all 
 minority individuals;
 (B) the elevated risk for minority individuals to 
 develop uterine fibroids; and
 (C) the availability, as medically appropriate, of 
 the range of treatment options for symptomatic uterine 
 fibroids, including non-hysterectomy treatments and 
 procedures.
 (2) Dissemination of information.--The Secretary may 
 disseminate information under paragraph (1) directly or through 
 arrangements with intra-agency initiatives, nonprofit 
 organizations, consumer groups, institutions of higher 
 education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001)), or Federal, State, or local 
 public private partnerships.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
 years 2025 through 2029.
 (d) Information to Health Care Providers With Respect to Uterine 
Fibroids.--
 (1) Dissemination of information.--The Secretary shall, in 
 consultation and in accordance with guidelines from relevant 
 medical societies, work with health care-related specialty 
 societies and health systems to promote evidence-based care for 
 individuals with fibroids. Such efforts shall include minority 
 individuals who have an elevated risk to develop uterine 
 fibroids and the range of available options for the treatment 
 of symptomatic uterine fibroids, including non-hysterectomy 
 drugs and devices approved under the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
 (2) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
 years 2025 through 2029.
 (e) Definition.--In this section, the term ``minority individuals'' 
means individuals who are members of a racial and ethnic minority 
group, as defined in section 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300u-6(g)).

 Subtitle E--HIV/AIDS

SEC. 7401. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States to achieve an AIDS-free 
generation, and to--
 (1) expand access to lifesaving antiretroviral therapy for 
 people living with HIV and immediately link people to 
 continuous and coordinated high-quality care when they learn 
 they are living with HIV;
 (2) expand targeted efforts to prevent HIV infection using 
 a combination of effective, evidence-based approaches, 
 including routine HIV screening, and universal access to HIV 
 prevention tools, including preexposure prophylaxis, in 
 communities disproportionately impacted by HIV, particularly 
 communities of color;
 (3) ensure laws, policies, and regulations do not impede 
 access to prevention, treatment, and care for people living 
 with HIV or disproportionately impacted by HIV;
 (4) accelerate research for more efficacious HIV prevention 
 and treatments, tools, a cure, and a vaccine; and
 (5) respect the human rights and dignity of persons living 
 with HIV.

SEC. 7402. ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR AIDS DRUG ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 
 TREATMENTS.

 Section 2623 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-31b) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) Additional Funding for AIDS Drug Assistance Program 
Treatments.--In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be 
appropriated for carrying out this subpart, there are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out sections 
2612(b)(3)(B) and 2616 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.''.

SEC. 7403. ENHANCING THE NATIONAL HIV SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM.

 (a) Grants.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
shall make grants to States to support integration of public health 
surveillance systems into all electronic health records in order to 
allow rapid communications between the clinical setting and health 
departments, by means that include--
 (1) providing technical assistance and policy guidance to 
 State and local health departments, clinical providers, and 
 other agencies serving individuals with HIV to improve the 
 interoperability of data systems relevant to monitoring HIV 
 care and supportive services;
 (2) capturing longitudinal data pertaining to the 
 initiation and ongoing prescription or dispensing of 
 antiretroviral therapy for individuals diagnosed with HIV (such 
 as through pharmacy-based reporting);
 (3) obtaining information--
 (A) on a voluntary basis, on sexual orientation and 
 gender identity; and
 (B) on sources of coverage (or the lack of 
 coverage) for medical treatment (including coverage 
 through the Medicaid program under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), the 
 Medicare program under title XVIII of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), the program under title XXVI of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-11 et 
 seq.; commonly referred to as the ``Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
 Program''), other public funding, private insurance, 
 and health maintenance organizations); and
 (4) obtaining and using current geographic markers of 
 residence (such as current address, ZIP Code, partial ZIP Code, 
 and census block).
 (b) Privacy and Security Safeguards.--In carrying out this section, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall ensure that 
appropriate privacy and security safeguards are met to prevent 
unauthorized disclosure of protected health information and compliance 
with the HIPAA privacy and security law (as defined in section 3009 of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-19)) and other relevant 
laws and regulations.
 (c) Prohibition Against Improper Use of Data.--No grant under this 
section may be used to allow or facilitate the collection or use of 
surveillance or clinical data or records--
 (1) for punitive measures of any kind, civil or criminal, 
 against the subject of such data or records; or
 (2) for imposing any requirement or restriction with 
 respect to an individual without the individual's written 
 consent.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7404. EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING LINKAGE TO, AND 
 RETENTION IN, APPROPRIATE CARE.

 (a) Strategies.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in 
collaboration with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance 
Use, the Director of the Office of AIDS Research, the Administrator of 
the Health Resources and Services Administration, and the Administrator 
of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, shall--
 (1) identify evidence-based strategies most effective at 
 addressing the multifaceted issues that impede disease status 
 awareness with respect to HIV/AIDS and linkage to, and 
 retention in, appropriate care, taking into consideration 
 health care systems issues, clinic and provider issues, and 
 individual psychosocial, environmental, and other contextual 
 factors;
 (2) support the wide-scale implementation of the evidence-
 based strategies identified pursuant to paragraph (1), 
 including through incorporating such strategies into health 
 care coverage supported by the Medicaid program under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), the 
 program under title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300ff-11 et seq.; commonly referred to as the ``Ryan 
 White HIV/AIDS Program''), and health plans purchased through 
 an Exchange established under title I of the Patient Protection 
 and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-148); and
 (3) not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, submit a report to the Congress on the status of 
 activities under paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7405. IMPROVING ENTRY INTO, AND RETENTION IN, CARE AND 
 ANTIRETROVIRAL ADHERENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HIV.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that AIDS 
research has led to scientific advancements that have--
 (1) saved the lives of millions of people living with HIV;
 (2) prevented millions of individuals from receiving new 
 diagnoses of HIV; and
 (3) had broad benefits that extend far beyond helping 
 people at risk for, or living with, HIV.
 (b) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall 
expand, intensify, and coordinate operational and translational 
research and other activities of the National Institutes of Health 
regarding methods--
 (1) to increase adoption of evidence-based adherence 
 strategies within HIV care and treatment programs;
 (2) to increase HIV testing and case detection rates;
 (3) to reduce HIV-related health disparities;
 (4) to ensure that research to improve adherence to HIV 
 care and treatment programs address the unique concerns of 
 women;
 (5) to integrate HIV prevention and care services with 
 mental health and substance use prevention and treatment 
 delivery systems;
 (6) to increase knowledge on the implementation of 
 preexposure prophylaxis (referred to in this section as 
 ``PrEP''), including with respect to--
 (A) who can benefit most from PrEP;
 (B) how to provide PrEP safely and efficiently;
 (C) how to integrate PrEP with other essential 
 prevention methods such as condoms; and
 (D) how to ensure high levels of adherence; and
 (7) to increase knowledge of ``undetectable and 
 untransmittable'', when a person living with HIV who is on 
 antiretroviral therapy and is durably virally suppressed 
 (defined as having a consistent viral load of less than 200 
 copies/ml) cannot sexually transmit HIV.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7406. SERVICES TO REDUCE HIV/AIDS IN RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITY 
 COMMUNITIES.

 (a) In General.--For the purpose of reducing new HIV diagnoses in 
racial and ethnic minority communities, the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services, acting through the Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
Minority Health, may make grants to public health agencies and faith-
based organizations to conduct--
 (1) outreach activities related to HIV prevention and 
 testing activities;
 (2) HIV prevention activities;
 (3) HIV testing activities; and
 (4) public health education campaigns on accessing HIV 
 prevention medication.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7407. MINORITY AIDS INITIATIVE.

 (a) Expanded Funding.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
Health, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
and the Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, shall 
provide funds and carry out activities to expand the Minority AIDS 
Initiative.
 (b) Use of Funds.--The additional funds made available under this 
section may be used, through the Minority AIDS Initiative, to support 
the following activities:
 (1) Providing technical assistance and infrastructure 
 support to reduce HIV/AIDS in minority populations.
 (2) Increasing minority populations' access to HIV 
 prevention and care services.
 (3) Building strong community programs and partnerships to 
 address HIV prevention and the health care needs of specific 
 racial and ethnic minority populations.
 (c) Priority Interventions.--Within the racial and ethnic minority 
populations referred to in subsection (b), priority in conducting 
intervention services shall be given to--
 (1) men who have sex with men;
 (2) youth;
 (3) persons who engage in intravenous drug abuse;
 (4) women;
 (5) homeless individuals;
 (6) individuals incarcerated or in the penal system;
 (7) transgender individuals; and
 (8) nonbinary individuals.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For carrying out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated $610,000,000 for 
fiscal year 2025 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2026 through 2029.

SEC. 7408. HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS TREATING INDIVIDUALS WITH HIV.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, shall expand, intensify, and coordinate workforce 
initiatives of the Health Resources and Services Administration to 
increase the capacity of the health workforce focusing primarily on HIV 
to meet the demand for culturally competent care, and may award grants 
for any of the following:
 (1) Development of curricula for training primary care 
 providers in HIV/AIDS prevention and care, including routine 
 HIV testing.
 (2) Support to expand access to culturally and 
 linguistically accessible benefits counselors, trained peer 
 navigators, and mental and behavioral health professionals with 
 expertise in HIV.
 (3) Training health care professionals to provide care to 
 individuals living with HIV.
 (4) Development by grant recipients under title XXVI of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-11 et seq.; commonly 
 referred to as the ``Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program'') and other 
 persons, of policies for providing culturally relevant and 
 sensitive treatment to individuals living with HIV, with 
 particular emphasis on treatment to racial and ethnic 
 minorities, men who have sex with men, and women, young people, 
 and children living with HIV.
 (5) Development and implementation of programs to increase 
 the use of telehealth to respond to HIV-specific health care 
 needs in rural and minority communities, with particular 
 emphasis given to medically underserved communities and insular 
 areas.
 (6) Evaluating interdisciplinary medical provider care team 
 models that promote high-quality care, with particular emphasis 
 on care to racial and ethnic minorities.
 (7) Training health care professionals to make them aware 
 of the high rates of chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis 
 C in adult racial and ethnic minority populations, and the 
 importance of prevention, detection, and medical management of 
 hepatitis B and hepatitis C and of liver cancer screening.
 (8) Development of curricula for training primary care 
 providers that HIV and tuberculosis are significant mutual 
 comorbidities, and that a patient who tests positive for one 
 disease should be offered and encouraged to receive testing for 
 the other.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7409. HIV/AIDS PROVIDER LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may enter into an agreement with any 
physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant under which--
 (1) the physician, nurse practitioner, or physician 
 assistant agrees to serve as a medical provider for a period of 
 not less than 2 years--
 (A) at a Ryan White-funded or title X-funded 
 facility with a critical shortage of doctors (as 
 determined by the Secretary); or
 (B) in an area with a high incidence of HIV/AIDS; 
 and
 (2) the Secretary agrees to make payments in accordance 
 with subsection (b) on the professional education loans of the 
 physician, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant.
 (b) Manner of Payments.--The payments described in subsection (a) 
shall be made by the Secretary as follows:
 (1) Upon completion by the physician, nurse practitioner, 
 or physician assistant for whom the payments are to be made of 
 the first year of the service specified in the agreement 
 entered into with the Secretary under subsection (a), the 
 Secretary shall pay 30 percent of the principal of and the 
 interest on the individual's professional education loans.
 (2) Upon completion by the physician, nurse practitioner, 
 or physician assistant of the second year of such service, the 
 Secretary shall pay another 30 percent of the principal of and 
 the interest on such loans.
 (3) Upon completion by that individual of a third year of 
 such service, the Secretary shall pay another 25 percent of the 
 principal of and the interest on such loans.
 (c) Applicability of Certain Provisions.--Subpart III of part D of 
title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l et seq.) 
shall, except as inconsistent with this section, apply to the program 
carried out under this section in the same manner and to the same 
extent as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps 
loan repayment program.
 (d) Reports.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
prepare and submit to Congress a report describing the program carried 
out under this section, including statements regarding the following:
 (1) The number of physicians, nurse practitioners, and 
 physician assistants enrolled in the program.
 (2) The number and amount of loan repayments provided 
 through the program.
 (3) The placement location of loan repayment recipients at 
 facilities described in subsection (a)(1).
 (4) The default rate on such loans and actions required.
 (5) The amount of outstanding default funds with respect to 
 such loans.
 (6) To the extent that it can be determined, the reason for 
 the default on such a loan.
 (7) The demographics of individuals participating in the 
 program.
 (8) An evaluation of the overall costs and benefits of the 
 program.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) HIV/AIDS.--The term ``HIV/AIDS'' means human 
 immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
 (2) Nurse practitioner.--The term ``nurse practitioner'' 
 means a registered nurse who has completed an accredited 
 graduate degree program in advanced nurse practice and has 
 successfully passed a national certification exam.
 (3) Physician.--The term ``physician'' means a graduate of 
 a school of medicine who has completed postgraduate training in 
 general or pediatric medicine.
 (4) Physician assistant.--The term ``physician assistant'' 
 means a medical provider who completed an accredited physician 
 assistant training program and successfully passed the 
 Physician Assistant National Certifying Examination.
 (5) Professional education loan.--The term ``professional 
 education loan''--
 (A) means a loan that is incurred for the cost of 
 attendance (including tuition, other reasonable 
 educational expenses, and reasonable living costs) at a 
 school of medicine, school of nursing, or physician 
 assistant training program; and
 (B) includes only the portion of the loan that is 
 outstanding on the date the physician, nurse 
 practitioner, or physician assistant involved begins 
 the service specified in the agreement under subsection 
 (a).
 (6) Ryan white-funded.--The term ``Ryan White-funded'' 
 means, with respect to a facility, receiving funds under title 
 XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-11 et 
 seq.).
 (7) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (8) School of medicine.--The term ``school of medicine'' 
 has the meaning given to that term in section 799B of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295p).
 (9) Title x-funded.--The term ``title X-funded'' means, 
 with respect to a facility, receiving funds under title X of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300 et seq.).
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7410. DENTAL EDUCATION LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may enter into an agreement with any 
dentist under which--
 (1) the dentist agrees to serve as a dentist for a period 
 of not less than 2 years at a facility with a critical shortage 
 of dentists (as determined by the Secretary) in an area with a 
 high incidence of HIV/AIDS; and
 (2) the Secretary agrees to make payments in accordance 
 with subsection (b) on the dental education loans of the 
 dentist.
 (b) Manner of Payments.--The payments described in subsection (a) 
shall be made by the Secretary as follows:
 (1) Upon completion by the dentist for whom the payments 
 are to be made of the first year of the service specified in 
 the agreement entered into with the Secretary under subsection 
 (a), the Secretary shall pay 30 percent of the principal of and 
 the interest on the dental education loans of the dentist.
 (2) Upon completion by the dentist of the second year of 
 such service, the Secretary shall pay another 30 percent of the 
 principal of and the interest on such loans.
 (3) Upon completion by that individual of a third year of 
 such service, the Secretary shall pay another 25 percent of the 
 principal of and the interest on such loans.
 (c) Applicability of Certain Provisions.--Subpart III of part D of 
title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l et seq.) 
shall, except as inconsistent with this section, apply to the program 
carried out under this section in the same manner and to the same 
extent as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps 
Loan Repayment Program.
 (d) Reports.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
prepare and submit to the Congress a report describing the program 
carried out under this section, including statements regarding the 
following:
 (1) The number of dentists enrolled in the program.
 (2) The number and amount of loan repayments provided 
 through the program.
 (3) The placement location of loan repayment recipients at 
 facilities described in subsection (a)(1).
 (4) The default rate on such loans and actions required.
 (5) The amount of outstanding default funds with respect to 
 such loans.
 (6) To the extent that it can be determined, the reason for 
 the default on such a loan.
 (7) The demographics of individuals participating in the 
 program.
 (8) An evaluation of the overall costs and benefits of the 
 program.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Dental education loan.--The term ``dental education 
 loan''--
 (A) means a loan that is incurred for the cost of 
 attendance (including tuition, other reasonable 
 educational expenses, and reasonable living costs) at a 
 school of dentistry; and
 (B) includes only the portion of the loan that is 
 outstanding on the date the dentist involved begins the 
 service specified in the agreement under subsection 
 (a).
 (2) Dentist.--The term ``dentist'' means a graduate of a 
 school of dentistry who has completed postgraduate training in 
 general or pediatric dentistry.
 (3) HIV/AIDS.--The term ``HIV/AIDS'' means human 
 immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
 (4) School of dentistry.--The term ``school of dentistry'' 
 has the meaning given to that term in section 799B of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295p).
 (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7411. REDUCING NEW HIV INFECTIONS AMONG INJECTING DRUG USERS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that providing 
sterile syringes and sterilized equipment to injecting drug users 
substantially reduces risk of HIV infection, increases the probability 
that they will initiate drug treatment, and does not increase drug use.
 (b) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
provide grants and technical assistance for the purpose of reducing the 
rate of HIV infections among injecting drug users through a 
comprehensive package of services for such users, including the 
provision of sterile syringes, education and outreach, access to 
infectious disease testing, overdose prevention, and treatment for drug 
dependence.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal years 2025 through 2028.

SEC. 7412. REPORT ON IMPACT OF HIV/AIDS IN VULNERABLE POPULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
submit to Congress and the President an annual report on the impact of 
HIV/AIDS for racial and ethnic minority communities, women, and youth 
aged 24 and younger.
 (b) Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall include 
information on the--
 (1) progress that has been made in reducing the impact of 
 HIV/AIDS in such communities;
 (2) opportunities that exist to make additional progress in 
 reducing the impact of HIV/AIDS in such communities;
 (3) challenges that may impede such additional progress; 
 and
 (4) Federal funding necessary to achieve substantial 
 reductions in HIV/AIDS in racial and ethnic minority 
 communities.

SEC. 7413. NATIONAL HIV/AIDS OBSERVANCE DAYS.

 (a) National Observance Days.--It is the sense of Congress that 
national observance days highlighting the impact of HIV on communities 
of color include the following:
 (1) National Black HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.
 (2) National Latino AIDS Awareness Day.
 (3) National Asian and Pacific Islander HIV/AIDS Awareness 
 Day.
 (4) National Native American HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.
 (5) National Youth HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.
 (b) Call to Action.--It is the sense of Congress that the President 
should call on members of communities of color--
 (1) to become involved at the local community level in HIV 
 testing, policy, and advocacy;
 (2) to become aware, engaged, and empowered on the HIV 
 epidemic within their communities; and
 (3) to urge members of their communities to reduce risk 
 factors, practice safe sex and other preventive measures, be 
 tested for HIV, and seek care when appropriate.

SEC. 7414. REVIEW OF ALL FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS, POLICIES, AND 
 REGULATIONS REGARDING THE CRIMINAL PROSECUTION OF 
 INDIVIDUALS FOR HIV-RELATED OFFENSES.

 (a) Sense of Congress Regarding Laws or Regulations Directed at 
People Living With HIV.--It is the sense of Congress that Federal and 
State laws, policies, and regulations regarding people living with 
HIV--
 (1) should not place unique or additional burdens on such 
 individuals solely as a result of their HIV status; and
 (2) should instead demonstrate a public health-oriented, 
 evidence-based, medically accurate, and contemporary 
 understanding of--
 (A) the multiple factors that lead to HIV 
 transmission;
 (B) the relative risk of demonstrated HIV 
 transmission routes;
 (C) the current health implications of living with 
 HIV;
 (D) the associated benefits of treatment and 
 support services for people living with HIV; and
 (E) the impact of punitive HIV-specific laws, 
 policies, regulations, and judicial precedents and 
 decisions on public health, on people living with or 
 affected by HIV, and on their families and communities.
 (b) Review of Federal and State Laws.--
 (1) Review of federal and state laws.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney 
 General, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 and the Secretary of Defense acting jointly (in this 
 section referred to as the ``designated officials'') 
 shall initiate a national review of Federal and State 
 laws, including the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
 (referred to in this section as the ``UCMJ''), 
 policies, regulations, and judicial precedents and 
 decisions regarding criminal and related civil 
 commitment cases involving people living with HIV/AIDS.
 (B) Consultation.--In carrying out the review under 
 subparagraph (A), the designated officials shall seek 
 to include diverse participation from, and consultation 
 with, each of the following:
 (i) Each State.
 (ii) State attorneys general (or their 
 representatives).
 (iii) State public health officials (or 
 their representatives).
 (iv) State judicial and court system 
 officers, including judges, district attorneys, 
 prosecutors, defense attorneys, law 
 enforcement, and correctional officers.
 (v) Members of the United States Armed 
 Forces, including members of other Federal 
 services subject to the UCMJ.
 (vi) People living with HIV/AIDS, 
 particularly those who have been subject to 
 HIV-related prosecution or who are from 
 minority communities whose members have been 
 disproportionately subject to HIV-specific 
 arrests and prosecution.
 (vii) Legal advocacy and HIV/AIDS service 
 organizations that work with people living with 
 HIV/AIDS.
 (viii) Nongovernmental health organizations 
 that work on behalf of people living with HIV/
 AIDS, including syringe services programs, 
 LGBTQ-focused health organizations, and 
 organizations who serve people who engage in 
 sex work.
 (ix) Trade organizations or associations 
 representing persons or entities described in 
 clauses (i) through (vii).
 (C) Relation to other reviews.--In carrying out the 
 review under subparagraph (A), the designated officials 
 may utilize other existing reviews of criminal and 
 related civil commitment cases involving people living 
 with HIV, including any such review conducted by any 
 Federal or State agency or any public health, legal 
 advocacy, or trade organization or association if the 
 designated officials determines that such reviews were 
 conducted in accordance with the principles set forth 
 in subsection (a).
 (2) Report.--Not later than 180 days after initiating the 
 review required under paragraph (1), the Attorney General shall 
 transmit to the Congress and make publicly available a report 
 containing the results of the review, which includes the 
 following:
 (A) For each State and for the UCMJ, a summary of 
 the relevant laws, policies, regulations, and judicial 
 precedents and decisions regarding criminal cases 
 involving people living with HIV, including the 
 following:
 (i) A determination of whether such laws, 
 policies, regulations, and judicial precedents 
 and decisions place any unique or additional 
 burdens upon people living with HIV.
 (ii) A determination of whether such laws, 
 policies, regulations, and judicial precedents 
 and decisions demonstrate a public health-
 oriented, evidence-based, medically accurate, 
 and contemporary understanding of--
 (I) the multiple factors that lead 
 to HIV transmission;
 (II) the relative risk of HIV 
 transmission routes, including that a 
 person that has an undetectable viral 
 load cannot transmit HIV;
 (III) the current health 
 implications of living with HIV, 
 including data disaggregated by race 
 and ethnicity;
 (IV) the current status of 
 providing protection to people who 
 engage in survival sex work against 
 whom condom possession has been used as 
 evidence of intent to commit a crime;
 (V) States that have the 
 classification of mandatory sex 
 offenders;
 (VI) the associated benefits of 
 treatment and support services for 
 people living with HIV; and
 (VII) the impact of punitive HIV-
 specific laws and policies on public 
 health, on people living with or 
 affected by HIV, and on their families 
 and communities, including people who 
 are in abusive, dependent, violent, or 
 nonconsensual relationships and are 
 unable to both negotiate the use of 
 condoms and status disclosure.
 (iii) An analysis of the public health and 
 legal implications of such laws, policies, 
 regulations, and judicial precedents and 
 decisions, including an analysis of the 
 consequences of having a similar penal scheme 
 applied to comparable situations involving 
 other communicable diseases.
 (iv) An analysis of the proportionality of 
 punishments imposed under HIV-specific laws, 
 policies, regulations, and judicial precedents, 
 taking into consideration penalties attached to 
 violation of State laws against similar degrees 
 of endangerment or harm, such as driving while 
 intoxicated or transmission of other 
 communicable diseases, or more serious harms, 
 such as vehicular manslaughter offenses.
 (B) An analysis of common elements shared between 
 State laws, policies, regulations, and judicial 
 precedents.
 (C) A set of best practice recommendations directed 
 to State governments, including State attorneys 
 general, public health officials, and judicial 
 officers, in order to ensure that laws, policies, 
 regulations, and judicial precedents regarding people 
 living with HIV are in accordance with the principles 
 set forth in subsection (a).
 (D) Recommendations for adjustments to the UCMJ, 
 including discontinuing the use of a service member's 
 HIV diagnosis as the basis for prosecution, enhanced 
 penalties, or discharge from military service, in order 
 to ensure that laws, policies, regulations, and 
 judicial precedents regarding people living with HIV 
 are in accordance with the principles set forth in 
 subsection (a). Such recommendations should include any 
 necessary and appropriate changes to ``Orders to Follow 
 Preventative Medicine Requirements''.
 (3) Guidance.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 release of the report required by paragraph (2), the Attorney 
 General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
 jointly develop and publicly release updated guidance for 
 States based on the set of best practice recommendations 
 required under paragraph (2)(C) in order to assist States 
 dealing with criminal and related civil commitment cases 
 regarding people living with HIV.
 (4) Monitoring and evaluation system.--Not later than 60 
 days after the date of the release of the guidance required 
 under paragraph (3), the Attorney General and the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services shall jointly establish an integrated 
 monitoring and evaluation system that includes, where 
 appropriate, objective and quantifiable performance goals and 
 indicators to measure progress toward statewide implementation 
 in each State of the best practice recommendations required 
 under paragraph (2)(C).
 (5) Modernization of federal laws, policies, and 
 regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 release of the report required under paragraph (2), the 
 designated officials shall develop and transmit to the 
 President and the Congress, and make publicly available, such 
 proposals as may be necessary to implement adjustments to 
 Federal laws, policies, or regulations, including the UCMJ, 
 based on the recommendations required under paragraph (2)(D), 
 either through Executive order or through changes to statutory 
 law.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to discourage the prosecution of individuals who 
intentionally transmit or attempt to transmit HIV to another 
individual.
 (d) No Additional Appropriations Authorized.--This section shall 
not be construed to increase the amount of appropriations that are 
authorized to be appropriated for any fiscal year.

SEC. 7415. EXPANDING SUPPORT FOR CONDOMS IN PRISONS.

 (a) Sense of Congress Regarding Distribution of Sexual Barrier 
Protection Devices in State Prison Systems.--It is the sense of the 
Congress that States shall allow for the legal distribution of sexual 
barrier protection devices in State correctional facilities to reduce 
the prevalence and spread of STIs in those facilities.
 (b) Authority To Allow Community Organizations To Provide STI 
Counseling, STI Prevention Education, and Sexual Barrier Protection 
Devices in Federal Correctional Facilities.--
 (1) Directive to attorney general.--Not later than 30 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General 
 shall direct the Director of the Bureau of Prisons to allow 
 community organizations to, in accordance with all relevant 
 Federal laws and regulations that govern visitation in Federal 
 correctional facilities--
 (A) distribute sexual barrier protection devices in 
 Federal correctional facilities; and
 (B) engage in STI counseling and STI prevention 
 education in Federal correctional facilities.
 (2) Information requirement.--Any community organization 
 permitted to distribute sexual barrier protection devices under 
 paragraph (1) shall ensure that the individuals to whom the 
 devices are distributed are informed about the proper use and 
 disposal of sexual barrier protection devices in accordance 
 with established public health practices. Any community 
 organization conducting STI counseling or STI prevention 
 education under paragraph (1) shall offer comprehensive 
 sexuality education.
 (3) Possession of device protected.--A Federal correctional 
 facility may not, because of the possession or use of a sexual 
 barrier protection device--
 (A) take adverse action against an incarcerated 
 individual; or
 (B) consider possession or use as evidence of 
 prohibited activity for the purpose of any Federal 
 correctional facility administrative proceeding.
 (4) Implementation.--The Attorney General and the Director 
 of the Bureau of Prisons shall implement this section according 
 to established public health practices in a manner that 
 protects the health, safety, and privacy of incarcerated 
 individuals and of correctional facility staff.
 (c) Survey of and Report on Correctional Facility Programs Aimed at 
Reducing the Spread of STIs.--
 (1) Survey.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 5 years, the 
 Attorney General, after consulting with the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services, State officials, and community 
 organizations, shall, to the maximum extent practicable, 
 conduct a survey of all Federal and State correctional 
 facilities, to determine the following:
 (A) Counseling, treatment, and supportive 
 services.--Whether the correctional facility--
 (i) requires incarcerated individuals to 
 participate in counseling, treatment, and 
 supportive services related to STIs; or
 (ii) offers such programs to incarcerated 
 individuals.
 (B) Access to sexual barrier protection devices.--
 Whether incarcerated individuals can--
 (i) possess sexual barrier protection 
 devices;
 (ii) purchase sexual barrier protection 
 devices;
 (iii) purchase sexual barrier protection 
 devices at a reduced cost; or
 (iv) obtain sexual barrier protection 
 devices without cost.
 (C) Incidence of sexual violence.--The incidence of 
 sexual violence and assault committed by incarcerated 
 individuals and by correctional facility staff.
 (D) Prevention education offered.--The type of 
 prevention education, information, or training offered 
 to incarcerated individuals and correctional facility 
 staff regarding sexual violence and the spread of STIs, 
 including whether such education, information, or 
 training--
 (i) constitutes comprehensive sexuality 
 education;
 (ii) is compulsory for new incarcerated 
 individuals and for new correctional facility 
 staff; and
 (iii) is offered on an ongoing basis.
 (E) STI testing.--Whether the correctional facility 
 tests incarcerated individuals for STIs or gives them 
 the option to undergo such testing--
 (i) at intake;
 (ii) on a regular basis; and
 (iii) prior to release.
 (F) STI test results.--The number of incarcerated 
 individuals who are tested for STIs and the outcome of 
 such tests at each correctional facility, disaggregated 
 to include results for--
 (i) the type of STI tested for;
 (ii) the race and ethnicity of an 
 individual tested;
 (iii) the age of an individual tested; and
 (iv) the gender of the individual tested.
 (G) Prerelease referral policy.--Whether 
 incarcerated individuals are informed prior to release 
 about STI-related services or other health services in 
 their communities, including free and low-cost 
 counseling and treatment options.
 (H) Prerelease referrals made.--The number of 
 referrals to community-based organizations or public 
 health facilities offering STI-related or other health 
 services provided to incarcerated individuals prior to 
 release, and the type of counseling or treatment for 
 which the referral was made.
 (I) Reinstatement of medicaid benefits.--Whether--
 (i) the correctional facility assists 
 incarcerated individuals that were enrolled in 
 the State Medicaid program prior to their 
 incarceration in reinstating their enrollment 
 upon release; and
 (ii) such individuals receive referrals as 
 described in subparagraph (G) to entities that 
 accept the State Medicaid program, including, 
 if applicable--
 (I) the number of such individuals, 
 including those diagnosed with HIV, 
 that have been reinstated;
 (II) a list of obstacles to 
 reinstating enrollment or to making 
 determinations of eligibility for 
 reinstatement, if any; and
 (III) the number of individuals 
 denied enrollment.
 (J) Other actions taken.--Whether the correctional 
 facility has taken any other action, in conjunction 
 with community organizations or otherwise, to reduce 
 the prevalence and spread of STIs in that facility.
 (2) Privacy.--In conducting the survey under paragraph (1), 
 the Attorney General shall not request or retain the identity 
 of any individual who has sought or been offered counseling, 
 treatment, testing, or prevention education information 
 regarding an STI (including information about sexual barrier 
 protection devices), or who has tested positive for an STI.
 (3) Report.--
 (A) In general.--The Attorney General shall 
 transmit to Congress and make publicly available the 
 results of the survey required under paragraph (1), 
 both for the United States as a whole and disaggregated 
 as to each State and each correctional facility.
 (B) Deadlines.--To the maximum extent possible, the 
 Attorney General shall--
 (i) issue the first report under 
 subparagraph (A) not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (ii) issue reports under subparagraph (A) 
 annually thereafter for 5 years.
 (d) Strategy.--
 (1) Directive to attorney general.--The Attorney General, 
 in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, State officials, and community organizations, shall 
 develop and implement a 5-year strategy to reduce the 
 prevalence and spread of STIs in Federal and State correctional 
 facilities. To the maximum extent possible, the strategy shall 
 be developed, transmitted to Congress, and made publicly 
 available not later than 180 days after the transmission of the 
 first report required under subsection (c)(3).
 (2) Contents of strategy.--The strategy developed under 
 paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 (A) Prevention education.--A plan for improving 
 prevention education, information, and training offered 
 to incarcerated individuals and correctional facility 
 staff, including information and training on sexual 
 violence and the spread of STIs, and comprehensive 
 sexuality education.
 (B) Sexual barrier protection device access.--A 
 plan for expanding access to sexual barrier protection 
 devices in correctional facilities.
 (C) Sexual violence reduction.--A plan for reducing 
 the incidence of sexual violence among incarcerated 
 individuals and correctional facility staff.
 (D) Counseling and supportive services.--A plan for 
 expanding access to counseling and supportive services 
 related to STIs in correctional facilities.
 (E) Testing.--A plan for testing incarcerated 
 individuals for STIs during intake, during regular 
 health exams, and prior to release that--
 (i) is conducted in accordance with 
 guidelines established by the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention;
 (ii) includes pretest counseling;
 (iii) requires that incarcerated 
 individuals are notified of their option to 
 decline testing at any time;
 (iv) requires that incarcerated individuals 
 are confidentially notified of their test 
 results in a timely manner; and
 (v) ensures that incarcerated individuals 
 testing positive for STIs receive post-test 
 counseling, care, treatment, and supportive 
 services.
 (F) Treatment.--A plan for ensuring that 
 correctional facilities have the necessary medicine and 
 equipment to treat and monitor STIs and for ensuring 
 that incarcerated individuals living with or testing 
 positive for STIs receive and have access to care and 
 treatment services.
 (G) Strategies for demographic groups.--A plan for 
 developing and implementing culturally appropriate, 
 sensitive, and specific strategies to reduce the spread 
 of STIs among demographic groups heavily impacted by 
 STIs.
 (H) Linkages with communities and facilities.--A 
 plan for establishing and strengthening linkages to 
 local community and health facilities that--
 (i) provide counseling, testing, care, and 
 treatment services;
 (ii) may receive individuals recently 
 released from incarceration who are living with 
 STIs; and
 (iii) accept payment through the State 
 Medicaid program.
 (I) Enrollment in state medicaid programs.--Plans 
 to ensure that--
 (i) incarcerated individuals who were 
 enrolled in their State Medicaid program prior 
 to incarceration in a correctional facility are 
 automatically reenrolled in such program upon 
 their release; and
 (ii) incarcerated individuals who were not 
 enrolled in their State Medicaid program prior 
 to incarceration, and who are diagnosed with 
 HIV while incarcerated in a correctional 
 facility, are automatically enrolled in such 
 program upon their release.
 (J) Other plans.--Any other plans developed by the 
 Attorney General for reducing the spread of STIs or 
 improving the quality of health care in correctional 
 facilities.
 (K) Monitoring system.--A monitoring system that 
 establishes performance goals related to reducing the 
 prevalence and spread of STIs in correctional 
 facilities and which, where feasible, expresses such 
 goals in quantifiable form.
 (L) Monitoring system performance indicators.--
 Performance indicators that measure or assess the 
 achievement of the performance goals described in 
 subparagraph (K).
 (M) Cost estimate.--A detailed estimate of the 
 funding necessary to implement the strategy at the 
 Federal and State levels for all 5 years, including the 
 amount of funds required by community organizations to 
 implement the parts of the strategy in which they take 
 part.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Attorney 
 General shall transmit to Congress and make publicly available 
 an annual progress report regarding the implementation and 
 effectiveness of the strategy described in paragraph (1). The 
 progress report shall include an evaluation of the 
 implementation of the strategy using the monitoring system and 
 performance indicators provided for in subparagraphs (K) and 
 (L) of paragraph (2).
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (2) Availability of funds.--Amounts made available under 
 paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until 
 expended.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Community organization.--The term ``community 
 organization'' means a public health care facility or a 
 nonprofit organization that provides health- or STI-related 
 services according to established public health standards.
 (2) Comprehensive sexuality education.--The term 
 ``comprehensive sexuality education'' means sexuality 
 education--
 (A) that includes information about abstinence and 
 about the proper use and disposal of sexual barrier 
 protection devices; and
 (B) that is--
 (i) evidence based;
 (ii) medically accurate;
 (iii) age and developmentally appropriate;
 (iv) gender and identity sensitive;
 (v) culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate; and
 (vi) structured to promote critical 
 thinking, self-esteem, respect for others, and 
 the development of healthy attitudes and 
 relationships.
 (3) Correctional facility.--The term ``correctional 
 facility'' means any prison, penitentiary, adult detention 
 facility, juvenile detention facility, jail, or other facility 
 to which individuals may be sent after conviction of a crime or 
 act of juvenile delinquency within the United States.
 (4) Incarcerated individual.--The term ``incarcerated 
 individual'' means any individual who is serving a sentence in 
 a correctional facility after conviction of a crime.
 (5) Sexual barrier protection device.--The term ``sexual 
 barrier protection device'' means any physical device approved, 
 cleared, or otherwise authorized by the Food and Drug 
 Administration that has not been tampered with and which 
 reduces the probability of STI transmission or infection 
 between sexual partners, including female condoms, male 
 condoms, and dental dams.
 (6) Sexually transmitted infection.--The term ``sexually 
 transmitted infection'' or ``STI'' means any disease or 
 infection that is commonly transmitted through sexual activity, 
 including HIV, gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, genital herpes, 
 viral hepatitis, and human papillomavirus.
 (7) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the United States 
 Virgin Islands.
 (8) State medicaid program.--The term ``State Medicaid 
 program'' means the State plan (or a waiver of such plan) under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).

SEC. 7416. AUTOMATIC REINSTATEMENT OR ENROLLMENT IN MEDICAID FOR PEOPLE 
 WHO TEST POSITIVE FOR HIV BEFORE REENTERING COMMUNITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1902(e) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(17) Enrollment of ex-offenders.--
 ``(A) Automatic enrollment or reinstatement.--
 ``(i) In general.--The State plan shall 
 provide for the automatic enrollment or 
 reinstatement of enrollment of an eligible 
 individual--
 ``(I) if such individual is 
 scheduled to be released from a public 
 institution due to the completion of 
 sentence, not less than 30 days prior 
 to the scheduled date of the release; 
 and
 ``(II) if such individual is to be 
 released from a public institution on 
 parole or on probation, as soon as 
 possible after the date on which the 
 determination to release such 
 individual was made, and before the 
 date such individual is released.
 ``(ii) Exception.--If a State makes a 
 determination that an individual is not 
 eligible to be enrolled under the State plan--
 ``(I) on or before the date by 
 which the individual would be enrolled 
 under clause (i), such clause shall not 
 apply to such individual; or
 ``(II) after such date, the State 
 may terminate the enrollment of such 
 individual.
 ``(B) Relationship of enrollment to payment for 
 services.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), an eligible individual who is 
 enrolled, or whose enrollment is reinstated, 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be eligible for 
 all services for which medical assistance is 
 provided under the State plan after the date 
 that the eligible individual is released from 
 the public institution.
 ``(ii) Relationship to payment prohibition 
 for inmates.--No provision of this paragraph 
 may be construed to permit payment for care or 
 services for which payment is excluded under 
 subdivision (A) following the last numbered 
 paragraph of section 1905(a).
 ``(C) Treatment of continuous eligibility.--
 ``(i) Suspension for inmates.--Any period 
 of continuous eligibility under this title 
 shall be suspended on the date an individual 
 enrolled under this title becomes an inmate of 
 a public institution (except as a patient of a 
 medical institution).
 ``(ii) Determination of remaining period.--
 Notwithstanding any changes to State law 
 related to continuous eligibility during the 
 time that an individual is an inmate of a 
 public institution (except as a patient of a 
 medical institution), subject to clause (iii), 
 with respect to an eligible individual who was 
 subject to a suspension under clause (i), on 
 the date that such individual is released from 
 a public institution the suspension of 
 continuous eligibility under such clause shall 
 be lifted for a period that is equal to the 
 time remaining in the period of continuous 
 eligibility for such individual on the date 
 that such period was suspended under such 
 clause.
 ``(iii) Exception.--If a State makes a 
 determination that an individual is not 
 eligible to be enrolled under the State plan--
 ``(I) on or before the date that 
 the suspension of continuous 
 eligibility is lifted under clause 
 (ii), such clause shall not apply to 
 such individual; or
 ``(II) after such date, the State 
 may terminate the enrollment of such 
 individual.
 ``(D) Automatic enrollment or reinstatement of 
 enrollment defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the term `automatic enrollment or reinstatement of 
 enrollment' means that the State determines eligibility 
 for medical assistance under the State plan without a 
 program application from, or on behalf of, the eligible 
 individual, but an individual can only be automatically 
 enrolled in the State Medicaid plan if the individual 
 affirmatively consents to being enrolled through 
 affirmation in writing, by telephone, orally, through 
 electronic signature, or through any other means 
 specified by the Secretary.
 ``(E) Eligible individual defined.--For purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `eligible individual' means an 
 individual who is an inmate of a public institution 
 (except as a patient in a medical institution)--
 ``(i) who was enrolled under the State plan 
 for medical assistance immediately before 
 becoming an inmate of such an institution; or
 ``(ii) who is diagnosed with human 
 immunodeficiency virus.''.
 (b) Supplemental Funding for State Implementation of Automatic 
Reinstatement of Medicaid Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), with respect to 
 a State, for each of the first 4 calendar quarters in which the 
 State plan meets the requirements of paragraph (17) of section 
 1902(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)) (as 
 added by subsection (a)), the Federal matching payments 
 (including payments based on the Federal medical assistance 
 percentage) made to such State under section 1903 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) for the State expenditures 
 described in paragraph (2) shall be increased by 5 percentage 
 points.
 (2) Expenditures.--The expenditures described in this 
 paragraph are the following:
 (A) Expenditures for which payment is available 
 under section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396b) and which are attributable to 
 strengthening the State's enrollment and administrative 
 resources for the purpose of improving processes for 
 enrolling (or reinstating the enrollment of) eligible 
 individuals (as such term is defined in subparagraph 
 (E) of paragraph (16) of section 1902(e) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)) (as amended by 
 subsection (a))).
 (B) Expenditures for medical assistance (as such 
 term is defined in section 1905(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a))) provided to such 
 eligible individuals.
 (3) Requirements; limitation.--
 (A) Report.--A State is not eligible for an 
 increase in its Federal matching payments under 
 paragraph (1) unless the State agrees to submit to the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, and make 
 publicly available, a report that contains the 
 information required under paragraph (4) by the end of 
 the 1-year period during which the State receives 
 increased Federal matching payments in accordance with 
 that paragraph.
 (B) Maintenance of eligibility.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), a 
 State is not eligible for an increase in its 
 Federal matching payments under paragraph (1) 
 if eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
 procedures under its State plan under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et 
 seq.), or waiver of such a plan, are more 
 restrictive than the eligibility standards, 
 methodologies, or procedures, respectively, 
 under such plan or waiver as in effect on the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (ii) State reinstatement of eligibility 
 permitted.--A State that has restricted 
 eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
 procedures under its State plan under title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et 
 seq.), or a waiver of such plan, after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, is no longer 
 ineligible under clause (i) beginning with the 
 first calendar quarter in which the State has 
 reinstated eligibility standards, 
 methodologies, or procedures that are no more 
 restrictive than the eligibility standards, 
 methodologies, or procedures, respectively, 
 under such plan (or waiver) as in effect on 
 such date.
 (C) Limitation of matching payments to 100 
 percent.--In no case shall an increase in Federal 
 matching payments under paragraph (1) result in Federal 
 matching payments that exceed 100 percent of State 
 expenditures.
 (4) Required report information.--The information that is 
 required in the report under paragraph (3)(A) shall include--
 (A) the results of an evaluation of the impact of 
 the implementation of the requirements of paragraph 
 (17) of section 1902(e) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(e)) on improving the State's processes for 
 enrolling individuals who are released from public 
 institutions under the State Medicaid plan;
 (B) the number of individuals who were 
 automatically enrolled (or whose enrollment was 
 reinstated) under such paragraph during the 1-year 
 period during which the State received increased 
 payments under this subsection; and
 (C) any other information that is required by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect 180 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Rule for changes requiring state legislation.--In the 
 case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) which the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires 
 State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) 
 in order for the plan to meet the additional requirement 
 imposed by the amendments made by subsection (a), the State 
 plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the 
 requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure 
 to meet this additional requirement before the first day of the 
 first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first 
 regular session of the State legislature that begins after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act. For purposes of the previous 
 sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative 
 session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a 
 separate regular session of the State legislature.

SEC. 7417. STOP HIV IN PRISON.

 (a) HIV Policy.--The Director of the Bureau of Prisons (referred to 
in this section as the ``Director'') shall develop a comprehensive 
policy to provide HIV testing, treatment, and prevention for inmates 
within the correctional setting and upon reentry.
 (b) Purpose.--The purposes of the policy required to be developed 
under subsection (a) shall be as follows:
 (1) To stop the spread of HIV among inmates.
 (2) To protect guards and other personnel at correctional 
 facilities from HIV infection.
 (3) To provide comprehensive medical treatment to inmates 
 who are living with HIV.
 (4) To promote HIV awareness and prevention among inmates.
 (5) To encourage inmates to take personal responsibility 
 for their health.
 (6) To reduce the risk that inmates will transmit HIV to 
 other persons in the community following their release from a 
 correctional facility.
 (c) Consultation.--The Director shall consult with appropriate 
officials of the Department of Health and Human Services, the Office of 
National Drug Control Policy, the Office of National AIDS Policy, and 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding the 
development of the policy required under subsection (a).
 (d) Time Limit.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Director shall draft appropriate regulations to 
implement the policy required to be developed under subsection (a).
 (e) Requirements for Policy.--The policy required to be developed 
under subsection (a) shall provide for the following:
 (1) Testing and counseling upon intake.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall provide routine HIV 
 testing to all inmates as a part of a comprehensive 
 medical examination immediately following admission to 
 a facility. Health care personnel need not provide 
 routine HIV testing to an inmate who is transferred to 
 a facility from another facility if the inmate's 
 medical records are transferred with the inmate and 
 indicate that the inmate has been tested previously.
 (B) With respect to all inmates admitted to a 
 facility prior to the effective date of the policy--
 (i) health care personnel shall provide 
 routine HIV testing by not later than 180 days 
 after such effective date; and
 (ii) HIV testing described in clause (i) 
 may be performed in conjunction with other 
 health services provided to these inmates by 
 health care personnel.
 (C) All HIV tests under this paragraph shall comply 
 with the opt-out provision under paragraph (9).
 (2) Pre-test and post-test counseling.--Health care 
 personnel shall provide confidential pre-test and post-test 
 counseling to all inmates who are tested for HIV. Counseling 
 may be included with other general health counseling provided 
 to inmates by health care personnel.
 (3) HIV prevention education.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall improve HIV 
 awareness through frequent educational programs for all 
 inmates. HIV educational programs may be provided by 
 community-based organizations, local health 
 departments, and inmate peer educators.
 (B) HIV educational materials shall be made 
 available to all inmates at orientation, at health care 
 clinics, at regular educational programs, and prior to 
 release. Both written and audiovisual materials shall 
 be made available to all inmates.
 (C)(i) The HIV educational programs and materials 
 under this paragraph shall include information on--
 (I) modes of transmission, including 
 transmission through tattooing, sexual contact, 
 and intravenous drug use;
 (II) prevention methods;
 (III) treatment; and
 (IV) disease progression.
 (ii) The programs and materials shall be culturally 
 sensitive, written or designed for low-literacy levels, 
 available in a variety of languages, and present 
 scientifically accurate information in a clear and 
 understandable manner.
 (4) HIV testing upon request.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall allow inmates to 
 obtain HIV tests upon request once per year or whenever 
 an inmate has a reason to believe the inmate may have 
 been exposed to HIV. Health care personnel shall, both 
 orally and in writing, inform inmates, during 
 orientation and periodically throughout incarceration, 
 of their right to obtain HIV tests.
 (B) Health care personnel shall encourage inmates 
 to request HIV tests if the inmate is sexually active, 
 has been raped, uses intravenous drugs, receives a 
 tattoo, or if the inmate is concerned that the inmate 
 may have been exposed to HIV.
 (C) An inmate's request for an HIV test shall not 
 be considered an indication that the inmate has put 
 themselves at risk of infection or committed a 
 violation of the rules of the correctional facility.
 (5) HIV testing of pregnant woman.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall provide routine HIV 
 testing to all inmates who become pregnant.
 (B) All HIV tests under this paragraph shall comply 
 with the opt-out provision under paragraph (9).
 (6) Comprehensive treatment.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall provide all inmates 
 who test positive for HIV--
 (i) timely, comprehensive medical 
 treatment;
 (ii) confidential counseling on managing 
 their medical condition and preventing its 
 transmission to other persons; and
 (iii) voluntary partner notification 
 services.
 (B) Health care provided under this paragraph shall 
 be consistent with Department of Health and Human 
 Services guidelines and standard medical practice. 
 Health care personnel shall discuss treatment options, 
 the importance of adherence to antiretroviral therapy, 
 and the side effects of medications with inmates 
 receiving treatment.
 (C) Health care personnel and pharmacy personnel 
 shall ensure that the facility formulary contains all 
 Food and Drug Administration-approved medications 
 necessary to provide comprehensive treatment for 
 inmates living with HIV, and that the facility 
 maintains adequate supplies of such medications to meet 
 inmates' medical needs. Health care personnel and 
 pharmacy personnel shall also develop and implement 
 automatic renewal systems for these medications to 
 prevent interruptions in care.
 (D) Correctional staff, health care personnel, and 
 pharmacy personnel shall develop and implement 
 distribution procedures to ensure timely and 
 confidential access to medications.
 (7) Protection of confidentiality.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall develop and 
 implement procedures to ensure the confidentiality of 
 inmate tests, diagnoses, and treatment. Health care 
 personnel and correctional staff shall receive regular 
 training on the implementation of these procedures. 
 Penalties for violations of inmate confidentiality by 
 health care personnel or correctional staff shall be 
 specified and strictly enforced.
 (B) HIV testing, counseling, and treatment shall be 
 provided in a confidential setting where other routine 
 health services are provided and in a manner that 
 allows the inmate to request and obtain these services 
 as routine medical services.
 (8) Testing, counseling, and referral prior to reentry.--
 (A) Health care personnel shall provide routine HIV 
 testing to all inmates not earlier than 90 days prior 
 to their release and reentry into the community. 
 Inmates who are already known to be infected need not 
 be tested again. This requirement may be waived if an 
 inmate's release occurs without sufficient notice to 
 the Director to allow health care personnel to perform 
 a routine HIV test and notify the inmate of the 
 results.
 (B) All HIV tests under this paragraph shall comply 
 with the opt-out provision under paragraph (9).
 (C) With respect to all inmates who test positive 
 for HIV and all inmates who already are known to have 
 HIV, health care personnel shall provide--
 (i) confidential prerelease counseling on 
 managing their medical condition in the 
 community, accessing appropriate treatment and 
 services in the community, and preventing the 
 transmission of their condition to family 
 members and other persons in the community;
 (ii) referrals to appropriate health care 
 providers and social service agencies in the 
 community that meet the inmate's individual 
 needs, including voluntary partner notification 
 services and prevention counseling services for 
 people living with HIV; and
 (iii) a 30-day supply of any medically 
 necessary medications the inmate is currently 
 receiving.
 (9) Opt-out provision.--Inmates shall have the right to 
 refuse routine HIV testing. Inmates shall be informed both 
 orally and in writing of this right. Oral and written 
 disclosure of this right may be included with other general 
 health information and counseling provided to inmates by health 
 care personnel. If an inmate refuses a routine test for HIV, 
 health care personnel shall make a note of the inmate's refusal 
 in the inmate's confidential medical records. However, the 
 inmate's refusal shall not be considered a violation of the 
 rules of the correctional facility or result in disciplinary 
 action.
 (10) Exclusion of tests performed under section 4014(b) 
 from the definition of routine hiv testing.--HIV testing of an 
 inmate under section 4014(b) of title 18, United States Code, 
 is not routine HIV testing for the purposes of the opt-out 
 provision under paragraph (9). Health care personnel shall 
 document the reason for testing under section 4014(b) of title 
 18, United States Code, in the inmate's confidential medical 
 records.
 (11) Timely notification of test results.--Health care 
 personnel shall provide timely notification to inmates of the 
 results of HIV tests.
 (f) Changes in Existing Law.--
 (1) Screening in general.--Section 4014(a) of title 18, 
 United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by striking ``for a period of 6 months or 
 more'';
 (B) by striking ``, as appropriate,''; and
 (C) by striking ``if such individual is determined 
 to be at risk for infection with such virus in 
 accordance with the guidelines issued by the Bureau of 
 Prisons relating to infectious disease management.'' 
 and inserting ``unless the individual declines. The 
 Attorney General shall also cause such individual to be 
 so tested before release from that incarceration unless 
 the individual declines.''.
 (2) Inadmissibility of hiv test results in civil and 
 criminal proceedings.--Section 4014(d) of title 18, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting ``or under section 7417 of 
 the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024'' after 
 ``under this section''.
 (3) Screening as part of routine screening.--Section 
 4014(e) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding 
 at the end the following: ``Such rules shall also provide that 
 the initial test under this section be performed as part of the 
 routine health screening conducted at intake.''.
 (g) Reporting Requirements.--
 (1) Report on hepatitis, liver, and other diseases.--Not 
 later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Director shall submit to Congress a report on the policies and 
 procedures of the Bureau of Prisons to provide testing, 
 treatment, and prevention education programs for hepatitis, 
 liver failure, and other liver-related diseases transmitted 
 through sexual activity, intravenous drug use, or other means. 
 The Director shall consult with appropriate officials of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, the Office of National 
 Drug Control Policy, the Office of National AIDS Policy, and 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding the 
 development of this report.
 (2) Annual reports.--
 (A) Generally.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, 
 the Director submit to Congress a report on the 
 incidence among inmates of diseases transmitted through 
 sexual activity and intravenous drug use.
 (B) Matters pertaining to various diseases.--Each 
 report under subparagraph (A) shall discuss--
 (i) the incidence among inmates of HIV, 
 hepatitis, and other diseases transmitted 
 through sexual activity and intravenous drug 
 use; and
 (ii) updates on the testing, treatment, and 
 prevention education programs for these 
 diseases conducted by the Bureau of Prisons.
 (C) Matters pertaining to hiv only.--Each report 
 under subparagraph (A) shall also include--
 (i) the number of inmates who tested 
 positive for HIV upon intake;
 (ii) the number of inmates who tested 
 positive for HIV prior to reentry;
 (iii) the number of inmates who were not 
 tested for HIV prior to reentry because they 
 were released without sufficient notice;
 (iv) the number of inmates who opted out of 
 taking an HIV test;
 (v) the number of inmates who were tested 
 under section 4014(b) of title 18, United 
 States Code; and
 (vi) the number of inmates under treatment 
 for HIV.
 (D) Consultation.--The Director shall consult with 
 appropriate officials of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services, the Office of National Drug Control 
 Policy, the Office of National AIDS Policy, and the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding 
 the development of each report under subparagraph (A).

SEC. 7418. TRANSFER OF FUNDS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ENDING THE HIV 
 EPIDEMIC: A PLAN FOR AMERICA.

 Title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) 
is amended by inserting after section 241 (42 U.S.C. 238j) the 
following:

``SEC. 241A. TRANSFER OF FUNDS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL HIV/AIDS 
 STRATEGY.

 ``(a) Transfer Authorization.--Of the discretionary appropriations 
made available to the Department of Health and Human Services for any 
fiscal year for programs and activities that, as determined by the 
Secretary, pertain to HIV, the Secretary may transfer up to 1 percent 
of such appropriations to the Office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Health for implementation of the Ending the HIV Epidemic: A Plan for 
America.
 ``(b) Congressional Notification.--Not less than 30 days before 
making any transfer under this section, the Secretary shall give notice 
of the transfer to the Congress.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section, the term `Ending the HIV 
Epidemic: A Plan for America' means the initiative of the Department of 
Health and Human Services that seeks to reduce the number of new HIV 
infections in the United States by 75 percent by 2025, and then by at 
least 90 percent by 2030, for an estimated 250,000 total HIV infections 
averted.''.

SEC. 7419. PREP ACCESS AND COVERAGE.

 (a) Coverage of HIV Testing and Prevention Services.--
 (1) Private insurance.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2713(a) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-13(a)) is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (2), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) in paragraph (3), by striking the 
 period and inserting a semicolon;
 (iii) in paragraph (4), by striking the 
 period and inserting a semicolon;
 (iv) in paragraph (5), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``; and''; and
 (v) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) any prescription drug approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration for the prevention of HIV (other than a drug 
 subject to preauthorization requirements consistent with 
 section 2729A), administrative fees for such drugs, laboratory 
 and other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of such 
 drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any 
 related services recommended in current United States Public 
 Health Service clinical practice guidelines, without 
 limitation.''.
 (B) Prohibition on preauthorization requirements.--
 Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729A. PROHIBITION ON PREAUTHORIZATION REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT 
 TO CERTAIN SERVICES.

 ``A group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group 
or individual health insurance coverage shall not impose any 
preauthorization requirements with respect to coverage of the services 
described in section 2713(a)(1)(E), except that a plan or issuer may 
impose preauthorization requirements with respect to coverage of a 
particular drug approved under section 505(c) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act or section 351(a) of this Act if such plan or 
issuer provides coverage without any preauthorization requirements for 
a drug that is therapeutically equivalent.''.
 (2) Coverage under federal employees health benefits 
 program.--Section 8904 of title 5, United States Code, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) Any health benefits plan offered under this chapter shall 
include benefits for, and may not impose any cost sharing requirements 
for, any prescription drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
for the prevention of HIV, administrative fees for such drugs, 
laboratory and other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of 
such drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any 
related services recommended in current United States Public Health 
Service clinical practice guidelines, without limitation.''.
 (3) Medicaid.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1905 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as amended by section 
 5406(g), is amended--
 (i) in subsection (a)(4)--
 (I) by striking ``; and (G)'' and 
 inserting ``; (G)''; and
 (II) by striking the semicolon at 
 the end and inserting ``; and (H) HIV 
 prevention services;''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(rr) HIV Prevention Services.--For purposes of subsection 
(a)(4)(H), the term `HIV prevention services' means prescription drugs 
for the prevention of HIV acquisition, administrative fees for such 
drugs, laboratory and other diagnostic procedures associated with the 
use of such drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any 
related services recommended in current United States Public Health 
Service clinical practice guidelines, without limitation.''.
 (B) No cost-sharing.--Title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended--
 (i) in section 1916, by inserting ``HIV 
 prevention services described in section 
 1905(a)(4)(H),'' after ``section 
 1905(a)(4)(C),'' each place it appears; and
 (ii) in section 1916A(b)(3)(B), as amended 
 by section 7305, by adding at the end the 
 following new clause:
 ``(xvi) HIV prevention services described 
 in section 1905(a)(4)(H).''.
 (C) Inclusion in benchmark coverage.--Section 
 1937(b)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
 7(b)(7)) is amended--
 (i) in the paragraph header, by inserting 
 ``and hiv prevention services'' after 
 ``supplies''; and
 (ii) by striking ``includes for any 
 individual described in section 1905(a)(4)(C), 
 medical assistance for family planning services 
 and supplies in accordance with such section'' 
 and inserting ``includes medical assistance for 
 HIV prevention services described in section 
 1905(a)(4)(H), and includes, for any individual 
 described in section 1905(a)(4)(H), medical 
 assistance for family planning services and 
 supplies in accordance with such section''.
 (4) CHIP.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2103 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc), as amended by section 
 2007(d)(5), is amended--
 (i) in subsection (a), by striking 
 ``through (13)'' and inserting ``through 
 (14)''; and
 (ii) in subsection (c), by adding at the 
 end the following new paragraph:
 ``(14) HIV prevention services.--Regardless of the type of 
 coverage elected by a State under subsection (a), the child 
 health assistance provided for a targeted low-income child, 
 and, in the case of a State that elects to provide pregnancy-
 related assistance pursuant to section 2112, the pregnancy-
 related assistance provided for a targeted low-income pregnant 
 woman (as such terms are defined for purposes of such section), 
 shall include coverage of HIV prevention services (as defined 
 in section 1905(rr)).''.
 (B) No cost-sharing.--Section 2103(e)(2) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(e)(2)) is amended 
 by inserting ``HIV prevention services described in 
 subsection (c)(14),'' before ``or for pregnancy-related 
 assistance''.
 (C) Effective date.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the amendments made by paragraph (3) and this 
 paragraph shall take effect on January 1, 2025.
 (ii) Delay permitted if state legislation 
 required.--In the case of a State plan approved 
 under title XIX or XXI of the Social Security 
 Act which the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services determines requires State legislation 
 (other than legislation appropriating funds) in 
 order for the plan to meet the additional 
 requirements imposed by this subsection, the 
 State plan shall not be regarded as failing to 
 comply with the requirements of such title 
 solely on the basis of the failure of the plan 
 to meet such additional requirements before the 
 1st day of the 1st calendar quarter beginning 
 after the close of the 1st regular session of 
 the State legislature that ends after the 1-
 year period beginning with the date of the 
 enactment of this Act. For purposes of the 
 preceding sentence, in the case of a State that 
 has a 2-year legislative session, each year of 
 the session is deemed to be a separate regular 
 session of the State legislature.
 (5) Coverage and elimination of cost-sharing under 
 medicare.--
 (A) Coverage of hiv prevention services under part 
 b.--
 (i) Coverage.--
 (I) In general.--Section 1861(s)(2) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x(s)(2)), as amended by section 
 4251(c)(1) and 6101(a)(1), is amended--
 (aa) by striking ``and'' at 
 the end of subparagraph (KK);
 (bb) by inserting ``and'' 
 at the end of subparagraph 
 (LL); and
 (cc) by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(MM) HIV prevention services (as defined in subsection 
 (ppp));''.
 (II) Definition.--Section 1861 of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x), as amended by sections 2007(b), 
 4221(a), 4251(c)(2), and 6101(a)(2), is 
 amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(rrr) HIV Prevention Services.--The term `HIV prevention 
services' means--
 ``(1) drugs or biologicals approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration for the prevention of HIV;
 ``(2) administrative fees for such drugs;
 ``(3) laboratory and other diagnostic procedures associated 
 with the use of such drugs; and
 ``(4) clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any 
 related services recommended in current United States Public 
 Health Service clinical practice guidelines, without 
 limitation.''.
 (ii) Elimination of coinsurance.--Section 
 1833(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)), as amended by sections 
 4251(c)(3) and 6101(a)(4), is amended--
 (I) by striking ``and'' before 
 ``(JJ)''; and
 (II) by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: 
 ``and (KK) with respect to HIV 
 prevention services (as defined in 
 section 1861(rrr)), the amount paid 
 shall be 100 percent of (i) except as 
 provided in clause (ii), the lesser of 
 the actual charge for the service or 
 the amount determined under the fee 
 schedule that applies to such services 
 under this part, and (ii) in the case 
 of such services that are covered OPD 
 services (as defined in subsection 
 (t)(1)(B)), the amount determined under 
 subsection (t)''.
 (iii) Exemption from part b deductible.--
 Section 1833(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395l(b)) is amended--
 (I) in paragraph (12), by striking 
 ``section 1861(s)(10)(A),, and'' and 
 inserting ``section 1861(s)(10)(A),'';
 (II) in paragraph (13), by striking 
 ``section 1861(n)..'' and inserting 
 ``section 1861(n), and (14) such 
 deductible shall not apply with respect 
 to HIV prevention services (as defined 
 in section 1861(rrr).''.
 (iv) Effective date.--The amendments made 
 by this subparagraph shall apply to items and 
 services furnished on or after January 1, 2025.
 (B) Elimination of cost-sharing for drugs for the 
 prevention of hiv under part d.--
 (i) In general.--Section 1860D-2 of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102) is 
 amended--
 (I) in subsection (b)--
 (aa) in paragraph (1)(A), 
 in the matter preceding clause 
 (i), by striking ``(8) and 
 (9)'' and inserting ``(8), (9), 
 and (10)'';
 (bb) in paragraph (2)(A), 
 in subparagraph (A), in the 
 matter preceding clause (i), by 
 striking ``(8) and (9)'' and 
 inserting ``(8), (9), and 
 (10)''; and
 (cc) by adding at the end 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Elimination of cost-sharing for drugs for the 
 prevention of hiv.--For plan years beginning on or after 
 January 1, 2025, with respect to a covered part D drug that is 
 for the prevention of HIV--
 ``(A) the deductible under paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply; and
 ``(B) there shall be no coinsurance or other cost-
 sharing under this part with respect to such drug.''; 
 and
 (II) in subsection (c), by adding 
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Treatment of cost-sharing for drugs for the 
 prevention of hiv.--The coverage is in accordance with 
 subsection (b)(10).''.
 (ii) Conforming amendments to cost-sharing 
 for low-income individuals.--Section 1860D-
 14(a)(1)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395w-114(a)(1)(D)) is amended in each 
 of clauses (ii) and (iii), by striking 
 ``paragraph (6)'' and inserting ``paragraph (6) 
 and section 1860D-2(b)(10)''.
 (6) Coverage of hiv prevention treatment by department of 
 veterans affairs.--
 (A) Elimination of medication copayments.--Section 
 1722A(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Paragraph (1) does not apply to a medication for the 
prevention of HIV.''.
 (B) Elimination of hospital care and medical 
 services copayments.--Section 1710 of such title is 
 amended--
 (i) in subsection (f)--
 (I) by redesignating paragraph (5) 
 as paragraph (6); and
 (II) by inserting after paragraph 
 (4) the following new paragraph (5):
 ``(5) A veteran shall not be liable to the United States under this 
subsection for any amounts for laboratory and other diagnostic 
procedures associated with the use of any prescription drug approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration for the prevention of HIV, 
administrative fees for such drugs, or for laboratory or other 
diagnostic procedures associated with the use of such drugs, or 
clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any related services 
recommended in current United States Public Health Service clinical 
practice guidelines, without limitation.''; and
 (ii) in subsection (g)(3), by adding at the 
 end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Any prescription drug approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration for the prevention of HIV, administrative fees 
 for such drugs, laboratory and other diagnostic procedures 
 associated with the use of such drugs, and clinical follow-up 
 and monitoring, including any related services recommended in 
 current United States Public Health Service clinical practice 
 guidelines, without limitation.''.
 (C) Inclusion as preventive health service.--
 Section 1701(9) of such title is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (K), by striking ``; 
 and'' and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraph (L) as 
 subparagraph (M); and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (K) 
 the following new subparagraph (L):
 ``(L) any prescription drug approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration for the prevention of HIV, 
 administrative fees for such drugs, laboratory and 
 other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of 
 such drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, 
 including any related services recommended in current 
 United States Public Health Service clinical practice 
 guidelines, without limitation; and''.
 (7) Coverage of hiv prevention treatment by department of 
 defense.--
 (A) In general.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting after section 
 1079c the following new section:
``Sec. 1079d. Coverage of HIV prevention treatment
 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure coverage 
under the TRICARE program of HIV prevention treatment described in 
subsection (b) for any beneficiary under section 1074(a) of this title.
 ``(b) HIV Prevention Treatment Described.--HIV prevention treatment 
described in this subsection includes any prescription drug approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration for the prevention of HIV, 
administrative fees for such drugs, laboratory and other diagnostic 
procedures associated with the use of such drugs, and clinical follow-
up and monitoring, including any related services recommended in 
current United States Public Health Service clinical practice 
guidelines, without limitation.
 ``(c) No Cost-Sharing.--Notwithstanding section 1075, 1075a, or 
1074g(a)(6) of this title or any other provision of law, there is no 
cost-sharing requirement for HIV prevention treatment covered under 
this section.''.
 (B) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at 
 the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 1079c the following 
 new item:

``1079d. Coverage of HIV prevention treatment.''.
 (8) Indian health service testing, monitoring, and 
 prescription drugs for the prevention of hiv.--Title II of the 
 Indian Health Care Improvement Act is amended by inserting 
 after section 223 (25 U.S.C. 1621v) the following:

``SEC. 224. TESTING, MONITORING, AND PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR THE 
 PREVENTION OF HIV.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Service, 
Indian tribes, and tribal organizations, shall provide, without 
limitation, funding for any prescription drug approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration for the prevention of human immunodeficiency virus 
(commonly known as `HIV'), administrative fees for that drug, 
laboratory and other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of 
that drug, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, including any related 
services recommended in current Public Health Service clinical practice 
guidelines.
 ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.''.
 (9) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1), 
 (2), (5), (6), (7), and (8) shall take effect with respect to 
 plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2025.
 (b) Prohibition on Denial of Coverage or Increase in Premiums of 
Life, Disability, or Long-Term Care Insurance for Individuals Taking 
Medication for the Prevention of HIV Acquisition.--
 (1) Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, it shall be unlawful to--
 (A) decline or limit coverage of a person under any 
 life insurance policy, disability insurance policy, or 
 long-term care insurance policy, on account of the 
 individual taking medication for the purpose of 
 preventing the acquisition of HIV;
 (B) preclude an individual from taking medication 
 for the purpose of preventing the acquisition of HIV as 
 a condition of receiving a life insurance policy, 
 disability insurance policy, or long-term care 
 insurance policy;
 (C) consider whether an individual is taking 
 medication for the purpose of preventing the 
 acquisition of HIV in determining the premium rate for 
 coverage of such individual under a life insurance 
 policy, disability insurance policy, or long-term care 
 insurance policy; or
 (D) otherwise discriminate in the offering, 
 issuance, cancellation, amount of such coverage, price, 
 or any other condition of a life insurance policy, 
 disability insurance policy, or long-term care 
 insurance policy for an individual, based solely and 
 without any additional actuarial risks upon whether the 
 individual is taking medication for the purpose of 
 preventing the acquisition of HIV.
 (2) Enforcement.--A State insurance regulator may take such 
 actions to enforce paragraph (1) as are specifically authorized 
 under the laws of such State.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Disability insurance policy.--The term 
 ``disability insurance policy'' means a contract under 
 which an entity promises to pay a person a sum of money 
 in the event that an illness or injury resulting in a 
 disability prevents such person from working.
 (B) Life insurance policy.--The term ``life 
 insurance policy'' means a contract under which an 
 entity promises to pay a designated beneficiary a sum 
 of money upon the death of the insured.
 (C) Long-term care insurance policy.--The term 
 ``long-term care insurance policy'' means a contract 
 for which the only insurance protection provided under 
 the contract is coverage of qualified long-term care 
 services (as defined in section 7702B(c) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
 (c) Patient Confidentiality.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall amend the regulations promulgated under section 264(c) 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 
U.S.C. 1320d-2 note), as necessary, to ensure that individuals are able 
to access the benefits described in section 2713(a)(1)(E) of the Public 
Health Service Act under a family plan without any other individual 
enrolled in such family plan, including a primary subscriber or 
policyholder of such plan, being informed of such use of such benefits.
 (d) Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis and Post-Exposure Prophylaxis 
Funding.--Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 280g et seq.), as amended by section 7303, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-11. PRE-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS AND POST-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS 
 FUNDING.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a program that 
awards grants to States, territories, Indian Tribes, and directly 
eligible entities for the establishment and support of pre-exposure 
prophylaxis (referred to in this section as `PrEP') and post-exposure 
prophylaxis (referred to in this section as `PEP') HIV programs.
 ``(b) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), a State, territory, Indian Tribe, or directly eligible 
entity shall--
 ``(1) submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may require, including a plan describing how any 
 funds awarded will be used to increase access to PrEP for 
 uninsured and underinsured individuals and reduce disparities 
 in access to PrEP and PEP for uninsured and underinsured 
 individuals and reduce disparities in access to PrEP and PEP; 
 and
 ``(2) appoint a PrEP and PEP grant administrator to manage 
 the program.
 ``(c) Directly Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `directly eligible entity'--
 ``(1) means a Federally qualified health center or other 
 nonprofit entity engaged in providing PrEP and PEP information 
 and services; and
 ``(2) may include--
 ``(A) a Federally qualified health center (as 
 defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(4)));
 ``(B) a family planning grantee (other than States) 
 funded under section 1001 of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 300);
 ``(C) a rural health clinic (as defined in section 
 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395x(aa)(2)));
 ``(D) a health facility operated by or pursuant to 
 a contract with the Indian Health Service;
 ``(E) a community-based organization, clinic, 
 hospital, or other health facility that provides 
 services to individuals at risk for or living with HIV; 
 and
 ``(F) a nonprofit private entity providing 
 comprehensive primary care to populations at risk of 
 HIV, including faith-based and community-based 
 organizations.
 ``(d) Awards.--In determining whether to award a grant, and the 
grant amount for each grant awarded, the Secretary shall consider the 
grant application and the need for PrEP and PEP services in the area, 
the number of uninsured and underinsured individuals in the area, and 
how the State, territory, or Indian Tribe coordinates PrEP and PEP 
activities with the directly funded entity, if the State, territory, or 
Indian Tribe applies for the funds.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any State, territory, Indian Tribe, or 
 directly eligible entity that is awarded funds under subsection 
 (a) shall use such funds for eligible PrEP and PEP expenses.
 ``(2) Eligible prep expenses.--The Secretary shall publish 
 a list of expenses that qualify as eligible PrEP and PEP 
 expenses for purposes of this section, which shall include--
 ``(A) any prescription drug approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration for the prevention of HIV, 
 administrative fees for such drugs, laboratory and 
 other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of 
 such drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, 
 including any related services recommended in current 
 United States Public Health Service clinical practice 
 guidelines, without limitation;
 ``(B) outreach and public education activities 
 directed toward populations overrepresented in the 
 domestic HIV epidemic that increase awareness about the 
 existence of PrEP and PEP, provide education about 
 access to and health care coverage of PrEP and PEP, 
 PrEP and PEP adherence programs, and counter stigma 
 associated with the use of PrEP and PEP; and
 ``(C) outreach activities directed toward 
 physicians and other providers that provide education 
 about PrEP and PEP.
 ``(f) Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall, in each of the 
first 5 years beginning one year after the date of the enactment of 
this section, submit to Congress, and make public on the internet 
website of the Department of Health and Human Services, a report on the 
impact of any grants provided to States, territories, and Indian Tribes 
and directly eligible entities for the establishment and support of 
pre-exposure prophylaxis programs under this section.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2030.''.
 (e) Clarification.--This section, including the amendments made by 
this section, shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
including Public Law 103-141.
 (f) Private Right of Action.--Any person aggrieved by a violation 
of this section, including the amendments made by this section, may 
commence a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court 
or other court of competent jurisdiction to obtain relief as allowed by 
law as either an individual or member of a class. If the plaintiff is 
the prevailing party in such an action, the court shall order the 
defendant to pay the costs and reasonable attorney fees of the 
plaintiff.

 Subtitle F--Diabetes

SEC. 7501. RESEARCH, TREATMENT, AND EDUCATION.

 Subpart 3 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 285c et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 434B. DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of NIH shall expand, intensify, and 
support ongoing research and other activities with respect to 
prediabetes and diabetes, particularly type 2, in minority populations.
 ``(b) Research.--
 ``(1) Description.--Research under subsection (a) shall 
 include investigation into--
 ``(A) the causes of diabetes, including 
 socioeconomic, geographic, clinical, environmental, 
 genetic, and other factors that may contribute to 
 increased rates of diabetes in minority populations; 
 and
 ``(B) the causes of increased incidence of diabetes 
 complications in minority populations, and possible 
 interventions to decrease such incidence.
 ``(2) Inclusion of minority participants.--In conducting 
 and supporting research described in subsection (a), the 
 Director of NIH shall seek to include minority participants as 
 study subjects in clinical trials.
 ``(c) Report; Comprehensive Plan.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Diabetes Mellitus Interagency 
 Coordinating Committee shall--
 ``(A) prepare and submit to Congress, not later 
 than 6 months after the date of enactment of this 
 section, a report on Federal research and public health 
 activities with respect to prediabetes and diabetes in 
 minority populations; and
 ``(B) develop and submit to Congress, not later 
 than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
 section, an effective and comprehensive Federal plan 
 (including all appropriate Federal health programs) to 
 address prediabetes and diabetes in minority 
 populations.
 ``(2) Contents.--The report under paragraph (1)(A) shall at 
 minimum address each of the following:
 ``(A) Research on diabetes and prediabetes in 
 minority populations, including such research on--
 ``(i) genetic, behavioral, socioeconomic, 
 and environmental factors;
 ``(ii) prevention of diabetes within these 
 populations and which of the populations have 
 individuals at increased risk of developing 
 diabetes;
 ``(iii) prevention of complications among 
 individuals in these populations who have 
 already developed diabetes; and
 ``(iv) barriers to health care access and 
 diabetes treatment within populations at 
 increased risk of developing diabetes.
 ``(B) Surveillance and data collection on diabetes 
 and prediabetes in minority populations, including with 
 respect to--
 ``(i) efforts to better determine the 
 prevalence of diabetes among Asian-American and 
 Pacific Islander subgroups; and
 ``(ii) efforts to coordinate data 
 collection on the American Indian population.
 ``(C) Community-based interventions to address 
 diabetes and prediabetes targeting minority 
 populations, including--
 ``(i) the evidence base for such 
 interventions;
 ``(ii) the cultural appropriateness of such 
 interventions; and
 ``(iii) efforts to educate the public on 
 the causes and consequences of diabetes.
 ``(D) Education and training programs for health 
 professionals (including community health workers) on 
 the prevention and management of diabetes and its 
 related complications that is supported by the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, including such 
 programs supported by--
 ``(i) the National Health Service Corps; or
 ``(ii) the community health centers program 
 under section 330.
 ``(d) Education.--The Director of NIH shall--
 ``(1) through the National Institute on Minority Health and 
 Health Disparities and the National Diabetes Education 
 Program--
 ``(A) make grants to programs funded under section 
 464z-4 for the purpose of establishing a medical 
 education program for health care professionals to be 
 more involved in weight counseling, obesity research, 
 nutrition, and shared decision making; and
 ``(B) provide for the participation of minority 
 health professionals in diabetes-focused research 
 programs; and
 ``(2) make grants to programs that establish a professional 
 pipeline that will increase the participation of minority 
 individuals in diabetes-focused health fields by expanding 
 Minority Access to Research Careers program internships and 
 mentoring opportunities for the purposes of recruitment.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) Diabetes mellitus interagency coordinating 
 committee.--The `Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating 
 Committee' means the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating 
 Committee established under section 429.
 ``(2) Minority population.--The term `minority population' 
 means a racial and ethnic minority group, as defined in section 
 1707.''.

SEC. 7502. RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.

 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 
et seq.), as amended by section 7201, is amended by inserting after 
section 317X the following:

``SEC. 317Y. DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 ``(a) Research and Other Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall conduct and support research and public health activities 
 with respect to diabetes in minority populations.
 ``(2) Certain activities.--Activities under paragraph (1) 
 regarding diabetes in minority populations shall include the 
 following:
 ``(A) Further enhancing the National Health and 
 Nutrition Examination Survey by oversampling Asian 
 Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders in 
 appropriate geographic areas to better determine the 
 prevalence of diabetes in such populations as well as 
 to improve the data collection of diabetes penetration 
 disaggregated into major ethnic groups within such 
 populations. The Secretary shall ensure that any such 
 oversampling does not reduce the oversampling of other 
 minority populations including African-American and 
 Latino populations.
 ``(B) Through the Division of Diabetes 
 Translation--
 ``(i) providing for prevention research to 
 better understand how to influence health care 
 systems changes to improve quality of care 
 being delivered to such populations;
 ``(ii) carrying out model demonstration 
 projects to design, implement, and evaluate 
 effective diabetes prevention and control 
 interventions for minority populations, 
 including culturally appropriate community-
 based interventions;
 ``(iii) developing and implementing a 
 strategic plan to reduce diabetes in minority 
 populations through applied research to reduce 
 disparities and culturally and linguistically 
 appropriate community-based interventions;
 ``(iv) supporting, through the national 
 diabetes prevention program under section 399V-
 3, diabetes prevention program sites in 
 underserved regions highly impacted by 
 diabetes; and
 ``(v) implementing, through the national 
 diabetes prevention program under section 399V-
 3, a demonstration program developing new 
 metrics measuring health outcomes related to 
 diabetes that can be stratified by specific 
 minority populations.
 ``(b) Education.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall direct the Division 
of Diabetes Translation to conduct and support both programs to educate 
the public on diabetes in minority populations and programs to educate 
minority populations about the causes and effects of diabetes.
 ``(c) Diabetes; Health Promotion, Prevention Initiatives, and 
Access.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention and the National Diabetes Education 
Program, shall conduct and support programs to educate specific 
minority populations through culturally appropriate and linguistically 
appropriate information campaigns and initiatives about prevention of, 
and managing, diabetes.
 ``(d) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `minority 
population' means a racial and ethnic minority group, as defined in 
section 1707.''.

SEC. 7503. PROGRAMS TO EDUCATE HEALTH PROVIDERS ON THE CAUSES AND 
 EFFECTS OF DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 7419(d), is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-12 PROGRAMS TO EDUCATE HEALTH PROVIDERS ON THE CAUSES AND 
 EFFECTS OF DIABETES IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall conduct and 
support programs described in subsection (b) to educate health 
professionals on the causes and effects of diabetes in minority 
populations.
 ``(b) Programs.--Programs described in this subsection, with 
respect to education on diabetes in minority populations, shall include 
the following:
 ``(1) Giving priority, under the primary care training and 
 enhancement program under section 747--
 ``(A) to awarding grants to focus on or address 
 diabetes; and
 ``(B) to adding minority populations to the list of 
 vulnerable populations that should be served by such 
 grants.
 ``(2) Providing additional funds for the Health Careers 
 Opportunity Program and the Centers of Excellence to partner 
 with the Office of Minority Health under section 1707 and the 
 National Institutes of Health to strengthen programs for career 
 opportunities focused on diabetes treatment and care within 
 underserved regions highly impacted by diabetes.
 ``(3) Developing a diabetes focus within, and providing 
 additional funds for, the National Health Service Corps 
 scholarship program--
 ``(A) to place individuals in areas that are 
 disproportionately affected by diabetes and to provide 
 diabetes treatment and care in such areas; and
 ``(B) to provide such individuals continuing 
 medical education specific to diabetes care.''.

SEC. 7504. RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES REGARDING DIABETES 
 IN AMERICAN INDIAN POPULATIONS.

 Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 7503, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 399V-13. RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES REGARDING 
 DIABETES IN AMERICAN INDIAN POPULATIONS.

 ``In addition to activities under sections 317X, 399V-12, and 434B, 
the Secretary, acting through the Indian Health Service and in 
collaboration with other appropriate Federal agencies, shall--
 ``(1) conduct and support research and other activities 
 with respect to diabetes; and
 ``(2) coordinate the collection of data on clinically and 
 culturally appropriate diabetes treatment, care, prevention, 
 and services by health care professionals to the American 
 Indian population.''.

SEC. 7505. UPDATED REPORT ON HEALTH DISPARITIES.

 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall seek to enter into 
an arrangement with the National Academy of Medicine under which the 
National Academy will--
 (1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, submit to Congress an updated version of the 2003 
 report entitled ``Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and 
 Ethnic Disparities in Health Care''; and
 (2) in such updated version, address how racial and ethnic 
 health disparities have changed since the publication of the 
 original report.

 Subtitle G--Lung Disease

SEC. 7601. ASTHMA-RELATED ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL 
 AND PREVENTION.

 Section 317I of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-10) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 317I. ASTHMA-RELATED ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE 
 CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

 ``(a) Program for Providing Information and Education to the 
Public.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, shall collaborate with State and local 
health departments to conduct activities, including the provision of 
information and education to the public, regarding asthma including--
 ``(1) deterring the harmful consequences of uncontrolled 
 asthma; and
 ``(2) disseminating health education and information 
 regarding prevention of asthma episodes and strategies for 
 managing asthma.
 ``(b) Development of State Asthma Plans.--The Secretary, acting 
through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
shall collaborate with State and local health departments to develop 
State plans incorporating public health responses to reduce the burden 
of asthma, particularly regarding disproportionately affected 
populations.
 ``(c) Compilation of Data.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall, in 
cooperation with State and local public health officials--
 ``(1) conduct asthma surveillance activities to collect 
 data on the prevalence and severity of asthma, the 
 effectiveness of public health asthma interventions, and the 
 quality of asthma management, including--
 ``(A) collection of data among people with asthma 
 to monitor the impact on health and quality of life;
 ``(B) surveillance of health care facilities; and
 ``(C) collection of data not containing 
 individually identifiable information from electronic 
 health records or other electronic communications;
 ``(2) compile and annually publish data regarding the 
 prevalence and incidence of childhood asthma, the child 
 mortality rate, and the number of hospital admissions and 
 emergency department visits by children associated with asthma 
 nationally and in each State and at the county level by age, 
 sex, race, and ethnicity, as well as lifetime and current 
 prevalence; and
 ``(3) compile and annually publish data regarding the 
 prevalence and incidence of adult asthma, the adult mortality 
 rate, and the number of hospital admissions and emergency 
 department visits by adults associated with asthma nationally 
 and in each State and at the county level by age, sex, race, 
 ethnicity, industry, and occupation, as well as lifetime and 
 current prevalence.
 ``(d) Coordination of Data Collection.--The Director of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, in conjunction with State and local 
health departments, shall coordinate data collection activities under 
paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (c) so as to maximize 
comparability of results.
 ``(e) Collaboration.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention may collaborate with national, State, and local 
 nonprofit organizations to provide information and education 
 about asthma, and to strengthen such collaborations when 
 possible.
 ``(2) Specific activities.--The Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention, acting through the Division of 
 Population Health of the Centers, may expand activities 
 relating to asthma with non-Federal partners, especially State-
 level entities.
 ``(f) Reports to Congress.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 
 2024, and once 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall, in 
 consultation with patient groups, nonprofit organizations, 
 medical societies, and other relevant governmental and 
 nongovernmental entities, submit to Congress a report that--
 ``(A) catalogs, with respect to asthma prevention, 
 management, and surveillance--
 ``(i) the activities of the Federal 
 Government, including an assessment of the 
 progress of the Federal Government and States, 
 with respect to achieving the goals of the 
 Healthy People 2030 initiative; and
 ``(ii) the activities of other entities 
 that participate in the program under this 
 section, including nonprofit organizations, 
 patient advocacy groups, and medical societies; 
 and
 ``(B) makes recommendations for the future 
 direction of asthma activities, in consultation with 
 researchers from the National Institutes of Health and 
 other member bodies of the Asthma Disparities 
 Subcommittee, including--
 ``(i) a description of how the Federal 
 Government may improve its response to asthma, 
 including identifying any barriers that may 
 exist;
 ``(ii) a description of how the Federal 
 Government may continue, expand, and improve 
 its private-public partnerships with respect to 
 asthma, including identifying any barriers that 
 may exist;
 ``(iii) identification of steps that may be 
 taken to reduce the--
 ``(I) morbidity, mortality, and 
 overall prevalence of asthma;
 ``(II) financial burden of asthma 
 on society;
 ``(III) burden of asthma on 
 disproportionately affected areas, 
 particularly those in medically 
 underserved populations (as defined in 
 section 330(b)(3)); and
 ``(IV) burden of asthma as a 
 chronic disease that can be worsened by 
 environmental exposures;
 ``(iv) the identification of programs and 
 policies that have achieved the steps described 
 under clause (iii), and steps that may be taken 
 to expand such programs and policies to benefit 
 larger populations; and
 ``(v) recommendations for future research 
 and interventions.
 ``(2) Subsequent reports.--
 ``(A) Congressional request.--During the 5-year 
 period following the submission of the second report 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit updates 
 and revisions of the report upon the request of the 
 Congress.
 ``(B) Five-year reevaluation.--At the end of the 5-
 year period referred to in subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) evaluate the analyses and 
 recommendations made in previous reports; and
 ``(ii) determine whether an additional 
 report is needed and if so submit such an 
 updated report to the Congress, including 
 appropriate recommendations.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations Funding.--In addition to any 
other authorization of appropriations that is available to the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention for the purpose of carrying out this 
section, there is authorized to be appropriated to such Centers 
$65,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2029 for the 
purpose of carrying out this section.''.

SEC. 7602. INFLUENZA AND PNEUMONIA VACCINATION CAMPAIGN.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall--
 (1) enhance the annual campaign by the Department of Health 
 and Human Services to increase the number of people vaccinated 
 each year for influenza and pneumonia; and
 (2) include in such campaign the use of written educational 
 materials, public service announcements, physician education, 
 and any other means which the Secretary determines effective.
 (b) Materials and Announcements.--In carrying out the annual 
campaign described in subsection (a), the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall ensure that--
 (1) educational materials and public service announcements 
 are readily and widely available in communities experiencing 
 disparities in the incidence and mortality rates of influenza 
 and pneumonia; and
 (2) the campaign uses targeted, culturally appropriate 
 messages and messengers to reach underserved communities.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

SEC. 7603. CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention shall conduct, support, and expand public health 
strategies and prevention, diagnosis, surveillance, and public and 
professional awareness activities regarding chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.
 (b) Chronic Disease Prevention Programs.--The Director of the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute shall carry out the 
following:
 (1) Conduct public education and awareness activities with 
 patient and professional organizations to stimulate earlier 
 diagnosis and improve patient outcomes from treatment of 
 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. To the extent known and 
 relevant, such public education and awareness activities shall 
 reflect differences in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by 
 cause (tobacco, environmental, occupational, biological, and 
 genetic) and include a focus on outreach to undiagnosed and, as 
 appropriate, minority populations.
 (2) Supplement and expand upon the activities of the 
 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute by making grants to 
 nonprofit organizations, State and local jurisdictions, and 
 Indian Tribes for the purpose of reducing the burden of chronic 
 obstructive pulmonary disease, especially in disproportionately 
 impacted communities, through public health interventions and 
 related activities.
 (3) Coordinate with the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, the Indian Health Service, the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration, and the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 to develop pilot programs to demonstrate best practices for the 
 diagnosis and management of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
 disease.
 (4) Develop improved techniques and identify best 
 practices, in coordination with the Secretary of Veterans 
 Affairs, for assisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 patients to successfully stop smoking, including identification 
 of subpopulations with different needs. Initiatives under this 
 paragraph may include research to determine whether successful 
 smoking cessation strategies are different for chronic 
 obstructive pulmonary disease patients compared to such 
 strategies for patients with other chronic diseases.
 (c) Environmental and Occupational Health Programs.--The Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall--
 (1) support research into the environmental and 
 occupational causes and biological mechanisms that contribute 
 to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and
 (2) develop and disseminate public health interventions 
 that will lessen the impact of environmental and occupational 
 causes of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
 (d) Data Collection.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, acting jointly, shall assess the depth and quality of 
information on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that is collected 
in surveys and population studies conducted by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, including whether there are additional 
opportunities for information to be collected in the National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey, the National Health Interview Survey, 
and the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance System surveys.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

 Subtitle H--Tuberculosis

SEC. 7701. UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO COMBAT TUBERCULOSIS.

 Section 104B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
2151b-3) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 104B. ASSISTANCE TO COMBAT TUBERCULOSIS.

 ``(a) Policy.--
 ``(1) In general.--It is a major objective of the foreign 
 assistance program of the United States to help end the TB 
 public health emergency through accelerated actions--
 ``(A) to support the diagnosis and treatment of all 
 adults and children with all forms of TB; and
 ``(B) to prevent new TB infections from occurring.
 ``(2) Support for global plans and objectives.--In 
 countries in which the United States Government has established 
 foreign assistance programs under this Act, particularly in 
 countries with the highest burden of TB and other countries 
 with high rates of infection and transmission of TB, it is the 
 policy of the United States--
 ``(A) to support the objectives of the World Health 
 Organization End TB Strategy, including its goals--
 ``(i) to reduce TB deaths by 95 percent by 
 2035;
 ``(ii) to reduce the TB incidence rate by 
 90 percent by 2035; and
 ``(iii) to reduce the number of families 
 facing catastrophic health costs due to TB by 
 100 percent by 2035;
 ``(B) to support the Stop TB Partnership's Global 
 Plan to End TB 2023-2030, including by providing 
 support for--
 ``(i) developing and using innovative new 
 technologies and therapies to increase active 
 case finding and rapidly diagnose and treat 
 children and adults with all forms of TB, 
 alleviate suffering, and ensure TB treatment 
 completion;
 ``(ii) expanding diagnosis and treatment in 
 line with the goals established by the 
 Political Declaration of the High-Level Meeting 
 of the General Assembly on the Fight Against 
 Tuberculosis, including--
 ``(I) successfully treating 
 40,000,000 people with active TB by 
 2023, including 3,500,000 children, and 
 1,500,000 people with drug-resistant 
 TB; and
 ``(II) diagnosing and treating 
 latent tuberculosis infection, in 
 support of the global goal of providing 
 preventive therapy to at least 
 30,000,000 people by 2023, including 
 4,000,000 children younger than 5 years 
 of age, 20,000,000 household contacts 
 of people affected by TB, and 6,000,000 
 people living with HIV;
 ``(iii) ensuring high-quality TB care by 
 closing gaps in care cascades, implementing 
 continuous quality improvement at all levels of 
 care, and providing related patient support; 
 and
 ``(iv) sustainable procurements of TB 
 commodities to avoid interruptions in supply, 
 the procurement of commodities of unknown 
 quality, or payment of excessive commodity 
 costs in countries impacted by TB; and
 ``(C) to ensure, to the greatest extent 
 practicable, that United States funding supports 
 activities that simultaneously emphasize--
 ``(i) the development of comprehensive 
 person-centered programs, including diagnosis, 
 treatment, and prevention strategies to ensure 
 that--
 ``(I) all people sick with TB 
 receive quality diagnosis and treatment 
 through active case finding; and
 ``(II) people at high risk for TB 
 infection are found and treated with 
 preventive therapies in a timely 
 manner;
 ``(ii) robust TB infection control 
 practices are implemented in all congregate 
 settings, including hospitals and prisons;
 ``(iii) the deployment of diagnostic and 
 treatment capacity--
 ``(I) in areas with the highest TB 
 burdens; and
 ``(II) for highly at-risk and 
 impoverished populations, including 
 patient support services;
 ``(iv) program monitoring and evaluation 
 based on critical TB indicators, including 
 indicators relating to infection control, the 
 numbers of patients accessing TB treatment and 
 patient support services, and preventative 
 therapy for those at risk, including all close 
 contacts, and treatment outcomes for all forms 
 of TB;
 ``(v) training and engagement of health 
 care workers on the use of new diagnostic tools 
 and therapies as they become available, and 
 increased support for training frontline health 
 care workers to support expanded TB active case 
 finding, contact tracing, and patient support 
 services;
 ``(vi) coordination with domestic agencies 
 and organizations to support an aggressive 
 research agenda to develop vaccines as well as 
 new tools to diagnose, treat, and prevent TB 
 globally;
 ``(vii) linkages with the private sector 
 on--
 ``(I) research and development of a 
 vaccine, and on new tools for diagnosis 
 and treatment of TB;
 ``(II) improving current tools for 
 diagnosis and treatment of TB, 
 including telehealth solutions for 
 prevention and treatment; and
 ``(III) training healthcare 
 professionals on use of the newest and 
 most effective diagnostic and 
 therapeutic tools;
 ``(viii) the reduction of barriers to care, 
 including stigma and treatment and diagnosis 
 costs, including through--
 ``(I) training health workers;
 ``(II) sensitizing policy makers;
 ``(III) requiring that all relevant 
 grants and funding agreements include 
 access and affordability provisions;
 ``(IV) supporting education and 
 empowerment campaigns for TB patients 
 regarding local TB services;
 ``(V) monitoring barriers to 
 accessing TB services; and
 ``(VI) increasing support for 
 patient-led and community-led TB 
 outreach efforts;
 ``(ix) support for country-level, 
 sustainable accountability mechanisms and 
 capacity to measure progress and ensure that 
 commitments made by governments and relevant 
 stakeholders are met; and
 ``(x) support for the integration of TB 
 diagnosis, treatment, and prevention activities 
 into primary health care, as appropriate.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 `appropriate congressional committees' means the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign 
 Affairs of the House of Representatives.
 ``(2) End tb strategy.--The term `End TB Strategy' means 
 the strategy to eliminate TB that was approved by the World 
 Health Assembly in May 2014, and is described in `The End TB 
 Strategy: Global Strategy and Targets for Tuberculosis 
 Prevention, Care and Control After 2015'.
 ``(3) Global alliance for tuberculosis drug development.--
 The term `Global Alliance for Tuberculosis Drug Development' 
 means the public-private partnership that bring together 
 leaders in health, science, philanthropy, and private industry 
 to devise new approaches to TB.
 ``(4) Global tuberculosis drug facility.--The term `Global 
 Tuberculosis Drug Facility' means the initiative of the Stop 
 Tuberculosis Partnership to increase access to the most 
 advanced, affordable, quality-assured TB drugs and diagnostics.
 ``(5) MDR-TB.--The term `MDR-TB' means multi-drug-resistant 
 TB.
 ``(6) Stop tuberculosis partnership.--The term `Stop 
 Tuberculosis Partnership' means the partnership of 1,600 
 organizations (including international and technical 
 organizations, government programs, research and funding 
 agencies, foundations, nongovernmental organizations, civil 
 society and community groups, and the private sector), donors, 
 including the United States, high TB burden countries, 
 multilateral agencies, and nongovernmental and technical 
 agencies, which is governed by the Stop TB Partnership 
 Coordinating Board and hosted by a United Nations entity, 
 committed to short- and long-term measures required to control 
 and eventually eliminate TB as a public health problem in the 
 world.
 ``(7) XDR-TB.--The term `XDR-TB' means extensively drug-
 resistant TB.
 ``(c) Authorization.--To carry out this section, the President is 
authorized, consistent with section 104(c), to furnish assistance, on 
such terms and conditions as the President may determine, for the 
prevention, treatment, control, and elimination of TB.
 ``(d) Goals.--In consultation with the appropriate congressional 
committees, the President shall establish goals, based on the policy 
and indicators described in subsection (a), for--
 ``(1) United States TB programs to detect, cure, and 
 prevent all forms of TB globally for the period between 2023 
 and 2030 that are aligned with the End TB Strategy's 2030 
 targets and the USAID's Global Tuberculosis (TB) Strategy 2023-
 2030; and
 ``(2) updating the National Action Plan for Combating 
 Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis.
 ``(e) Coordination.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out this section, the 
 President shall coordinate with the World Health Organization, 
 the Stop TB Partnership, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
 Tuberculosis, and Malaria, and other organizations with respect 
 to the development and implementation of a comprehensive global 
 TB response program.
 ``(2) Bilateral assistance.--In providing bilateral 
 assistance under this section, the President, acting through 
 the Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
 Development, shall--
 ``(A) catalyze support for research and development 
 of new tools to prevent, diagnose, treat, and control 
 TB worldwide, particularly to reduce the incidence of, 
 and mortality from, all forms of drug-resistant TB;
 ``(B) ensure United States programs and activities 
 focus on finding individuals with active TB disease and 
 provide quality diagnosis and treatment, including 
 through digital health solutions, and reaching those at 
 high risk with preventive therapy; and
 ``(C) ensure coordination among relevant United 
 States Government agencies, including the Department of 
 State, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 the National Institutes of Health, the Biomedical 
 Advanced Research and Development Authority, the Food 
 and Drug Administration, the National Science 
 Foundation, the Department of Defense (through its 
 Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs), 
 and other relevant Federal departments and agencies 
 that engage in international TB activities--
 ``(i) to ensure accountability and 
 transparency;
 ``(ii) to reduce duplication of efforts; 
 and
 ``(iii) to ensure appropriate integration 
 and coordination of TB services into other 
 United States-supported health programs.
 ``(f) Priority To End TB Strategy.--In furnishing assistance under 
subsection (c), the President shall prioritize--
 ``(1) building and strengthening TB programs--
 ``(A) to increase the diagnosis and treatment of 
 everyone who is sick with TB; and
 ``(B) to ensure that such individuals have access 
 to quality diagnosis and treatment;
 ``(2) direct, high-quality integrated services for all 
 forms of TB, as described by the World Health Organization, 
 which call for the coordination of active case finding, 
 treatment of all forms of TB disease and infection, patient 
 support, and TB prevention;
 ``(3) treating individuals co-infected with HIV and other 
 co-morbidities, and other individuals with TB who may be at 
 risk of stigma;
 ``(4) strengthening the capacity of health systems to 
 detect, prevent, and treat TB, including MDR-TB and XDR-TB, as 
 described in the latest international guidance related to TB;
 ``(5) researching and developing innovative diagnostics, 
 drug therapies, and vaccines, and program-based research;
 ``(6) support for the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership's 
 Global Drug Facility, the Global Alliance for Tuberculosis Drug 
 Development, and other organizations promoting the development 
 of new products and drugs for TB; and
 ``(7) ensuring that TB programs can serve as key platforms 
 for supporting national respiratory pandemic response against 
 existing and new infectious respiratory disease.
 ``(g) Assistance for the World Health Organization and the Stop 
Tuberculosis Partnership.--In carrying out this section, the President, 
acting through the Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, is authorized--
 ``(1) to provide resources to the World Health Organization 
 and the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership to improve the capacity 
 of countries with high burdens or rates of TB and other 
 affected countries to implement the End TB Strategy, the Stop 
 TB Global Plan to End TB, their own national strategies and 
 plans, other global efforts to control MDR-TB and XDR-TB; and
 ``(2) to leverage the contributions of other donors for the 
 activities described in paragraph (1).
 ``(h) Annual Report on TB Activities.--Not later than December 15 
of each year until the earlier of the date on which the goals specified 
in subsection (a)(2)(A) are met or the last day of 2030, the President 
shall submit an annual report to the appropriate congressional 
committees that describes United States foreign assistance to control 
TB and the impact of such efforts, including--
 ``(1) the number of individuals with active TB disease that 
 were diagnosed and treated, including the rate of treatment 
 completion and the number receiving patient support;
 ``(2) the number of persons with MDR-TB and XDR-TB that 
 were diagnosed and treated, including the rate of completion, 
 in countries receiving United States bilateral foreign 
 assistance for TB control programs;
 ``(3) the number of people trained by the United States 
 Government in TB surveillance and control;
 ``(4) the number of individuals with active TB disease 
 identified as a result of engagement with the private sector 
 and other nongovernmental partners in countries receiving 
 United States bilateral foreign assistance for TB control 
 programs;
 ``(5) a description of the collaboration and coordination 
 of United States anti-TB efforts with the World Health 
 Organization, the Stop TB Partnership, the Global Fund to Fight 
 AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and other major public and 
 private entities;
 ``(6) a description of the collaboration and coordination 
 among the United States Agency for International Development 
 and other United States departments and agencies, including the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Office of 
 the Global AIDS Coordinator, for the purposes of combating TB 
 and, as appropriate, its integration into primary care;
 ``(7) the constraints on implementation of programs posed 
 by health workforce shortages, health system limitations, 
 barriers to digital health implementation, other challenges to 
 successful implementation, and strategies to address such 
 constraints;
 ``(8) a breakdown of expenditures for patient services 
 supporting TB diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, including 
 procurement of drugs and other commodities, drug management, 
 training in diagnosis and treatment, health systems 
 strengthening that directly impacts the provision of TB 
 services, and research; and
 ``(9) for each country, and when practicable, each project 
 site receiving bilateral United States assistance for the 
 purpose of TB prevention, treatment, and control--
 ``(A) a description of progress toward the adoption 
 and implementation of the most recent World Health 
 Organization guidelines to improve diagnosis, 
 treatment, and prevention of TB for adults and 
 children, disaggregated by sex, including the 
 proportion of health facilities that have adopted the 
 latest World Health Organization guidelines on 
 strengthening monitoring systems and preventative, 
 diagnostic, and therapeutic methods, including the use 
 of rapid diagnostic tests and orally administered TB 
 treatment regimens;
 ``(B) the number of individuals screened for TB 
 disease and the number evaluated for TB infection using 
 active case finding outside of health facilities;
 ``(C) the number of individuals with active TB 
 disease that were diagnosed and treated, including the 
 rate of treatment completion and the number receiving 
 patient support;
 ``(D) the number of adults and children, including 
 people with HIV and close contacts, who are evaluated 
 for TB infection, the number of adults and children 
 started on treatment for TB infection, and the number 
 of adults and children completing such treatment, 
 disaggregated by sex and, as possible, income or wealth 
 quintile;
 ``(E) the establishment of effective TB infection 
 control in all relevant congregant settings, including 
 hospitals, clinics, and prisons;
 ``(F) a description of progress in implementing 
 measures to reduce TB incidence, including actions--
 ``(i) to expand active case finding and 
 contact tracing to reach vulnerable groups; and
 ``(ii) to expand TB preventive therapy, 
 engagement of the private sector, and 
 diagnostic capacity;
 ``(G) a description of progress to expand 
 diagnosis, prevention, and treatment for all forms of 
 TB, including in pregnant women, children, and 
 individuals and groups at greater risk of TB, including 
 migrants, prisoners, miners, people exposed to silica, 
 and people living with HIV/AIDS, disaggregated by sex;
 ``(H) the rate of successful completion of TB 
 treatment for adults and children, disaggregated by 
 sex, and the number of individuals receiving support 
 for treatment completion;
 ``(I) the number of people, disaggregated by sex, 
 receiving treatment for MDR-TB, the proportion of those 
 treated with the latest regimens endorsed by the World 
 Health Organization, factors impeding scale up of such 
 treatment, and a description of progress to expand 
 community-based MDR-TB care;
 ``(J) a description of TB commodity procurement 
 challenges, including shortages, stockouts, or failed 
 tenders for TB drugs or other commodities;
 ``(K) the proportion of health facilities with 
 specimen referral linkages to quality diagnostic 
 networks, including established testing sites and 
 reference labs, to ensure maximum access and referral 
 for second line drug resistance testing, and a 
 description of the turnaround time for test results;
 ``(L) the number of people trained by the United 
 States Government to deliver high-quality TB 
 diagnostic, preventative, monitoring, treatment, and 
 care services;
 ``(M) a description of how supported activities are 
 coordinated with--
 ``(i) country national TB plans and 
 strategies; and
 ``(ii) TB control efforts supported by the 
 Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and 
 Malaria, and other international assistance 
 programs and funds, including in the areas of 
 program development and implementation; and
 ``(N) for the first 3 years of the report required 
 under this subsection, a description of the progress in 
 recovering from the negative impact of COVID-19 on TB, 
 including--
 ``(i) whether there has been the 
 development and implementation of a 
 comprehensive plan to recover TB activities 
 from diversion of resources;
 ``(ii) the continued use of bidirectional 
 TB-COVID testing; and
 ``(iii) progress on increased diagnosis and 
 treatment of active TB.
 ``(i) Annual Report on TB Research and Development.--The President, 
acting through the Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, and in coordination with the National 
Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, the Food 
and Drug Administration, the National Science Foundation, and the 
Office of the Global AIDS Coordinator, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees until 2030 an annual report that--
 ``(1) describes the current progress and challenges to the 
 development of new tools for the purpose of TB prevention, 
 treatment, and control;
 ``(2) identifies critical gaps and emerging priorities for 
 research and development, including for rapid and point-of-care 
 diagnostics, shortened treatments and prevention methods, 
 telehealth solutions for prevention and treatment, and 
 vaccines; and
 ``(3) describes research investments by type, funded 
 entities, and level of investment.
 ``(j) Evaluation Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, and 
5 years thereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees that 
evaluates the performance and impact on TB prevention, diagnosis, 
treatment, and care efforts that are supported by United States 
bilateral assistance funding, including recommendations for improving 
such programs.''.

 Subtitle I--Osteoarthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases

SEC. 7801. OSTEOARTHRITIS AND OTHER MUSCULOSKELETAL HEALTH-RELATED 
 ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
 PREVENTION.

 (a) Education and Awareness Activities.--The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, shall direct the National Center for 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion to conduct and expand 
the Health Community Program and Arthritis Program to educate the 
public on--
 (1) the causes of, preventive health actions for, and 
 effects of arthritis, lupus, and other musculoskeletal 
 conditions in minority patient populations; and
 (2) the effects of such conditions on other comorbidities 
 including obesity, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
 (b) Programs on Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Conditions.--
Education and awareness programs of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention on arthritis and other musculoskeletal conditions in 
minority communities shall--
 (1) be culturally and linguistically appropriate to 
 minority patients, targeting musculoskeletal health promotion 
 and prevention programs of each major ethnic group, including--
 (A) Native Americans and Alaska Natives;
 (B) Asian Americans;
 (C) African Americans and Blacks;
 (D) Hispanic and Latino Americans; and
 (E) Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders; and
 (2) include public awareness campaigns directed toward 
 these patient populations that emphasize the importance of 
 musculoskeletal health, physical activity, diet and healthy 
 lifestyle, and weight reduction for overweight and obese 
 patients.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for 
fiscal year 2025 and each subsequent fiscal year.

SEC. 7802. GRANTS FOR COMPREHENSIVE OSTEOARTHRITIS AND MUSCULOSKELETAL 
 DISEASE HEALTH EDUCATION WITHIN HEALTH PROFESSIONS 
 SCHOOLS.

 (a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), in coordination 
with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants, on a competitive 
basis, to academic health science centers, health professions schools, 
and institutions of higher education to enable such centers, schools, 
and institutions to provide people with comprehensive education on 
arthritis and musculoskeletal health, particularly--
 (1) obesity-related musculoskeletal diseases;
 (2) arthritis and osteoarthritis;
 (3) arthritis and musculoskeletal health disparities; and
 (4) the relationship between arthritis and musculoskeletal 
 diseases and metabolic activity, psychological health, and 
 comorbidities such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, lupus, 
 and hypertension.
 (b) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a 
period of 5 years.
 (c) Applications.--An academic health science center, health 
professions school, or institution of higher education seeking a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 (d) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary 
shall give priority to an institution of higher education that--
 (1) has an enrollment of needy students, as defined in 
 section 318(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1059e(b));
 (2) is a Hispanic-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 502(a) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1101a(a));
 (3) is a Tribal College or University, as defined in 
 section 316(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b));
 (4) is an Alaska Native-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b));
 (5) is a Native Hawaiian-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b));
 (6) is a Predominately Black Institution, as defined in 
 section 318(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059e(b));
 (7) is a Native American-serving, nontribal institution, as 
 defined in section 319(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059f(b));
 (8) is an Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution, as defined in section 320(b) of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059g(b)); or
 (9) is a minority institution, as defined in section 365 of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 1067k), with an enrollment of needy 
 students, as defined in section 312 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1058).
 (e) Uses of Funds.--An academic health science center, health 
professions school, or institution of higher education receiving a 
grant under this section may use the grant funds to integrate issues 
relating to comprehensive arthritis and musculoskeletal health into the 
academic or support sectors of the center, school, or institution in 
order to reach a large number of students, by carrying out 1 or more of 
the following activities:
 (1) Developing educational content for issues relating to 
 comprehensive arthritis and musculoskeletal health education 
 that will be incorporated into first-year orientation or core 
 courses.
 (2) Creating innovative technology-based approaches to 
 deliver arthritis and musculoskeletal health education to 
 students, faculty, and staff.
 (3) Developing and employing peer-outreach and education 
 programs to generate discussion, educate, and raise awareness 
 among students about issues relating to arthritis and 
 musculoskeletal health disorders, and their relationship to 
 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, psychological 
 health, and other comorbid conditions.
 (f) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for a period 
 of 5 years, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress a report on the activities 
 to provide health professions students with comprehensive 
 arthritis and musculoskeletal health education funded under 
 this section.
 (2) Report elements.--The report described in paragraph (1) 
 shall include information about--
 (A) the number of entities that are receiving a 
 grant under this section;
 (B) the specific activities supported by grants 
 under this section;
 (C) the number of students served by programs 
 supported by grants under this section; and
 (D) the status of evaluations of such programs.
 (g) Definition of Institution of Higher Education.--In this 
section, the term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning 
given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1001).

 Subtitle J--Sleep and Circadian Rhythm Disorders

SEC. 7901. SLEEP AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHM DISORDERS RESEARCH ACTIVITIES OF 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health, 
acting through the Director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, shall--
 (1) continue to expand research activities addressing sleep 
 health disparities; and
 (2) continue implementation of the NIH Sleep Disorders 
 Research Plan across all institutes and centers of the National 
 Institutes of Health to improve treatment and prevention of 
 sleep health disparities.
 (b) Required Research Activities.--In conducting or supporting 
research relating to sleep and circadian rhythm, the Director of the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute shall--
 (1) advance epidemiology and clinical research to achieve a 
 more complete understanding of disparities in domains of sleep 
 health and across population subgroups for which cardiovascular 
 and metabolic health disparities exist, including--
 (A) prevalence and severity of sleep apnea;
 (B) habitual sleep duration;
 (C) sleep timing and regularity; and
 (D) insomnia;
 (2) develop study designs and analytical approaches to 
 explain and predict multilevel and life-course determinants of 
 sleep health and to elucidate the sleep-related causes of 
 cardiovascular and metabolic health disparities across the age 
 spectrum, including such determinants and causes that are--
 (A) environmental;
 (B) biological or genetic;
 (C) psychosocial;
 (D) societal;
 (E) political; or
 (F) economic;
 (3) determine the contribution of sleep impairments such as 
 sleep apnea, insufficient sleep duration, irregular sleep 
 schedules, and insomnia to unexplained disparities in 
 cardiovascular and metabolic risk and disease outcomes;
 (4) develop study designs, data sampling and collection 
 tools, and analytical approaches to optimize understanding of 
 mediating and moderating factors, and feedback mechanisms 
 coupling sleep to cardiovascular and metabolic health 
 disparities;
 (5) advance research to understand cultural and linguistic 
 barriers (on the person, provider, or system level) to access 
 to care, medical diagnosis, and treatment of sleep disorders in 
 diverse population groups;
 (6) develop and test multilevel interventions (including 
 sleep health education in diverse communities) to reduce 
 disparities in sleep health that will impact the ability to 
 improve disparities in cardiovascular and metabolic risk or 
 disease;
 (7) create opportunities to integrate sleep and health 
 disparity science by strategically utilizing resources 
 (involving existing or anticipated cohorts) and exchanging 
 scientific data and ideas (including through cross-over into 
 scientific meetings); and
 (8) enhance the diversity and foster career development of 
 young investigators involved in sleep and health disparities 
 science.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal year 2025 and each subsequent fiscal year.

SEC. 7902. SLEEP AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHM HEALTH DISPARITIES-RELATED 
 ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
 PREVENTION.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention shall conduct, support, and expand public health 
strategies and prevention, diagnosis, surveillance, and public and 
professional awareness activities regarding sleep and circadian rhythm 
disorders.
 (b) Required Surveillance and Education Awareness Activities.--In 
conducting or supporting research relating to sleep and circadian 
rhythm disorders surveillance and education awareness activities, the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall--
 (1) ensure that such activities are culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate to minority patients, targeting 
 sleep and circadian rhythm health promotion and prevention 
 programs of each major ethnic group, including--
 (A) Native Americans and Alaska Natives;
 (B) Asian Americans;
 (C) African Americans and Blacks;
 (D) Hispanic and Latino-Americans; and
 (E) Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders;
 (2) collect and compile national and State surveillance 
 data on sleep disorders health disparities;
 (3) continue to develop and implement new sleep questions 
 in public health surveillance systems to increase public 
 awareness of sleep health and sleep disorders and their impact 
 on health;
 (4) publish monthly reports highlighting geographic, 
 racial, and ethnic disparities in sleep health, as well as 
 relationships between insufficient sleep and chronic disease, 
 health risk behaviors, and other outcomes as determined 
 necessary by the Director; and
 (5) include public awareness campaigns that inform patient 
 populations from major ethnic groups about the prevalence of 
 sleep and circadian rhythm disorders and emphasize the 
 importance of sleep health.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal year 2025 and each subsequent fiscal year.

SEC. 7903. GRANTS FOR COMPREHENSIVE SLEEP AND CIRCADIAN HEALTH 
 EDUCATION WITHIN HEALTH PROFESSIONS SCHOOLS.

 (a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), in coordination 
with the Secretary of Education, shall award grants, on a competitive 
basis, to academic health science centers, health professions schools, 
and institutions of higher education to enable such centers, schools, 
and institutions to provide people with comprehensive education on 
sleep and circadian health, particularly--
 (1) poor sleep health;
 (2) sleep disorders;
 (3) sleep health disparities; and
 (4) the relationship between sleep and circadian health on 
 metabolic activity, neurological activity, comorbidities, and 
 other diseases.
 (b) Duration.--Grants awarded under this section shall be for a 
period of 5 years.
 (c) Applications.--An academic health science center, health 
professions school, or institution of higher education seeking a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 (d) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary 
shall give priority to an institution of higher education that--
 (1) has an enrollment of needy students, as defined in 
 section 318(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1059e(b));
 (2) is a Hispanic-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 502(a) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1101a(a));
 (3) is a Tribal College or University, as defined in 
 section 316(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b));
 (4) is an Alaska Native-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b));
 (5) is a Native Hawaiian-serving institution, as defined in 
 section 317(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b));
 (6) is a Predominately Black Institution, as defined in 
 section 318(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059e(b));
 (7) is a Native American-serving, nontribal institution, as 
 defined in section 319(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059f(b));
 (8) is an Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution, as defined in section 320(b) of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 1059g(b)); or
 (9) is a minority institution, as defined in section 365 of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 1067k), with an enrollment of needy 
 students, as defined in section 312 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1058).
 (e) Uses of Funds.--An academic health science center, health 
professions school, or institution of higher education receiving a 
grant under this section may use the grant funds to integrate issues 
relating to comprehensive sleep and circadian health into the academic 
or support sectors of the center, school, or institution, in order to 
reach a large number of students, by carrying out 1 or more of the 
following activities:
 (1) Developing educational content for issues relating to 
 comprehensive sleep and circadian health education that will be 
 incorporated into first-year orientation or core courses.
 (2) Creating innovative technology-based approaches to 
 deliver sleep health education to students, faculty, and staff.
 (3) Developing and employing peer-outreach and education 
 programs to generate discussion, educate, and raise awareness 
 among students about issues relating to poor quality sleep, 
 sleep and circadian disorders, and the role sleep health plays 
 in other diseases and comorbidities.
 (f) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for a period 
 of 5 years, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress a report on the activities 
 to provide health professions students with comprehensive sleep 
 and circadian health education funded under this section.
 (2) Report elements.--The report described in paragraph (1) 
 shall include information about--
 (A) the number of entities that are receiving a 
 grant under this section;
 (B) the specific activities supported by grants 
 under this section;
 (C) the number of students served by programs 
 supported by grants under this section; and
 (D) the status of evaluations of programs supported 
 by such grants.
 (g) Definition of Institution of Higher Education.--In this 
section, the term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning 
given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1001).

SEC. 7904. REPORT ON IMPACT OF SLEEP AND CIRCADIAN HEALTH DISORDERS IN 
 VULNERABLE AND RACIAL/ETHNIC POPULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to 
Congress and the President a report on the impact of sleep and 
circadian health disorders for racial and ethnic minority communities 
and other vulnerable populations.
 (b) Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall include 
information on the--
 (1) progress that has been made in reducing the impact of 
 sleep and circadian health disorders in such communities and 
 populations;
 (2) opportunities that exist to make additional progress in 
 reducing the impact of sleep and circadian health disorders in 
 such communities and populations;
 (3) challenges that may impede such additional progress; 
 and
 (4) Federal funding necessary to achieve substantial 
 reductions in sleep and circadian health disorders in racial 
 and ethnic minority communities.

 Subtitle K--Kidney Disease Research, Surveillance, Prevention, and 
 Treatment

SEC. 7901A. KIDNEY DISEASE RESEARCH IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Research and training centers.--Section 431(c)(3) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285c-5(c)(3)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) improving data science through improvement in 
 bioinformatics, data integration, and data sharing;
 ``(E) defining the chronic kidney disease mechanism 
 and identifying new therapeutic targets for chronic 
 kidney disease using specific tools, including mapping 
 the genetic architecture of kidney function and disease 
 and translating genetic maps to disease-causing genes 
 and mechanisms, especially among minority populations;
 ``(F) improving models of human disease including 
 better humanized animal models, improved 
 reproducibility, and functional characterization of 
 kidney organoids, and accelerating the development of 
 in vivo imaging technologies; and
 ``(G) developing cell-specific drug delivery 
 systems and gene editing, including targeted systems 
 for the delivery of therapeutic compounds to specific 
 kidney compartments or cell types and accelerating the 
 implementation of gene editing and gene therapy for the 
 treatment of kidney diseases in vivo; and''.
 (2) Inclusion of minority participants.--In conducting and 
 supporting research described in the amendment made by 
 paragraph (1), the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health shall work with the Director of the National Institute 
 on Minority Health and Health Disparities to improve the number 
 of minority participants as study subjects in clinical trials. 
 Such work may include--
 (A) developing and sustaining clinical trial 
 consortia that can recruit patients with chronic kidney 
 disease to ensure adequate capacity for assessment of 
 kidney outcomes and increase the enrollment of 
 underrepresented populations;
 (B) encouraging the use of novel designs in 
 clinical trials to enhance the recruitment and 
 retention of underrepresented populations which will 
 enhance the generalizability of study findings;
 (C) supporting outreach initiatives that 
 incorporate acknowledgment of both historical and 
 current grounds for participation reluctance, and that 
 prioritize demonstrating trustworthiness, in order to 
 enhance the ability to promote and effectively convey 
 the benefits of clinical research participation;
 (D) completing clinical trials that test 
 interventions to improve patient quality of life and 
 address patient-reported outcomes; and
 (E) encouraging inclusion of persons with chronic 
 kidney disease in clinical trials of treatments for 
 nonkidney diseases.
 (b) Report; Comprehensive Plan.--Section 429 of the Public Health 
Services Act (42 U.S.C. 285c-3) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(c) Report by Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic Diseases 
Coordinating Committee.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic 
 Diseases Coordinating Committee, in coordination with the 
 Chronic Kidney Disease Initiative at the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention, shall--
 ``(A) prepare and submit to the Congress, not later 
 than 6 months after the date of enactment of this 
 subsection, a report on Federal research and public 
 health activities with respect to kidney disease in 
 minority populations; and
 ``(B) develop and submit to the Congress, the 
 Secretary, the Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health, and the Advisory Board established under 
 section 430 for the diseases for which the Committee 
 was established, not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this subsection, an effective and 
 comprehensive Federal plan (including all appropriate 
 Federal health programs) to address kidney disease in 
 minority populations.
 ``(2) Contents.--The report under paragraph (1)(A) shall at 
 minimum address each of the following:
 ``(A) Research on kidney disease in minority 
 populations, including such research on--
 ``(i) genetic, behavioral, and 
 environmental factors;
 ``(ii) prevention and complications among 
 individuals within these populations who have 
 already developed kidney disease;
 ``(iii) the delivery of evidenced-based 
 care for all chronic kidney disease stages, 
 especially in underrepresented and underserved 
 populations;
 ``(iv) expanding support for a root-cause 
 analysis approach to disparities, including 
 causes, detection, and management of chronic 
 kidney disease for underserved populations;
 ``(v) developing research teams that engage 
 with community organizations to develop and 
 implement interventions which halt or delay 
 development and progression of chronic kidney 
 disease; and
 ``(vi) continued support of observational 
 studies of kidney disease measures and 
 outcomes.
 ``(B) Surveillance and data collection on kidney 
 disease in minority populations, including with respect 
 to--
 ``(i) efforts to better determine the 
 prevalence of kidney disease among Asian-
 American and Pacific Islander subgroups; and
 ``(ii) efforts to coordinate data 
 collection on the American Indian population.
 ``(C) Community-based interventions to address 
 kidney disease targeting minority populations, 
 including--
 ``(i) the evidence bases for such 
 interventions;
 ``(ii) the cultural appropriateness of such 
 interventions; and
 ``(iii) efforts to educate the public on 
 the causes and consequences of kidney disease.
 ``(D) Education and training programs for health 
 professionals (including community health workers) on 
 the prevention and management of kidney disease and its 
 related complications that are supported by the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, including such 
 programs supported by the Bureau of Health Workforce, 
 the Bureau of Primary Health Care, and the Health 
 Systems Bureau. This shall include--
 ``(i) identification of effective 
 strategies to increase implementation of proven 
 therapies to slow chronic kidney disease 
 incidence and progression, especially in high-
 risk underrepresented populations; and
 ``(ii) identification of effective practice 
 improvement strategies in large and small 
 health systems to reduce chronic kidney disease 
 incidence and progression.''.

SEC. 7901A-1. KIDNEY DISEASE ACTION PLAN.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention shall conduct, support, and expand public health 
strategies, prevention, diagnosis, surveillance, and public and 
professional awareness activities regarding kidney disease.
 (b) National Action Plan.--
 (1) Development.--Pursuant to section 426 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285c), not later than 2 years 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of 
 the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
 Diseases, in consultation with the Director of the National 
 Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities and the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 shall develop a national action plan to address kidney disease 
 in the United States with participation from patients, 
 caregivers, health professionals, patient advocacy 
 organizations, researchers, providers, public health 
 professionals, and other stakeholders.
 (2) Contents.--At a minimum, such plan shall include 
 recommendations for--
 (A) public health interventions for the purpose of 
 implementation of the national plan;
 (B) biomedical, health services, and public health 
 research on kidney disease; and
 (C) inclusion of kidney disease in the health data 
 collections of all Federal agencies.
 (c) Kidney Disease Prevention Programs.--The Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, through the Chronic Kidney 
Disease Initiative, shall carry out the following:
 (1) Conduct public education and awareness activities with 
 patient and professional organizations to stimulate earlier 
 diagnosis and improve patient outcomes from treatment of kidney 
 disease. To the extent known and relevant, such public 
 education and awareness activities shall reflect differences in 
 kidney disease by cause (such as hypertension, diabetes, lupus 
 nephritis, COVID-19, and polycystic kidney disease) and include 
 a focus on outreach to undiagnosed and, as appropriate, 
 minority populations.
 (2) Supplement and expand upon the activities of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention by making grants to 
 nonprofit organizations, State and local jurisdictions, and 
 Indian Tribes for the purpose of reducing the burden of kidney 
 disease, especially in disproportionately impacted communities, 
 through public health interventions and related activities.
 (3) Coordinate with the National Institute of Diabetes and 
 Digestive and Kidney Diseases, the Indian Health Service, the 
 Health Resources and Services Administration, and the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs to develop pilot programs to 
 demonstrate best practices for the diagnosis and management of 
 kidney disease.
 (4) Develop improved techniques and identify best 
 practices, in coordination with the Secretary of Veterans 
 Affairs, for assisting kidney disease patients.
 (d) Data Collection.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, acting jointly, shall 
assess the depth and quality of information on kidney disease that is 
collected in surveys and population studies conducted by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, including whether there are 
additional opportunities for information to be collected in the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, the National Health 
Interview Survey, and the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
surveys. The Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases shall include the results of such 
assessment in the national action plan under subsection (b).
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, 
$1,000,000 for fiscal year 2026, $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2027, 
$1,000,000 for fiscal year 2028, and $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2029.

SEC. 7901A-2. PROVIDING FOR STAFF-ASSISTED HOME DIALYSIS FOR CERTAIN 
 HEMODIALYSIS AND PERITONEAL DIALYSIS PATIENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1881(b)(14) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(14)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(J)(i) With respect to staff-assisted home 
 dialysis (as defined in clause (iv)(IV)) furnished on 
 or after the date that is 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this subparagraph, subject to the 
 succeeding provisions of this subparagraph, the 
 Secretary shall increase the single payment that would 
 otherwise apply under this paragraph for renal dialysis 
 services by the add-on payment amount established 
 pursuant to clause (iii).
 ``(ii)(I) Subject to subclause (II), staff-assisted 
 home dialysis may only be furnished--
 ``(aa) with respect to an initializing 
 patient (as defined in clause (iv)(I)) or a 
 returning patient (as defined in clause 
 (iv)(III)), for a period of up to 90 days, 
 referred to as the `initial period', which may 
 be extended as determined necessary by the care 
 team of the individual in not more than 2 
 intervals of up to 30 days each, each of which 
 is referred to as an `extended interval'; and
 ``(bb) with respect to a temporary 
 assistance patient (as defined in clause 
 (iv)(V)), for any 30-day period as determined 
 necessary by the care team of the individual, 
 notwithstanding whether such an individual 
 receives any routine dialysis respite care 
 during such period.
 ``(II) Notwithstanding subclause (I), staff-
 assisted home dialysis may be furnished for as long as 
 the Secretary determines appropriate to an individual 
 who--
 ``(aa) is blind;
 ``(bb) has a cognitive or neurological 
 impairment (including a stroke, Alzheimer's 
 Disease, dementia, amyotrophic lateral 
 sclerosis, or any other impairment determined 
 by the Secretary); or
 ``(cc) has any other illness or injury that 
 reduces mobility (including cerebral palsy, 
 spinal cord injuries, an injury or illness that 
 requires the individual to be on a ventilator, 
 or any other illness or injury determined by 
 the Secretary).
 ``(iii) The Secretary shall, by regulation, 
 establish an add-on payment amount for staff-assisted 
 home dialysis to determine the amounts payable to a 
 qualified provider (as defined in clause (iv)(II)) for 
 assisting in the furnishing of staff-assisted home 
 dialysis on a frequency as determined by the Secretary 
 and in consultation with clinicians, patients, and care 
 partners to ensure maximum patient choice, access, and 
 flexibility. In establishing the add-on payment under 
 this clause, the Secretary shall consult with 
 stakeholders, including providers of renal dialysis 
 services, individuals receiving home dialysis, 
 qualified providers, private insurance payers, and 
 Medicare Advantage plans under part C.
 ``(iv) In this subparagraph:
 ``(I) The term `initializing patient' means 
 an individual who initiates a home dialysis 
 modality, including home hemodialysis and 
 peritoneal dialysis.
 ``(II) The term `qualified provider' means 
 a trained professional (as determined by the 
 Secretary, including a registered or licensed 
 practical nurse and a certified patient care 
 technician) who--
 ``(aa) furnishes renal dialysis 
 services;
 ``(bb) meets requirements (as 
 determined by the Secretary) that 
 ensure competency in patient care and 
 modality usage; and
 ``(cc) during a period described in 
 clause (ii)(I), provides in-person 
 assistance to an individual for an 
 appropriate number of dialysis 
 sessions, as determined by the care 
 team of the individual based on the 
 needs of the individual, caregiver 
 availability, prescription, and mode of 
 home dialysis.
 ``(III) The term `returning patient' means 
 an individual who is returning to home dialysis 
 after a period of hospitalization or other non-
 home dialysis modality.
 ``(IV)(aa) The term `staff-assisted home 
 dialysis' means dialysis furnished by the 
 individual in a home, residence, or other 
 approved setting with the assistance of a 
 qualified provider, the frequency of which is 
 determined by the qualified provider in 
 coordination with the individual, the care 
 partner, and the care team of the individual 
 and outlined in a patient plan of care.
 ``(bb) In this subclause, the term `care 
 partner' means a friend or family member who is 
 designated by the individual who is trained to 
 assist the individual with the furnishing of 
 home dialysis.
 ``(cc) In this subclause, the term `patient 
 plan of care' has the meaning given such term 
 in section 494.90 of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulations).
 ``(V) The term `temporary assistance 
 patient' means an individual who is receiving 
 home dialysis and is temporarily unable to 
 perform functions necessary to self-furnish 
 unassisted home dialysis due to illness, 
 injury, caregiver unavailability, or other 
 temporary circumstances not to exceed 30 
 days.''.
 (b) Patient Education and Training Relating to Staff-Assisted Home 
Dialysis.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1881(b)(5) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(5)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (C), by striking at the end 
 ``and'';
 (B) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(E) educate individuals on the opportunity to 
 receive staff-assisted home dialysis (as defined in 
 paragraph (14)(J)(iv)(IV)) during the periods described 
 in paragraph (14)(J)(ii); and
 ``(F) provide for registered or licensed nurses, 
 certified patient care technicians, or other qualified 
 providers (as determined by a physician) to train 
 individuals and their care partners in skills and 
 procedures needed to furnish staff-assisted home 
 dialysis, including--
 ``(i) in a group-training environment with 
 other individuals and their care partners when 
 appropriate and in accordance with Federal 
 regulations (concerning the privacy of 
 individually identifiable health information) 
 promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
 Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
 1996;
 ``(ii) via telehealth (following an initial 
 period of in-person competency training, in 
 accordance with standards specified by the 
 Secretary);
 ``(iii) through interdisciplinary team 
 training (as described in the interpretive 
 guidance relating to tag number V590 of 
 `Advance Copy--End Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) 
 Program Interpretive Guidance Version 1.1' 
 (published on October 3, 2008)); and
 ``(iv) in the home or residence of an 
 individual, in a dialysis facility, in a stand-
 alone training facility, or the place in which 
 the individual has been approved to perform 
 home dialysis by the care team.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on the date that is 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Other Provisions.--
 (1) Anti-kickback statute.--Section 1128B(b)(3) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b)(3)) is amended--
 (A) by moving subparagraphs (J) and (K) 2 ems to 
 the left;
 (B) in subparagraph (K), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (C) in subparagraph (L), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(M) any remuneration relating to the furnishing of staff-
 assisted home dialysis (as defined in section 
 1881(b)(14)(J)(iv)(IV)).''.
 (2) Study.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') 
 shall submit, to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the 
 Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways and Means of the 
 House of Representatives, a report that--
 (A) examines racial disparities in the utilization 
 of home dialysis (as defined in section 
 1881(b)(14)(J)(iv)(IV) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(14)(J)(iv)(IV)), as added by 
 subsection (a)), and makes recommendations on how to 
 improve access to home dialysis for communities of 
 color;
 (B) examines coverage for, and utilization of, home 
 dialysis in rural communities, and makes 
 recommendations on how to improve access to home 
 dialysis for such rural communities; and
 (C) analyzes clinical and quality of life outcomes 
 for patients, disaggregated by geographic and 
 demographic indicators, who receive different dialysis 
 modalities, including staff-assisted home dialysis, 
 unassisted home dialysis, and dialysis furnished in a 
 facility.
 (3) Patient decision tool.--Not later than December 31, 
 2025, for the purposes of section 1881(b)(14)(J) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)(14)(J)), as added by 
 subsection (a), the Secretary shall convene a patient panel to 
 develop a patient-centered decision tool to assist dialysis 
 patients in evaluating their lifestyle and goals and in 
 choosing the dialysis setting and modality. Such tool shall 
 include an acknowledgment that the patient is capable of home 
 dialysis and wants home dialysis, if that is the modality such 
 patient chooses.
 (4) Patient quality of life metric.--Section 
 1881(h)(2)(A)(iv) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395rr(h)(2)(A)(iv)) is amended--
 (A) in subclause (II), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subclause (III), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(IV) patient quality of life for 
 all individuals utilizing dialysis 
 regardless of modality, with the intent 
 of measuring and improving patient 
 quality of life on dialysis.''.

SEC. 7901A-3. INCREASING KIDNEY TRANSPLANTS IN MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health 
shall expand, intensify, and support ongoing research and other 
activities with respect to kidney transplants in minority populations.
 (b) CMS Data Collection and Reporting.--The Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services shall collect and report annual data on dialysis 
facility and nephrologist performance on transplant referral, with an 
emphasis on data relating to patients of color.
 (c) OPTN Data Collection and Reporting.--The Organ Procurement and 
Transplantation Network shall collect and the Scientific Registry of 
Transplant Recipients shall report annual data, broken down by 
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, on individual transplant 
center performance as it relates to patients referred, evaluated, 
waitlisted, and successfully transplanted.
 (d) Transplant Center Data.--Each organ transplant center shall 
report on the percent of appropriate waitlisted patients (including 
socioeconomic and demographic data) giving and receiving annual 
informed consent for offers for suboptimal kidneys (such as kidneys 
with a kidney donor profile index of greater than 85 percent or kidney 
age 50 with diabetes, or age greater than 60).
 (e) Organ Procurement Organization Data.--Each organ procurement 
organization shall report annual data on referrals, refusals (patient 
or doctor), and acceptance of organs by hospital, ZIP Code, race, 
ethnicity, and age strata except as prohibited by need for 
confidentiality.
 (f) Data Transparency for Patients.--Each organ transplant center 
shall provide to each patient of such center, on an annual basis--
 (1) the number of times an organ was offered to the 
 patient, declined, and transplanted into another patient from 
 organs within a 500-mile radius; and
 (2) the number of times an organ was offered to and 
 declined for the patient from a low-risk donor which was 
 subsequently transplanted into another patient.
 (g) Improved Transplantation Education.--The Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services shall certify a nonbiased, third-party organization 
to accredit organ transplant education.
 (h) Research.--Research under subsection (a) shall include 
investigation into--
 (1) the causes of lower rates of kidney transplants in 
 minority populations, including socioeconomic, geographic, 
 clinical, environmental, genetic, and other factors that may 
 contribute to lower rates of kidney transplants in minority 
 populations; and
 (2) possible interventions to increase kidney transplants.
 (i) Report; Comprehensive Plan.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall--
 (A) prepare and submit to the Congress, not later 
 than 6 months after the date of enactment of this 
 section, a report on Federal research and public health 
 activities with respect to kidney transplants as a 
 treatment for end-stage renal disease in minority 
 populations; and
 (B) develop and submit to the Congress, not later 
 than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
 section, an effective and comprehensive Federal plan 
 (including all appropriate Federal health programs) to 
 increase the number of kidney transplants in minority 
 populations.
 (2) Contents.--The report under paragraph (1)(A) shall at a 
 minimum address each of the following:
 (A) Research on kidney transplants in minority 
 populations, including such research on financial, 
 insurance coverage, genetic, behavioral, and 
 environmental factors.
 (B) Surveillance and data collection on kidney 
 transplants in minority populations, including with 
 respect to--
 (i) efforts to increase kidney transplants 
 among Asian-American and Pacific Islander 
 subgroups with end-stage renal disease; and
 (ii) efforts to increase kidney transplants 
 in the American Indian population.
 (C) Community-based efforts to increase kidney 
 transplants targeting minority populations, including--
 (i) the evidence base for such increases;
 (ii) the cultural appropriateness of such 
 increases; and
 (iii) efforts to educate the public on 
 kidney transplants.
 (D) Education and training programs for health 
 professionals (including community health workers) on 
 the kidney transplants that are supported by the Health 
 Resources and Services Administration, including such 
 programs supported by the Bureau of Health Workforce, 
 the Bureau of Primary Health Care, and the Health 
 Systems Bureau.

SEC. 7901A-4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.

 The Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
shall--
 (1) support research into the environmental and 
 occupational causes and biological mechanisms that contribute 
 to kidney disease; and
 (2) develop and disseminate public health interventions 
 that will lessen the impact of environmental and occupational 
 causes of kidney disease.

SEC. 7901A-5. UNDERSTANDING THE TREATMENT PATTERNS ASSOCIATED WITH 
 PROVIDING CARE AND TREATMENT OF KIDNEY FAILURE IN 
 MINORITY POPULATIONS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this 
section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct a study on 
treatment patterns associated with providing care, under the Medicare 
program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et 
seq.), under the Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), and through private health insurance, to minority 
populations that are disproportionately affected by kidney failure.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the 
study conducted under subsection (a), together with such 
recommendations as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.

SEC. 7901A-6. ENCOURAGING KIDNEY CARE WORKFORCE IN UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 (a) Definition of Primary Health Services.--Section 331(a)(3)(D) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254d(a)(3)(D)) is amended by 
inserting ``nephrology,'' after ``dentistry,''.
 (b) National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program.--Section 
338A(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l(a)(2)) is 
amended by inserting ``, which may include kidney health 
professionals'' before the period at the end.
 (c) National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program.--Section 
338B(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l-1(a)(2)) is 
amended by inserting ``, which may include kidney health 
professionals'' before the period at the end.

SEC. 7901A-7. THE JACK REYNOLDS MEMORIAL MEDIGAP EXPANSION ACT; MEDIGAP 
 COVERAGE FOR BENEFICIARIES WITH END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE.

 (a) Guaranteed Availability of Medigap Policies to All ESRD 
Medicare Beneficiaries.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1882(s) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395ss(s)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``is 
 65'' and all that follows through the period at 
 the end and inserting the following: ``is--
 ``(i) 65 years of age or older and is enrolled for 
 benefits under part B; or
 ``(ii) is entitled to benefits under 226A(b) and is 
 enrolled for benefits under part B.''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (D), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by inserting ``(or is 
 entitled to benefits under 226A(b))'' after 
 ``is 65 years of age or older''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3)(B)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by inserting ``(or is 
 entitled to benefits under 226A(b))'' after 
 ``is 65 years of age or older''; and
 (ii) in clause (vi), by inserting ``(or 
 under 226A(b))'' after ``at age 65''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to Medicare supplemental policies effective on or 
 after January 1, 2025.
 (b) Additional Enrollment Period for Certain Individuals.--
 (1) One-time enrollment period.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of an individual 
 described in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services shall establish a one-time enrollment 
 period during which such an individual may enroll in 
 any Medicare supplemental policy under section 1882 of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ss) of the 
 individual's choosing.
 (B) Enrollment period.--The enrollment period 
 established under subparagraph (A) shall begin on 
 January 1, 2025, and shall end June 30, 2025.
 (2) Individual described.--An individual described in this 
 paragraph is an individual who--
 (A) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits 
 under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395c et seq.) or under section 226A(b) of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 426-1(b));
 (B) is enrolled for benefits under part B of such 
 title XVIII (42 U.S.C. 1395j et seq.); and
 (C) would not, but for the provisions of, and 
 amendments made by, subsection (a) be eligible for the 
 guaranteed issue of a Medicare supplemental policy 
 under paragraph (2) or (3) of section 1882(s) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ss(s)).

 Subtitle L--Diversity in Clinical Trials

SEC. 7901B. FDA REVIEW OF CLINICAL TRIAL BEST PRACTICES.

 The Commissioner of Food and Drugs shall--
 (1) aggregate information on the accumulated experience of 
 sponsors of drugs that develop and execute clinical trial 
 diversity plans during drug development;
 (2) include in such aggregated information an analysis from 
 the perspectives of the Food and Drug Administration and such 
 sponsors of which actions worked or which did not work to 
 enhance clinical trial diversity;
 (3) not later than September 30, 2025, convene a public 
 meeting, including representatives from the regulated industry 
 and patient organizations, to discuss findings and 
 recommendations for specific actions that have led to 
 measurable improvements in the representation of racial and 
 ethnic populations in clinical research; and
 (4) not later than September 30, 2026, update the guidance 
 of the Food and Drug Administration titled ``Enhancing the 
 Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations--Eligibility Criteria, 
 Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs'' to align such 
 guidance with findings and recommendations that were discussed 
 at the meeting under paragraph (3).

SEC. 7901B-1. DIVERSIFYING INVESTIGATIONS VIA EQUITABLE RESEARCH 
 STUDIES FOR EVERYONE TRIALS ACT.

 (a) Encouragement of Clinical Trial Enrollment by Racially and 
Ethnically Diverse Populations.--
 (1) No cost provision of digital health technologies.--The 
 free provision of digital health technologies by drug or device 
 manufacturers to their clinical trial participants shall not be 
 considered a violation of section 1128A of the Social Security 
 Act (commonly known as the ``Civil Monetary Penalties Law'') 
 (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a), section 1128B of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b), or sections 3729 through 3733 of title 
 31, United States Code (commonly known as the ``False Claims 
 Act''), provided that--
 (A) the use of digital health technologies will 
 facilitate in any phase of clinical development the 
 inclusion of diversity of patient populations, such as 
 underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities, low-
 income populations, and the elderly;
 (B) the digital health technologies will facilitate 
 individuals' participation, or are necessary to such 
 participation;
 (C) all features of the digital health technologies 
 that are unrelated to use in the clinical trial are 
 disabled or only allowed to remain activated to model 
 real-world usage of the digital technology; and
 (D) the clinical trial sponsor requires 
 participants to return, purchase, or disable the 
 digital health technologies by the conclusion of the 
 trial.
 (2) Grants and contracts.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') may issue grants to, and enter into 
 contracts with, entities to support community 
 education, outreach, and recruitment activities for 
 clinical trials with respect to drugs, including 
 vaccines for diseases or conditions which have a 
 disproportionate impact on underrepresented populations 
 (including on racial and ethnic minority populations), 
 including for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment 
 of COVID-19. Such activities may include--
 (i) working with community clinical trial 
 sites, including community health centers, 
 academic health centers, and other facilities;
 (ii) training health care personnel 
 including potential clinical trial 
 investigators, with a focus on significantly 
 increasing the number of underrepresented 
 racial and ethnic minority health care 
 personnel who are clinical trial investigators 
 at the community sites for ongoing clinical 
 trials;
 (iii) engaging community stakeholders to 
 encourage participation in clinical trials, 
 especially in underrepresented racial and 
 ethnic minority communities; and
 (iv) fostering partnerships with community-
 based organizations serving underrepresented 
 racial and ethnic minority populations, 
 including labor organizations and frontline 
 health care workers.
 (B) Priority for grant and contract awards.--In 
 awarding grants and contracts under this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall prioritize entities that--
 (i) develop educational, recruitment, and 
 training materials in multiple languages; or
 (ii) undertake clinical trial outreach 
 efforts in more diverse racial and ethnic 
 communities that are traditionally 
 underrepresented in clinical trials, such as 
 Tribal areas.
 (C) Authorization of appropriations.--There is 
 authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2025 and 
 2026 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
 paragraph.
 (b) Clarification That Certain Remuneration Related to 
Participation in Clinical Trials Does Not Constitute Remuneration Under 
the Federal Civil Money Penalties Law.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1128A(i)(6)(F) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(i)(6)(F)) is amended by 
 inserting ``(including remuneration offered or transferred to 
 an individual to promote the participation in an approved 
 clinical trial, as defined in subsection (d) of the first 
 section 2709 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-
 8) (relating to coverage for individuals participating in 
 approved clinical trials), as so designated by section 
 1563(c)(10)(C) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
 Act, that is registered with the database of clinical trials 
 maintained by the National Library of Medicine (or any 
 successor database), so long as such remuneration facilitates 
 equitable inclusion of patients from all relevant demographic 
 and socioeconomic populations and is related to patient 
 participation in the approved clinical trial)'' after 
 ``promotes access to care''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to remuneration provided on or after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (c) National Academy of Medicine Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into an 
 arrangement with the National Academy of Medicine under which 
 the National Academy agrees to study and propose a design for a 
 national interoperable data platform to improve access to 
 health data, and other relevant data needs, during public 
 health emergencies.
 (2) Report.--The arrangement under paragraph (1) shall 
 provide that the National Academy of Medicine, not later than 
 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, shall submit 
 a report to the Secretary and Congress on the results of the 
 study under paragraph (1) and the design proposed based on such 
 study.

SEC. 7901B-2. CLINICAL TRIAL DIVERSITY.

 (a) Diversity Requirements for Applications for Federal Funding for 
Clinical Trials.--
 (1) Applications.--Beginning on the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
 through the Director of the National Institutes of Health (in 
 this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary''), shall 
 require that an entity seeking to conduct a clinical trial 
 investigating a drug or device (as those terms are defined in 
 section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 321)) or biological product (as defined in section 
 351(i) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(i))) 
 that is funded by the National Institutes of Health and 
 conducted at any national research institute or national 
 center, submit an application (or renewal thereof) for such 
 funding that includes--
 (A) clear and measurable goals for the recruitment 
 and retention of participants that reflect--
 (i) the race, ethnicity, age, and gender or 
 sex of patients with the disease or condition 
 being investigated; or
 (ii) the race, ethnicity, age, and gender 
 or sex of the general population of the United 
 States if the prevalence of the disease or 
 condition is not known;
 (B) a rationale for the goals specified under 
 subparagraph (A) that specifies--
 (i) how investigators will calculate the 
 number of participants for each population 
 category that reflect the population groups 
 specified in subparagraph (A); and
 (ii) strategies that will be used to enroll 
 and retain participants across the different 
 racial, ethnic, age, and gender or sex 
 categories;
 (C) a detailed plan for how the clinical trial will 
 achieve the goals specified under subparagraph (A) that 
 specifies--
 (i) the requirements for researchers, in 
 conducting the trial to analyze the population 
 groups specified in subparagraph (A) 
 separately;
 (ii) the role of community partners or 
 community institutional review boards in 
 reviewing the plans; and
 (iii) how the trial will recruit a study 
 population that is--
 (I) in proportion to the prevalence 
 of the disease or condition in such 
 groups relative to the prevalence of 
 the disease or condition in the overall 
 population of the United States;
 (II) in sufficient numbers to 
 obtain clinically and statistically 
 meaningful determinations of the safety 
 and effectiveness of the drug being 
 studied in the respective race, 
 ethnicity, age, and gender or sex 
 groups; and
 (III) consistent with the guidance 
 under section 505(b)(1) of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
 355(b)(1)) and guidance issued by the 
 National Institutes of Health on the 
 inclusion of women and minorities in 
 clinical trials;
 (D) the entity's plan for implementing, or an 
 explanation of why the entity cannot implement, 
 alternative clinical trial follow-up requirements that 
 are less burdensome for trial participants, such as--
 (i) requiring fewer follow-up visits;
 (ii) allowing phone follow-up or home 
 visits by nurse trial coordinators (in lieu of 
 in-person visits by patients);
 (iii) allowing for online follow-up 
 options;
 (iv) permitting the patient's primary care 
 provider to perform some of the follow-up visit 
 requirements and to reimburse the patient for 
 any out-of-pocket costs incurred by the patient 
 for such follow-up visits;
 (v) allowing for weekend hours for required 
 follow-up visits;
 (vi) allowing virtual or telemedicine 
 visits;
 (vii) use of wearable technology to record 
 key health parameters; and
 (viii) use of alternate labs or imaging 
 centers, which may be closer to the residence 
 of the patients participating in the trial; and
 (E) the entity's education and training 
 requirements for researchers and other individuals 
 conducting or supporting the clinical trial with 
 respect to diversity and health inequities in 
 underrepresented populations, including a requirement 
 to consult with, and review materials made available 
 by, such committees, task forces, and working groups 
 other entities the Secretary determines are 
 appropriate, including the following:
 (i) The Equity Committee of the National 
 Institutes of Health.
 (ii) The National Advisory Council on 
 Minority Health and Health Disparities.
 (iii) The Advisory Committee on Research on 
 Women's Health.
 (iv) The Sexual & Gender Minority Research 
 Coordinating Committee of the National 
 Institutes of Health.
 (v) The Tribal Health Research Coordinating 
 Committee of the National Institutes of Health.
 (2) Terms.--
 (A) In general.--As a condition on the receipt of 
 funding through the National Institutes of Health, as 
 described in paragraph (1), with respect to a clinical 
 trial, the sponsor of the clinical trial shall agree to 
 terms requiring that--
 (i) the aggregate demographic information 
 of trial participants be shared on an annual 
 basis with the Secretary while participant 
 recruitment and data collection in such trial 
 is ongoing, and that such information is 
 provided with respect to--
 (I) underrepresented populations, 
 including populations grouped by race, 
 ethnicity, age, sex, gender identity 
 and expression, geographic region, 
 primary written and spoken language, 
 disability status, sexual orientation, 
 socioeconomic status, occupation, and 
 other relevant factors; and
 (II) such populations that reflect 
 the prevalence of the disease or 
 condition that is the subject of the 
 clinical trial involved (as available 
 and as appropriate to the scientific 
 objective for the study, as determined 
 by the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health);
 (ii) the sponsor submits to the program 
 officer and grants management specialist of the 
 specific National Institutes of Health national 
 research institute or national center, as 
 frequently as such officer or specialist 
 determines necessary, the retention rate of 
 participants in the clinical trial, 
 disaggregated by race, ethnicity, gender or 
 sex, and age;
 (iii) both the clinical trial researchers 
 and the applicant reviewers complete education 
 and training programs on diversity in clinical 
 trials; and
 (iv) at the conclusion of the trial, the 
 sponsor submits to the Secretary the number of 
 participants in the trial, disaggregated by 
 race, ethnicity, age, and gender or sex.
 (B) Privacy protections.--Any data shared under 
 subparagraph (A) may not include any individually 
 identifiable information or protected health 
 information with respect to clinical trial participants 
 and shall only be disclosed to the extent allowed under 
 Federal privacy laws.
 (3) Exception.--In lieu of submitting an application under 
 paragraph (1) and documentation of goals as required by 
 subparagraph (A) of such paragraph, an applicant may provide 
 reasoning (other than cost) for why the recruitment of each of 
 the population groups specified in subparagraph (A) of 
 paragraph (1) is not necessary and why such recruitment is not 
 scientifically justified or possible.
 (4) Publication.--The Secretary shall--
 (A) publish on a public website of the National 
 Institutes of Health, upon receipt of an application to 
 which paragraph (1) applies or reasoning under 
 paragraph (3)--
 (i) a summary of the disease being targeted 
 in the clinical trial that is the subject of 
 the application and the prevalence of such 
 disease across race, ethnicity, gender or sex, 
 age, and clinical trial representation in each 
 such category;
 (ii) the goals specified in such 
 application, as required by paragraph (1)(A); 
 or
 (iii) the reasoning described in paragraph 
 (3); and
 (B) ensure that, in publishing information relating 
 to an application or reasoning under subparagraph (A), 
 the design of the study involved is not disclosed.
 (5) Remediation.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a clinical trial 
 subject to paragraph (1) that fails to meet the 
 condition specified pursuant to paragraph (1) by such 
 date as may be agreed upon by the sponsor of the trial 
 and the program officer and grants management 
 specialist of the specific National Institutes of 
 Health national research institute or national center, 
 the Secretary shall require the sponsor of that 
 clinical trial, not later than 60 days after such date 
 occurs--
 (i) to develop, in consultation with the 
 Secretary and advocacy and community-based 
 organizations representing individuals who are 
 members of relevant demographic groups 
 specified in paragraph (1)(A), a strategic plan 
 to increase participation in such clinical 
 trial of such individuals; and
 (ii) to submit to the Secretary, such 
 strategic plan.
 (B) Publication.--The Secretary shall make publicly 
 available on the website of the National Institutes of 
 Health, the strategic plan received under subparagraph 
 (A) as soon as possible after receipt. The Secretary 
 shall ensure that, in publishing such plan under the 
 preceding sentence, the design of the study involved is 
 not disclosed.
 (C) Implementation.--The sponsor of the clinical 
 trial that is the subject of the strategic plan 
 published under subparagraph (B), shall, not later than 
 60 days after such date as may be agreed upon by the 
 sponsor of the trial and the appropriate program 
 officer and grants management specialist of the 
 National Institutes of Health, implement the strategic 
 plan.
 (D) Technical assistance.--The Secretary may 
 provide technical assistance to a sponsor of a clinical 
 trial, as necessary for the sponsor to meet the 
 requirements of subparagraph (C).
 (6) Penalties in case of failure of remediation.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a clinical trial 
 subject to paragraph (1) that, after the close of the 
 60-day period specified in paragraph (5)(C), continues 
 to fail to meet the condition specified pursuant to 
 paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall--
 (i) hold the noncompeting continuation of 
 funding received through the grant involved;
 (ii) apply specific conditions on the award 
 of funds to such sponsor to conduct such 
 clinical trial; or
 (iii) terminate such funding.
 (B) Waiver.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of a clinical 
 trial subject to the penalty under subparagraph 
 (A) that fails to meet the condition referred 
 to in such subparagraph, the sponsor of such 
 clinical trial may, prior to the conclusion of 
 the 60-day period referred to in subparagraph 
 (A), submit an application to the relevant 
 program officer and grants specialist 
 requesting a waiver of such condition. Such an 
 application shall specify reasoning for why the 
 recruitment of each of the population groups 
 specified in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) 
 is not necessary or why such recruitment is not 
 scientifically justified or possible.
 (ii) Review.--Not later than 30 days after 
 a date agreed upon by the sponsor of the trial 
 and the appropriate program officer and grants 
 management specialist of the National 
 Institutes of Health, the Secretary shall--
 (I) complete the review of such 
 application; and
 (II) make a determination to 
 approve or deny the application.
 (iii) No additional penalties.--No 
 additional penalties may be applied with 
 respect to a sponsor of a clinical trial under 
 subparagraph (A) during the 30-day period 
 specified in clause (ii).
 (C) Termination of funding.--In the case of a 
 clinical trial described in subparagraph (B)(i), the 
 Secretary may elect to terminate funding described in 
 paragraph (1) for the clinical trial if no request for 
 a waiver under subparagraph (B) is received by the 
 conclusion 60-day period referred to in subparagraph 
 (A).
 (7) Waiver for certain clinical trials.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a clinical trial 
 that received funding through the National Institutes 
 of Health and is ongoing as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the sponsor of such clinical 
 trial is exempt from the requirements of (and 
 associated penalties imposed by) this section.
 (B) Report.--The Secretary shall include in the 
 triennial report required to be submitted under section 
 403 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 283), a 
 list of all clinical trials receiving funding through 
 the National Institutes of Health--
 (i) that requested and received waivers 
 under this subsection; or
 (ii) with respect to which funding has been 
 terminated pursuant to this subsection.
 (8) Nondiscrimination.--Section 1557 of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18116) shall 
 apply with respect to a clinical trial subject to paragraph 
 (1).
 (b) Eliminating Cost Barriers.--
 (1) Study on modernization of human subject regulations.--
 Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through 
 the Director of the National Institutes of Health (referred to 
 in this subsection as the ``Secretary''), shall conduct and 
 complete a study on--
 (A) the need for review of human subject 
 regulations specified in part 46 of title 45, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or successor regulations), and 
 related guidance;
 (B) the modernization of such regulations and 
 guidance to establish updated guidelines for 
 reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses of human 
 subjects, compensation of human subjects for time spent 
 participating in the clinical trial, and incentives for 
 recruitment of human subjects; and
 (C) the need for updated safe harbor rules under 
 section 1001.952 of title 42, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations) and section 
 1128B of the Social Security Act (commonly referred to 
 as the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute (42 U.S.C. 1320a-
 7b)) with respect to the assistance provided under this 
 subsection.
 (2) Reimbursement for costs associated with clinical trial 
 participation.--As a condition on receipt of any funding 
 provided through the National Institutes of Health to conduct a 
 clinical trial investigating a drug or device (as those terms 
 are defined in section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321)) or biological product (as defined 
 in section 351(i) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 262(i))), the Secretary shall require that the sponsor of such 
 clinical trial--
 (A) works with institutional review boards and 
 program officers of the National Institutes of Health 
 to determine when reimbursement for the costs 
 associated with clinical trial participation is 
 warranted; and
 (B) subject to paragraph (3), provides to clinical 
 trial participants reimbursement for expenses (using 
 funds other than funds supplied through the National 
 Institutes of Health) incurred as a result of that 
 participation, which may include--
 (i) missed or forgone salary;
 (ii) language assistance, including 
 interpreter services;
 (iii) food expenses;
 (iv) childcare expenses;
 (v) lodging expenses;
 (vi) transportation expenses; or
 (vii) other expenses as identified by the 
 participant, subject to review by the clinical 
 trial sponsor, at its discretion, on a case-by-
 case basis.
 (3) Provision of costs associated with clinical trial 
 participation.--
 (A) Application and documentation.--
 (i) In general.--A sponsor of a clinical 
 trial to which subsection (a)(1) applies, may 
 require that, in order to receive reimbursement 
 as described in paragraph (2), a participant 
 complete an application and share with the 
 sponsor such documentation of expenses 
 described in such paragraph, as the sponsor may 
 require.
 (ii) Timing.--Not later than 30 days after 
 the date on which a sponsor of a clinical trial 
 receives an application under clause (i), the 
 sponsor shall--
 (I) review the application; and
 (II) provide for reimbursement of 
 eligible expenses documented in such 
 application, as determined at the 
 discretion of the clinical trial 
 sponsor on a case-by-case basis.
 (B) Enforcement.--A sponsor of a clinical trial to 
 which subsection (a)(1) applies, shall submit on an 
 annual basis, as part of the progress reports submitted 
 to the Secretary pursuant to section 402(j) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 282(j)), during 
 the data collection period of the clinical trial, to 
 the Secretary an accounting of the reimbursements made 
 to clinical trial participants under subparagraph (A). 
 Such data shall--
 (i) include relevant aggregate data with 
 respect to each population group specified in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A)(i) when such data will not 
 compromise the identities of study participants 
 and in a manner consistent with applicable 
 privacy protections; and
 (ii) not later than 6 months after receipt 
 by the Secretary, be published on a public 
 website of the National Institutes of Health.
 (c) Public Awareness and Education Campaign.--
 (1) National campaign.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health and the Commissioner of Food and Drugs 
 (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary''), in 
 consultation with the stakeholders specified in paragraph (5), 
 shall carry out a national campaign to increase the awareness 
 and knowledge of individuals in the United States with respect 
 to the need for diverse clinical trials among the demographic 
 groups identified pursuant to subsection (a)(1)(A).
 (2) Requirements.--The national campaign conducted shall 
 include--
 (A) the development and distribution of written 
 educational materials, and the development and placing 
 of public service announcements, that are intended to 
 encourage individuals who are members of the 
 demographic groups identified pursuant to subsection 
 (a)(2)(A)(i)(I) to seek to participate in clinical 
 trials;
 (B) such efforts as are reasonable and necessary to 
 ensure meaningful access by consumers with limited 
 English proficiency;
 (C) the development and distribution of best 
 practices and training for recruiting underrepresented 
 study populations, including a method for sharing such 
 best practices among clinical trial sponsors, 
 providers, community-based organizations who assist 
 with recruitment, and with the public; and
 (D) the conduct of focus groups to better 
 understand the concerns and fears of certain 
 underrepresented groups who may be reluctant to 
 participate in clinical trials.
 (3) Health inequities.--In developing the national campaign 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall recognize and 
 address--
 (A) health inequities among individuals who are 
 members of the population groups specified in 
 subsection (a)(2)(A)(i) with respect to access to care 
 and participation in clinical trials; and
 (B) any barriers in access to care and 
 participation in clinical trials that are specific to 
 individuals who are members of such groups.
 (4) Grants.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
 award grants to nonprofit private entities, including 
 community-based organizations and faith communities, 
 institutions of higher education eligible to receive funds 
 under section 371 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1067q) and national organizations that serve 
 underrepresented populations and community pharmacies to enable 
 such entities--
 (A) to test alternative outreach and education 
 strategies to increase the awareness and knowledge of 
 individuals in the United States, with respect to the 
 need for diverse clinical trials that reflect the race, 
 ethnicity, age, and gender or sex of patients with the 
 disease or condition being investigated; and
 (B) to cover administrative costs of such entities 
 in assisting in diversifying clinical trials subject to 
 subsection (a).
 (5) Stakeholders specified.--The stakeholders specified in 
 this paragraph are the following:
 (A) Representatives of the Health Resources 
 Services Administration, the Office of Minority Health 
 of the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the 
 National Institutes of Health.
 (B) Community-based resources and advocates.
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Clinical trial.--The term ``clinical trial'' means a 
 research study in which one or more human subjects are 
 prospectively assigned to one or more interventions (which may 
 include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of 
 those interventions on health-related biomedical or behavioral 
 outcomes.
 (2) Sponsor.--The term ``sponsor'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 50.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations).

SEC. 7901B-3. PATIENT EXPERIENCE DATA.

 (a) Policy.--Section 569C of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 360bbb-8c) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections 
 (c) and (d), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following:
 ``(b) Collection, Submission, and Use of Data.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) for any drug for which an exemption is 
 granted for investigational use under section 505(i) of 
 this Act or section 351(a) of the Public Health Service 
 Act, require the sponsor of the drug to collect 
 standardized patient experience data as part of the 
 clinical trials conducted pursuant to such exemption;
 ``(B) require any application for the approval or 
 licensing of such drug under section 505(b) of this Act 
 or section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act to 
 include--
 ``(i) the standardized patient experience 
 data so collected; and
 ``(ii) such related information as the 
 Secretary may require; and
 ``(C) consider patient experience data and related 
 information that is submitted pursuant to subparagraph 
 (B) in deciding whether to approve or license, as 
 applicable, the drug involved.
 ``(2) Applicability.--Paragraph (1) applies only with 
 respect to drugs for which a request for an exemption described 
 in paragraph (1)(A) is submitted on or after the date of the 
 enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, 
 or an application under section 505(b) of this Act or section 
 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act is filed, as 
 applicable, on or after the day that is 2 years after the date 
 of the enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 
 2024.''.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
acting through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall promulgate 
final regulations to implement section 569C(b) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as added by this section.

 Subtitle M--Additional Provisions Addressing High-Impact Minority 
 Diseases

SEC. 7901C. MEDICARE COVERAGE OF MULTI-CANCER EARLY DETECTION SCREENING 
 TESTS.

 (a) Coverage.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x), as amended by sections 2007, 4221, 4251, 6101, and 7419, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (s)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (LL), by striking ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (B) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (MM); and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(NN) multi-cancer early detection screening tests 
 (as defined in subsection (sss));''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(sss) Multi-Cancer Early Detection Screening Tests.--The term 
`multi-cancer early detection screening test' means any of the 
following tests, approved or cleared by the Food and Drug 
Administration, furnished to an individual for the purpose of early 
detection of cancer across many cancer types (as categorized in the 
Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer issued by the 
National Cancer Institute):
 ``(1) A genomic sequencing blood or blood product test that 
 includes the analysis of cell-free nucleic acids.
 ``(2) Such other equivalent tests (which are based on urine 
 or another sample of biological material) as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.''.
 (b) Payment and Frequency Limit.--
 (1) Payment under fee schedule.--Section 1833(h) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(h)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting after 
 ``(including'' the following: ``multi-cancer early 
 detection screening tests under section 1861(sss) and 
 including''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(10) No payment may be made under this part for a multi-
 cancer early detection screening test (as defined in section 
 1861(sss)) for an individual if such a test was furnished to 
 the individual during the previous 11 months.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1862(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (O), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (P), by striking the 
 semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and''; 
 and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(Q) in the case of multi-cancer early detection screening 
 tests (as defined in section 1861(sss)), which are performed 
 more frequently than is covered under section 1833(h)(10);''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (7), by striking ``or (P)'' and 
 inserting ``(P), or (Q)''.
 (c) Rule of Construction Relating to Other Cancer Screening 
Tests.--Nothing in this section, including the amendments made by this 
section, shall be construed--
 (1) in the case of an individual who undergoes a multi-
 cancer early detection screening test, to affect coverage under 
 part B for other cancer screening tests covered under this 
 section, such as screening tests for breast, cervical, 
 colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer; or
 (2) in the case of an individual who undergoes another 
 cancer screening test, to affect coverage for a multi-cancer 
 early detection screening test or the use of such a test as a 
 diagnostic or confirmatory test for a result of the other 
 cancer screening test.

SEC. 7901C-1. AMPUTATION REDUCTION AND COMPASSION ACT.

 (a) Peripheral Artery Disease Education Program.--Part P of title 
III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.), as 
amended by section 7504, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-14. PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE EDUCATION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in collaboration with 
the Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and 
the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall establish and coordinate a peripheral artery disease education 
program to support, develop, and implement educational initiatives and 
outreach strategies that inform health care professionals and the 
public about the existence of peripheral artery disease and methods to 
reduce amputations related to such disease, particularly with respect 
to at-risk populations.
 ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.''.
 (b) Medicare Coverage of Peripheral Artery Disease Screening Tests 
Furnished to At-Risk Beneficiaries Without Imposition of Cost Sharing 
Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x), as amended by sections 2007, 4221, 4251, 
 6101, 7419, and 7901C, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (s)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (MM), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (NN), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(OO) peripheral artery disease screening tests 
 furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as such terms are 
 defined in subsection (ttt)).''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(ttt) Peripheral Artery Disease Screening Test; At-Risk 
Beneficiary.--(1) The term `peripheral artery disease screening test' 
means--
 ``(A) noninvasive physiologic studies of extremity arteries 
 (commonly referred to as ankle-brachial index testing);
 ``(B) arterial duplex scans of lower extremity arteries 
 vascular; and
 ``(C) such other items and services as the Secretary 
 determines, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, to be 
 appropriate for screening for peripheral artery disease for at-
 risk beneficiaries.
 ``(2) The term `at-risk beneficiary' means an individual entitled 
to, or enrolled for, benefits under part A and enrolled for benefits 
under part B--
 ``(A) who is 65 years of age or older;
 ``(B) who is at least 50 years of age but not older than 64 
 years of age with risk factors for atherosclerosis (such as 
 diabetes mellitus, a history of smoking, hyperlipidemia, and 
 hypertension) or a family history of peripheral artery disease;
 ``(C) who is younger than 50 years of age with diabetes 
 mellitus and 1 additional risk factor for atherosclerosis; or
 ``(D) with a known atherosclerotic disease in another 
 vascular bed such as coronary, carotid, subclavian, renal, or 
 mesenteric artery stenosis, or abdominal aortic aneurysm.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall, in consultation with appropriate 
organizations, establish standards regarding the frequency for 
peripheral artery disease screening tests described in subsection 
(s)(2)(OO) for purposes of coverage under this title.''.
 (2) Inclusion of peripheral artery disease screening tests 
 in initial preventive physical examination.--Section 
 1861(ww)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ww)(2)) 
 is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (N), by moving the margins of 
 such subparagraph 2 ems to the left;
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (O) as 
 subparagraph (P); and
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (N) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(O) Peripheral artery disease screening tests 
 furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as such terms are 
 defined in subsection (ttt)).''.
 (3) Payment.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1833(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)), as amended by 
 sections 4251(c)(3), 6101(a)(4), and 7419, is amended--
 (i) in paragraph (1)--
 (I) in subparagraph (N), by 
 inserting ``and other than peripheral 
 artery disease screening tests 
 furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as 
 such terms are defined in section 
 1861(ttt))'' after ``other than 
 personalized prevention plan services 
 (as defined in section 1861(hhh)(1))'';
 (II) by striking ``and'' before 
 ``(KK)''; and
 (III) by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: ``, 
 and (LL) with respect to peripheral 
 artery disease screening tests 
 furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as 
 such terms are defined in section 
 1861(ttt)), the amount paid shall be 
 100 percent of the lesser of the actual 
 charge for the services or the amount 
 determined under the payment basis 
 determined under section 1848''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2)--
 (I) in subparagraph (G), by 
 striking ``and'' at the end;
 (II) in subparagraph (H), by 
 inserting `` and'' at the end; and
 (III) by inserting after 
 subparagraph (H) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(I) with respect to peripheral artery disease screening 
 tests (as defined in paragraph (1) of section 1861(ttt)) 
 furnished by an outpatient department of a hospital to at-risk 
 beneficiaries (as defined in paragraph (2) of such section), 
 the amount determined under paragraph (1)(EE),''.
 (B) No deductible.--Section 1833(b) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(b)), as amended by 
 section 7419(a)(5)(A)(iii), is amended, in the first 
 sentence--
 (i) by striking ``and'' before ``(14)''; 
 and
 (ii) by inserting ``, and (15) such 
 deductible shall not apply with respect to 
 peripheral artery disease screening tests 
 furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as such 
 terms are defined in section 1861(ttt))'' 
 before the period at the end.
 (C) Exclusion from prospective payment system for 
 hospital outpatient department services.--Section 
 1833(t)(1)(B)(iv) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395l(t)(1)(B)(iv)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``, or personalized'' and 
 inserting ``, personalized''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, or peripheral artery 
 disease screening tests furnished to at-risk 
 beneficiaries (as such terms are defined in 
 section 1861(ttt))'' after ``personalized 
 prevention plan services (as defined in section 
 1861(hhh)(1))''.
 (D) Payment under physician fee schedule.--Section 
 1848(j)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 4(j)(3)), as amended by section 4251(c)(4), is amended 
 by inserting ``, (2)(OO),'' after ``(2)(KK)''.
 (4) Exclusion from coverage and medicare as secondary payer 
 for tests performed more frequently than allowed.--Section 
 1862(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)), 
 as amended by subsection (b)(2), is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (P), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (Q), by striking the semicolon 
 at the end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(R) in the case of peripheral artery disease 
 screening tests furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as 
 such terms are defined in section 1861(ttt)), which are 
 performed more frequently than is covered under such 
 section;''.
 (5) Authority to modify or eliminate coverage of certain 
 preventive services.--Section 1834(n) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(n)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) of 
 paragraph (1) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively, 
 and moving the margins of such clauses, as so 
 redesignated, 2 ems to the right;
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and moving the 
 margins of such subparagraphs, as so redesignated, 2 
 ems to the right;
 (C) by striking ``Certain Preventive Services'' and 
 all that follows through ``any other provision of this 
 title'' and inserting: ``Certain Preventive Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this title''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Inapplicability.--The Secretarial authority described 
 in paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to preventive 
 services described in section 1861(ww)(2)(O).''.
 (6) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to items and services furnished on or 
 after January 1, 2025.
 (c) Medicaid Coverage of Peripheral Artery Disease Screening Tests 
Furnished to At-Risk Beneficiaries Without Imposition of Cost Sharing 
Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396d) as amended by section 7419(a)(3)(A)(ii), is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by redesignating paragraph (34) as 
 paragraph (35);
 (ii) in paragraph (33), by striking ``and'' 
 after the semicolon; and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (33) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(34) peripheral artery disease screening tests furnished 
 to at-risk beneficiaries (as such terms are defined in 
 subsection (ss)); and''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(ss) Peripheral Artery Disease Screening Test; At-Risk 
Beneficiary.--
 ``(1) Peripheral artery disease screening test.--The term 
 `peripheral artery disease screening test' means--
 ``(A) noninvasive physiologic studies of extremity 
 arteries (commonly referred to as ankle-brachial index 
 testing);
 ``(B) arterial duplex scans of lower extremity 
 arteries vascular; and
 ``(C) such other items and services as the 
 Secretary determines, in consultation with relevant 
 stakeholders, to be appropriate for screening for 
 peripheral artery disease for at-risk beneficiaries.
 ``(2) At-risk beneficiary.--The term `at-risk beneficiary' 
 means an individual enrolled under a State plan (or a waiver of 
 such plan)--
 ``(A) who is 65 years of age or older;
 ``(B) who is at least 50 years of age but not older 
 than 64 years of age with risk factors for 
 atherosclerosis (such as diabetes mellitus, a history 
 of smoking, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) or a 
 family history of peripheral artery disease;
 ``(C) who is younger than 50 years of age with 
 diabetes mellitus and one additional risk factor for 
 atherosclerosis; or
 ``(D) with a known atherosclerotic disease in 
 another vascular bed such as coronary, carotid, 
 subclavian, renal, or mesenteric artery stenosis, or 
 abdominal aortic aneurysm.
 ``(3) Frequency.--The Secretary shall, in consultation with 
 appropriate organizations, establish standards regarding the 
 frequency for peripheral artery disease screening tests 
 described in subsection (a)(34) for purposes of coverage under 
 a State plan under this title.''.
 (2) No cost sharing.--
 (A) In general.--Subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2) of 
 section 1916 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396o), as amended by section 7305(b)(1), are each 
 amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``or'' 
 after the comma at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (K), by striking ``; 
 and'' and inserting ``, or''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(L) peripheral artery disease 
 screening tests furnished to at-risk 
 beneficiaries (as such terms are 
 defined in section 1905(hh)); and''.
 (B) Application to alternative cost sharing.--
 Section 1916A(b)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396o-1(b)(3)(B)), as amended by section 
 7305(b)(2), is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new clause:
 ``(xv) Peripheral artery disease screening 
 tests furnished to at-risk beneficiaries (as 
 such terms are defined in section 1905(qq)).''.
 (3) Mandatory coverage.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)), as amended by 
 section 2007(d)(2), is amended by striking ``and (32)'' and 
 inserting ``(32), and (34)''.
 (d) Requirement for Group Health Plans and Health Insurance Issuers 
Offering Group or Individual Health Insurance Coverage To Provide 
Coverage for Peripheral Artery Disease Screening Tests Furnished to At-
Risk Enrollees Without Imposition of Cost Sharing Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2713 of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-13) is amended--
 (A) by amending subsection (a), as amended by 
 section 7419(a)(1)(A), to read as follows:
 ``(a) Coverage of Preventive Health Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--A group health plan and a health 
 insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
 coverage shall, at a minimum, provide coverage for and shall 
 not impose any cost sharing requirements for--
 ``(A) evidence-based items or services that have in 
 effect a rating of `A' or `B' in the current 
 recommendations of the United States Preventive 
 Services Task Force;
 ``(B) immunizations that have in effect a 
 recommendation from the Advisory Committee on 
 Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention with respect to the individual 
 involved;
 ``(C) with respect to infants, children, and 
 adolescents, evidence-informed preventive care and 
 screenings provided for in the comprehensive guidelines 
 supported by the Health Resources and Services 
 Administration;
 ``(D) with respect to women, such additional 
 preventive care and screenings not described in 
 subparagraph (A) as provided for in comprehensive 
 guidelines supported by the Health Resources and 
 Services Administration for purposes of this 
 subparagraph;
 ``(E) any prescription drug approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration for the prevention of HIV 
 (other than a drug subject to preauthorization 
 requirements consistent with section 2729A), 
 administrative fees for such drugs, laboratory and 
 other diagnostic procedures associated with the use of 
 such drugs, and clinical follow-up and monitoring, 
 including any related services recommended in current 
 United States Public Health Service clinical practice 
 guidelines, without limitation; and
 ``(F) with respect to at-risk enrollees, peripheral 
 artery disease screening tests.
 ``(2) Frequency.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
 appropriate organizations, shall establish standards regarding 
 the frequency for peripheral artery disease screening tests for 
 purposes of coverage under this section.
 ``(3) Clarification regarding breast cancer screening, 
 mammography, and prevention recommendations.--For the purposes 
 of this Act, and for the purposes of any other provision of 
 law, the current recommendations of the United States 
 Preventive Services Task Force regarding breast cancer 
 screening, mammography, and prevention shall be considered the 
 most current other than those issued in or around November 
 2009.
 ``(4) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) At-risk enrollee.--The term `at-risk 
 enrollee' means an individual enrolled in a group 
 health plan or group or individual health insurance 
 coverage--
 ``(i) who is 65 years of age or older;
 ``(ii) who is at least 50 years of age but 
 not older than 64 years of age with risk 
 factors for atherosclerosis (such as diabetes 
 mellitus, a history of smoking, hyperlipidemia, 
 and hypertension) or a family history of 
 peripheral artery disease;
 ``(iii) who is younger than 50 years of age 
 with diabetes mellitus and one additional risk 
 factor for atherosclerosis; or
 ``(iv) with a known atherosclerotic disease 
 in another vascular bed such as coronary, 
 carotid, subclavian, renal, or mesenteric 
 artery stenosis, or abdominal aortic aneurysm.
 ``(B) Peripheral artery disease screening test.--
 The term `peripheral artery disease screening test' 
 means--
 ``(i) noninvasive physiologic studies of 
 extremity arteries (commonly referred to as 
 ankle-brachial index testing);
 ``(ii) arterial duplex scans of lower 
 extremity arteries vascular; and
 ``(iii) such other items and services as 
 the Secretary determines, in consultation with 
 relevant stakeholders, to be appropriate for 
 screening for peripheral artery disease for at-
 risk enrollees.
 ``(5) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection 
 shall be construed to prohibit a plan or issuer from providing 
 coverage for services in addition to those recommended by the 
 United States Preventive Services Task Force or to deny 
 coverage for services that are not recommended by such Task 
 Force.''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(1)--
 (i) by striking ``subsection (a)(1) or 
 (a)(2) or a guideline under subsection (a)(3)'' 
 and inserting ``subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 subsection (a)(1) or a guideline under 
 subparagraph (C) of such subsection''; and
 (ii) by striking ``described in subsection 
 (a)'' and inserting ``described in subsection 
 (a)(1)''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply with respect to plan years beginning on or after 
 January 1, 2025.
 (e) Disallowance of Payment for Nontraumatic Amputation Services 
Furnished Without Anatomical Testing Services.--Section 1834 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m), as amended by section 
4221(b)(2), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(bb) Disallowance of Payment for Nontraumatic Amputation Services 
Furnished Without Anatomical Testing Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of nontraumatic amputation 
 services furnished by a supplier on or after January 1, 2025, 
 to an individual entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under 
 part A and enrolled for benefits under this part, for which 
 payment is made under this part, payment may only be made under 
 this part if--
 ``(A) such supplier furnishes anatomical testing 
 services to such individual during the 3-month period 
 preceding the date on which such nontraumatic 
 amputation services is furnished; or
 ``(B) such individual has a pre-existing 
 dysfunctional or unsalvageable limb, life-threatening 
 sepsis, intractable infection, extensive gangrene or 
 necrotic tissue loss beyond salvage, a poor functional 
 status, severe dementia, or a short life expectancy 
 after shared decision making with a health care team 
 and patient, family, or caregiver.
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Anatomical testing services.--The term 
 `anatomical testing services' means arterial duplex 
 scanning, computed tomography angiography, and magnetic 
 resonance angiography.
 ``(B) Nontraumatic amputation services.--The term 
 `nontraumatic amputation services' means amputations as 
 a result of atherosclerotic vascular disease or a 
 related comorbidity of such disease (including 
 diabetes).''.
 (f) Development and Implementation of Quality Measures.--
 (1) Development.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary'') 
 shall, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, develop 
 quality measures for nontraumatic, lower-limb, major amputation 
 that utilize appropriate diagnostic screening (including 
 peripheral artery disease screening) in order to encourage 
 alternative treatments (including revascularization) in lieu of 
 such an amputation.
 (2) Implementation.--After appropriate testing and 
 validation of the measures developed under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall incorporate such measures in quality reporting 
 programs for appropriate providers of services and suppliers 
 under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), including for purposes 
 of--
 (A) the merit-based incentive payment system under 
 section 1848(q) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(q));
 (B) incentive payments for participation in 
 eligible alternative payment models under section 
 1833(z) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(z));
 (C) the shared savings program under section 1899 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395jjj);
 (D) models under section 1115A of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1315a); and
 (E) such other payment systems or models as the 
 Secretary may specify.

SEC. 7901C-2. ELIMINATING THE COINSURANCE REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN 
 COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING TESTS FURNISHED UNDER THE 
 MEDICARE PROGRAM.

 Section 1833(dd) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(dd)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and before January 1, 
 2030,''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by adding ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``through 
 2026'' and inserting ``through 2024''; and
 (C) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(C) for 2025 and each subsequent year, 100 
 percent.''.

SEC. 7901C-3. EXPANDING THE AVAILABILITY OF MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY 
 SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395x) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (s)(2)(V), by striking ``in the case of'' 
 and all that follows through ``organizations''; and
 (2) in subsection (vv)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``disease management'' and 
 inserting ``the prevention, management, or 
 treatment of a disease or condition specified 
 in paragraph (4)''; and
 (ii) by striking ``by a physician'' and all 
 that follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting the following: ``by a--
 ``(A) physician (as defined in subsection (r)(1));
 ``(B) physician assistant;
 ``(C) nurse practitioner;
 ``(D) clinical nurse specialist (as defined in 
 subsection (aa)(5)(B)); or
 ``(E) in the case of such services furnished to 
 manage such a disease or condition that is an eating 
 disorder, a clinical psychologist (as defined by the 
 Secretary).
 Such term shall not include any services furnished to an 
 individual for the prevention, management, or treatment of a 
 renal disease if such individual is receiving maintenance 
 dialysis for which payment is made under section 1881.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) For purposes of paragraph (1), the diseases and conditions 
specified in this paragraph are the following:
 ``(A) Diabetes and prediabetes.
 ``(B) A renal disease.
 ``(C) Obesity (as defined for purposes of subsection 
 (yy)(2)(C) or as otherwise defined by the Secretary).
 ``(D) Hypertension.
 ``(E) Dyslipidemia.
 ``(F) Malnutrition.
 ``(G) Eating disorders.
 ``(H) Cancer.
 ``(I) Gastrointestinal diseases, including celiac disease.
 ``(J) HIV.
 ``(K) AIDS.
 ``(L) Cardiovascular disease.
 ``(M) Any other disease or condition--
 ``(i) specified by the Secretary relating to 
 unintentional weight loss;
 ``(ii) for which the Secretary determines the 
 services described in paragraph (1) to be medically 
 necessary and appropriate for the prevention, 
 management, or treatment of such disease or condition, 
 consistent with any applicable recommendations of the 
 United States Preventive Services Task Force; or
 ``(iii) for which the Secretary determines the 
 services described in paragraph (1) are medically 
 necessary, consistent with either protocols established 
 by registered dietitians or nutrition professional 
 organizations or with accepted clinical guidelines 
 identified by the Secretary.''.
 (b) Exclusion Modification.--Section 1862(a)(1) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by sections 
7901C(b)(2) and 7901C-1(b)(4), is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (Q), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (R), by striking the semicolon at the 
 end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(S) in the case of medical nutrition therapy services (as 
 defined in section 1861(vv)), which are not furnished for the 
 prevention, management, or treatment of a disease or condition 
 specified in paragraph (4) of such section;''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to items and services furnished on or after January 
1, 2024.

SEC. 7901C-4. ENCOURAGING THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF DISARM 
 ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS.

 (a) Additional Payment for DISARM Antimicrobial Drugs Under 
Medicare.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1886(d)(5) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(N)(i)(I) Effective for discharges beginning on or after October 
1, 2025, or such sooner date as specified by the Secretary, subject to 
subclause (II), the Secretary shall, after notice and opportunity for 
public comment (in the publications required by subsection (e)(5) for a 
fiscal year or otherwise), provide for an additional payment under a 
mechanism (separate from the mechanism established under subparagraph 
(K)), with respect to such discharges involving any DISARM 
antimicrobial drug, in an amount equal to--
 ``(aa) the amount payable under section 1847A for such drug 
 during the calendar quarter in which the discharge occurred; or
 ``(bb) if no amount for such drug is determined under 
 section 1847A, an amount to be determined by the Secretary in a 
 manner similar to the manner in which payment amounts are 
 determined under section 1847A based on information submitted 
 by the manufacturer or sponsor of such drug (as required under 
 clause (v)).
 ``(II) In determining the amount payable under section 1847A for 
purposes of items (aa) and (bb) of subclause (I), subparagraphs (A) and 
(B) of subsection (b)(1) of such section shall be applied by 
substituting `102 percent' for `106 percent' each place it appears and 
paragraph (8)(B) of such section shall be applied by substituting `2 
percent' for `6 percent'.
 ``(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, a DISARM antimicrobial 
drug is--
 ``(I) a drug--
 ``(aa) that--
 ``(AA) is approved by the Food and Drug 
 Administration;
 ``(BB) is designated by the Food and Drug 
 Administration as a qualified infectious 
 disease product under subsection (d) of section 
 505E of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 355f(d)); and
 ``(CC) has received an extension of its 
 exclusivity period pursuant to subsection (a) 
 of such section; and
 ``(bb) that has been designated by the Secretary 
 pursuant to the process established under clause 
 (iv)(I)(bb); or
 ``(II) an antibacterial or antifungal biological product--
 ``(aa) that is licensed for use, or an 
 antibacterial or antifungal biological product for 
 which an indication is first licensed for use, by the 
 Food and Drug Administration on or after June 5, 2014, 
 under section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act 
 for human use to treat serious or life-threatening 
 infections, as determined by the Food and Drug 
 Administration, including those caused by, or likely to 
 be caused by--
 ``(AA) an antibacterial or antifungal 
 resistant pathogen, including novel or emerging 
 infectious pathogens; or
 ``(BB) a qualifying pathogen (as defined 
 under section 505E(f) of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355f(f))); 
 and
 ``(bb) has been designated by the Secretary 
 pursuant to the process established under clause 
 (iv)(I)(bb).
 ``(iii) The mechanism established pursuant to clause (i) shall 
provide that the additional payment under clause (i) shall--
 ``(I) with respect to a discharge, only be made to a 
 subsection (d) hospital that, as determined by the Secretary--
 ``(aa) is participating in the National Healthcare 
 Safety Network Antimicrobial Use and Resistance Module 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and
 ``(bb) has an antimicrobial stewardship program 
 that aligns with the Core Elements of Hospital 
 Antibiotic Stewardship Programs of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention or the Antimicrobial 
 Stewardship Standard set by the Joint Commission; and
 ``(II) apply to discharges occurring on or after October 1 
 of the year in which the drug or biological product is 
 designated by the Secretary as a DISARM antimicrobial drug.
For purposes of this clause, in the case of a similar reporting program 
described in item (aa), a subsection (d) hospital shall be treated as 
participating in such a program if the entity maintaining such program 
identifies to the Secretary such hospital as so participating.
 ``(iv)(I) The mechanism established pursuant to clause (i) shall 
provide for a process for--
 ``(aa) a manufacturer or sponsor of a drug or biological 
 product to request the Secretary to designate the drug or 
 biological product as a DISARM antimicrobial drug; and
 ``(bb) the designation (and removal of such designation) by 
 the Secretary of drugs and biological products as DISARM 
 antimicrobial drugs.
 ``(II) A designation of a drug or biological product as a DISARM 
antimicrobial drug may be revoked by the Secretary if the Secretary 
determines that--
 ``(aa) the drug or biological product no longer meets the 
 requirements for a DISARM antimicrobial drug under clause (ii);
 ``(bb) the request for such designation contained an untrue 
 statement of material fact; or
 ``(cc) clinical or other information that was not available 
 to the Secretary at the time such designation was made shows 
 that--
 ``(AA) such drug or biological product is unsafe 
 for use or not shown to be safe for use for individuals 
 who are entitled to benefits under part A; or
 ``(BB) an alternative to such drug or biological 
 product is an advance that substantially improves the 
 diagnosis or treatment of such individuals.
 ``(III) Not later than October 1, 2024, the Secretary shall publish 
in the Federal Register a list of the DISARM antimicrobial drugs 
designated under this subparagraph pursuant to the process established 
under subclause (I)(bb). The Secretary shall annually update such list.
 ``(v)(I) For purposes of determining additional payment amounts 
under clause (i), a manufacturer or sponsor of a drug or biological 
product that submits a request described in clause (iv)(I)(aa) shall 
submit to the Secretary information described in section 
1927(b)(3)(A)(iii).
 ``(II) The penalties for failure to provide timely information 
under clause (i) of subparagraph (C) section 1927(b)(3) and for 
providing false information under clause (ii) of such subparagraph 
shall apply to manufacturers and sponsors of a drug or biological 
product under this section with respect to information under subclause 
(I) in the same manner as such penalties apply to manufacturers under 
such clauses with respect to information under subparagraph (A) of such 
section.
 ``(vi)(I) The mechanism established pursuant to clause (i) shall 
provide that--
 ``(aa) except as provided in item (bb), no additional 
 payment shall be made under this subparagraph for discharges 
 involving a DISARM antimicrobial drug if any additional 
 payments have been made for discharges involving such drug as a 
 new medical service or technology under subparagraph (K);
 ``(bb) additional payments may be made under this 
 subparagraph for discharges involving a DISARM antimicrobial 
 drug if any additional payments have been made for discharges 
 occurring prior to the date of enactment of this subparagraph 
 involving such drug as a new medical service or technology 
 under subparagraph (K); and
 ``(cc) no additional payment shall be made under 
 subparagraph (K) for discharges involving a DISARM 
 antimicrobial drug as a new medical service or technology if 
 any additional payments for discharges involving such drug have 
 been made under this subparagraph.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1886(d)(5)(K)(ii)(III) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(K)(ii)(III)) 
 is amended by striking ``provide'' and inserting ``subject to 
 subparagraph (N)(vi), provide''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations for the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention $500,000,000, to remain 
available until expended, to support the establishment and 
implementation of antimicrobial stewardship programs and data reporting 
capabilities to the Antimicrobial Use and Resistance option of the CDC 
National Healthcare Safety Network, especially in critical access 
hospitals, rural hospitals, and community hospitals, to support 
detection, surveillance, containment, and prevention of resistant 
pathogens in the United States and overseas.
 (c) Study and Reports on Removing Barriers to the Development of 
DISARM Antimicrobial Drugs.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 (in this subsection referred to as the ``Comptroller 
 General''), in consultation with the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, the 
 Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
 and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, shall conduct a study over a 5-year period of the 
 barriers that prevent the development of DISARM antimicrobial 
 drugs (as defined in section 1886(d)(5)(N)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act, as added by subsection (a)), including--
 (A) patient outcomes in conjunction with the use of 
 DISARM drugs, including--
 (i) duration of stay in the intensive care 
 unit;
 (ii) recidivism within 30 days; and
 (iii) measures of additional follow-up 
 care;
 (B) the effectiveness of antimicrobial stewardship 
 and surveillance programs, including--
 (i) changes in the percentage of hospitals 
 in the United States with an antimicrobial 
 stewardship program in place that aligns with 
 the Core Elements of Hospital Antibiotic 
 Stewardship Programs, as outlined by the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
 (ii) changes in inpatient care of 
 clostridioides difficile infection; and
 (iii) changes in inpatient rates of 
 resistance to key pathogens; and
 (C) considerations relating to Medicare payment 
 reform, including--
 (i) changes in the number of qualified 
 antimicrobial products approved;
 (ii) changes in wholesale acquisition cost 
 of individual qualified antimicrobial products 
 over time;
 (iii) changes in year-over-year volume of 
 individual qualified antimicrobial products 
 sold; and
 (iv) the overall cost of qualified 
 antimicrobial products to the Medicare program 
 as a proportion of total Medicare part A 
 spending.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this section, the Comptroller General shall submit 
 to Congress a report containing the results of the study 
 conducted under paragraph (1), together with recommendations 
 for such legislation and administrative action as the 
 Comptroller General determines appropriate.

SEC. 7901C-5. TREAT AND REDUCE OBESITY ACT.

 (a) Authority To Expand Health Care Providers Qualified To Furnish 
Intensive Behavioral Therapy.--Section 1861(ddd) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(ddd)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(4)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary may, in 
 addition to qualified primary care physicians and other primary 
 care practitioners, cover intensive behavioral therapy for 
 obesity furnished by any of the following:
 ``(i) A physician (as defined in subsection (r)(1)) 
 who is not a qualified primary care physician.
 ``(ii) Any other appropriate health care provider 
 (including a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, 
 or clinical nurse specialist (as those terms are 
 defined in subsection (aa)(5)), a clinical 
 psychologist, a registered dietitian or nutrition 
 professional (as defined in subsection (vv))).
 ``(iii) An evidence-based, community-based 
 lifestyle counseling program approved by the Secretary.
 ``(B) In the case of intensive behavioral therapy for 
 obesity furnished by a provider described in clause (ii) or 
 (iii) of subparagraph (A), the Secretary may only cover such 
 therapy if such therapy is furnished--
 ``(i) upon referral from, and in coordination with, 
 a physician or primary care practitioner operating in a 
 primary care setting or any other setting specified by 
 the Secretary; and
 ``(ii) in an office setting, a hospital outpatient 
 department, a community-based site that complies with 
 the Federal regulations concerning the privacy of 
 individually identifiable health information 
 promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
 Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, 
 or another setting specified by the Secretary.
 ``(C) In order to ensure a collaborative effort, the 
 coordination described in subparagraph (B)(i) shall include the 
 health care provider or lifestyle counseling program 
 communicating to the referring physician or primary care 
 practitioner any recommendations or treatment plans made 
 regarding the therapy.''.
 (b) Medicare Part D Coverage of Obesity Medication.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1860D-2(e)(2)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(e)(2)(A)) is amended, in the 
 first sentence--
 (A) by striking ``and other than'' and inserting 
 ``other than''; and
 (B) by inserting after ``benzodiazepines),'' the 
 following: ``and other than subparagraph (A) of such 
 section if the drug is used for the treatment of 
 obesity (as defined in section 1861(yy)(2)(C)) or for 
 weight loss management for an individual who is 
 overweight (as defined in section 1861(yy)(2)(F)(i)) 
 and has 1 or more related comorbidities,''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to plan years beginning on or after the date that 
 is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this section.
 (c) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than the date that is 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this section, and every 2 
 years thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall submit a report to Congress describing the steps the 
 Secretary has taken to implement the provisions of, and 
 amendments made by, this section.
 (2) Recommendations.--Such report shall also include 
 recommendations for better coordination and leveraging of 
 programs within the Department of Health and Human Services and 
 other Federal agencies that relate in any way to supporting 
 appropriate research and clinical care (such as any 
 interactions between physicians and other health care providers 
 and their patients) to treat, reduce, and prevent obesity in 
 the adult population.

SEC. 7901C-6. INCENTIVES, IMPROVEMENTS, AND OUTREACH TO INCREASE 
 DIVERSITY IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH.

 (a) Improving Access for and Outreach to Underrepresented 
Populations.--
 (1) Expanding access to alzheimer's research centers.--
 (A) In general.--Section 445(a)(1) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-2(a)(1)) is 
 amended--
 (i) by striking ``(a)(1) The Director of 
 the Institute may'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(a)(1) The Director of the Institute--
 ``(A) may'';
 (ii) by striking ``disease.'' and inserting 
 ``disease; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) beginning January 1, 2024, shall enter into 
 cooperative agreements and make grants to public or private 
 nonprofit entities under this subsection for the planning, 
 establishment, and operation of new such centers that are 
 located in areas with a higher concentration of minority groups 
 (as determined under section 444(d)(3)(D)), such as entities 
 that are historically Black colleges and universities, 
 Hispanic-serving institutions, Tribal colleges and 
 universities, or centers of excellence for other minority 
 populations.''.
 (B) Use of funding for clinics to operate clinical 
 trials.--Section 445(b) of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-2(b)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(3) Federal payments made under a cooperative agreement or grant 
under subsection (a) from funds made available under section 7901C-6(g) 
of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024 shall, with respect 
to Alzheimer's disease, be used in part to establish and operate 
diagnostic and treatment clinics designed--
 ``(A) to meet the special needs of minority and rural 
 populations and other underserved populations; and
 ``(B) to operate clinical trials.''.
 (2) Outreach.--
 (A) Alzheimer's disease centers.--Section 445(b) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-2(b)), as 
 amended by paragraph (1)(B), is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(4) Federal payments made under a cooperative agreement or grant 
under subsection (a) shall be used to establish engagement centers to 
carry out public outreach, education efforts, and dissemination of 
information for members of minority groups about clinical trial 
participation. Activities funded pursuant to the preceding sentence 
shall include--
 ``(A) using established mechanisms to encourage members of 
 minority groups to participate in clinical trials on 
 Alzheimer's disease;
 ``(B) expanding education efforts to make members of 
 minority groups aware of ongoing clinical trials;
 ``(C) working with trial sponsors to increase the number of 
 recruitment events for members of minority groups;
 ``(D) conducting outreach to national, State, and local 
 physician professional organizations, especially for members of 
 such organizations who are primary care physicians or 
 physicians who specialize in dementia, to increase awareness of 
 clinical research opportunities for members of minority groups; 
 and
 ``(E) using community-based participatory research 
 methodologies to engage with minority populations.''.
 (B) Resource centers for minority aging research.--
 Section 444(c) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 285e-1(c)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``(c) The Director'' and 
 inserting ``(c)(1) The Director''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) The Director of the Institute, acting through the Resource 
Centers for Minority Aging Research of the Institute, shall carry out 
public outreach, education efforts, and dissemination of information 
for members of minority groups about participation in clinical research 
on Alzheimer's disease carried out or supported under this subpart.''.
 (b) Incentives To Increase Diversity in Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Through Principal Investigators and Researchers From 
Underrepresented Populations.--
 (1) Alzheimer's clinical research and training awards.--
 Section 445I of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-
 10a) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Enhancing the Participation of Principal Investigators and 
Researchers Who Are Members of Underrepresented Populations.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Institute shall 
 enhance diversity in the conduct or support of clinical 
 research on Alzheimer's disease under this subpart by 
 encouraging the participation of individuals from groups that 
 are underrepresented in the biomedical, clinical, behavioral, 
 and social sciences as principal investigators of such clinical 
 research, as researchers for such clinical research, or both.
 ``(2) Training for principal investigators.--The Director 
 of the Institute shall provide training for principal 
 investigators who are members of a minority group with respect 
 to skills for--
 ``(A) the design and conduct of clinical research 
 and clinical protocols;
 ``(B) applying for grants for clinical research; 
 and
 ``(C) such other areas as the Director of the 
 Institute determines to be appropriate.''.
 (2) Senior researcher awards.--Section 445B(a) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-4(a)) is amended by 
 inserting ``, including senior researchers who are members of a 
 minority group'' before the period at the end of the first 
 sentence.
 (c) Incentives To Increase Diversity in Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Through Trial Sites.--Section 444(d) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-1(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(d) The Director'' and inserting ``(d)(1) 
 The Director''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) In conducting or supporting clinical research on Alzheimer's 
disease for purposes of this subpart, in addition to requirements 
otherwise imposed under this title, including under section 492B, the 
Director of the Institute shall increase the participation of members 
of minority groups in such clinical research through one or more of the 
activities described in paragraph (3).
 ``(3)(A) The Director of the Institute shall provide incentives for 
the support of clinical research on Alzheimer's disease with clinical 
trial sites established in areas with a higher concentration of 
minority groups, including rural areas if practicable.
 ``(B) In determining whether to conduct or support clinical 
research on Alzheimer's disease, the Director of the Institute shall 
encourage the conduct of clinical research with clinical trial sites in 
areas described in subparagraph (A) as a higher-level priority 
criterion among the criteria established to evaluate whether to conduct 
or support clinical research.
 ``(C) In determining the amount of funding to be provided for the 
conduct or support of such clinical research, the Director of the 
Institute shall provide additional funding for the conduct of such 
clinical research with clinical trial sites in areas described in 
subparagraph (A).
 ``(D) In determining whether an area is an area with a higher 
concentration of minority groups, the Director of the Institute--
 ``(i) shall consider the most recent data collected by the 
 Bureau of the Census; and
 ``(ii) may also consider--
 ``(I) data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services on the incidence of Alzheimer's disease in the 
 United States by region; and
 ``(II) such other data as the Director determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(4) In order to facilitate the participation of members of 
minority groups in clinical research supported under this subpart, in 
addition to activities described in paragraph (3), the Director of the 
Institute shall--
 ``(A) ensure that such clinical research uses community-
 based participatory research methodologies; and
 ``(B) encourage the use of remote health technologies, 
 including telehealth, remote patient monitoring, and mobile 
 technologies, that reduce or eliminate barriers to 
 participation of members of minority groups in such clinical 
 research.
 ``(5)(A) Clinical research on Alzheimer's disease conducted or 
supported under this subpart shall ensure that such research includes 
outreach activities designed to increase the participation of members 
of minority groups in such research.
 ``(B)(i) Each applicant for a grant under this subpart for clinical 
research on Alzheimer's disease shall submit to the Director of the 
Institute in the application for such grant--
 ``(I) a budget for outreach activities to members of 
 minority populations with respect to participation in such 
 clinical research; and
 ``(II) a description of the plan to conduct such outreach.
 ``(ii) The Director of the Institute shall encourage applicants 
for, and recipients of, grants under this subpart to conduct clinical 
research on Alzheimer's disease to engage with community-based 
organizations to increase participation of minority populations in such 
research.
 ``(6) For purposes of this subpart:
 ``(A) The term `clinical research' includes a clinical 
 trial.
 ``(B) The term `minority group' has the meaning given such 
 term under section 492B(g).''.
 (d) Participant Eligibility Criteria.--Section 445I of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-10a), as amended by subsection 
(b)(1), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Participant Eligibility Criteria.--The Director of the 
Institute shall take such actions as are necessary to ensure that 
clinical research on Alzheimer's disease conducted or supported under 
this subpart is designed with eligibility criteria that ensure the 
clinical trial population reflects the diversity of the prospective 
patient population. Such actions may include the following:
 ``(1) Examination of criteria.--
 ``(A) In general.--An examination of each exclusion 
 criterion to determine if the criterion is necessary to 
 ensure the safety of trial participants or to achieve 
 the study objectives.
 ``(B) Modification of criteria.--In the case of an 
 exclusion criterion that is not necessary to ensure the 
 safety of trial participants or to achieve the study 
 objectives--
 ``(i) encouraging the modification or 
 elimination of the criterion; or
 ``(ii) encouraging tailoring the criterion 
 as narrowly as possible to avoid unnecessary 
 limits to the population of the clinical study.
 ``(2) Requirement for strong justification for exclusion.--
 A review of each exclusion criterion to ensure that populations 
 are included in clinical trials, such as older adults, 
 individuals with a mild form of disease, individuals at the 
 extremes of the weight range, or children, unless there is a 
 strong clinical or scientific justification to exclude them.
 ``(3) Use of adaptive design.--Encouraging the use of an 
 adaptive clinical trial design that--
 ``(A) starts with a defined population where there 
 are concerns about safety; and
 ``(B) may expand to a broader population based on 
 initial data from the trial and external data.''.
 (e) Resource Center for Successful Strategies To Increase 
Participation of Underrepresented Populations in Alzheimer's Disease 
Clinical Research.--Section 444 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 285e-1) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e)(1) The Director of the Institute, acting through the Office 
of Special Populations and in consultation with the Division of 
Extramural Activities, shall support resource information and technical 
assistance to grantees under section 445 (relating to Alzheimer's 
disease centers), other grantees, and prospective grantees, designed to 
increase the participation of minority populations in clinical research 
on Alzheimer's disease conducted or supported under this subpart.
 ``(2) The resource information and technical assistance provided 
under paragraph (1) shall include the maintenance of a central resource 
library in order to collect, prepare, analyze, and disseminate 
information relating to strategies and best practices used by 
recipients of grants under this subpart and other researchers in the 
development of the clinical research designed to increase the 
participation of minority populations in such clinical research.''.
 (f) Annual Reports.--Section 444 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 285e-1), as amended by subsection (e), is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(f)(1)(A) The Director of the Institute shall submit annual 
reports to the Congress on the impact of the amendments made to this 
subpart by the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024.
 ``(B) The Secretary shall transmit a copy of each such report to 
the Advisory Council on Alzheimer's Research, Care, and Services 
established under section 2(e) of the National Alzheimer's Project Act.
 ``(2) In each report under paragraph (1), the Director of the 
Institute shall include information and data on the following matters 
with respect to clinical trials on Alzheimer's disease conducted during 
the preceding year:
 ``(A) The number of participants who are members of a 
 minority group in such clinical trials.
 ``(B) The number of such clinical trials for which 
 incentives under subsection (d)(3) were made available, the 
 nature of such incentives, the amount of increased funding (if 
 any) made available for research on Alzheimer's disease, and 
 the training provided to principal investigators who are 
 members of a minority group and the amount of funding (if any) 
 for such training.
 ``(C) The number of such clinical trials for which the 
 principal investigator is a member of a minority group.
 ``(D) The number of such clinical trials for which a 
 significant percentage of researchers are members of a minority 
 group.
 ``(E) Modifications to patient eligibility criteria in 
 clinical trial designs under section 445I(e).
 ``(F) Outreach and education efforts conducted under 
 section 445(b)(4).
 ``(3) The Director of the Institute shall make each report under 
paragraph (1) available to the public, including through posting on the 
appropriate website of the Department of Health and Human Services.''.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--For each of fiscal years 2025 
through 2029, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services $60,000,000 to carry out the amendments 
made by this section, to remain available until expended.

 TITLE VIII--HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

SEC. 8001. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Access.--The term ``access'', with respect to health 
 information, means access described in section 164.524 of title 
 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations).
 (2) Certified electronic health record technology.--The 
 term ``certified EHR technology''--
 (A) has the meaning given such term in section 3000 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj);
 (B) includes the health information infrastructure 
 for interoperability, access, exchange, and use of 
 electronic health information required under title XXX 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj et 
 seq.); and
 (C) is not limited to electronic health records 
 maintained by doctors.
 (3) EHR.--The term ``EHR''--
 (A) means an electronic health record;
 (B) includes the health information infrastructure 
 for interoperability, access, exchange, and use of 
 electronic health information required under title XXX 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj et 
 seq.); and
 (C) is not limited to electronic health records 
 maintained by doctors.
 (4) Interoperability.--The term ``interoperability'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3000 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj).

 Subtitle A--Reducing Health Disparities Through Health IT

SEC. 8101. HRSA ASSISTANCE TO HEALTH CENTERS FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH 
 IT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, shall expand and intensify the programs and activities 
of the Administration (directly or through grants or contracts) to 
provide technical assistance and resources to health centers (as 
defined in section 330(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b(a))) to adopt and meaningfully use certified EHR technology for 
the management of chronic diseases and health conditions and reduction 
of health disparities.
 (b) Funding Initiatives.--The activities under subsection (a) may 
include funding initiatives, including establishing basic connectivity 
such as 5G internet for telemedicine capabilities, grant funding to 
implement the next generation of EHR, and funding for technology 
hardware.

SEC. 8102. ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT OF HEALTH IT ON RACIAL AND ETHNIC 
 MINORITY COMMUNITIES; OUTREACH AND ADOPTION OF HEALTH IT 
 IN SUCH COMMUNITIES.

 (a) National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the National Coordinator for Health 
 Information Technology (referred to in this title as the 
 ``National Coordinator'') shall--
 (A) conduct an evaluation of the level of 
 interoperability, access, use, and accessibility of 
 electronic health records in racial and ethnic minority 
 communities, focusing on whether patients in such 
 communities have providers who use electronic health 
 records, and the degree to which patients in such 
 communities can access, exchange, and use without 
 special effort their health information in those 
 electronic health records;
 (B) include in such evaluation an indication of 
 whether such providers--
 (i) are participating in the Medicare 
 program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) or a 
 State plan under title XIX of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) (or a waiver of such 
 plan);
 (ii) have received incentive payments or 
 incentive payment adjustments under Medicare 
 and Medicaid Electronic Health Records 
 Incentive Programs (as defined in subsection 
 (c)(2));
 (iii) are MIPS eligible professionals, as 
 defined in paragraph (1)(C) of section 1848(q) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
 4(q)), for purposes of the Merit-Based 
 Incentive Payment System under such section; or
 (iv) have been recruited by any of the 
 Health Information Technology Regional 
 Extension Centers established under section 
 3012 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300jj-32); and
 (C) publish the results of such evaluation 
 including the indications under subparagraph (B), the 
 race and ethnicity of such providers, and the 
 populations served by such providers.
 (2) Evaluation of interoperability.--The evaluation of the 
 level of interoperability described in paragraph (1)(A) shall 
 consider exchange of electronic health information, usability 
 of exchanged electronic health information, effective 
 application and use of the exchanged electronic health 
 information, and impact on outcomes of interoperability.
 (3) Certification criterion.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the National Coordinator 
 shall--
 (A) promulgate a certification criterion and module 
 of certified EHR technology that stratifies quality 
 measures for purposes of the Merit-Based Incentive 
 Payment System by disparity characteristics, including 
 race, ethnicity, language, gender, gender identity, 
 sexual orientation, socio-economic status, and 
 disability status, as such characteristics are defined 
 for purposes of certified EHR technology; and
 (B) report to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
 Services the quality measures stratified by race and at 
 least 2 other disparity characteristics.
 (b) National Center for Health Statistics.--Not later than one year 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the National 
Center for Health Statistics shall provide to Congress a report that 
details the adoption of certified electronic health record systems and 
electronic information sharing in physicians' offices in communities of 
color and rural communities during fiscal years 2017 through 2020.
 (c) Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.--
 (1) In general.--As part of the process of collecting 
 information, with respect to a provider, at registration and 
 attestation for purposes of Medicare and Medicaid Electronic 
 Health Records Incentive Programs (as defined in paragraph (2)) 
 or the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System under section 
 1848(q) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(q)), the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall collect the race 
 and ethnicity of such provider.
 (2) Medicare and medicaid electronic health records 
 incentive programs defined.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
 term ``Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health Records 
 Incentive Programs'' means the incentive programs under the 
 following:
 (A) Subsection (l)(3) of section 1814(l)(3) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f).
 (B) Subsections (a)(7) and (o) of section 1848 of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4).
 (C) Subsections (l) and (m) of section 1853 of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23).
 (D) Subsections (b)(3)(B)(ix)(I) and (n) of section 
 1886 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww).
 (E) Subsections (a)(3)(F) and (t) of section 1903 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b).
 (d) National Coordinator's Assessment of Impact of HIT.--Section 
3001(c)(6)(C) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-
11(c)(6)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in the heading by inserting ``, racial and ethnic 
 minority communities,'' after ``health disparities'';
 (2) by inserting ``, in communities with a high proportion 
 of individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups (as 
 defined in section 1707(g)), including people with disabilities 
 in such groups,'' after ``communities with health 
 disparities'';
 (3) by striking ``The National Coordinator'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(i) In general.--The National 
 Coordinator''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Criteria.--In any publication under 
 clause (i), the National Coordinator shall 
 include best practices for encouraging 
 partnerships between the Federal Government, 
 States, private entities, national nonprofit 
 intermediaries, and community-based 
 organizations to expand outreach and education 
 for and the adoption of certified EHR 
 technology in communities with a high 
 proportion of individuals from racial and 
 ethnic minority groups (as defined in section 
 1707(g)), while also maintaining the 
 accessibility requirements of section 508 of 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to encourage 
 patient involvement in patient health care. The 
 National Coordinator shall--
 ``(I) not later than 6 months after 
 the submission of the report required 
 under section 8302(b) of the Health 
 Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, 
 establish criteria for evaluating the 
 impact of health information technology 
 on communities with a high proportion 
 of individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups (as so defined) taking 
 into account the findings in such 
 report; and
 ``(II) not later than 1 year after 
 the submission of such report, publish 
 the results of an evaluation of such 
 impact.''.

SEC. 8103. NONDISCRIMINATION AND HEALTH EQUITY IN HEALTH INFORMATION 
 TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) In General.--Covered entities shall ensure that electronic and 
information technology in their health programs or activities does not 
exclude individuals from participation in, deny individuals the 
benefits of, or subject individuals to discrimination under any health 
program or activity on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, 
age, or disability.
 (b) Covered Entities.--In this section, the term ``covered entity'' 
means--
 (1) an entity that operates a health program or activity, 
 any part of which receives Federal financial assistance;
 (2) an entity established under title I of the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 114-148) that 
 administers a health program or activity; or
 (3) the Department of Health and Human Services.

SEC. 8104. LANGUAGE ACCESS IN HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.

 The National Coordinator shall--
 (1) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, propose a rule for providing access to patients, 
 through certified EHR technology, to their personal health 
 information in a computable format, including using patient 
 portals or third-party applications (as described in section 
 3009(e) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-
 19(e))), in the 10 most common non-English languages;
 (2) hold a public hearing to identify best practices for 
 carrying out paragraph (1); and
 (3) not later than 6 months after the public hearing under 
 paragraph (2), promulgate a final regulation with respect to 
 paragraph (1).

 Subtitle B--Modifications To Achieve Parity in Existing Programs

SEC. 8201. EXTENDING FUNDING TO STRENGTHEN THE HEALTH IT INFRASTRUCTURE 
 IN RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES.

 Section 3011 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-31) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1), by inserting ``, including with respect to communities 
 with a high proportion of individuals from racial and ethnic 
 minority groups (as defined in section 1707(g))'' before the 
 colon at the end; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Annual Report on Expenditures.--The National Coordinator 
shall report annually to Congress on activities and expenditures under 
this section.''.

SEC. 8202. EXTENDING COMPETITIVE GRANTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOAN 
 PROGRAMS TO FACILITATE ADOPTION OF CERTIFIED EHR 
 TECHNOLOGY BY PROVIDERS SERVING RACIAL AND ETHNIC 
 MINORITY GROUPS.

 Section 3014(e) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-
34(e)) is amended, in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting 
``, including with respect to communities with a high proportion of 
individuals from racial and ethnic minority groups (as defined in 
section 1707(g))'' after ``health care provider to''.

SEC. 8203. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 3018 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-38) 
is amended by striking ``fiscal years 2009 through 2013'' and inserting 
``fiscal years 2025 through 2030''.

 Subtitle C--Additional Research and Studies

SEC. 8301. DATA COLLECTION AND ASSESSMENTS CONDUCTED IN COORDINATION 
 WITH MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 3001(c)(6) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300jj-11(c)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(F) Data collection and assessments conducted in 
 coordination with minority-serving institutions.--
 ``(i) In general.--In carrying out 
 subparagraph (C) with respect to communities 
 with a high proportion of individuals from 
 racial and ethnic minority groups (as defined 
 in section 1707(g)), the National Coordinator 
 shall, to the greatest extent possible, 
 coordinate with an entity described in clause 
 (ii).
 ``(ii) Minority-serving institutions.--For 
 purposes of clause (i), an entity described in 
 this clause is a historically Black college or 
 university, a Hispanic-serving institution, a 
 Tribal College or University, or an Asian-
 American-, Native American-, or Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution with an accredited 
 public health, health policy, or health 
 services research program.''.

SEC. 8302. STUDY OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN MEDICALLY 
 UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall--
 (1) enter into an agreement with the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to conduct a study on the 
 development, implementation, and effectiveness of health 
 information technology within medically underserved areas; and
 (2) submit a report to Congress describing the results of 
 such study, including any recommendations for legislative or 
 administrative action.
 (b) Study.--The study described in subsection (a)(1) shall--
 (1) identify barriers to successful implementation of 
 health information technology in medically underserved areas;
 (2) survey a cross-section of individuals in medically 
 underserved areas and report their opinions about the various 
 topics of study;
 (3) examine the degree of interoperability among health 
 information technology and users of health information 
 technology in medically underserved areas, including patients, 
 providers, and community services, which such examination shall 
 consider the exchange of electronic health information, 
 usability of exchanged electronic health information, effective 
 application and use of the exchanged electronic health 
 information, and impact on outcomes of interoperability;
 (4) examine the impact of health information technology on 
 providing quality care and reducing the cost of care to 
 individuals in such areas, including the impact of such 
 technology on improved health outcomes for individuals, 
 including which technology worked for which population and how 
 it improved health outcomes for that population;
 (5) examine the impact of health information technology on 
 improving health care-related decisions by both patients and 
 providers in such areas;
 (6) identify specific best practices for using health 
 information technology to foster the consistent provision of 
 accessibility and reasonable policy accommodations in health 
 care to individuals with disabilities in such areas;
 (7) assess the feasibility and costs associated with the 
 use of health information technology in such areas;
 (8) evaluate whether the adoption and use of qualified 
 electronic health records (as defined in section 3000 of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj)) is effective in 
 reducing health disparities, including analysis of clinical 
 quality measures reported by providers who are participating in 
 the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) or a State plan under title XIX of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) (or a waiver of such plan), 
 pursuant to programs to encourage the adoption and use of 
 certified EHR technology;
 (9) identify providers in medically underserved areas that 
 are not electing to adopt and use electronic health records and 
 determine what barriers are preventing those providers from 
 adopting and using such records; and
 (10) examine urban and rural community health systems and 
 determine the impact that health information technology may 
 have on the capacity of primary health providers in those 
 systems.
 (c) Medically Underserved Area.--In this section, the term 
``medically underserved area'' means--
 (1) a population that has been designated as a medically 
 underserved population under section 330(b)(3) of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(b)(3));
 (2) an area that has been designated as a health 
 professional shortage area under section 332 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e);
 (3) an area or population that has been designated as a 
 medically underserved community under section 799B of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295p); or
 (4) another area or population that--
 (A) experiences significant barriers to accessing 
 quality health services; and
 (B) has a high prevalence of diseases or conditions 
 described in title VII, with such diseases or 
 conditions having a disproportionate impact on racial 
 and ethnic minority groups (as defined in section 
 1707(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300u-6(g))) or a subgroup of people with disabilities 
 who have specific functional impairments.

SEC. 8303. ASSESSMENT OF USE AND MISUSE OF DE-IDENTIFIED HEALTH DATA.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall--
 (1) enter into an agreement with the Office of the National 
 Coordinator of Health Information Technology to conduct a 
 study, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, on the 
 impact of digital health technology on medically underserved 
 areas (as defined in section 8302(c)); and
 (2) submit a report to Congress describing the results of 
 such study, including any recommendations for legislative or 
 administrative action.
 (b) Study.--The study described in subsection (a)(1) shall--
 (1) examine the overall prevalence, and historical and 
 existing practices and their respective prevalence, of use and 
 misuse of de-identified protected health information to 
 discriminate against or benefit medically underserved areas;
 (2) identify best practices and tools to leverage the 
 benefits and prevent misuse of de-identified protected health 
 information to discriminate against medically underserved 
 areas;
 (3) examine the overall prevalence, and historical and 
 existing practices and their respective prevalence, of use and 
 misuse of de-identified personal health information other than 
 protected health information to discriminate against or benefit 
 medically underserved areas; and
 (4) identify best practices and tools to leverage the 
 benefits and prevent misuse of de-identified personal health 
 information other than protected health information to 
 discriminate against medically underserved areas.
 (c) Definition of Protected Health Information.--In this section, 
the term ``protected health information'' has the meaning given such 
term in section 160.103, title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
successor regulations).

 Subtitle D--Closing Gaps in Funding To Adopt Certified EHRs

SEC. 8401. EXTENDING MEDICAID EHR INCENTIVE PAYMENTS TO REHABILITATION 
 FACILITIES, LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES, AND HOME HEALTH 
 AGENCIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1903(t)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396b(t)(2)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking ``, or'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by inserting after clause (ii) the following new 
 clauses:
 ``(iii) a rehabilitation facility (as defined in section 
 1886(j)(1)) that furnishes acute or subacute rehabilitation 
 services;
 ``(iv) a long-term care hospital described in section 
 1886(d)(1)(B)(iv); or
 ``(v) a home health agency (as defined in section 
 1861(o)).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to amounts expended under section 1903(a)(3)(F) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(3)(F)) for calendar 
quarters beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 8402. EXTENDING PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT ELIGIBILITY FOR MEDICAID 
 ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD INCENTIVE PAYMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1903(t)(3)(B)(v) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(t)(3)(B)(v)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(v) physician assistant.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to amounts expended under section 1903(a)(3)(F) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(3)(F)) for calendar 
quarters beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle E--Expanding Access to Telehealth Services

SEC. 8501. REMOVING GEOGRAPHIC REQUIREMENTS FOR TELEHEALTH SERVICES.

 Section 1834(m)(4)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(m)(4)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), in the matter preceding subclause (I), 
 by striking ``clause (iii)'' and inserting ``clauses (iii) and 
 (iv)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) Removal of geographic 
 requirements.--The geographic requirements 
 described in clause (i) shall not apply with 
 respect to telehealth services furnished on or 
 after the first day after the end of the period 
 for which clause (iii) applies.''.

SEC. 8502. EXPANDING ORIGINATING SITES.

 (a) Expanding the Home as an Originating Site.--Section 
1834(m)(4)(C)(ii)(X) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(m)(4)(C)(ii)(X)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(X)(aa) Prior to the date 
 described in item (bb), the home of an 
 individual but only for purposes of 
 section 1881(b)(3)(B) or telehealth 
 services described in paragraph (7) or 
 clause (iii).
 ``(bb) On or after the first day 
 after the end of the period for which 
 clause (iii) applies, the home of an 
 individual.''.
 (b) Allowing Additional Originating Sites.--Section 
1834(m)(4)(C)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(m)(4)(C)(ii)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subclause:
 ``(XII) Any other site determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary at which 
 an eligible telehealth individual is 
 located at the time a telehealth 
 service is furnished via a 
 telecommunications system.''.
 (c) Parameters for New Originating Sites.--Section 1834(m)(4)(C) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(m)(4)(C)), as amended by 
section 8501, is amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) Requirements for new sites.--
 ``(I) In general.--The Secretary 
 may establish requirements for the 
 furnishing of telehealth services at 
 sites described in clause (ii)(XII) to 
 provide for beneficiary and program 
 integrity protections.
 ``(II) Clarification.--Nothing in 
 this clause shall be construed to 
 preclude the Secretary from 
 establishing requirements for other 
 originating sites described in clause 
 (ii).''.
 (d) No Originating Site Facility Fee for New Sites.--Section 
1834(m)(2)(B)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(m)(2)(B)(ii)) is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``if originating site is 
 the home'' and inserting ``for certain sites''; and
 (2) by striking ``paragraph (4)(C)(ii)(X)'' and inserting 
 ``subclause (X) or (XII) of paragraph (4)(C)''.

 TITLE IX--ACCOUNTABILITY AND EVALUATION

SEC. 9001. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATION IN FEDERAL ASSISTED HEALTH 
 CARE SERVICES AND RESEARCH ON THE BASIS OF SEX (INCLUDING 
 SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, AND PREGNANCY, 
 INCLUDING TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY), RACE, COLOR, 
 NATIONAL ORIGIN, MARITAL STATUS, FAMILIAL STATUS, OR 
 DISABILITY STATUS.

 (a) In General.--No person in the United States shall, on the basis 
of sex (including sexual orientation, gender identity, and pregnancy, 
including termination of pregnancy), race, color, national origin, 
marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
or disability status, be excluded from participation in, be denied the 
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under--
 (1) any health program or activity, including any health 
 research program or activity, receiving Federal financial 
 assistance, including credits, subsidies, or contracts of 
 insurance; or
 (2) any health program or activity that is administered by 
 an executive agency.
 (b) Definition.--In this section, the term ``familial status'' 
means, with respect to one or more individuals--
 (1) being domiciled with any individual related by blood or 
 affinity whose close association with the individual is the 
 equivalent of a family relationship;
 (2) being in the process of securing legal custody of any 
 individual; or
 (3) being pregnant.

SEC. 9002. TREATMENT OF MEDICARE PAYMENTS UNDER TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL 
 RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.

 For the purposes of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), a payment made under part A, B, C, or D of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) to a provider 
of services, physician, or other supplier (including a payment made to 
a subcontractor of the provider of services, physician, or other 
supplier) shall be deemed a grant, not a contract of insurance or 
guaranty.

SEC. 9003. ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

 Title XXXIV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by titles 
I, II, III, and IV of this Act, is further amended by inserting after 
subtitle D the following:

 ``Subtitle E--Strengthening Accountability

``SEC. 3451. ELEVATION OF THE OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND HEALTH 
 EQUITY.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Name of office.--Beginning on the date of enactment 
 of this subtitle, the Office for Civil Rights of the Department 
 of Health and Human Services shall be known as the `Office for 
 Civil Rights and Health Equity' of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services. Any reference to the Office for Civil Rights of 
 the Department of Health and Human Services in any law, 
 regulation, map, document, record, or other paper of the United 
 States shall be deemed to be a reference to the Office for 
 Civil Rights and Health Equity.
 ``(2) Head of office.--The head of the Office for Civil 
 Rights and Health Equity shall be the Director for Civil Rights 
 and Health Equity, to be appointed by the President. Any 
 reference to the Director of the Office for Civil Rights of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services in any law, regulation, 
 map, document, record, or other paper of the United States 
 shall be deemed to be a reference to the Director for Civil 
 Rights and Health Equity.
 ``(b) Purpose.--The Director for Civil Rights and Health Equity 
shall ensure that the health programs, activities, policies, projects, 
procedures, and operations of health entities that receive Federal 
financial assistance are in compliance with title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), including through the 
following activities:
 ``(1) The development and implementation of an action plan 
 to address racial and ethnic health care disparities. Such plan 
 shall--
 ``(A) address concerns relating to the Office for 
 Civil Rights and Health Equity as released by the 
 United States Commission on Civil Rights in the report 
 entitled `Health Care Challenge: Acknowledging 
 Disparity, Confronting Discrimination, and Ensuring 
 Equity' (September 1999), in conjunction with existing 
 and future reports of the National Academy of Medicine 
 (formerly known as the Institute of Medicine) including 
 the reports titled `Unequal Treatment: Confronting 
 Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care', 
 `Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for 
 the 21st Century', `In the Nation's Compelling 
 Interest: Ensuring Diversity in the Health Care 
 Workforce', `The National Partnership for Action to End 
 Health Disparities', and `The Health of Lesbian, Gay, 
 Bisexual, and Transgender People', and other related 
 reports of the National Academies of Sciences, 
 Engineering, and Medicine;
 ``(B) be issued in proposed form for public review 
 and comment; and
 ``(C) be finalized taking into consideration any 
 comments or concerns that are received by the Office.
 ``(2) Investigative and enforcement actions against 
 intentional or in effect discrimination and policies and 
 practices that have a disparate impact on racial and ethnic 
 minority groups and communities of color pursuant to section 
 9007 of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024.
 ``(3) The review of racial, ethnic, gender identity, sexual 
 orientation, sex, disability status, socioeconomic status, and 
 primary language health data collected by Federal health 
 agencies to assess health care disparities related to 
 intentional discrimination and policies and practices that have 
 a disparate impact on minorities. Such review shall include an 
 assessment of health disparities in communities with a 
 combination of these classes.
 ``(4) Outreach and education activities relating to 
 compliance with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
 including the process of filing a complaint in accordance with 
 section 9007 of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 
 2024.
 ``(5) The provision of technical assistance for health 
 entities to facilitate compliance with title VI of the Civil 
 Rights Act of 1964.
 ``(6) Coordination and oversight of activities of the civil 
 rights compliance offices established under section 3452.
 ``(7) Ensuring--
 ``(A) at a minimum, compliance with the most recent 
 version of the Office of Management and Budget 
 statistical policy directive entitled `Standards for 
 Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on 
 Race and Ethnicity'; and
 ``(B) consideration of available data and language 
 standards such as--
 ``(i) the standards for collecting, 
 monitoring, and reporting data under section 
 3101; and
 ``(ii) the National Standards on Culturally 
 and Linguistically Appropriate Services of the 
 Office of Minority Health.
 ``(c) Funding and Staff.--The Secretary shall ensure the 
effectiveness of the Office for Civil Rights and Health Equity by 
ensuring that the Office is provided with--
 ``(1) adequate funding to enable the Office to carry out 
 its duties under this section; and
 ``(2) staff with expertise in--
 ``(A) epidemiology;
 ``(B) statistics;
 ``(C) health quality assurance;
 ``(D) minority health and health disparities;
 ``(E) health equity;
 ``(F) cultural and linguistic competency;
 ``(G) civil rights; and
 ``(H) social, political, mental, behavioral, 
 economic, and related determinants of health, including 
 education access and quality, health care access and 
 quality, neighborhood and built environment, and social 
 and community context.
 ``(d) Advisory Board.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary, in collaboration with 
 the Director Civil Rights and Health Equity and the Deputy 
 Assistant Secretary for Minority Health, shall establish an 
 advisory board (in this subsection referred to as the `advisory 
 board') to report in accordance with paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Reports to congress.--Not later than December 31, 
 2025, and annually thereafter, the advisory board shall publish 
 and submit to the Office, other Federal agencies, and the 
 Congress a report that includes--
 ``(A) the number of complaints filed in accordance 
 with section 9007 of the Health Equity and 
 Accountability Act of 2024 during the reporting period 
 under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, broken 
 down by category;
 ``(B) the number of such complaints investigated 
 and closed by the Office;
 ``(C) the outcomes of such complaints investigated;
 ``(D) the staffing levels of the Office, including 
 staff credentials;
 ``(E) the number of such complaints that are 
 pending (including backlogged complaints) in which 
 civil rights inequities can be demonstrated and an 
 explanation of why such complaints remain pending; and
 ``(F) trends among filed complaints and other 
 systemic patterns or themes, including an analysis from 
 the Department of Justice about litigation concerning 
 such complaints.
 ``(3) Composition.--The members of the advisory board shall 
 include--
 ``(A) representatives of stakeholders; and
 ``(B) subject matter- and disciplinary-appropriate 
 experts.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.

``SEC. 3452. ESTABLISHMENT OF HEALTH PROGRAM OFFICES FOR CIVIL RIGHTS 
 WITHIN AGENCIES OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN 
 SERVICES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish civil rights 
compliance offices in each agency within the Department of Health and 
Human Services that administers health programs.
 ``(b) Purpose of Offices.--Each office established under subsection 
(a) shall ensure that recipients of Federal financial assistance under 
Federal health programs administer programs, and determine and 
implement policies, services, and activities, in a manner that--
 ``(1) does not discriminate, either intentionally or in 
 effect, on the basis of race, color, national origin, language, 
 ethnicity, sex, age, disability status, sexual orientation, or 
 gender identity; and
 ``(2) promotes the reduction and elimination of disparities 
 in health and health care based on race, color, national 
 origin, language, ethnicity, sex, age, disability status, 
 sexual orientation, or gender identity.
 ``(c) Powers and Duties.--The offices established in subsection (a) 
shall, with respect to the applicable agency, have the following powers 
and duties:
 ``(1) The establishment of compliance and program 
 participation standards for recipients of Federal financial 
 assistance under each program administered by the agency, 
 including the establishment of disparity reduction standards to 
 encompass disparities in health and health care related to 
 race, color, national origin, language, ethnicity, sex, age, 
 disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity.
 ``(2) The development and implementation of policies, 
 procedures, and program-specific guidelines that interpret and 
 apply Department of Health and Human Services guidance under 
 title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and section 1557 of 
 the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to each Federal 
 health program administered by the agency.
 ``(3) The development of a disparity-reduction impact 
 analysis methodology that shall--
 ``(A) be applied to every rule issued by the agency 
 and published as part of the formal rulemaking process 
 under sections 555, 556, and 557 of title 5, United 
 States Code; and
 ``(B) include an analysis of the intersecting forms 
 of discrimination.
 ``(4) Oversight of data collection, reporting, analysis, 
 and publication requirements for all recipients of Federal 
 financial assistance under each Federal health program 
 administered by the agency, compliance with, at a minimum, the 
 most recent version of the Office of Management and Budget 
 statistical policy directive entitled `Standards for 
 Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race 
 and Ethnicity', and consideration of available data and 
 language standards such as--
 ``(A) the standards for collecting and reporting 
 data under section 3101;
 ``(B) the National Standards on Culturally and 
 Linguistically Appropriate Services of the Office of 
 Minority Health; and
 ``(C) the disaggregation of all health and health 
 care data by racial and ethnic minority group.
 ``(5) The conduct of publicly available studies regarding 
 discrimination within Federal health programs administered by 
 the agency as well as disparity reduction initiatives by 
 recipients of Federal financial assistance under Federal health 
 programs.
 ``(6) Annual reports to the Committee on Health, Education, 
 Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on Finance of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on 
 Ways and Means of the House of Representatives on the progress 
 in reducing disparities in health and health care through the 
 Federal programs administered by the agency.
 ``(d) Relationship to Office for Civil Rights in the Department of 
Justice.--
 ``(1) Department of health and human services.--The Office 
 for Civil Rights of the Department of Health and Human Services 
 shall provide standard-setting and compliance review 
 investigation support services to each civil rights compliance 
 office established under subsection (a), subject to paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(2) Department of justice.--The Office for Civil Rights 
 of the Department of Justice may, as appropriate, institute 
 formal proceedings when a civil rights compliance office 
 established under subsection (a) determines that a recipient of 
 Federal financial assistance is not in compliance with the 
 disparity reduction standards of the applicable agency.
 ``(e) Definition.--In this section, the term `Federal health 
programs' mean programs--
 ``(1) under the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) 
 that pay for health care and services; and
 ``(2) under this Act that--
 ``(A) provide Federal financial assistance for 
 health care, biomedical research, or health services 
 research; or
 ``(B) are designed to improve the public's health, 
 including health service programs.''.

SEC. 9004. UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS.

 (a) Coordination Within Department of Justice of Activities 
Regarding Health Disparities.--Section 3(a) of the Civil Rights 
Commission Act of 1983 (42 U.S.C. 1975a(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) shall, with respect to activities carried out in 
 health care and correctional facilities, toward the goal of 
 eliminating health disparities between the general population 
 and members of minority groups based on race or color, promote 
 coordination of such activities of--
 ``(A) the Office of Justice Programs of the 
 Department of Justice, including the Office for Civil 
 Rights within that Office;
 ``(B) the Office for Civil Rights within the 
 Department of Health and Human Services; and
 ``(C) the Office of Minority Health within the 
 Department of Health and Human Services.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 5 of the Civil Rights 
Commission Act of 1983 (42 U.S.C. 1975c) is amended by striking the 
first sentence and inserting the following: ``For the purpose of 
carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and such sums as may be necessary for 
each of the fiscal years 2026 through 2030.''.

SEC. 9005. SENSE OF CONGRESS CONCERNING FULL FUNDING OF ACTIVITIES TO 
 ELIMINATE RACIAL AND ETHNIC HEALTH DISPARITIES.

 It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) health disparities negatively impact outcomes for 
 health and human security of the Nation;
 (2) reducing racial, ethnic, age, sexual, and gender 
 disparities in prevention and treatment are unique civil and 
 human rights challenges and, as such, Federal agencies and 
 health care entities and systems receiving Federal funds should 
 be accountable for their role in causing disparities and 
 inequity;
 (3) funding for the National Institute on Minority Health 
 and Health Disparities, the Office of Civil Rights in the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, the National Institute 
 of Nursing Research, and the Office of Minority Health should 
 be doubled by fiscal year 2025, to effectively address racial 
 and ethnic disparities elimination in health and health care as 
 a matter of health and national security;
 (4) adequate funding by fiscal year 2025, and subsequent 
 funding increases, should be provided for health and human 
 service professions training programs, the Racial and Ethnic 
 Approaches to Community Health Initiative at the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention, the Minority HIV/AIDS 
 Initiative, the Excellence Centers to Eliminate Ethnic/Racial 
 Disparities Program at the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
 Quality, and the National Health Service Corps Scholarship 
 Program initiatives, programs, policies, projects, and 
 activities that are the backbone of the Nation's agenda to 
 eliminate racial and ethnic health disparities and inequities;
 (5) adequate funding for fiscal year 2025 and increased 
 funding for future years should be provided for the Racial and 
 Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Initiative's United 
 States Risk Factor Survey to ensure adequate data collection to 
 track health disparities, and there should be appropriate 
 avenues provided to disseminate findings to the general public;
 (6) current and newly created health disparity elimination 
 incentives, programs, agencies, and departments under this Act 
 (and the amendments made by this Act) should receive adequate 
 staffing and funding by fiscal year 2025; and
 (7) stewardship and accountability should be provided to 
 the Congress and the President for measurable and sustainable 
 progress toward health disparity elimination under programs 
 under this Act, including increased data collection and 
 reporting, capacity building for impacted communities, 
 technical assistance, training programs, and avenues to 
 disseminate program details and successes to the public and to 
 policymakers.

SEC. 9006. GAO AND NIH REPORTS.

 (a) GAO Report on NIH Grant Racial and Ethnic Diversity.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study on the racial and ethnic diversity 
 among the following groups:
 (A) All applicants for grants, contracts, and 
 cooperative agreements awarded by the National 
 Institutes of Health during the period beginning on 
 January 1, 2025, and ending December 31, 2034.
 (B) All recipients of such grants, contracts, and 
 cooperative agreements during such period.
 (C) All members of the peer review panels of such 
 applicants and recipients, respectively.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall complete 
 the study under paragraph (1) and submit to Congress a report 
 containing the results of such study.
 (b) NIH Report on Certain Authority of National Institute on 
Minority Health and Health Disparities.--Not later than 6 months after 
the date of enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter, the 
Director of the National Institutes of Health, in collaboration with 
the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities, shall submit to Congress a report that details and 
evaluates--
 (1) the steps taken during the applicable report period by 
 the Director of the National Institutes of Health to plan, 
 coordinate, review, and evaluate all minority health and health 
 disparity research that is conducted or supported by the 
 institutes and centers at the National Institutes of Health; 
 and
 (2) the outcomes of such steps.
 (c) GAO Report Related to Recipients of PPACA Funding.--Not later 
than one year after the date of enactment of this Act and biennially 
thereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit 
to Congress a report that identifies--
 (1) the racial and ethnic diversity of community-based 
 organizations that applied for Federal enrollment funding 
 provided pursuant to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
 Act (Public Law 111-148) (including the amendments made by such 
 Act);
 (2) the percentage of such organizations that were awarded 
 such funding; and
 (3) the impact of such community-based organizations' 
 enrollment efforts on the insurance status of their 
 communities.
 (d) Annual Report on Activities of National Institute on Minority 
Health and Health Disparities.--The Director of the National Institute 
on Minority Health and Health Disparities shall prepare an annual 
report on the activities carried out or to be carried out by such 
institute, and shall submit each such report to the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, and the Director of the National Institutes 
of Health. With respect to the fiscal year involved, the report shall--
 (1) describe and evaluate the progress made in health 
 disparities research conducted or supported by institutes and 
 centers of the National Institutes of Health;
 (2) summarize and analyze expenditures made for activities 
 with respect to health disparities research conducted or 
 supported by the National Institutes of Health;
 (3) include a separate statement applying the requirements 
 of paragraphs (1) and (2) specifically to minority health 
 disparities research; and
 (4) contain such recommendations as the Director of the 
 Institute considers appropriate.

SEC. 9007. INVESTIGATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--In carrying out the investigative and enforcement 
actions of section 3451(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 9003 of this Act, the Director for Civil Rights and 
Health Equity (referred to in this section as the ``Director'') shall 
pursue such investigative and enforcement actions pursuant to this 
section.
 (b) Administrative Complaint and Conciliation Process.--
 (1) Complaints and answers.--
 (A) In general.--An aggrieved person may, not later 
 than 1 year after an alleged violation of subsection 
 (a) has occurred or concluded, file a complaint with 
 the Director alleging inequitable provision of health 
 care by a provider described in subsection (a).
 (B) Complaint.--A complaint submitted pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) shall be in writing and shall contain 
 such information and be in such form as the Director 
 requires.
 (C) Oath or affirmation.--The complaint and any 
 answer made under this subsection shall be made under 
 oath or affirmation, and may be reasonably and fairly 
 modified at any time.
 (2) Response to complaints.--
 (A) In general.--Upon the filing of a complaint 
 under this subsection, the following procedures shall 
 apply:
 (i) Complainant notice.--The Director shall 
 serve notice upon the complainant acknowledging 
 receipt of such filing and advising the 
 complainant of the time limits and procedures 
 provided under this section.
 (ii) Respondent notice.--The Director 
 shall, not later than 30 days after receipt of 
 such filing--
 (I) serve on the respondent a 
 notice of the complaint, together with 
 a copy of the original complaint; and
 (II) advise the respondent of the 
 procedural rights and obligations of 
 respondents under this section.
 (iii) Answer.--The respondent may file, not 
 later than 60 days after receipt of the notice 
 from the Director, an answer to such complaint.
 (iv) Investigative duties.--The Director 
 shall--
 (I) make an investigation of the 
 alleged inequitable provision of health 
 care; and
 (II) complete such investigation 
 within 180 days (unless it is 
 impracticable to complete such 
 investigation within 180 days) after 
 the filing of the complaint.
 (B) Investigations.--
 (i) Pattern or practice.--In the course of 
 investigating the complaint, the Director may 
 seek records of care provided to patients other 
 than the complainant if necessary to 
 demonstrate or disprove an allegation of 
 inequitable provision of health care or to 
 determine whether there is a pattern or 
 practice of such care.
 (ii) Accounting for social determinants of 
 health.--In investigating the complaint and 
 reaching a determination on the validity of the 
 complaint, the Director shall account for 
 social determinants of health and the effect of 
 such social determinants on health care 
 outcomes.
 (iii) Inability to complete 
 investigation.--If the Director is unable to 
 complete (or finds it is impracticable to 
 complete) the investigation within 180 days 
 after the filing of the complaint (or, if the 
 Secretary takes further action under paragraph 
 (6)(B) with respect to a complaint, within 180 
 days after the commencement of such further 
 action), the Director shall notify the 
 complainant and respondent in writing of the 
 reasons involved.
 (C) Report.--
 (i) Final report.--On completing each 
 investigation under this paragraph, the 
 Director shall prepare a final investigative 
 report.
 (ii) Modification of report.--A final 
 report under this subparagraph may be modified 
 if additional evidence is later discovered.
 (3) Conciliation.--
 (A) In general.--During the period beginning on the 
 date on which a complaint is filed under this 
 subsection and ending on the date of final disposition 
 of such complaint (including during an investigation 
 under paragraph (2)(B)), the Director shall, to the 
 extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to 
 such complaint.
 (B) Conciliation agreement.--A conciliation 
 agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an 
 agreement between the respondent and the complainant, 
 and shall be subject to approval by the Director.
 (C) Rights protected.--The Director shall approve a 
 conciliation agreement only if the agreement protects 
 the rights of the complainant and other persons 
 similarly situated.
 (D) Publicly available agreement.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the Secretary shall make available to the 
 public a copy of a conciliation agreement 
 entered into pursuant to this subsection unless 
 the complainant and respondent otherwise agree, 
 and the Secretary determines, that disclosure 
 is not required to further the purposes of this 
 subsection.
 (ii) Limitation.--A conciliation agreement 
 that is made available to the public pursuant 
 to clause (i) may not disclose individually 
 identifiable health information.
 (4) Failure to comply with conciliation agreement.--
 Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that a 
 respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the Director 
 shall refer the matter to the Attorney General to consider 
 filing a civil action to enforce such agreement.
 (5) Written consent for disclosure of information.--Nothing 
 said or done in the course of conciliation under this 
 subsection may be made public, or used as evidence in a 
 subsequent proceeding under this subsection, without the 
 written consent of the parties to the conciliation.
 (6) Prompt judicial action.--
 (A) In general.--If the Director determines at any 
 time following the filing of a complaint under this 
 subsection that prompt judicial action is necessary to 
 carry out the purposes of this subsection, the Director 
 may recommend that the Attorney General promptly 
 commence a civil action under subsection (d).
 (B) Immediate suit.--If the Director determines at 
 any time following the filing of a complaint under this 
 subsection that the public interest would be served by 
 allowing the complainant to bring a civil action under 
 subsection (c) in a State or Federal court immediately, 
 the Director shall certify that the administrative 
 process has concluded and that the complainant may file 
 such a suit immediately.
 (7) Annual report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Director 
 shall make publicly available a report detailing the activities 
 of the Office for Civil Rights and Health Equity under this 
 subsection, including--
 (A) the number of complaints filed and the basis on 
 which the complaints were filed;
 (B) the number of investigations undertaken as a 
 result of such complaints; and
 (C) the disposition of all such investigations.
 (c) Enforcement by Private Persons.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Civil action.--
 (i) In suit.--A complainant under 
 subsection (b) may commence a civil action to 
 obtain appropriate relief with respect to an 
 alleged violation of subsection (a), or for 
 breach of a conciliation agreement under 
 subsection (b), in an appropriate district 
 court of the United States or State court--
 (I) not sooner than the earliest 
 of--
 (aa) the date a 
 conciliation agreement is 
 reached under subsection (b);
 (bb) the date of a final 
 disposition of a complaint 
 under subsection (b); or
 (cc) 180 days after the 
 first day of the alleged 
 violation; and
 (II) not later than 2 years after 
 the final day of the alleged violation.
 (ii) Statute of limitations.--The 
 computation of such 2-year period shall not 
 include any time during which an administrative 
 proceeding (including investigation or 
 conciliation) under subsection (b) was pending 
 with respect to a complaint under such 
 subsection.
 (B) Barring suit.--If the Director has obtained a 
 conciliation agreement under subsection (b) regarding 
 an alleged violation of subsection (a), no action may 
 be filed under this paragraph by the complainant 
 involved with respect to the alleged violation except 
 for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an 
 agreement.
 (2) Relief which may be granted.--
 (A) In general.--In a civil action under paragraph 
 (1), if the court finds that a violation of subsection 
 (a) or breach of a conciliation agreement has occurred, 
 the court may award to the plaintiff actual and 
 punitive damages, and may grant as relief, as the court 
 determines to be appropriate, any permanent or 
 temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or 
 other order (including an order enjoining the defendant 
 from engaging in a practice violating subsection (a) or 
 ordering such affirmative action as may be 
 appropriate).
 (B) Fees and costs.--In a civil action under 
 paragraph (1), the court, in its discretion, may allow 
 the prevailing party, other than the United States, a 
 reasonable attorney's fee and costs. The United States 
 shall be liable for such fees and costs to the same 
 extent as a private person.
 (3) Intervention by attorney general.--Upon timely 
 application, the Attorney General may intervene in a civil 
 action under paragraph (1), if the Attorney General certifies 
 that the case is of general public importance.
 (d) Enforcement by the Attorney General.--
 (1) Commencement of actions.--
 (A) Pattern or practice cases.--The Attorney 
 General may commence a civil action in any appropriate 
 district court of the United States if the Attorney 
 General has reasonable cause to believe that any health 
 care provider covered by subsection (a)--
 (i) is engaged in a pattern or practice 
 that violates such subsection; or
 (ii) is engaged in a violation of such 
 subsection that raises an issue of significant 
 public importance.
 (B) Cases by referral.--The Director may determine, 
 based on a pattern of complaints, a pattern of 
 violations, a review of data reported by a health care 
 provider covered by subsection (a), or any other means, 
 that there is reasonable cause to believe a health care 
 provider is engaged in a pattern or practice that 
 violates subsection (a). If the Director makes such a 
 determination, the Director shall refer the related 
 findings to the Attorney General. If the Attorney 
 General finds that such reasonable cause exists, the 
 Attorney General may commence a civil action in any 
 appropriate district court of the United States.
 (2) Enforcement of subpoenas.--The Attorney General, on 
 behalf of the Director, or another party at whose request a 
 subpoena is issued under this subsection, may enforce such 
 subpoena in appropriate proceedings in the district court of 
 the United States for the district in which the person to whom 
 the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts 
 business.
 (3) Relief which may be granted in civil actions.--
 (A) In general.--In a civil action under paragraph 
 (1), the court--
 (i) may award such preventive relief, 
 including a permanent or temporary injunction, 
 temporary restraining order, or other order 
 against the person responsible for a violation 
 of subsection (a) as is necessary to assure the 
 full enjoyment of the rights granted by this 
 subsection;
 (ii) may award such other relief as the 
 court determines to be appropriate, including 
 monetary damages, to aggrieved persons; and
 (iii) may, to vindicate the public 
 interest, assess punitive damages against the 
 respondent--
 (I) in an amount not exceeding 
 $500,000, for a first violation; and
 (II) in an amount not exceeding 
 $1,000,000, for any subsequent 
 violation.
 (B) Fees and costs.--In a civil action under this 
 subsection, the court, in its discretion, may allow the 
 prevailing party, other than the United States, a 
 reasonable attorney's fee and costs. The United States 
 shall be liable for such fees and costs to the extent 
 provided by section 2412 of title 28, United States 
 Code.
 (4) Intervention in civil actions.--Upon timely 
 application, any person may intervene in a civil action 
 commenced by the Attorney General under paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 if the action involves an alleged violation of subsection (a) 
 with respect to which such person is an aggrieved person 
 (including a person who is a complainant under subsection (b)) 
 or a conciliation agreement to which such person is a party.

SEC. 9008. FEDERAL HEALTH EQUITY COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment of Commission.--
 (1) In general.--There is established the Federal Health 
 Equity Commission (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
 the ``Commission'').
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed 
 of--
 (i) 8 voting members appointed under 
 subparagraph (B); and
 (ii) the nonvoting, ex officio members 
 listed in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Voting members.--Not more than 4 of the members 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i) shall at any one time 
 be of the same political party. Such members shall have 
 recognized expertise in and personal experience with 
 racial and ethnic health inequities, health care needs 
 of vulnerable and marginalized populations, and health 
 equity as a vehicle for improving health status and 
 health outcomes. Such members shall be appointed to the 
 Commission as follows:
 (i) Four members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the President.
 (ii) Two members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the President pro tempore of the 
 Senate, upon the recommendations of the 
 majority leader and the minority leader of the 
 Senate. Each member appointed to the Commission 
 under this clause shall be appointed from a 
 different political party.
 (iii) Two members of the Commission shall 
 be appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives upon the recommendations of the 
 majority leader and the minority leader of the 
 House of Representatives. Each member appointed 
 to the Commission under this clause shall be 
 appointed from a different political party.
 (C) Ex officio member.--The Commission shall have 
 the following nonvoting, ex officio members:
 (i) The Director for Civil Rights and 
 Health Equity of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (ii) The Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
 Minority Health of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (iii) The Director of the National 
 Institute on Minority Health and Health 
 Disparities.
 (iv) The Chairperson of the Advisory 
 Committee on Minority Health established under 
 section 1707(c) of the Public Health Service 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6(c)).
 (3) Terms.--The term of office of each member appointed 
 under paragraph (2)(B) of the Commission shall be 6 years.
 (4) Chairperson; vice chairperson.--
 (A) Chairperson.--The President shall, with the 
 concurrence of a majority of the members of the 
 Commission appointed under paragraph (2)(B), designate 
 a Chairperson from among the members of the Commission 
 appointed under such paragraph.
 (B) Vice chairperson.--
 (i) Designation.--The Speaker of the House 
 of Representatives shall, in consultation with 
 the majority leaders and the minority leaders 
 of the Senate and the House of Representatives 
 and with the concurrence of a majority of the 
 members of the Commission appointed under 
 paragraph (2)(B), designate a Vice Chairperson 
 from among the members of the Commission 
 appointed under such paragraph. The Vice 
 Chairperson may not be a member of the same 
 political party as the Chairperson.
 (ii) Duty.--The Vice Chairperson shall act 
 in place of the Chairperson in the absence of 
 the Chairperson.
 (5) Removal of members.--The President may remove a member 
 of the Commission only for neglect of duty or malfeasance in 
 office.
 (6) Quorum.--A majority of members of the Commission 
 appointed under paragraph (2)(B) shall constitute a quorum of 
 the Commission, but a lesser number of members may hold 
 hearings.
 (b) Duties of the Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall--
 (A) monitor and report on the implementation of 
 this Act; and
 (B) investigate, monitor, and report on progress 
 towards health equity and the elimination of health 
 disparities.
 (2) Annual report.--The Commission shall--
 (A) submit to the President and Congress at least 
 one report annually on health equity and health 
 disparities; and
 (B) include in such report--
 (i) a description of actions taken by the 
 Department of Health and Human Services and any 
 other Federal agency related to health equity 
 or health disparities; and
 (ii) recommendations on ensuring equitable 
 health care and eliminating health disparities.
 (c) Powers.--
 (1) Hearings.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission or, at the 
 direction of the Commission, any subcommittee or member 
 of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out 
 this section, as the Commission or the subcommittee or 
 member considers advisable--
 (i) hold such hearings, meet and act at 
 such times and places, take such testimony, 
 receive such evidence, and administer such 
 oaths; and
 (ii) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the 
 attendance and testimony of such witnesses and 
 the production of such books, records, 
 correspondence, memoranda, papers, documents, 
 tapes, and materials.
 (B) Limitation on hearings.--The Commission may 
 hold a hearing under subparagraph (A)(i) only if the 
 hearing is approved--
 (i) by a majority of the members of the 
 Commission appointed under subsection 
 (a)(2)(B); or
 (ii) by a majority of such members present 
 at a meeting when a quorum is present.
 (2) Issuance and enforcement of subpoenas.--
 (A) Issuance.--A subpoena issued under paragraph 
 (1) shall--
 (i) bear the signature of the Chairperson 
 of the Commission; and
 (ii) be served by any person or class of 
 persons designated by the Chairperson for that 
 purpose.
 (B) Enforcement.--In the case of contumacy or 
 failure to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), 
 the United States district court for the district in 
 which the subpoenaed person resides, is served, or may 
 be found may issue an order requiring the person to 
 appear at any designated place to testify or to produce 
 documentary or other evidence.
 (C) Noncompliance.--Any failure to obey the order 
 of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt 
 of court.
 (3) Witness allowances and fees.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1821 of title 28, United 
 States Code, shall apply to a witness requested or 
 subpoenaed to appear at a hearing of the Commission.
 (B) Expenses.--The per diem and mileage allowances 
 for a witness shall be paid from funds available to pay 
 the expenses of the Commission.
 (4) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions 
 as other agencies of the Federal Government.
 (5) Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of 
 gifts or donations of services or property.
 (d) Administrative Provisions.--
 (1) Staff.--
 (A) Director.--There shall be a full-time staff 
 director for the Commission who shall--
 (i) serve as the administrative head of the 
 Commission; and
 (ii) be appointed by the Chairperson with 
 the concurrence of the Vice Chairperson.
 (B) Other personnel.--The Commission may--
 (i) appoint such other personnel as it 
 considers advisable, subject to the provisions 
 of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service, and 
 the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III 
 of chapter 53 of that title relating to 
 classification and General Schedule pay rates; 
 and
 (ii) may procure temporary and intermittent 
 services under section 3109(b) of title 5, 
 United States Code, at rates for individuals 
 not in excess of the daily equivalent paid for 
 positions at the maximum rate for GS-15 of the 
 General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Compensation of members.--
 (A) Non-federal employees.--Each member of the 
 Commission who is not an officer or employee of the 
 Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal 
 to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay 
 prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under 
 section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each 
 day (including travel time) during which the member is 
 engaged in the performance of the duties of the 
 Commission.
 (B) Federal employees.--Each member of the 
 Commission who is an officer or employee of the Federal 
 Government shall serve without compensation in addition 
 to the compensation received for the services of the 
 member as an office or employee of the Federal 
 Government.
 (C) Travel expenses.--A member of the Commission 
 shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in 
 lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an 
 employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 
 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the 
 home or regular place of business of the member in the 
 performance of the duties of the Commission.
 (3) Cooperation.--The Commission may secure directly from 
 any Federal department or agency such information as the 
 Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act. Upon 
 request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such 
 department or agency shall furnish such information to the 
 Commission.
 (e) Permanent Commission.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the Commission.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated for fiscal year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter such 
sums as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.

 TITLE X--ADDRESSING SOCIAL DETERMINANTS AND IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL 
 JUSTICE

 Subtitle A--In General

SEC. 10001. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) Agency.--The term ``Agency'' means the Environmental 
 Protection Agency.
 (3) Built environment.--The term ``built environment'' 
 means the components of the environment, and the location of 
 those components in a geographically defined space, that are 
 created or modified by individuals to form the physical and 
 social characteristics of a community or enhance quality of 
 human life, including--
 (A) homes, schools, and places of work and worship;
 (B) parks, recreation areas, and greenways;
 (C) transportation systems;
 (D) business, industry, and agriculture; and
 (E) land-use plans, projects, and policies that 
 impact the physical or social characteristics of a 
 community, including access to services and amenities.
 (4) Determinants of health.--The term ``determinants of 
 health''--
 (A) means the range of nonclinical factors 
 inclusive of personal, social, economic, and 
 environmental factors that directly influence health 
 status; and
 (B) includes social determinants of health.
 (5) Economic determinants of health.--The term ``economic 
 determinants of health'' means income and social status.
 (6) Environmental determinants of health.--The term 
 ``environmental determinants of health'' means the broad 
 physical (including manmade and natural), psychological, 
 social, spiritual, cultural, and aesthetic environment.
 (7) Personal determinants of health.--The term ``personal 
 determinants of health'' means an individual's behavior, 
 biology, and genetics.
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (9) Social determinants of health.--The term ``social 
 determinants of health''--
 (A) means a subset of determinants of the health of 
 individuals and environments (such as communities, 
 neighborhoods, and societies) that describe an 
 individual's or group of people's social identity, 
 describe the social and economic resources to which 
 such individual or group has access, and describe the 
 conditions in which an individual or group of people 
 works, lives, and plays; and
 (B) are sometimes referred to as ``social and 
 economic determinants of health'', ``socioeconomic 
 determinants of health'', ``environmental determinants 
 of health'', ``social drivers of inequality'', or 
 ``personal determinants of health''.

SEC. 10002. HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.

 Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.), as amended by section 7901C-1(a), is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-15. HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Administrator.--The term `Administrator' means the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 ``(2) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 ``(3) Health impact assessment.--The term `health impact 
 assessment' means a systematic process that uses an array of 
 data sources and analytic methods and considers input from 
 stakeholders to determine the potential effects of a proposed 
 policy, plan, program, or project on the health of a population 
 and the distribution of those effects within the population. 
 Such term includes identifying and recommending appropriate 
 actions on monitoring and maximizing potential benefits and 
 minimizing potential harms.
 ``(4) Health inequity.--The term `health inequity' means a 
 particular type of health difference that is closely linked 
 with social, economic, or environmental disadvantage and that 
 adversely affects groups of people who have systematically 
 experienced greater obstacles to health based on their--
 ``(A) racial or ethnic group;
 ``(B) religion;
 ``(C) socioeconomic status;
 ``(D) gender;
 ``(E) age;
 ``(F) mental health;
 ``(G) cognitive, sensory, or physical disability;
 ``(H) sexual orientation or gender identity;
 ``(I) geographic location;
 ``(J) citizenship status; or
 ``(K) other characteristics historically linked to 
 discrimination or exclusion.
 ``(b) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
and in collaboration with the Administrator, shall--
 ``(1) in consultation with the Director of the National 
 Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion and 
 the heads of relevant offices within the Department of Housing 
 and Urban Development, the Department of Transportation, and 
 the Department of Agriculture, establish a program at the 
 National Center for Environmental Health of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention focused on advancing the field 
 of health impact assessment that includes--
 ``(A) collecting and disseminating best practices;
 ``(B) administering capacity building grants to 
 States, Indian Tribes, and Tribal organizations to 
 support subgrantees in initiating health impact 
 assessments, in accordance with subsection (d);
 ``(C) providing technical assistance;
 ``(D) developing training tools and providing 
 training on conducting a health impact assessment and 
 the implementation of built environment and health 
 indicators;
 ``(E) making information available, as appropriate, 
 regarding the existence of other community healthy 
 living tools, checklists, and indices that help connect 
 public health to other sectors, and tools to help 
 examine the effect of the indoor built environment and 
 building codes on population health;
 ``(F) conducting research and evaluations of health 
 impact assessments; and
 ``(G) awarding competitive extramural research 
 grants;
 ``(2) develop guidance and guidelines to conduct health 
 impact assessments in accordance with subsection (c); and
 ``(3) establish a grant program to allow States, Indian 
 Tribes, and Tribal organizations to award subgrants to eligible 
 entities to conduct health impact assessments.
 ``(c) Guidance.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, 
 the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall issue final 
 guidance for conducting health impact assessments. In 
 developing such guidance, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) consult with the Director of the National 
 Center for Environmental Health, the Director of the 
 National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
 Health Promotion, and the heads of relevant offices 
 within the Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
 the Department of Transportation, and the Department of 
 Agriculture; and
 ``(B) consider available international health 
 impact assessment guidance, North American health 
 impact assessment practice standards, and 
 recommendations from the National Academy of Sciences.
 ``(2) Content.--The guidance under this subsection shall 
 include--
 ``(A) background on national and international 
 efforts to bridge urban planning, climate forecasting, 
 and public health institutions and disciplines, 
 including a review of health impact assessment best 
 practices internationally;
 ``(B) evidence-based direct and indirect pathways 
 that link land-use planning, transportation, and 
 housing policy and objectives to human health outcomes;
 ``(C) data resources and quantitative and 
 qualitative forecasting methods to evaluate both the 
 status of health determinants and health effects, 
 including identification of existing programs that can 
 disseminate these resources;
 ``(D) best practices for inclusive public 
 involvement in conducting health impact assessments; 
 and
 ``(E) technical assistance for other agencies 
 seeking to develop their own guidelines and procedures 
 for health impact assessment.
 ``(d) Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director and in collaboration with the Administrator, shall--
 ``(A) award grants to States, Indian Tribes, and 
 Tribal organizations to award subgrants to eligible 
 entities for capacity building or to prepare health 
 impact assessments; and
 ``(B) ensure that States, Indian Tribes, and Tribal 
 organizations receiving a grant under this subsection 
 further support training and technical assistance for 
 subgrantees under subparagraph (A) by funding and 
 overseeing appropriate experts on health impact 
 assessments from local, State, and Tribal governments, 
 the Federal Government, institutions of higher 
 education, and nonprofit organizations to provide such 
 training and technical assistance.
 ``(2) Applications for subgrants.--
 ``(A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a 
 subgrant under this subsection, an eligible entity 
 shall--
 ``(i) be a community-based organization 
 serving individuals or populations, the health 
 of which are, or will be, affected by an 
 activity or a proposed activity; and
 ``(ii) submit to the grantee an application 
 in accordance with this subsection, at such 
 time, in such manner, and containing such 
 additional information as the Secretary (acting 
 through the Director and in collaboration with 
 the Administrator) and the grantee may require.
 ``(B) Inclusion.--An application for a subgrant 
 under this subsection shall include--
 ``(i) a list of proposed activities that 
 require or would benefit from conducting a 
 health impact assessment by not later than 180 
 days after receiving the subgrant;
 ``(ii) supporting documentation, including 
 letters of support, from potential conductors 
 of health impact assessments for the listed 
 proposed activities;
 ``(iii) an assessment by the applicant of 
 the health of the population to be served 
 through the subgrant; and
 ``(iv) a description of potential adverse 
 or positive effects on health that the proposed 
 activities may create.
 ``(C) Preference.--In awarding subgrants under this 
 subsection, a State may give preference to eligible 
 entities that demonstrate the potential to 
 significantly improve population health or lower health 
 care costs as a result of potential health impact 
 assessment work.
 ``(3) Use of funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal 
 organization receiving a grant under this subsection 
 shall use such grant to conduct health impact 
 assessment capacity building in support of a subgrantee 
 conducting a health impact assessment for a proposed 
 activity in accordance with this subsection.
 ``(B) Purposes.--The purposes of a health impact 
 assessment under this subsection are--
 ``(i) to facilitate the involvement of 
 Tribal, State, and local public health 
 officials in community planning, 
 transportation, housing, and land use decisions 
 and other decisions affecting the built 
 environment to identify any potential health 
 concern or health benefit relating to an 
 activity or proposed activity;
 ``(ii) to provide for an investigation of 
 any health-related issue of concern raised in a 
 planning process, an environmental impact 
 assessment process, or policy appraisal 
 relating to a proposed activity;
 ``(iii) to describe and compare 
 alternatives (including no-action alternatives) 
 to a proposed activity to provide clarification 
 with respect to the potential health outcomes 
 associated with the proposed activity and, 
 where appropriate, to the related benefit-cost 
 or cost-effectiveness of the proposed activity 
 and alternatives;
 ``(iv) to contribute, when applicable, to 
 the findings of a planning process, policy 
 appraisal, or an environmental impact statement 
 with respect to the terms and conditions of 
 implementing a proposed activity or related 
 mitigation recommendations, as necessary;
 ``(v) to ensure that the disproportionate 
 distribution of negative impacts among 
 vulnerable populations is minimized as much as 
 possible;
 ``(vi) to engage affected community members 
 and ensure adequate opportunity for public 
 comment on all stages of the health impact 
 assessment;
 ``(vii) where appropriate, to consult with 
 local and county health departments and 
 appropriate organizations, including planning, 
 transportation, and housing organizations, and 
 provide them information and tools regarding 
 how to conduct and integrate health impact 
 assessment into their work; and
 ``(viii) to inspect homes, water systems, 
 and other elements that pose risks to lead 
 exposure, with an emphasis on areas that pose a 
 higher risk to children.
 ``(4) Assessments.--Health impact assessments carried out 
 using funds under this section shall--
 ``(A) take appropriate health factors into 
 consideration as early as practicable during the 
 planning, review, or decision-making processes;
 ``(B) assess the effect on the health of 
 individuals and populations of proposed policies, 
 projects, or plans that result in modifications to the 
 built environment; and
 ``(C) assess the distribution of health effects 
 across various factors, such as race, income, 
 ethnicity, age, disability status, gender, and 
 geography.
 ``(5) Eligible activities.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal 
 organization receiving a grant under this section shall 
 conduct an evaluation of any activity proposed to be 
 funded through the grant, including through a subgrant, 
 to determine whether such activity will have a 
 significant adverse or positive effect on the health of 
 the affected population to be served, based on the 
 criteria described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Criteria.--The criteria described in this 
 subparagraph include, as applicable to the proposed 
 activity, the following:
 ``(i) Any substantial adverse effect or 
 significant health benefit on health outcomes 
 or factors known to influence health, including 
 the following:
 ``(I) Physical activity.
 ``(II) Injury.
 ``(III) Mental health.
 ``(IV) Accessibility to health-
 promoting goods and services.
 ``(V) Respiratory health.
 ``(VI) Chronic disease.
 ``(VII) Nutrition.
 ``(VIII) Land use changes that 
 promote local, sustainable food 
 sources.
 ``(IX) Infectious disease.
 ``(X) Health inequities.
 ``(XI) Existing air quality, ground 
 or surface water quality or quantity, 
 or noise levels.
 ``(XII) Lead exposure.
 ``(XIII) Drinking water quality and 
 accessibility.
 ``(ii) Other factors that may be 
 considered, including--
 ``(I) the potential for a proposed 
 activity to result in systems failure 
 that leads to a public health 
 emergency;
 ``(II) the probability that the 
 proposed activity will result in a 
 significant increase in tourism, 
 economic development, or employment in 
 the population to be served;
 ``(III) any other significant 
 potential hazard or enhancement to 
 human health, as determined by the 
 grantee; or
 ``(IV) whether the evaluation of a 
 proposed activity would duplicate 
 another analysis or study being 
 undertaken in conjunction with the 
 proposed activity.
 ``(C) Factors for consideration.--In evaluating a 
 proposed activity under subparagraph (A), a grantee may 
 take into consideration any reasonable, direct, 
 indirect, or cumulative effect that can be clearly 
 related to potential health effects and that is related 
 to the proposed activity, including the effect of any 
 action that is--
 ``(i) included in the long-range plan 
 relating to the proposed activity;
 ``(ii) likely to be carried out in 
 coordination with the proposed activity;
 ``(iii) dependent on the occurrence of the 
 proposed activity; or
 ``(iv) likely to have a disproportionate 
 impact on high-risk or vulnerable populations.
 ``(6) Requirements.--A health impact assessment prepared 
 with funds awarded under this subsection shall incorporate the 
 following, after conducting the screening phase (identifying 
 projects or policies for which a health impact assessment would 
 be valuable and feasible) through the application process:
 ``(A) Scoping.--Identifying which health effects to 
 consider and the research methods to be utilized.
 ``(B) Assessing risks and benefits.--Assessing the 
 baseline health status and factors known to influence 
 the health status in the affected community, which may 
 include aggregating and synthesizing existing health 
 assessment evidence and data from the community.
 ``(C) Developing recommendations.--Suggesting 
 changes to proposals to promote positive or mitigate 
 adverse health effects.
 ``(D) Reporting.--Synthesizing the assessment and 
 recommendations and communicating the results to 
 decision makers.
 ``(E) Monitoring and evaluating.--Tracking the 
 decision and implementation effect on health 
 determinants and health status.
 ``(7) Plan.--A subgrantee under this subsection shall 
 develop and implement a plan, to be approved by the Secretary 
 (acting through the Director and in collaboration with the 
 Administrator) and the grantee, for meaningful and inclusive 
 stakeholder involvement in all phases of the health impact 
 assessment. Stakeholders may include community leaders, 
 community-based organizations, youth-serving organizations, 
 planners, public health experts, State and local public health 
 departments and officials, health care experts or officials, 
 housing experts or officials, and transportation experts or 
 officials.
 ``(8) Submission of findings.--A grantee under this 
 subsection shall submit the findings of any funded health 
 impact assessment activities to the Secretary and make these 
 findings publicly available.
 ``(9) Assessment of impacts.--A subgrantee under this 
 subsection shall ensure the assessment of the distribution of 
 health impacts (related to the proposed activity) across race, 
 ethnicity, income, age, gender, disability status, and 
 geography.
 ``(10) Conduct of assessment.--To the greatest extent 
 feasible, a health impact assessment shall be conducted under 
 this section in a manner that respects the needs and timing of 
 the decision-making process such assessment evaluates.
 ``(11) Methodology.--In preparing a health impact 
 assessment funded under this subsection, a subgrantee under 
 this subsection shall follow the guidance published under 
 subsection (c).
 ``(e) Health Impact Assessment Database.--The Secretary, acting 
through the Director and in collaboration with the Administrator, shall 
establish, maintain, and make publicly available a health impact 
assessment database, including--
 ``(1) a catalog of health impact assessments received under 
 this section;
 ``(2) an inventory of tools used by subgrantees to conduct 
 health impact assessments; and
 ``(3) guidance for subgrantees with respect to the 
 selection of appropriate tools described in paragraph (2).
 ``(f) Evaluation of Grantee Activities.--The Secretary shall award 
competitive grants to Prevention Research Centers, or nonprofit 
organizations or academic institutions with expertise in health impact 
assessments, to--
 ``(1) assist grantees and subgrantees with the provision of 
 training and technical assistance in the conducting of health 
 impact assessments;
 ``(2) evaluate the activities carried out with grants and 
 subgrants under subsection (d); and
 ``(3) assist the Secretary in disseminating evidence, best 
 practices, and lessons learned from grantees and subgrantees.
 ``(g) Report to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of the Health Equity and Accountability Act of 2024, the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report concerning the evaluation 
of the programs under this section, including recommendations as to how 
lessons learned from such programs can be incorporated into future 
guidance documents developed and provided by the Secretary and other 
Federal agencies, as appropriate.
 ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary.

``SEC. 399V-16. IMPLEMENTATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS TO IMPROVE HEALTH 
 OUTCOMES THROUGH THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT.

 ``(a) Research Grant Program.--The Secretary, in collaboration with 
the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (referred to 
in this section as the `Administrator'), shall award grants to public 
agencies or private nonprofit institutions to implement evidence-based 
programming to improve human health through improvements to the built 
environment and subsequently human health, by addressing--
 ``(1) levels of physical activity;
 ``(2) consumption of nutritional foods;
 ``(3) rates of crime;
 ``(4) air, water, and soil quality;
 ``(5) risk or rate of injury;
 ``(6) accessibility to health-promoting goods and services;
 ``(7) chronic disease rates;
 ``(8) community design;
 ``(9) housing;
 ``(10) transportation options; and
 ``(11) other factors as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(b) Applications.--A public agency or private nonprofit 
institution desiring a grant under this section shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Administrator, may require.
 ``(c) Research.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Administrator, shall support, through grants awarded under this 
section, research that--
 ``(1) uses evidence-based research to improve the built 
 environment and human health;
 ``(2) examines--
 ``(A) the scope and intensity of the impacts that 
 the built environment (including the various 
 characteristics of the built environment) has on human 
 health; or
 ``(B) the distribution of such impacts by--
 ``(i) location; and
 ``(ii) population subgroup;
 ``(3) is used to develop--
 ``(A) measures and indicators to address health 
 impacts and the connection of health to the built 
 environment;
 ``(B) efforts to link the measures to 
 transportation, land use, and health databases; and
 ``(C) efforts to enhance the collection of built 
 environment surveillance data;
 ``(4) distinguishes carefully between personal attitudes 
 and choices and external influences on behavior to determine 
 how much the association between the built environment and the 
 health of residents, versus the lifestyle preferences of the 
 people that choose to live in the neighborhood, reflects the 
 physical characteristics of the neighborhood; and
 ``(5)(A) identifies or develops effective intervention 
 strategies focusing on enhancements to the built environment 
 that promote increased use, physical activity, access to 
 nutritious foods, or other health-promoting activities by 
 residents; and
 ``(B) in developing the intervention strategies under 
 subparagraph (A), ensures that the intervention strategies will 
 reach out to high-risk or vulnerable populations, including 
 low-income urban and rural communities and aging populations, 
 in addition to the general population.
 ``(d) Surveys.--The Secretary may allow recipients of grants under 
this section to use such grant funds to support the expansion of 
national surveys and data tracking systems to provide more detailed 
information about the connection between the built environment and 
health.
 ``(e) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary and the Administrator shall give priority to entities with 
programming that incorporates--
 ``(1) interdisciplinary approaches; or
 ``(2) the expertise of the public health, physical 
 activity, urban planning, land use, and transportation research 
 communities in the United States and abroad.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section. 
The Secretary may allocate not more than 20 percent of the amount so 
appropriated for a fiscal year for purposes of conducting research 
under subsection (c).''.

SEC. 10003. GRANT PROGRAM TO CONDUCT ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH IMPROVEMENT 
 ACTIVITIES AND TO IMPROVE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, acting in 
 collaboration with the Administrator and the Director of the 
 National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
 (2) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means a 
 State, Indian Tribe, Tribal organization, or local community 
 that--
 (A) bears a disproportionate burden of exposure to 
 environmental health hazards;
 (B) bears a disproportionate burden of exposure to 
 unhealthy living conditions, low standard housing 
 conditions, low socioeconomic status, poor nutrition, 
 less opportunity for educational attainment, 
 disproportionately high unemployment rates, or lower 
 literacy levels and access to information;
 (C) has established a coalition--
 (i) with not less than 1 community-based 
 organization or demonstration program; and
 (ii) with not less than 1--
 (I) public health entity;
 (II) health care provider 
 organization;
 (III) academic institution, 
 including any minority-serving 
 institution described in section 371(a) 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1067q(a));
 (IV) child-serving institution; or
 (V) landlord or housing provider 
 working on lead remediation;
 (D) ensures planned activities and funding streams 
 are coordinated to improve community health; and
 (E) submits an application in accordance with 
 subsection (c).
 (b) Establishment.--The Director shall establish a grant program 
under which eligible entities shall receive grants to conduct 
environmental health improvement activities and to improve social 
determinants of health.
 (c) Application.--To receive a grant under this section, an 
eligible entity shall submit an application to the Director at such 
time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the 
Director may require.
 (d) Use of Grant Funds.--An eligible entity may use a grant under 
this section--
 (1) to promote environmental health;
 (2) to address environmental health inequities among all 
 populations, including children; and
 (3) to address racial and ethnic inequities in social 
 determinants of health.
 (e) Amount of Grants.--The Director shall award grants to eligible 
entities at the following 3 funding levels:
 (1) Level 1 grants.--
 (A) In general.--An eligible entity awarded a grant 
 under this paragraph shall use the funds to identify 
 environmental health problems and solutions by--
 (i) establishing a planning and 
 prioritizing council in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B); and
 (ii) conducting an environmental health 
 assessment in accordance with subparagraph (C).
 (B) Planning and prioritizing council.--
 (i) In general.--A planning and 
 prioritizing council established under 
 subparagraph (A)(i) (referred to in this 
 paragraph as a ``PPC'') shall assist the 
 environmental health assessment process and 
 environmental health promotion activities of 
 the eligible entity.
 (ii) Membership.--Membership of a PPC shall 
 consist of representatives from various 
 organizations within public health, planning, 
 development, and environmental services and 
 shall include stakeholders from vulnerable 
 groups such as children, the elderly, disabled, 
 and minority ethnic groups that are often not 
 actively involved in democratic or decision-
 making processes.
 (iii) Duties.--A PPC shall--
 (I) identify key stakeholders and 
 engage and coordinate potential 
 partners in the planning process;
 (II) establish a formal advisory 
 group to plan for the establishment of 
 services;
 (III) conduct an in-depth review of 
 the nature and extent of the need for 
 an environmental health assessment, 
 including a local epidemiological 
 profile, an evaluation of the service 
 provider capacity of the community, and 
 a profile of any target populations; 
 and
 (IV) define the components of care 
 and form essential programmatic 
 linkages with related providers in the 
 community.
 (C) Environmental health assessment.--
 (i) In general.--A PPC shall carry out an 
 environmental health assessment to identify 
 environmental health concerns.
 (ii) Assessment process.--The PPC shall--
 (I) define the goals of the 
 assessment;
 (II) generate the environmental 
 health issue list;
 (III) analyze issues with a systems 
 framework;
 (IV) develop appropriate community 
 environmental health indicators;
 (V) rank the environmental health 
 issues;
 (VI) set priorities for action;
 (VII) develop an action plan;
 (VIII) implement the plan; and
 (IX) evaluate progress and planning 
 for the future.
 (D) Evaluation.--Each eligible entity that receives 
 a grant under this paragraph shall evaluate, report, 
 and disseminate program findings and outcomes.
 (E) Technical assistance.--The Director may provide 
 such technical and other non-financial assistance to 
 eligible entities as the Director determines to be 
 necessary.
 (2) Level 2 grants.--
 (A) Eligibility.--
 (i) In general.--The Director shall award 
 grants under this paragraph to eligible 
 entities that have already--
 (I) established broad-based 
 collaborative partnerships; and
 (II) completed environmental 
 assessments.
 (ii) No level 1 requirement.--To be 
 eligible to receive a grant under this 
 paragraph, an eligible entity is not required 
 to have successfully completed a Level 1 grant 
 (as described in paragraph (1)).
 (B) Use of grant funds.--An eligible entity awarded 
 a grant under this paragraph shall use the funds to 
 further activities to carry out environmental health 
 improvement activities, including--
 (i) addressing community environmental 
 health priorities in accordance with paragraph 
 (1)(C)(ii), including--
 (I) geography;
 (II) the built environment;
 (III) air quality;
 (IV) water quality;
 (V) land use;
 (VI) solid waste;
 (VII) housing;
 (VIII) violence;
 (IX) socioeconomic status;
 (X) ethnicity, social construct, 
 and language preference;
 (XI) educational attainment;
 (XII) employment;
 (XIII) food safety, accessibility, 
 and affordability;
 (XIV) nutrition;
 (XV) health care services; and
 (XVI) injuries;
 (ii) building partnerships between 
 planning, public health, and other sectors, 
 including child-serving institutions, to 
 address how the built environment impacts food 
 availability and access and physical activity 
 to promote healthy behaviors and lifestyles and 
 reduce overweight and obesity, musculoskeletal 
 diseases, respiratory conditions, infectious 
 diseases, dental, oral, and mental health 
 conditions, poverty, and related co-
 morbidities;
 (iii) establishing programs to address--
 (I) how environmental and social 
 conditions of work and living choices 
 influence physical activity and dietary 
 intake; or
 (II) how the conditions described 
 in subclause (I) influence the concerns 
 and needs of people who have impaired 
 mobility and use assistance devices, 
 including wheelchairs, lower limb 
 prostheses, and hip, knee, and other 
 joint replacements; and
 (iv) convening intervention and 
 demonstration programs that examine the role of 
 the social environment in connection with the 
 physical and chemical environment in--
 (I) determining access to 
 nutritional food;
 (II) improving physical activity to 
 reduce overweight, obesity, and co-
 morbidities and increase quality of 
 life; and
 (III) location and access to 
 medical facilities.
 (3) Level 3 grants.--
 (A) In general.--An eligible entity awarded a grant 
 under this paragraph shall use the funds to identify 
 and address racial and ethnic inequities in social 
 determinants of health by creating demonstration 
 programs that assess the feasibility of establishing a 
 federally funded comprehensive program and describe key 
 outcomes that address racial and ethnic inequities in 
 social determinants of health.
 (B) Program design.--
 (i) Evaluation.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Director shall evaluate the best practices of 
 existing programs from the private, public, 
 community-based, and academically supported 
 initiatives focused on reducing inequities in 
 the social determinants of health for racial 
 and ethnic populations.
 (ii) Demonstration projects.--Not later 
 than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, the Director shall implement at least 
 12 demonstration projects, including at least 
 one project for each major racial and ethnic 
 minority group, each of which is unique to the 
 cultural and linguistic needs of each of the 
 following groups:
 (I) Native Americans and Alaska 
 Natives.
 (II) Asian Americans.
 (III) African Americans/Blacks.
 (IV) Hispanic/Latino-Americans.
 (V) Native Hawaiians and Pacific 
 Islanders.
 (VI) Middle Eastern and Northern 
 African communities.
 (iii) Report to congress.--No later than 2 
 years after the implementation of the initial 
 demonstration projects under this paragraph, 
 the Director shall submit to Congress a report 
 that includes--
 (I) a description of each 
 demonstration project and design;
 (II) an evaluation of the cost-
 effectiveness of each project's 
 prevention and treatment efforts;
 (III) an evaluation of the cultural 
 and linguistic appropriateness of each 
 project by racial and ethnic group; and
 (IV) an evaluation of the 
 beneficiary's health status improvement 
 under the demonstration project.
 (iv) Any other information determined 
 appropriate by the director.--The Director 
 shall require eligible entities awarded a grant 
 under this paragraph to report any other 
 information the Director determines appropriate 
 to be shared by or developed by such entity, 
 including the following:
 (I) Developing models and 
 evaluating methods that improve the 
 cultural and linguistically appropriate 
 services provided through the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention to 
 target individuals impacted by health 
 inequities based on their race, 
 ethnicity, gender, or sexual 
 orientation.
 (II) Promoting the collaboration 
 between primary and specialty care 
 health care providers and patients, to 
 ensure patients impacted by health 
 inequities based on race, ethnicity, 
 gender, or sexual orientation are 
 receiving comprehensive and organized 
 treatment and care.
 (III) Educating health care 
 professionals on the causes and effects 
 of inequities in the social 
 determinants of health in relation to 
 minority and racial and ethnic 
 communities and the need for culturally 
 and linguistically appropriate care in 
 the prevention and treatment of high-
 impact diseases.
 (IV) Encouraging collaboration 
 among community- and patient-based 
 organizations that work to address 
 inequities in the social determinants 
 of health in relation to high-impact 
 diseases in minority and racial and 
 ethnic populations.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section--
 (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2025; and
 (2) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2026 
 through 2028.

SEC. 10004. ADDITIONAL RESEARCH ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE BUILT 
 ENVIRONMENT AND THE HEALTH OF COMMUNITY RESIDENTS.

 (a) Definition of Eligible Institution.--In this section, the term 
``eligible institution'' means a public or private nonprofit 
institution that submits to the Secretary and the Administrator an 
application for a grant under the grant program authorized under 
subsection (b)(2) at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary and 
Administrator may require.
 (b) Research Grant Program.--
 (1) Definition of health.--In this section, the term 
 ``health'' includes--
 (A) levels of physical activity;
 (B) degree of mobility due to factors such as 
 musculoskeletal diseases, arthritis, and obesity;
 (C) consumption of nutritional foods;
 (D) rates of crime;
 (E) air, water, and soil quality;
 (F) risk of injury;
 (G) accessibility to health care services;
 (H) levels of educational attainment; and
 (I) other indicators as determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (2) Grants.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
 Administrator, shall provide grants to eligible institutions to 
 conduct and coordinate research on the built environment and 
 its influence on individual and population-based health.
 (3) Research.--The Secretary shall support research that--
 (A) investigates and defines the causal links 
 between all aspects of the built environment and the 
 health of residents;
 (B) examines--
 (i) the extent of the impact of the built 
 environment (including the various 
 characteristics of the built environment) on 
 the health of residents;
 (ii) the variation in the health of 
 residents by--
 (I) location (such as inner cities, 
 inner suburbs, outer suburbs, 
 reservations, and rural areas); and
 (II) population subgroup (including 
 children, young adults, the elderly, 
 the disadvantaged); or
 (iii) the importance of the built 
 environment to the total health of residents, 
 which is the primary variable of interest from 
 a public health perspective;
 (C) is used to develop--
 (i) measures to address health and the 
 connection of health to the built environment; 
 and
 (ii) efforts to link the measures to travel 
 and health databases;
 (D) distinguishes carefully between personal 
 attitudes and choices and external influences on 
 observed behavior to determine how much an observed 
 association between the built environment and the 
 health of residents, versus the lifestyle preferences 
 of the people that choose to live in the neighborhood, 
 reflects the physical characteristics of the 
 neighborhood; and
 (E)(i) identifies or develops effective 
 intervention strategies to promote better health among 
 residents with a focus on behavioral interventions and 
 enhancements of the built environment that promote 
 increased use by residents; and
 (ii) in developing the intervention strategies 
 under clause (i), ensures that the intervention 
 strategies will reach out to high-risk populations, 
 including racial and ethnic minorities, low-income 
 urban and rural communities, and children.
 (4) Priority.--In providing assistance under the grant 
 program authorized under paragraph (2), the Secretary and the 
 Administrator shall give priority to research that 
 incorporates--
 (A) minority-serving institutions as grantees;
 (B) interdisciplinary approaches; or
 (C) the expertise of the public health, physical 
 activity, nutrition and health care (including child 
 health), urban planning, and transportation research 
 communities in the United States and abroad.

SEC. 10005. ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC HEALTH RESTORATION.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the Federal 
Government to work in conjunction with States, territories, Tribal 
governments, international organizations, and foreign governments as a 
steward of the environment for the benefit of public health, to 
maintain air quality and water quality, to sustain the diversity of 
plant and animal species, to combat global climate change, and to 
protect the environment for future generations.
 (b) Study and Report on Public Health or Environmental Impact of 
Revised Rules, Regulations, Laws, or Other Agency Decisions.--
 (1) Study.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the President shall seek to enter into 
 an arrangement under which the National Academy of Sciences 
 shall conduct a study to determine the effects on public 
 health, air quality, water quality, wildlife, and the 
 environment of the following regulations, laws, and other 
 agency decisions:
 (A) Clean water.--
 (i) The final rule of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency and the Corps of Engineers 
 entitled ``Final Revisions to the Clean Water 
 Act Regulatory Definitions of `Fill Material' 
 and `Discharge of Fill Material''' and 
 published in the Federal Register on May 9, 
 2002 (67 Fed. Reg. 31129).
 (ii) The final rule of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency entitled ``National Pollutant 
 Discharge Elimination System Permit Regulation 
 for Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations: 
 Removal of Vacated Elements in Response to 2011 
 Court Decision'' and published in the Federal 
 Register on July 30, 2012 (77 Fed. Reg. 44494).
 (iii) The final rule of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency entitled ``Withdrawal of 
 Revisions to the Water Quality Planning and 
 Management Regulation and Revisions to the 
 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 Program in Support of Revisions to the Water 
 Quality Planning and Management Regulation'' 
 and published in the Federal Register on March 
 19, 2003 (68 Fed. Reg. 13608).
 (iv) The final rule of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency entitled ``Consolidated 
 Permit Regulations: RCRA Hazardous Waste; SDWA 
 Underground Injection Control; CWA National 
 Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; CWA 
 Section 404 Dredge or Fill Programs; and CAA 
 Prevention of Significant Deterioration'' and 
 published in the Federal Register on May 19, 
 1980 (45 Fed. Reg. 33290), with respect to the 
 definition of the ``waters of the United 
 States''.
 (v) The final rule of the Corps of 
 Engineers and the Environmental Protection 
 Agency entitled ``Definition of `Waters of the 
 United States'--Recodification of Pre-Existing 
 Rules'' and published in the Federal Register 
 on October 22, 2019 (84 Fed. Reg. 56626).
 (vi) The final rule of the Corps of 
 Engineers and the Environmental Protection 
 Agency entitled ``The Navigable Waters 
 Protection Rule: Definition of `Waters of the 
 United States''' and published in the Federal 
 Register on April 21, 2020 (85 Fed. Reg. 
 22250).
 (B) Forests and land management.--
 (i) The Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 
 2003 (16 U.S.C. 6501 et seq.).
 (ii) The application of section 553(e) of 
 title 5, United States Code, such that a State 
 may petition for a special rule for the 
 inventoried roadless areas within National 
 Forest System land within the State.
 (iii) The final rules of the Forest Service 
 entitled ``National Forest System Land 
 Management Planning'' (77 Fed. Reg. 21162), 
 ``National Forest System Land Management 
 Planning; Correction'' (78 Fed. Reg. 23491), 
 and ``National Forest System Land Management 
 Planning'' (81 Fed. Reg. 90723), published on 
 April 9, 2012, April 19, 2013, and December 15, 
 2016, respectively.
 (iv) The final rule of the Bureau of Land 
 Management entitled ``Oil Shale Management--
 General'' and published on November 18, 2008 
 (73 Fed. Reg. 69414). 
 (v) The record of decision described in the 
 notice of availability of the Bureau of Land 
 Management entitled ``Notice of Availability of 
 Approved Land Use Plan Amendments/Record of 
 Decision for Allocation of Oil Shale and Tar 
 Sands Resources on Lands Administered by the 
 Bureau of Land Management in Colorado, Utah, 
 and Wyoming and Final Programmatic 
 Environmental Impact Statement'' and published 
 on April 1, 2013 (78 Fed. Reg. 19518).
 (C) Scientific review.--The final rule of the 
 United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the 
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
 entitled ``Interagency Cooperation Under the Endangered 
 Species Act'' and published on December 16, 2008 (73 
 Fed. Reg. 76272), as amended by the final rule of the 
 United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the 
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
 entitled ``Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and 
 Plants; Regulations for Interagency Cooperation'' and 
 published on August 27, 2019 (84 Fed. Reg. 44976).
 (2) Method.--In conducting the study under paragraph (1), 
 the National Academy of Sciences may use and compare existing 
 scientific studies regarding the regulations, laws, and other 
 agency decisions described in paragraph (1).
 (3) Report.--Not later than 270 days after the date on 
 which the President enters into the arrangement under paragraph 
 (1), the National Academy of Sciences shall make publicly 
 available and shall submit to Congress and to the head of each 
 department and agency of the Federal Government that issued, 
 implements, or would implement a regulation, law, or other 
 agency decision described in paragraph (1), a report that 
 includes--
 (A) a description of the effects of each 
 regulation, law, or other agency decision described in 
 paragraph (1) on public health, air quality, water 
 quality, wildlife, and the environment, compared to the 
 impact of preexisting regulations, laws, or other 
 agency decisions in effect, as applicable, including--
 (i) any negative impacts to air quality or 
 water quality;
 (ii) any negative impacts to wildlife;
 (iii) any delays in hazardous waste cleanup 
 that are projected to be hazardous to public 
 health; and
 (iv) any other negative impact on public 
 health or the environment; and
 (B) any recommendations that the National Academy 
 of Sciences considers appropriate to maintain, restore, 
 or improve in whole or in part protections for public 
 health, air quality, water quality, wildlife, and the 
 environment for each of the regulations, laws, and 
 other agency decisions described in paragraph (1), 
 which may include recommendations for the adoption of 
 any regulation or law in place or proposed prior to 
 January 1, 2001.
 (c) Department and Agency Revision of Existing Rules, Regulations, 
or Laws.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which the report is 
submitted pursuant to subsection (b)(3), the head of each department or 
agency that has issued or implemented a regulation, law, or other 
agency decision described in subsection (b)(1) shall submit to Congress 
a plan describing the steps the department or agency will take, or has 
taken, to restore or improve protections for public health and the 
environment in whole or in part that were in existence prior to the 
issuance of the applicable regulation, law, or other agency decision.

SEC. 10006. GAO REPORT ON HEALTH EFFECTS OF DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL RIG 
 EXPLOSION IN THE GULF COAST.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on the type and scope of health care services 
administered through the Department of Health and Human Services 
addressing the provision of health care to racial and ethnic 
minorities, including residents, cleanup workers, and volunteers, 
affected by the blowout and explosion of the mobile offshore drilling 
unit Deepwater Horizon that occurred on April 20, 2010, and resulting 
hydrocarbon releases into the environment.
 (b) Specific Components.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall--
 (1) assess the type, size, and scope of programs 
 administered by the Secretary that focus on the provision of 
 health care to communities on the Gulf Coast;
 (2) identify the merits and disadvantages associated with 
 each of the programs;
 (3) perform an analysis of the costs and benefits of the 
 programs; and
 (4) determine whether there is any duplication of programs.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
Congress a report that includes--
 (1) the findings of the study conducted under subsection 
 (a); and
 (2) recommendations for improving access to health care for 
 racial and ethnic minorities.

SEC. 10007. ESTABLISH AN INTERAGENCY COUNCIL AND GRANT PROGRAMS ON 
 SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH.

 (a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are as follows:
 (1) To establish effective, coordinated Federal technical 
 assistance to help State and local governments to improve 
 outcomes and cost-effectiveness of, and return on investment 
 from, health and social services programs.
 (2) To build a pipeline of State and locally designed, 
 cross-sector interventions and strategies that generate 
 rigorous evidence about how to improve health and social 
 outcomes, and increase the cost-effectiveness of, and return on 
 investment from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal health and 
 social services programs.
 (3) To enlist State and local governments and the service 
 providers of such governments as partners in identifying 
 Federal statutory, regulatory, and administrative challenges in 
 improving the health and social outcomes of, cost-effectiveness 
 of, and return on investment from, Federal spending on 
 individuals enrolled in Medicaid.
 (4) To develop strategies to improve health and social 
 outcomes without denying services to, or restricting the 
 eligibility of, vulnerable populations.
 (b) Social Determinants Accelerator Council.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Administrator''), shall 
 establish an interagency council, to be known as the Social 
 Determinants Accelerator Interagency Council (referred to in 
 this section as the ``Council'') to achieve the purposes listed 
 in subsection (a).
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) Federal composition.--The Council shall be 
 composed of at least one designee from each of the 
 following Federal agencies:
 (i) The Office of Management and Budget.
 (ii) The Department of Agriculture.
 (iii) The Department of Education.
 (iv) The Indian Health Service.
 (v) The Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development.
 (vi) The Department of Labor.
 (vii) The Department of Transportation.
 (viii) Any other Federal agency the Chair 
 of the Council determines necessary.
 (B) Designation.--
 (i) In general.--The head of each agency 
 specified in subparagraph (A) shall designate 
 at least one employee described in clause (ii) 
 to serve as a member of the Council.
 (ii) Responsibilities.--An employee 
 described in this clause shall be a senior 
 employee of the agency--
 (I) whose responsibilities relate 
 to authorities, policies, and 
 procedures with respect to the health 
 and well-being of individuals receiving 
 medical assistance under a State plan 
 (or a waiver of such plan) under title 
 XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); or
 (II) who has authority to implement 
 and evaluate transformative initiatives 
 that harness data or conduct rigorous 
 evaluation to improve the impact and 
 cost-effectiveness of federally funded 
 services and benefits.
 (C) HHS representation.--In addition to the 
 designees under subparagraph (A), the Council shall 
 include designees from at least 3 agencies within the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, including the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, at least one 
 of whom shall meet the criteria under subparagraph 
 (B)(ii).
 (D) OMB role.--The Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget shall facilitate the timely 
 resolution of Federal Government-wide and multiagency 
 issues to help the Council achieve consensus 
 recommendations described under this section.
 (E) Non-federal composition.--The Comptroller 
 General of the United States may designate up to 6 
 Council designees--
 (i) who have relevant subject matter 
 expertise, including expertise implementing and 
 evaluating transformative initiatives that 
 harness data and conduct evaluations to improve 
 the impact and cost-effectiveness of Federal 
 Government services; and
 (ii) that each represent--
 (I) State, local, and Tribal health 
 and human services agencies;
 (II) public housing authorities or 
 State housing finance agencies;
 (III) State and local government 
 budget offices;
 (IV) State Medicaid agencies; or
 (V) national consumer advocacy 
 organizations.
 (F) Chair.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall select 
 the Chair of the Council from among the members 
 of the Council.
 (ii) Initiating guidance.--The Chair, on 
 behalf of the Council, shall identify and 
 invite individuals from diverse entities to 
 provide the Council with advice and information 
 pertaining to addressing social determinants of 
 health, including--
 (I) individuals from State and 
 local government health and human 
 services agencies;
 (II) individuals from State 
 Medicaid agencies;
 (III) individuals from State and 
 local government budget offices;
 (IV) individuals from public 
 housing authorities or State housing 
 finance agencies;
 (V) individuals from nonprofit 
 organizations, small businesses, and 
 philanthropic organizations;
 (VI) advocates;
 (VII) researchers; and
 (VIII) any other individuals the 
 Chair determines to be appropriate.
 (3) Duties.--The duties of the Council are--
 (A) to make recommendations to the Secretary and 
 the Administrator regarding the criteria for making 
 awards under this section;
 (B) to identify Federal authorities and 
 opportunities for use by States or local governments to 
 improve coordination of funding and administration of 
 Federal programs, the beneficiaries of whom include 
 individuals, and which may be unknown or underutilized, 
 and to make information on such authorities and 
 opportunities publicly available;
 (C) to provide targeted technical assistance to 
 States developing a social determinants accelerator 
 plan under this section, including identifying 
 potential statutory or regulatory pathways for 
 implementation of the plan and assisting in identifying 
 potential sources of funding to implement the plan;
 (D) to report to Congress annually on the subjects 
 set forth in this section;
 (E) to develop and disseminate evaluation 
 guidelines and standards that can be used to reliably 
 assess the impact of an intervention or approach that 
 may be implemented pursuant to this section on outcomes 
 and cost-effectiveness of, and return on investment 
 from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments, 
 and to facilitate technical assistance, where needed, 
 to help to improve State and local evaluation designs 
 and implementation;
 (F) to seek feedback from State, local, and Tribal 
 governments, including through an annual survey by an 
 independent third party, on how to improve the 
 technical assistance the Council provides to better 
 equip State, local, and Tribal governments to 
 coordinate health and social service programs;
 (G) to solicit applications for grants under 
 subsection (c); and
 (H) to coordinate with other cross-agency 
 initiatives focused on improving the health and well-
 being of low-income and at-risk populations in order to 
 prevent unnecessary duplication between agency 
 initiatives.
 (4) Schedule.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Council shall convene to develop a 
 schedule and plan for carrying out the duties described in this 
 section, including solicitation of applications for the grants 
 under this section.
 (5) Report to congress.--The Council shall submit an annual 
 report to Congress, which shall include--
 (A) a list of the Council members;
 (B) activities and expenditures of the Council;
 (C) summaries of the interventions and approaches 
 that will be supported by State, local, and Tribal 
 governments that received a grant under this section, 
 including--
 (i) the best practices and evidence-based 
 approaches such governments plan to employ to 
 achieve the purposes listed in this section; 
 and
 (ii) a description of how the practices and 
 approaches will impact the outcomes and cost-
 effectiveness of, and return on investment 
 from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal 
 governments with respect to such purposes;
 (D) the feedback received from State and local 
 governments on ways to improve the technical assistance 
 of the Council, including findings from a third-party 
 survey and actions the Council plans to take in 
 response to such feedback; and
 (E) the major statutory, regulatory, and 
 administrative challenges identified by State, local, 
 and Tribal governments that received a grant under 
 subsection (c), and the actions that Federal agencies 
 are taking to address such challenges.
 (6) FACA inapplicability.--Chapter 10 of title 5, United 
 States Code, shall not apply to the Council.
 (7) Council procedures.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Comptroller General of the United States and the 
 Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall 
 establish procedures for the Council to--
 (A) ensure that adequate resources are available to 
 effectively execute the responsibilities of the 
 Council;
 (B) effectively coordinate with other relevant 
 advisory bodies and working groups to avoid unnecessary 
 duplication;
 (C) create transparency to the public and Congress 
 with regard to Council membership, costs, and 
 activities, including through use of modern technology 
 and social media to disseminate information; and
 (D) avoid conflicts of interest that would 
 jeopardize the ability of the Council to make decisions 
 and provide recommendations.
 (c) Social Determinants Accelerator Grants to States or Local 
Governments.--
 (1) Grants to states, local governments, and tribes.--Not 
 later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary and the 
 Council, shall award on a competitive basis not more than 25 
 grants to eligible applicants described in this subsection, for 
 the development of social determinants accelerator plans, as 
 described in this subsection.
 (2) Eligible applicant.--An eligible applicant described in 
 this subsection is a State, local, or Tribal health or human 
 services agency that--
 (A) demonstrates the support of relevant parties 
 across relevant State, local, or Tribal jurisdictions; 
 and
 (B) in the case of an applicant that is a local 
 government agency, provides to the Secretary a letter 
 of support from the lead State health or human services 
 agency for the State in which the local government is 
 located.
 (3) Amount of grant.--The Administrator, in coordination 
 with the Council, shall determine the total amount that the 
 Administrator will make available to each grantee under this 
 subsection.
 (4) Application.--An eligible applicant seeking a grant 
 under this subsection shall include in the application the 
 following information:
 (A) The target population (or populations) that 
 would benefit from implementation of the social 
 determinants accelerator plan proposed to be developed 
 by the applicant.
 (B) A description of the objective or objectives 
 and outcome goals of such proposed plan, which shall 
 include at least one health outcome and at least one 
 other important social outcome.
 (C) The sources and scope of inefficiencies that, 
 if addressed by the plan, could result in improved 
 cost-effectiveness of or return on investment from 
 Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments.
 (D) A description of potential interventions that 
 could be designed or enabled using such proposed plan.
 (E) The State, local, and Tribal governments, 
 academic institutions, nonprofit organizations, 
 community-based organizations, and other public and 
 private sector partners that would participate in the 
 development of the proposed plan and subsequent 
 implementation of programs or initiatives included in 
 such proposed plan.
 (F) Such other information as the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Secretary and the Council, 
 determines necessary to achieve the purposes of this 
 section.
 (5) Use of funds.--A recipient of a grant under this 
 subsection may use funds received through the grant for the 
 following purposes:
 (A) To convene and coordinate with relevant 
 government entities and other stakeholders across 
 sectors to assist in the development of a social 
 determinant accelerator plan.
 (B) To identify populations of individuals 
 receiving medical assistance under a State plan (or a 
 waiver of such plan) under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) who may benefit 
 from the proposed approaches to improving the health 
 and well-being of such individuals through the 
 implementation of the proposed social determinants 
 accelerator plan.
 (C) To engage qualified research experts to advise 
 on relevant research and to design a proposed 
 evaluation plan, in accordance with the standards and 
 guidelines issued by the Administrator.
 (D) To collaborate with the Council to support the 
 development of social determinants accelerator plans.
 (E) To prepare and submit a final social 
 determinants accelerator plan to the Council.
 (6) Contents of plans.--A social determinant accelerator 
 plan developed under this subsection shall include the 
 following:
 (A) A description of the target population (or 
 populations) that would benefit from implementation of 
 the social determinants accelerator plan, including an 
 analysis describing the projected impact on the well-
 being of individuals described in paragraph (5)(B).
 (B) A description of the interventions or 
 approaches designed under the social determinants 
 accelerator plan and the evidence for selecting such 
 interventions or approaches.
 (C) The objectives and outcome goals of such 
 interventions or approaches, including at least one 
 health outcome and at least one other important social 
 outcome.
 (D) A plan for accessing and linking relevant data 
 to enable coordinated benefits and services for the 
 jurisdictions described in this section and an 
 evaluation of the proposed interventions and 
 approaches.
 (E) A description of the State, local, and Tribal 
 governments, academic institutions, nonprofit 
 organizations, or any other public or private sector 
 organizations that would participate in implementing 
 the proposed interventions or approaches, and the role 
 each would play to contribute to the success of the 
 proposed interventions or approaches.
 (F) The identification of the funding sources that 
 would be used to finance the proposed interventions or 
 approaches.
 (G) A description of any financial incentives that 
 may be provided, including outcome-focused contracting 
 approaches to encourage service providers and other 
 partners to improve outcomes of, cost-effectiveness of, 
 and return on investment from, Federal, State, local, 
 or Tribal government spending.
 (H) The identification of the applicable Federal, 
 State, local, or Tribal statutory and regulatory 
 authorities, including waiver authorities, to be 
 leveraged to implement the proposed interventions or 
 approaches.
 (I) A description of potential considerations that 
 would enhance the impact, scalability, or 
 sustainability of the proposed interventions or 
 approaches and the actions the grant awardee would take 
 to address such considerations.
 (J) A proposed evaluation plan, to be carried out 
 by an independent evaluator, to measure the impact of 
 the proposed interventions or approaches on the 
 outcomes of, cost-effectiveness of, and return on 
 investment from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal 
 governments.
 (K) Precautions for ensuring that vulnerable 
 populations will not be denied access to Medicaid or 
 other essential services as a result of implementing 
 the proposed plan.
 (d) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--Out of any money in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to carry out this 
 section $25,000,000, to remain available for obligation until 
 the date that is 5 years after the date of enactment of this 
 section.
 (2) Reservation of funds.--
 (A) In general.--Of the funds made available under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reserve not less 
 than 20 percent to award grants to eligible applicants 
 for the development of social determinants accelerator 
 plans under this section intended to serve rural 
 populations.
 (B) Exception.--In the case of a fiscal year for 
 which the Secretary determines that there are not 
 sufficient eligible applicants to award up to 25 grants 
 under subsection (c) that are intended to serve rural 
 populations and the Secretary cannot satisfy the 20-
 percent requirement, the Secretary may reserve an 
 amount that is less than 20 percent of amounts made 
 available under paragraph (1) to award grants for such 
 purpose.
 (3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 prevent Federal agencies represented on the Council from 
 contributing additional funding from other sources to support 
 activities to improve the effectiveness of the Council.

SEC. 10008. CORRECTING HURTFUL AND ALIENATING NAMES IN GOVERNMENT 
 EXPRESSION (CHANGE).

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Correcting 
Hurtful and Alienating Names in Government Expression Act'' or the 
``CHANGE Act''.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Employee.--The term ``employee'' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 2105 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 105 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (3) Officer.--The term ``officer'' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 2104 of title 5, United States Code.
 (4) Prohibited term.--The term ``prohibited term'' means--
 (A) the term ``alien'', when used to refer to an 
 individual who is not a citizen or national of the 
 United States; and
 (B) the term ``illegal alien'', when used to refer 
 to an individual who--
 (i) is unlawfully present in the United 
 States; or
 (ii) lacks a lawful immigration status in 
 the United States.
 (c) Modernization of Language Referring to Individuals Who Are Not 
Citizens or Nationals of the United States.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), on 
 and after the date of enactment of this Act, an Executive 
 agency may not use a prohibited term in any proposed or final 
 rule, regulation, interpretation, publication, other document, 
 display, or sign issued by the Executive agency.
 (2) Exception.--An Executive agency may use a prohibited 
 term under paragraph (1) if the Executive agency uses the 
 prohibited term while quoting or reproducing text written by a 
 source that is not an officer or employee of the Executive 
 agency.
 (d) Uniform Definition.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 1 of title 1, United States Code, 
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 9. Definition of `foreign national'
 ``In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress or any ruling, 
regulation, or interpretation of an administrative bureau or agency of 
the United States, the term `foreign national' means any individual who 
is not an individual who--
 ``(1) is a citizen of the United States; or
 ``(2) though not a citizen of the United States, owes 
 permanent allegiance to the United States.''.
 (2) Technical amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 
 1 of title 1, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:

``9. Definition of `foreign national'.''.
 (e) References.--Any reference in any Federal statute, rule, 
regulation, Executive order, publication, or other document of the 
United States--
 (1) to the term ``alien'', when used to refer to an 
 individual who is not a citizen or national of the United 
 States, is deemed to refer to the term ``foreign national''; 
 and
 (2) to the term ``illegal alien'' is deemed to refer to the 
 term ``undocumented foreign national'', when used to refer to 
 an individual who--
 (A) is unlawfully present in the United States; or
 (B) lacks a lawful immigration status in the United 
 States.

SEC. 10009. ANDREW KEARSE ACCOUNTABILITY FOR DENIAL OF MEDICAL CARE.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 13 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 251. Medical attention for individuals in Federal custody 
 displaying medical distress
 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section--
 ``(1) the term `appropriate Inspector General', with 
 respect to a covered official, means--
 ``(A) the Inspector General of the Federal agency 
 that employs the covered official; or
 ``(B) in the case of a covered official employed by 
 a Federal agency that does not have an Inspector 
 General, the Inspector General of the Department of 
 Justice;
 ``(2) the term `covered official' means--
 ``(A) a Federal law enforcement officer (as defined 
 in section 115);
 ``(B) an officer or employee of the Bureau of 
 Prisons; or
 ``(C) an officer or employee of the United States 
 Marshals Service; and
 ``(3) the term `medical distress' includes breathing 
 difficulties.
 ``(b) Requirement.--
 ``(1) Offense.--It shall be unlawful for a covered official 
 to negligently fail to obtain or provide immediate medical 
 attention to an individual in Federal custody who displays 
 medical distress in the presence of the covered official if the 
 individual suffers unnecessary pain, injury, or death as a 
 result of that failure.
 ``(2) Penalty.--A covered official who violates paragraph 
 (1) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned for not more 
 than 1 year, or both.
 ``(3) State civil enforcement.--Whenever an attorney 
 general of a State has reasonable cause to believe that a 
 resident of the State has been aggrieved by a violation of 
 paragraph (1) by a covered official, the attorney general, or 
 another official, agency, or entity designated by the State, 
 may bring a civil action in any appropriate district court of 
 the United States to obtain appropriate equitable and 
 declaratory relief.
 ``(c) Inspector General Investigation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The appropriate Inspector General shall 
 investigate any instance in which--
 ``(A) a covered official fails to obtain or provide 
 immediate medical attention to an individual in Federal 
 custody who displays medical distress in the presence 
 of the covered official; and
 ``(B) the individual suffers unnecessary pain, 
 injury, or death as a result of the failure to obtain 
 or provide immediate medical attention.
 ``(2) Referral for prosecution.--If an appropriate 
 Inspector General, in conducting an investigation under 
 paragraph (1), concludes that the covered official acted 
 negligently in failing to obtain or provide immediate medical 
 attention to the individual in Federal custody, the appropriate 
 Inspector General shall refer the case to the Attorney General 
 for prosecution under this section.
 ``(3) Confidential complaint process.--The Inspector 
 General of a Federal agency that employs covered officials 
 shall establish a process under which an individual may 
 confidentially submit a complaint to the Inspector General 
 regarding an incident described in paragraph (1) involving a 
 covered official employed by the Federal agency (or, in the 
 case of the Inspector General of the Department of Justice, 
 involving a covered official employed by a Federal agency that 
 does not have an Inspector General).
 ``(d) Training.--The head of an agency that employs covered 
officials shall provide training to each such covered official on 
obtaining or providing medical assistance to individuals in medical 
distress.''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for 
chapter 13 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``251. Medical attention for individuals in Federal custody displaying 
 medical distress.''.

SEC. 10010. INVESTING IN COMMUNITY HEALING.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that it is 
imperative that a comprehensive public health approach to addressing 
trauma and mental health care be focused on care delivery that is 
culturally sensitive and competent.
 (b) Research on Adverse Health Effects Associated With Interactions 
With Law Enforcement.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
 of the Office of Minority Health of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention (established pursuant to section 1707A 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6a)), shall 
 conduct research on the adverse health effects associated with 
 interactions with law enforcement.
 (2) Effects among racial and ethnic minorities.--The 
 research under paragraph (1) shall include research on--
 (A) the health consequences, both individual and 
 community-wide, of trauma related to violence committed 
 by law enforcement among racial and ethnic minorities; 
 and
 (B) the disproportionate burden of morbidity and 
 mortality associated with such trauma.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (A) complete the research under this subsection; 
 and
 (B) submit to Congress a report on the findings, 
 conclusions, and recommendations resulting from such 
 research.
 (c) Grants for Increasing Racial and Ethnic Minority Access to 
High-Quality Trauma Support Services and Mental Health Care.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, shall 
 award grants to eligible entities to establish or expand 
 programs for the purpose of increasing racial and ethnic 
 minority access to high-quality trauma support services and 
 mental health care.
 (2) Eligible entities.--To seek a grant under this 
 subsection, an entity shall be a community-based program or 
 organization that--
 (A) provides culturally competent programs and 
 resources that are aligned with evidence-based 
 practices for trauma-informed care; and
 (B) has demonstrated expertise in serving 
 communities of color or can partner with a program that 
 has such demonstrated expertise.
 (3) Use of funds.--As a condition on receipt of a grant 
 under this subsection, a grantee shall agree to use the grant 
 to increase racial and ethnic minority access to high-quality 
 trauma support services and mental health care, such as by--
 (A) establishing and maintaining community-based 
 programs providing evidence-based services in trauma-
 informed care and culturally specific services and 
 other resources;
 (B) developing innovative culturally specific 
 strategies and projects to enhance access to trauma-
 informed care and resources for racial and ethnic 
 minorities who face obstacles to using more traditional 
 services and resources (such as obstacles in geographic 
 access to providers, insurance coverage, and access to 
 audio and video technologies);
 (C) working with State and local governments and 
 social service agencies to develop and enhance 
 effective strategies to provide culturally specific 
 services to racial and ethnic minorities;
 (D) increasing communities' capacity to provide 
 culturally specific resources and support for 
 communities of color;
 (E) working in cooperation with the community to 
 develop education and prevention strategies 
 highlighting culturally specific issues and resources 
 regarding racial and ethnic minorities;
 (F) providing culturally specific programs for 
 racial and ethnic minorities exposed to law enforcement 
 violence; and
 (G) examining the dynamics of culture and its 
 impact on victimization and healing.
 (4) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities 
 proposing to serve communities that have faced high rates of 
 community trauma, including from exposure to law enforcement 
 violence, intergenerational poverty, civil unrest, 
 discrimination, or oppression.
 (5) Grant period.--The period of a grant under this 
 subsection shall be 4 years.
 (6) Evaluation.--Not later than 6 months after the end of 
 the period of all grants under this subsection, the Secretary 
 shall--
 (A) conduct an evaluation of the programs funded by 
 a grant under this subsection;
 (B) include in such evaluation an assessment of the 
 outcomes of each such program; and
 (C) submit a report on the results of such 
 evaluation to Congress.
 (7) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 subsection, there is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 
 for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029.
 (d) Behavioral and Mental Health Outreach Education Strategy.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in coordination with 
 advocacy and behavioral and mental health organizations serving 
 racial and ethnic minority groups, shall develop and implement 
 an outreach and education strategy to promote behavioral and 
 mental health, and reduce stigma associated with mental health 
 conditions, among racial and ethnic minorities.
 (2) Design.--The strategy under this subsection shall be 
 designed to--
 (A) meet the diverse cultural and language needs of 
 racial and ethnic minority groups;
 (B) provide information on evidence-based, 
 culturally and linguistically appropriate and adapted 
 interventions and treatments;
 (C) increase awareness of symptoms of mental 
 illness among racial and ethnic minority groups; and
 (D) ensure full participation of, and engage, both 
 consumers and community members in the development and 
 implementation of materials.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress, 
 and make publicly available, a report detailing the outreach 
 and education strategy that is developed and implemented under 
 this subsection and the results of such implementation.

SEC. 10011. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE MAPPING AND DATA COLLECTION.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Advisory council.--The term ``advisory council'' means 
 the advisory council established under subsection (b)(4)(B)(i).
 (2) Committee.--The term ``Committee'' means the 
 Environmental Justice Mapping Committee established by 
 subsection (b)(1).
 (3) Environmental justice.--The term ``environmental 
 justice'' means the fair treatment and meaningful involvement 
 of all people regardless of race, color, culture, national 
 origin, or income, with respect to the development, 
 implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, 
 regulations, and policies to ensure that each person enjoys--
 (A) the same degree of protection from 
 environmental and health hazards; and
 (B) equal access to any Federal agency action 
 relating to the development, implementation, and 
 enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and 
 policies for the purpose of having a healthy 
 environment in which to live, learn, work, and 
 recreate.
 (4) Environmental justice community.--The term 
 ``environmental justice community'' means a community with 
 significant representation of communities of color, low-income 
 communities, or Tribal and indigenous communities, that 
 experiences, or is at risk of experiencing, higher or more 
 adverse human health or environmental effects, as compared to 
 other communities.
 (5) Ground-truthing.--The term ``ground-truthing'' means a 
 community fact-finding process by which residents of a 
 community supplement technical information with local knowledge 
 for the purpose of better informing policy and project 
 decisions.
 (6) Relevant stakeholder.--The term ``relevant 
 stakeholder'' means--
 (A) a representative of a regional, State, Tribal, 
 or local government agency;
 (B) a representative of a nongovernmental 
 organization with experience in areas that may include 
 Tribal relations, environmental conservation, city and 
 regional planning, and public health;
 (C) a representative of a labor union;
 (D) a representative or member of--
 (i) an environmental justice community; or
 (ii) a community-based organization for an 
 environmental justice community;
 (E) an individual with expertise in cumulative 
 impacts, geospatial data, and environmental justice, 
 particularly such an individual from an academic or 
 research institution; and
 (F) an advocate with experience in environmental 
 justice who represents an environmental justice 
 community.
 (b) Establishment of Committee.--
 (1) In general.--There is established a committee, to be 
 known as the ``Environmental Justice Mapping Committee''.
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) In general.--The Committee shall be composed of 
 not fewer than 1 representative of each of the 
 following:
 (i) Of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency--
 (I) the Office of Air and 
 Radiation;
 (II) the Office of Chemical Safety 
 and Pollution Prevention;
 (III) the Office of International 
 and Tribal Affairs;
 (IV) the Office of Land and 
 Emergency Management;
 (V) the Office of Water;
 (VI) the Office of Environmental 
 Justice and External Civil Rights;
 (VII) the Office of Research and 
 Development; and
 (VIII) the Office of Public 
 Engagement and Environmental Education.
 (ii) The Council on Environmental Quality.
 (iii) Of the Department of Commerce--
 (I) the Office of Oceanic and 
 Atmospheric Research of the National 
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
 including not fewer than 1 
 representative of the Climate Program 
 Office;
 (II) the Bureau of Economic 
 Analysis; and
 (III) the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology.
 (iv) Of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services--
 (I) the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention, not including the 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
 Registry;
 (II) the Agency for Toxic 
 Substances and Disease Registry;
 (III) the Administration for 
 Children and Families;
 (IV) of the National Institutes of 
 Health--
 (aa) the National Institute 
 of Environmental Health 
 Sciences;
 (bb) the National Institute 
 of Mental Health; and
 (cc) the National Institute 
 on Minority Health and Health 
 Disparities; and
 (V) the Office for Civil Rights.
 (v) Of the Department of the Interior--
 (I) the Bureau of Indian Affairs;
 (II) the Office of Diversity, 
 Inclusion, and Civil Rights; and
 (III) the United States Geological 
 Survey.
 (vi) The Forest Service.
 (vii) The Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development.
 (viii) The Department of Energy.
 (ix) The Department of Transportation.
 (x) The Department of Justice.
 (xi) The Federal Energy Regulatory 
 Commission.
 (xii) The Department of the Treasury.
 (xiii) Such other Federal departments, 
 agencies, and offices as the Administrator 
 determines to be appropriate, particularly 
 offices relating to public engagement.
 (B) Selection of representatives.--The head of a 
 department or agency described in subparagraph (A) 
 shall, in appointing to the Committee a representative 
 of the department or agency, select a representative--
 (i) of a component of the department or 
 agency that is among the components that are 
 the most relevant to the responsibilities of 
 the Committee; or
 (ii) who has expertise in areas relevant to 
 those responsibilities, such as demographic 
 indicators relating to socioeconomic hardship, 
 environmental justice, public engagement, 
 public health, exposure to pollution, future 
 climate and extreme weather mapping, affordable 
 energy, sustainable transportation, and access 
 to water, food, and green space.
 (C) Co-chairs.--
 (i) In general.--The members of the 
 Committee shall select 3 members to serve as 
 co-chairs of the Committee--
 (I) 1 of whom shall be a 
 representative of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency;
 (II) 1 of whom shall be a 
 representative of the Council on 
 Environmental Quality; and
 (III) 1 of whom shall have 
 substantial experience in public 
 engagement.
 (ii) Terms.--Each co-chair shall serve for 
 a term of not more than 3 years.
 (iii) Responsibilities of co-chairs.--The 
 co-chairs of the Committee shall--
 (I) determine the agenda of the 
 Committee, in consultation with other 
 members of the Committee;
 (II) direct the work of the 
 Committee, including the oversight of a 
 meaningful public engagement process; 
 and
 (III) convene meetings of the 
 Committee not less frequently than once 
 each fiscal quarter.
 (3) Administrative support.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall provide 
 technical and administrative support to the Committee.
 (B) Funding.--The Administrator may carry out 
 subparagraph (A) using, in addition to any amounts made 
 available under subsection (e), amounts authorized to 
 be appropriated to the Administrator before the date of 
 enactment of this Act and available for obligation as 
 of that date of enactment.
 (4) Consultation.--
 (A) In general.--In carrying out the duties of the 
 Committee, the Committee shall consult with relevant 
 stakeholders.
 (B) Advisory council.--
 (i) In general.--The Committee shall 
 establish an advisory council composed of a 
 balanced proportion of relevant stakeholders, 
 at least \1/2\ of whom shall represent 
 environmental justice communities.
 (ii) Chair.--The advisory council shall be 
 chaired by an environmental justice advocate or 
 other relevant stakeholder with substantial 
 experience in environmental justice.
 (iii) Requirements.--Consultation described 
 in subparagraph (A) shall include--
 (I) early and regular engagement 
 with the advisory council, including in 
 carrying out public engagement under 
 subparagraph (C); and
 (II) consideration of the 
 recommendations of the advisory 
 council.
 (iv) Recommendations not used.--If the 
 Committee does not use a recommendation of the 
 advisory council, not later than 60 days after 
 the date on which the Committee receives notice 
 of the recommendation, the Committee shall--
 (I) make available to the public on 
 an internet website of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency a 
 written report describing the rationale 
 of the Committee for not using the 
 recommendation; and
 (II) submit the report described in 
 subclause (I) to the Committee on 
 Environment and Public Works of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Energy and 
 Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (v) Outreach.--The advisory council may 
 carry out public outreach activities using 
 amounts made available under subsection (e) to 
 supplement public engagement carried out by the 
 Committee under subparagraph (C).
 (C) Public engagement.--
 (i) In general.--The Committee shall, 
 throughout the process of carrying out the 
 duties of the Committee described in subsection 
 (c)--
 (I) meaningfully engage with 
 relevant stakeholders, particularly--
 (aa) members and 
 representatives of 
 environmental justice 
 communities;
 (bb) environmental justice 
 advocates; and
 (cc) individuals with 
 expertise in cumulative impacts 
 and geospatial data; and
 (II) ensure that the input of the 
 stakeholders described in subclause (I) 
 is central to the activities of the 
 Committee.
 (ii) Plan.--
 (I) In general.--In carrying out 
 clause (i), the Committee shall develop 
 a plan, in consultation with the 
 advisory council, for comprehensive 
 public engagement with, and 
 incorporation of feedback from, 
 environmental justice advocates and 
 members of environmental justice 
 communities.
 (II) Strategies to overcome 
 barriers to public engagement.--The 
 plan developed under subclause (I) 
 shall include strategies to overcome 
 barriers to public engagement, 
 including--
 (aa) language barriers;
 (bb) transportation 
 barriers;
 (cc) economic barriers; and
 (dd) lack of internet 
 access.
 (III) Consideration.--In developing 
 the plan under subclause (I), the 
 Committee shall consider the diverse 
 and varied experiences of environmental 
 justice communities relating to the 
 scope and types of environmental 
 hazards and socioeconomic injustices.
 (iii) Consultation and solicitation of 
 public comment.--
 (I) In general.--In carrying out 
 clause (i), not less frequently than 
 once each fiscal quarter, the Committee 
 shall consult with the advisory council 
 and solicit meaningful public comment, 
 particularly from relevant 
 stakeholders, on the activities of the 
 Committee.
 (II) Requirements.--The Committee 
 shall carry out subclause (I) through 
 means including--
 (aa) public notice of a 
 meeting of the Committee 
 occurring during the applicable 
 fiscal quarter, which shall 
 include--

 (AA) notice in 
 publications relevant 
 to environmental 
 justice communities;

 (BB) notification 
 to environmental 
 justice communities 
 through direct means, 
 such as community 
 centers and schools; 
 and

 (CC) direct 
 outreach to known 
 environmental justice 
 groups;

 (bb) public broadcast of 
 that meeting, including 
 soliciting and receiving 
 comments by virtual means; and
 (cc) public availability of 
 a transcript of that meeting 
 through publication on an 
 accessible website.
 (III) Languages.--The Committee 
 shall provide each notice, 
 notification, direct outreach, 
 broadcast, and transcript described in 
 subclause (II) in each language 
 commonly used in the applicable 
 environmental justice community, 
 including through oral interpretation, 
 if applicable.
 (iv) Funding.--Of amounts made available 
 under subsection (e), the Administrator shall 
 make available to the Committee such sums as 
 are necessary for participation by relevant 
 stakeholders in public engagement under this 
 paragraph, as determined by the Administrator, 
 in consultation with the advisory council.
 (c) Duties of Committee.--
 (1) In general.--The Committee shall--
 (A) establish a tool described in paragraph (2) to 
 identify environmental justice communities, including 
 the identification of--
 (i) criteria to be used in the tool; and
 (ii) a methodology to determine the 
 cumulative impacts of those criteria;
 (B) assess and address data gaps in accordance with 
 paragraph (4); and
 (C) collect data for the environmental justice data 
 repository established under subsection (d).
 (2) Establishment of tool.--
 (A) In general.--The Committee, in consultation 
 with relevant stakeholders and the advisory council, 
 shall establish an interactive, transparent, 
 integrated, and Federal Government-wide tool for 
 assessing and mapping environmental justice communities 
 based on the cumulative impacts of all indicators 
 selected by the Committee to be integrated into the 
 tool.
 (B) Requirements.--In establishing the tool under 
 subparagraph (A), the Committee shall--
 (i) integrate into the tool multiple data 
 layers of indicators that fall into categories 
 including--
 (I) demographics, particularly 
 relating to socioeconomic hardship and 
 social stressors, such as--
 (aa) race and ethnicity;
 (bb) low income;
 (cc) high unemployment;
 (dd) low levels of home 
 ownership;
 (ee) high rent burden;
 (ff) high transportation 
 burden;
 (gg) low levels of 
 educational attainment;
 (hh) linguistic isolation;
 (ii) energy insecurity or 
 high utility rate burden;
 (jj) food insecurity;
 (kk) health insurance 
 status and access to health 
 care; and
 (ll) membership in an 
 Indian Tribe;
 (II) public health, particularly 
 data that are indicative of sensitive 
 populations, such as--
 (aa) rates of asthma;
 (bb) rates of 
 cardiovascular disease;
 (cc) childhood leukemia or 
 other cancers that correlate 
 with environmental hazards;
 (dd) low birth weight;
 (ee) maternal mortality;
 (ff) rates of lead 
 poisoning; and
 (gg) rates of diabetes;
 (III) pollution burdens, such as 
 pollution burdens created by--
 (aa) toxic chemicals;
 (bb) air pollutants;
 (cc) water pollutants;
 (dd) soil contaminants; and
 (ee) perfluoroalkyl and 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances; and
 (IV) environmental effects, such as 
 effects created by proximity to--
 (aa) risk management plan 
 sites;
 (bb) hazardous waste 
 facilities;
 (cc) sites on the National 
 Priorities List developed by 
 the President in accordance 
 with section 105(a)(8)(B) of 
 the Comprehensive Environmental 
 Response, Compensation, and 
 Liability Act of 1980 (42 
 U.S.C. 9605(a)(8)(B)); and
 (dd) fossil fuel 
 infrastructure;
 (ii) investigate how further indicators of 
 vulnerability to the impacts of climate change 
 (including proximity and exposure to sea level 
 rise, wildfire smoke, flooding, drought, rising 
 average temperatures, extreme storms, and 
 extreme heat, and financial burdens from flood 
 and fire insurance) should be incorporated into 
 the tool as an additional set of layers;
 (iii) identify and consider the effects of 
 other indicators relating to environmental 
 justice for integration into the tool as 
 layers, including--
 (I) safe, sufficient, and 
 affordable drinking water, sanitation, 
 and stormwater services;
 (II) access to and the quality of--
 (aa) green space and tree 
 canopy cover;
 (bb) healthy food;
 (cc) affordable energy and 
 water;
 (dd) transportation;
 (ee) reliable communication 
 systems, such as broadband 
 internet;
 (ff) child care;
 (gg) high-quality public 
 schools, early childhood 
 education, and child care; and
 (hh) health care 
 facilities;
 (III) length of commute;
 (IV) indoor air quality in 
 multiunit dwellings;
 (V) mental health;
 (VI) labor market categories, 
 particularly relating to essential 
 workers; and
 (VII) each type of utility expense;
 (iv) consider the implementation of 
 specific regional indicators, with the 
 potential--
 (I) to create regionally and 
 locally downscaled maps in addition to 
 a national map;
 (II) to provide incentives for 
 States to collect data and conduct 
 additional analyses to capture 
 conditions specific to their 
 localities;
 (III) to provide resources for and 
 engage in ground-truthing to identify 
 and verify important data with 
 community members; and
 (IV) to develop companion resources 
 for, and provide technical support to, 
 regional, State, local, or Tribal 
 governments to create their own maps 
 and environmental justice scores with 
 relevant regional, State, local, and 
 Tribal data;
 (v) identify a methodology to account for 
 the cumulative impacts of all indicators 
 selected by the Committee under clause (i), in 
 addition to other indicators as the Committee 
 determines to be necessary, to provide relative 
 environmental justice scores for regions that 
 are--
 (I) as small as practicable to 
 identify communities; and
 (II) not larger than a census 
 tract;
 (vi) ensure that the tool is capable of 
 providing maps of environmental justice 
 communities based on environmental justice 
 scores described in clause (v);
 (vii) ensure that users of the tool are 
 able to map available layers together or 
 independently as desired;
 (viii) implement a method for users of the 
 tool to generate a map and environmental 
 justice score based on a subset of indicators, 
 particularly for the purpose of using the tool 
 in addressing various policy needs, permitting 
 processes, and investment goals;
 (ix) make the tool customizable to address 
 specific policy needs, permitting processes, 
 and investment goals;
 (x) account for conditions that are not 
 captured by the quantitative data used to 
 develop the 1 or more maps and environmental 
 justice scores comprising the tool, by--
 (I) developing and executing a plan 
 to perform outreach to relevant 
 communities; and
 (II) establishing a mechanism by 
 which communities can self-identify as 
 environmental justice communities to be 
 included in the tool, which may include 
 citing qualitative data on conditions 
 for which quantitative data are 
 lacking, such as cultural loss in 
 Tribal communities;
 (xi) consider that the tool--
 (I) will be used across the Federal 
 Government in screening Federal 
 policies, permitting processes, and 
 investments for environmental and 
 climate justice impacts; and
 (II) may be used to assess 
 communities for pollution reduction 
 programs; and
 (xii) carry out such other activities as 
 the Committee determines to be appropriate.
 (3) Transparency and updates.--
 (A) In general.--
 (i) Notice and comment.--The Committee 
 shall establish the tool described in paragraph 
 (2) after providing notice and an opportunity 
 for public comment.
 (ii) Hearings.--In carrying out clause (i), 
 the Committee shall hold hearings, which shall 
 be time and language appropriate, in 
 communities affected by environmental justice 
 issues in geographically disparate States and 
 Tribal areas.
 (B) Updates.--
 (i) Annual updates.--The Committee shall 
 update the tool described in paragraph (2) not 
 less frequently than annually to account for 
 data sets that are updated annually.
 (ii) Other updates.--Not less frequently 
 than once every 3 years, the Committee shall--
 (I) update the indicators, 
 methodology, or both for the tool 
 described in paragraph (2); and
 (II) reevaluate data submitted by 
 Federal departments and agencies that 
 is used for the tool.
 (iii) Reports.--After the initial 
 establishment of the tool described in 
 paragraph (2) and each update under clause (i) 
 or (ii), the Committee shall publish a report 
 describing--
 (I) the process for identifying 
 indicators relating to environmental 
 justice in the development of the tool;
 (II) the methodology described in 
 paragraph (2)(B)(v); and
 (III) the use of public input and 
 community engagement in that process.
 (C) Training tutorials and sessions.--
 (i) In general.--The Committee shall--
 (I) develop virtual training 
 tutorials and sessions for 
 environmental justice communities for 
 the use of the tool described in 
 paragraph (2); and
 (II) where practicable, provide in-
 person training sessions for 
 environmental justice communities for 
 the use of that tool.
 (ii) Languages.--The tutorials and sessions 
 under clause (i) shall be made available in 
 each language commonly used in the applicable 
 environmental justice community.
 (D) Public availability.--
 (i) In general.--The Committee shall make 
 available to the public on an internet website 
 of the Environmental Protection Agency--
 (I) the tool described in paragraph 
 (2);
 (II) each update under clauses (i) 
 and (ii) of subparagraph (B);
 (III) each report under 
 subparagraph (B)(iii); and
 (IV) the training tutorials and 
 sessions developed under subparagraph 
 (C)(i)(I).
 (ii) Accessibility.--The Committee shall 
 make the tool, updates, and reports described 
 in clause (i) accessible to the public by 
 publication in relevant languages and with 
 accessibility functions, as appropriate.
 (iii) Requirement.--In carrying out clause 
 (i)(I), the Committee shall take measures to 
 prevent the tool from being misused to 
 discriminate against environmental justice 
 communities, such as by providing safeguards 
 against the use of downscaled data that may 
 enable the identification of individuals.
 (4) Data gap audit.--
 (A) In general.--In establishing the tool described 
 in paragraph (2), the Committee shall direct relevant 
 Federal departments and agencies to conduct an audit of 
 data collected by the department or agency to identify 
 any data that are relevant to environmental justice 
 concerns, including data relating to--
 (i) public health metrics;
 (ii) toxic chemicals;
 (iii) socioeconomic demographics;
 (iv) air quality;
 (v) water quality; and
 (vi) killings of individuals by law 
 enforcement officers.
 (B) Requirements.--An audit described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall--
 (i) examine the granularity and 
 accessibility of the data;
 (ii) address the need for improved air 
 quality monitoring; and
 (iii) include recommendations to other 
 Federal departments and agencies on means to 
 improve the quality, granularity, and 
 transparency of, and public involvement in, 
 data collection and dissemination.
 (C) Improvements.--The Committee shall direct a 
 Federal department or agency, in conducting an audit 
 under subparagraph (A), to address gaps in existing 
 data collection that will assist the Committee in 
 establishing and operating the tool described in 
 paragraph (2), including by providing to the department 
 or agency--
 (i) benchmarks to meet in addressing the 
 gaps;
 (ii) instructions for consistency in data 
 formatting that will allow for inclusion of 
 data in the environmental justice data 
 repository described in subsection (d); and
 (iii) best practices for collecting data in 
 collaboration with local organizations and 
 partners, such as engaging in ground-truthing.
 (D) Reports.--Not later than 180 days after a 
 Federal department or agency has conducted an audit 
 under subparagraph (A), the Committee shall--
 (i) make available to the public on an 
 internet website of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency a report describing the 
 findings and conclusions of the audit, 
 including the progress made by the Federal 
 department or agency in addressing 
 environmental justice data gaps; and
 (ii) submit the report described in clause 
 (i) to--
 (I) the Committee on Environment 
 and Public Works of the Senate;
 (II) the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
 Senate;
 (III) the Committee on Energy and 
 Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (IV) the Committee on Education and 
 the Workforce of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (d) Environmental Justice Data Repository.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish an 
 environmental justice data repository to maintain--
 (A) the data collected by the Committee through the 
 establishment of the tool described in subsection 
 (c)(2) and the audits conducted under subsection 
 (c)(4)(A); and
 (B) any subnational data collected under paragraph 
 (3)(B).
 (2) Updates.--The Administrator shall update the data in 
 the data repository described in paragraph (1) as frequently as 
 practicable, including every year if practicable, but not less 
 frequently than once every 3 years.
 (3) Availability; inclusion of subnational data.--The 
 Administrator--
 (A) shall make the data repository described in 
 paragraph (1) available to regional, State, local, and 
 Tribal governments; and
 (B) may collaborate with the governments described 
 in subparagraph (A) to include within that data 
 repository subnational data in existence before the 
 establishment of the tool described in subsection 
 (c)(2) and the completion of the audits under 
 subsection (c)(4)(A).
 (4) Requirement.--The Administrator shall take measures to 
 prevent the data in the data repository described in paragraph 
 (1) from being misused to discriminate against environmental 
 justice communities, such as by providing safeguards against 
 the use of downscaled data that may enable the identification 
 of individuals.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this section, including 
any necessary administrative costs of the Committee--
 (1) $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2025 and 2026; and
 (2) $18,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2027 through 2029.
 (f) Effect.--Nothing in any provision of this section relating to 
the tool described in subsection (c)(2) prohibits a State from 
developing a map relating to environmental justice or pollution burden 
that relies on different data, or analyzes data differently, than that 
tool.

SEC. 10012. ANTIRACISM IN PUBLIC HEALTH.

 (a) Public Health Research and Investment in Dismantling Structural 
Racism.--Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 243 et seq.), as amended by section 5201(e), is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 320D. NATIONAL CENTER ON ANTIRACISM AND HEALTH.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) National center.--There is established within the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention a center to be known 
 as the `National Center on Antiracism and Health' (referred to 
 in this section as the `Center'). The Director of the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention shall appoint a director to 
 head the Center who has experience living in and working with 
 racial and ethnic minority communities. The Center shall 
 promote public health by--
 ``(A) declaring racism a public health crisis and 
 naming racism as an historical and present threat to 
 the physical and mental health and well-being of the 
 United States and world;
 ``(B) aiming to develop new knowledge in the 
 science and practice of antiracism, including by 
 identifying the mechanisms by which racism operates in 
 the provision of health care and in systems that impact 
 health and well-being;
 ``(C) transferring that knowledge into practice, 
 including by developing interventions that dismantle 
 the mechanisms of racism and replace such mechanisms 
 with equitable structures, policies, practices, norms, 
 and values so that a healthy society can be realized; 
 and
 ``(D) contributing to a national and global 
 conversation regarding the impacts of racism on the 
 health and well-being of the United States and world.
 ``(2) General duties.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Center, shall undertake activities to carry out the mission of 
 the Center as described in paragraph (1), such as the 
 following:
 ``(A) Conduct research into, collect, analyze and 
 make publicly available data on, and provide leadership 
 and coordination for the science and practice of 
 antiracism, the public health impacts of structural 
 racism, and the effectiveness of intervention 
 strategies to address these impacts. Topics of research 
 and data collection under this subparagraph may include 
 identifying and understanding--
 ``(i) policies and practices that have a 
 disparate impact on the health and well-being 
 of communities of color;
 ``(ii) the public health impacts of 
 implicit racial bias, White supremacy, 
 weathering, xenophobia, discrimination, and 
 prejudice;
 ``(iii) the social determinants of health 
 resulting from structural racism, including 
 poverty, housing, employment, political 
 participation, and environmental factors; and
 ``(iv) the intersection of racism and other 
 systems of oppression, including as related to 
 age, sexual orientation, gender identity, and 
 disability status.
 ``(B) Award noncompetitive grants and cooperative 
 agreements to eligible public and nonprofit private 
 entities, including State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal health agencies and organizations, for the 
 research and collection, analysis, and reporting of 
 data on the topics described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) Establish, through grants or cooperative 
 agreements, at least 3 regional centers of excellence, 
 located in racial and ethnic minority communities, in 
 antiracism for the purpose of developing new knowledge 
 in the science and practice of antiracism in health by 
 researching, understanding, and identifying the 
 mechanisms by which racism operates in the health 
 space, racial and ethnic inequities in health care 
 access and outcomes, the history of successful 
 antiracist movements in health, and other antiracist 
 public health work.
 ``(D) Establish a clearinghouse within the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention for the collection 
 and storage of data generated under the programs 
 implemented under this section for which there is not 
 an otherwise existing surveillance system at the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Such data 
 shall--
 ``(i) be comprehensive and disaggregated, 
 to the extent practicable, by including racial, 
 ethnic, primary language, sex, gender identity, 
 sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status, 
 and disability disparities;
 ``(ii) be made publicly available;
 ``(iii) protect the privacy of individuals 
 whose information is included in such data; and
 ``(iv) comply with privacy protections 
 under the regulations promulgated under section 
 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act of 1996.
 ``(E) Provide information and education to the 
 public on the public health impacts of structural 
 racism and on antiracist public health interventions.
 ``(F) Consult with other Centers and National 
 Institutes within the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, including the Office of Health Equity, the 
 Office of Tribal Affairs and Strategic Alliances, the 
 Office of Rural Health, and the Office of Island 
 Affairs, to ensure that scientific and programmatic 
 activities initiated by the agency consider structural 
 racism in their designs, conceptualizations, and 
 executions, which shall include--
 ``(i) putting measures of racism in 
 population-based surveys;
 ``(ii) establishing a Federal Advisory 
 Committee on racism and health for the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention;
 ``(iii) developing training programs, 
 curricula, and seminars for the purposes of 
 training public health professionals and 
 researchers around issues of race, racism, and 
 antiracism;
 ``(iv) providing standards and best 
 practices for programming and grant recipient 
 compliance with Federal data collection 
 standards, including section 3101 of the Public 
 Health Service Act; and
 ``(v) establishing leadership and 
 stakeholder councils with experts and leaders 
 in racism and public health disparities.
 ``(G) Coordinate with the Indian Health Service and 
 with the Tribal Advisory Committee of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention to ensure meaningful 
 Tribal consultation, the gathering of information from 
 Tribal authorities, and respect for Tribal data 
 sovereignty.
 ``(H) Engage in government to government 
 consultation with Indian Tribes and Tribal 
 organizations.
 ``(I) At least every 2 years, produce and publicly 
 post on the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention's website a report on antiracist activities 
 completed by the Center, which may include newly 
 identified antiracist public health practices.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Antiracism.--The term `antiracism' is a collection of 
 antiracist policies that lead to racial equity, and are 
 substantiated by antiracist ideas.
 ``(2) Antiracist.--The term `antiracist' is any measure 
 that produces or sustains racial equity between racial groups.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section.''.
 (b) Public Health Research and Investment in Police Violence.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish within the 
 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (referred to in this 
 subsection as the ``Center'') a law enforcement violence 
 prevention program.
 (2) General duties.--In implementing the program under 
 paragraph (1), the Center shall conduct research into, and 
 provide leadership and coordination for--
 (A) the understanding and promotion of knowledge 
 about the public health impacts of uses of force by law 
 enforcement, including police brutality and violence;
 (B) developing public health interventions and 
 perspectives for eliminating deaths, injury, trauma, 
 and negative mental health effects from police presence 
 and interactions, including police brutality and 
 violence; and
 (C) ensuring comprehensive data collection, 
 analysis, and reporting regarding police violence and 
 misconduct, in consultation with the Department of 
 Justice and independent researchers.
 (3) Functions.--Under the program under paragraph (1), the 
 Center shall--
 (A) summarize and enhance the knowledge of the 
 distribution, status, and characteristics of law 
 enforcement-related death, trauma, and injury;
 (B) conduct research and prepare, with the 
 assistance of State public health departments--
 (i) statistics on law enforcement-related 
 death, injury, and brutality;
 (ii) studies of the factors, including 
 legal, socioeconomic, discrimination, and other 
 factors that correlate with or influence police 
 brutality;
 (iii) public information about uses of 
 force by law enforcement, including police 
 brutality and violence, for the practical use 
 of the public health community, including 
 publications that synthesize information 
 relevant to the national goal of understanding 
 police violence and methods for its control;
 (iv) information to identify socioeconomic 
 groups, communities, and geographic areas in 
 need of study, and a strategic plan for 
 research necessary to comprehend the extent and 
 nature of police uses of force by law 
 enforcement, including police brutality and 
 violence, and determine what options exist to 
 reduce or eradicate death and injury that 
 result; and
 (v) best practices in police violence 
 prevention in other countries;
 (C) award grants, contracts, and cooperative 
 agreements to provide for the conduct of epidemiologic 
 research on uses of force by law enforcement, including 
 police brutality and violence, by Federal, State, 
 local, and private agencies, institutions, 
 organizations, and individuals;
 (D) award grants, contracts, and cooperative 
 agreements to community groups, independent research 
 organizations, academic institutions, and other 
 entities to support, execute, or conduct research on 
 interventions to reduce or eliminate uses of force by 
 law enforcement, including police brutality and 
 violence;
 (E) coordinate with the Department of Justice and 
 other Federal, State, and local agencies on the 
 standardization of data collection, storage, and 
 retrieval necessary to collect, evaluate, analyze, and 
 disseminate information about the extent and nature of 
 uses of force by law enforcement, including police 
 brutality and violence, as well as options for the 
 eradication of such practices;
 (F) submit an annual report to Congress on research 
 findings with recommendations to improve data 
 collection and standardization and to disrupt processes 
 in policing that preserve and reinforce racism and 
 racial disparities in public health;
 (G) conduct primary research and explore uses of 
 force by law enforcement, including police brutality 
 and violence, and options for its control; and
 (H) study alternatives to law enforcement response 
 as a method of reducing police violence.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out 
 this subsection.

SEC. 10013. LGBTQ ESSENTIAL DATA.

 (a) Improving Data Collection on the Sexual Orientation and Gender 
Identity of Deceased Individuals Through the National Violent Death 
Reporting System.--
 (1) Collection of sexual orientation and gender identity 
 data.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall take 
 measures to improve the incidence of the collection of 
 information on the sexual orientation and gender 
 identity of deceased individuals through the National 
 Violent Death Reporting System or any successor 
 programs.
 (B) Confidentiality.--Any information collected 
 relating to the sexual orientation or gender identity 
 of a decedent shall be maintained in accordance with 
 the confidentiality and privacy standards and policies 
 for the protection of individuals applicable to all 
 other data collected for purposes of the National 
 Violent Death Reporting System.
 (2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Gender identity.--The term ``gender identity'' 
 means an individual's sense of being male, female, 
 transgender, or another gender, as distinct from the 
 individual's sex assigned at birth.
 (B) Sexual orientation.--The term ``sexual 
 orientation'' means how a person identifies in terms of 
 their emotional, romantic, or sexual attractions, and 
 includes identification as straight, heterosexual, gay, 
 lesbian, or bisexual, among other terms.
 (3) Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated 
 $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2025 to carry out this subsection.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has made 
 significant efforts to encourage States and other jurisdictions 
 to collect data on sexual orientation and gender identity 
 through the National Violent Death Reporting System; and
 (2) jurisdictions that participate in the collection of 
 such data through the National Violent Death Reporting System 
 should be commended for their participation.

SEC. 10014. SOCIAL DETERMINANTS ACCELERATOR.

 (a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are as follows:
 (1) To establish effective, coordinated Federal technical 
 assistance to help State and local governments to improve 
 outcomes and cost-effectiveness of, and return on investment 
 from, health and social services programs.
 (2) To build a pipeline of State and locally designed, 
 cross-sector interventions and strategies that generate 
 rigorous evidence about how to improve health and social 
 outcomes, and increase the cost-effectiveness of, and return on 
 investment from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal health and 
 social services programs.
 (3) To enlist State and local governments and the service 
 providers of such governments as partners in identifying 
 Federal statutory, regulatory, and administrative challenges in 
 improving the health and social outcomes of, cost-effectiveness 
 of, and return on investment from, Federal spending on 
 individuals enrolled in the Medicaid program under title XIX of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 (4) To develop strategies to improve health and social 
 outcomes without denying services to, or restricting the 
 eligibility of, vulnerable populations.
 (b) Social Determinants Accelerator Council.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Administrator''), shall 
 establish an interagency council, to be known as the Social 
 Determinants Accelerator Interagency Council (referred to in 
 this section as the ``Council''), to achieve the purposes 
 listed in subsection (a).
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) Federal composition.--The Council shall be 
 composed of at least one designee from each of the 
 following Federal agencies:
 (i) The Office of Management and Budget.
 (ii) The Department of Agriculture.
 (iii) The Department of Education.
 (iv) The Indian Health Service.
 (v) The Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development.
 (vi) The Department of Labor.
 (vii) The Department of Transportation.
 (viii) Any other Federal agency the Chair 
 of the Council determines necessary.
 (B) Designation.--
 (i) In general.--The head of each agency 
 specified in subparagraph (A) shall designate 
 at least one employee described in clause (ii) 
 to serve as a member of the Council.
 (ii) Responsibilities.--An employee 
 described in this clause shall be a senior 
 employee of the agency--
 (I) whose responsibilities relate 
 to authorities, policies, and 
 procedures with respect to the health 
 and well-being of individuals receiving 
 medical assistance under a State plan 
 (or a waiver of such plan) under title 
 XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); or
 (II) who has authority to implement 
 and evaluate transformative initiatives 
 that harness data or conducts rigorous 
 evaluation to improve the impact and 
 cost-effectiveness of federally funded 
 services and benefits.
 (C) HHS representation.--In addition to the 
 designees under subparagraph (A), the Council shall 
 include designees from at least three agencies within 
 the Department of Health and Human Services, including 
 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, at least 
 one of whom shall meet the criteria under subparagraph 
 (B)(ii).
 (D) OMB role.--The Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget shall facilitate the timely 
 resolution of Government-wide and multiagency issues to 
 help the Council achieve consensus recommendations 
 described under paragraph (3)(A).
 (E) Non-federal composition.--The Comptroller 
 General of the United States may designate up to 6 
 Council designees--
 (i) who have relevant subject matter 
 expertise, including expertise implementing and 
 evaluating transformative initiatives that 
 harness data and conduct evaluations to improve 
 the impact and cost-effectiveness of Federal 
 Government services; and
 (ii) that each represent--
 (I) State, local, and Tribal health 
 and human services agencies;
 (II) public housing authorities or 
 State housing finance agencies;
 (III) State and local government 
 budget offices;
 (IV) State Medicaid agencies; or
 (V) national consumer advocacy 
 organizations.
 (F) Chair.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall select 
 the Chair of the Council from among the members 
 of the Council.
 (ii) Initiating guidance.--The Chair, on 
 behalf of the Council, shall identify and 
 invite individuals from diverse entities to 
 provide the Council with advice and information 
 pertaining to addressing social determinants of 
 health, including--
 (I) individuals from State and 
 local government health and human 
 services agencies;
 (II) individuals from State 
 Medicaid agencies;
 (III) individuals from State and 
 local government budget offices;
 (IV) individuals from public 
 housing authorities or State housing 
 finance agencies;
 (V) individuals from nonprofit 
 organizations, small businesses, and 
 philanthropic organizations;
 (VI) advocates;
 (VII) researchers; and
 (VIII) any other individuals the 
 Chair determines to be appropriate.
 (3) Duties.--The duties of the Council are--
 (A) to make recommendations to the Secretary and 
 the Administrator regarding the criteria for making 
 awards under subsection (b);
 (B) to identify Federal authorities and 
 opportunities for use by States or local governments to 
 improve coordination of funding and administration of 
 Federal programs, the beneficiaries of whom include 
 individuals described in subsection (a), and which may 
 be unknown or underutilized and to make information on 
 such authorities and opportunities publicly available;
 (C) to provide targeted technical assistance to 
 States developing a social determinants accelerator 
 plan under subsection (c), including identifying 
 potential statutory or regulatory pathways for 
 implementation of the plan and assisting in identifying 
 potential sources of funding to implement the plan;
 (D) to report to Congress annually on the subjects 
 set forth in paragraph (5);
 (E) to develop and disseminate evaluation 
 guidelines and standards that can be used to reliably 
 assess the impact of an intervention or approach that 
 may be implemented pursuant to this section on 
 outcomes, cost-effectiveness of, and return on 
 investment from Federal, State, local, and Tribal 
 governments, and to facilitate technical assistance, 
 where needed, to help to improve State and local 
 evaluation designs and implementation;
 (F) to seek feedback from State, local, and Tribal 
 governments, including through an annual survey by an 
 independent third party, on how to improve the 
 technical assistance the Council provides to better 
 equip State, local, and Tribal governments to 
 coordinate health and social service programs;
 (G) to solicit applications for grants under 
 subsection (c); and
 (H) to coordinate with other cross-agency 
 initiatives focused on improving the health and well-
 being of low-income and at-risk populations in order to 
 prevent unnecessary duplication between agency 
 initiatives.
 (4) Schedule.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Council shall convene to develop a 
 schedule and plan for carrying out the duties described in 
 paragraph (3), including solicitation of applications for the 
 grants under subsection (c).
 (5) Report to congress.--The Council shall submit an annual 
 report to Congress, which shall include--
 (A) a list of the Council members;
 (B) a description of the activities and 
 expenditures of the Council;
 (C) summaries of the interventions and approaches 
 that will be supported by State, local, and Tribal 
 governments that received a grant under subsection (c), 
 including--
 (i) the best practices and evidence-based 
 approaches such governments plan to employ to 
 achieve the purposes listed in subsection (a); 
 and
 (ii) a description of how the practices and 
 approaches will impact the outcomes, cost-
 effectiveness of, and return on investment 
 from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal 
 governments with respect to such purposes;
 (D) the feedback received from State and local 
 governments on ways to improve the technical assistance 
 of the Council, including findings from a third-party 
 survey and actions the Council plans to take in 
 response to such feedback; and
 (E) the major statutory, regulatory, and 
 administrative challenges identified by State, local, 
 and Tribal governments that received a grant under 
 subsection (c), and the actions that Federal agencies 
 are taking to address such challenges.
 (6) FACA applicability.--Chapter 10 of title 5, United 
 States Code, shall not apply to the Council.
 (7) Council procedures.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Comptroller General of the United States and the 
 Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall 
 establish procedures for the Council to--
 (A) ensure that adequate resources are available to 
 effectively execute the responsibilities of the 
 Council;
 (B) effectively coordinate with other relevant 
 advisory bodies and working groups to avoid unnecessary 
 duplication;
 (C) create transparency to the public and Congress 
 with regard to Council membership, costs, and 
 activities, including through use of modern technology 
 and social media to disseminate information; and
 (D) avoid conflicts of interest that would 
 jeopardize the ability of the Council to make decisions 
 and provide recommendations.
 (c) Social Determinants Accelerator Grants to States or Local 
Governments.--
 (1) Grants to states, local governments, and tribes.--Not 
 later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary and the 
 Council, shall award on a competitive basis not more than 25 
 grants to eligible applicants described in paragraph (2), for 
 the development of social determinants accelerator plans, as 
 described in paragraph (6).
 (2) Eligible applicant.--An eligible applicant described in 
 this subsection is a State, local, or Tribal health or human 
 services agency that--
 (A) demonstrates the support of relevant parties 
 across relevant State, local, or Tribal jurisdictions; 
 and
 (B) in the case of an applicant that is a local 
 government agency, provides to the Secretary a letter 
 of support from the lead State health or human services 
 agency for the State in which the local government is 
 located.
 (3) Amount of grant.--The Administrator, in coordination 
 with the Council, shall determine the total amount that the 
 Administrator will make available to each grantee under this 
 subsection.
 (4) Application.--An eligible applicant seeking a grant 
 under this subsection shall include in the application the 
 following information:
 (A) The target population (or populations) that 
 would benefit from implementation of the social 
 determinants accelerator plan proposed to be developed 
 by the applicant.
 (B) A description of the objective or objectives 
 and outcome goals of such proposed plan, which shall 
 include at least one health outcome and at least one 
 other important social outcome.
 (C) The sources and scope of inefficiencies that, 
 if addressed by the plan, could result in improved 
 cost-effectiveness of or return on investment from 
 Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments.
 (D) A description of potential interventions that 
 could be designed or enabled using such proposed plan.
 (E) The State, local, Tribal, academic, nonprofit, 
 community-based organizations, and other private sector 
 partners that would participate in the development of 
 the proposed plan and subsequent implementation of 
 programs or initiatives included in such proposed plan.
 (F) Such other information as the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Secretary and the Council, 
 determines necessary to achieve the purposes of this 
 section.
 (5) Use of funds.--A recipient of a grant under this 
 subsection may use funds received through the grant for the 
 following purposes:
 (A) To convene and coordinate with relevant 
 government entities and other stakeholders across 
 sectors to assist in the development of a social 
 determinants accelerator plan.
 (B) To identify populations of individuals 
 receiving medical assistance under a State plan (or a 
 waiver of such plan) under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) who may benefit 
 from the proposed approaches to improving the health 
 and well-being of such individuals through the 
 implementation of the proposed social determinants 
 accelerator plan.
 (C) To engage qualified research experts to advise 
 on relevant research and to design a proposed 
 evaluation plan, in accordance with the standards and 
 guidelines issued by the Administrator.
 (D) To collaborate with the Council to support the 
 development of social determinants accelerator plans.
 (E) To prepare and submit a final social 
 determinants accelerator plan to the Council.
 (6) Contents of plans.--A social determinants accelerator 
 plan developed under this subsection shall include the 
 following:
 (A) A description of the target population (or 
 populations) that would benefit from implementation of 
 the social determinants accelerator plan, including an 
 analysis describing the projected impact on the well-
 being of individuals described in paragraph (5)(B).
 (B) A description of the interventions or 
 approaches designed under the social determinants 
 accelerator plan and the evidence for selecting such 
 interventions or approaches.
 (C) The objectives and outcome goals of such 
 interventions or approaches, including at least one 
 health outcome and at least one other important social 
 outcome.
 (D) A plan for accessing and linking relevant data 
 to enable coordinated benefits and services for the 
 jurisdictions described in paragraph (2)(A) and an 
 evaluation of the proposed interventions and 
 approaches.
 (E) A description of the State, local, Tribal, 
 academic, nonprofit, or community-based organizations, 
 or any other private sector organizations that would 
 participate in implementing the proposed interventions 
 or approaches, and the role each would play to 
 contribute to the success of the proposed interventions 
 or approaches.
 (F) The identification of the funding sources that 
 would be used to finance the proposed interventions or 
 approaches.
 (G) A description of any financial incentives that 
 may be provided, including outcome-focused contracting 
 approaches to encourage service providers and other 
 partners to improve outcomes of, cost-effectiveness of, 
 and return on investment from, Federal, State, local, 
 or Tribal government spending.
 (H) The identification of the applicable Federal, 
 State, local, or Tribal statutory and regulatory 
 authorities, including waiver authorities, to be 
 leveraged to implement the proposed interventions or 
 approaches.
 (I) A description of potential considerations that 
 would enhance the impact, scalability, or 
 sustainability of the proposed interventions or 
 approaches and the actions the grant awardee would take 
 to address such considerations.
 (J) A proposed evaluation plan, to be carried out 
 by an independent evaluator, to measure the impact of 
 the proposed interventions or approaches on the 
 outcomes of, cost-effectiveness of, and return on 
 investment from, Federal, State, local, and Tribal 
 governments.
 (K) Precautions for ensuring that vulnerable 
 populations will not be denied access to Medicaid or 
 other essential services as a result of implementing 
 the proposed plan.
 (d) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--Out of any money in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to carry out this 
 section $25,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 
 2029, of which up to $5,000,000 may be used to carry out this 
 section, to remain available for obligation until the date that 
 is 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Reservation of funds.--
 (A) In general.--Of the funds made available under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reserve not less 
 than 20 percent to award grants to eligible applicants 
 for the development of social determinants accelerator 
 plans under subsection (c) intended to serve rural 
 populations.
 (B) Exception.--In the case of a fiscal year for 
 which the Secretary determines that there are not 
 sufficient eligible applicants for grants under 
 subsection (c) that are intended to serve rural 
 populations and the Secretary cannot satisfy the 20-
 percent requirement, the Secretary may reserve an 
 amount that is less than 20 percent of amounts made 
 available under paragraph (1) to award grants for such 
 purpose.
 (3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 prevent Federal agencies represented on the Council from 
 contributing additional funding from other sources to support 
 activities to improve the effectiveness of the Council.

SEC. 10015. IMPROVING SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH.

 (a) Social Determinants of Health Program.--
 (1) Program.--To the extent and in the amounts made 
 available in advance in appropriations Acts, the Director of 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (in this section 
 referred to as the ``Director'') shall carry out a program, to 
 be known as the Social Determinants of Health Program (in this 
 section referred to as the ``Program''), to achieve the 
 following goals:
 (A) Improve health outcomes and reduce health 
 inequities by coordinating social determinants of 
 health activities across the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention.
 (B) Improve the capacity of public health agencies 
 and community organizations to address social 
 determinants of health in communities.
 (2) Activities.--To achieve the goals listed in paragraph 
 (1), the Director shall carry out activities including the 
 following:
 (A) Coordinating across the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention to ensure that relevant programs 
 consider and incorporate social determinants of health 
 in grant awards and other activities.
 (B) Awarding grants under subsection (b) to State, 
 local, territorial, and Tribal health agencies and 
 organizations, and to other eligible entities, to 
 address social determinants of health in target 
 communities.
 (C) Awarding grants under subsection (c) to 
 nonprofit organizations and public or other nonprofit 
 institutions of higher education--
 (i) to conduct research on best practices 
 to improve social determinants of health;
 (ii) to provide technical assistance, 
 training, and evaluation assistance to grantees 
 under subsection (b); and
 (iii) to disseminate best practices to 
 grantees under subsection (b).
 (D) Coordinating, supporting, and aligning 
 activities of the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention related to social determinants of health 
 with activities of other Federal agencies related to 
 social determinants of health, including such 
 activities of agencies in the Department of Health and 
 Human Services such as the Centers for Medicare & 
 Medicaid Services.
 (E) Collecting and analyzing data related to the 
 social determinants of health.
 (b) Grants To Address Social Determinants of Health.--
 (1) In general.--The Director, as part of the Program, 
 shall award grants to eligible entities to address social 
 determinants of health in their communities.
 (2) Eligibility.--To be eligible to apply for a grant under 
 this subsection, an entity shall be--
 (A) a State, local, territorial, or Tribal health 
 agency or organization;
 (B) a qualified nongovernmental entity, as defined 
 by the Director; or
 (C) a consortium of entities that includes a State, 
 local, territorial, or Tribal health agency or 
 organization.
 (3) Use of funds.--
 (A) In general.--A grant under this subsection 
 shall be used to address social determinants of health 
 in a target community by designing and implementing 
 innovative, evidence-based, cross-sector strategies.
 (B) Target community.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, a target community shall be a State, 
 county, city, or other municipality.
 (4) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
 the Director shall prioritize applicants proposing to serve 
 target communities with significant unmet health and social 
 needs, as defined by the Director.
 (5) Application.--To seek a grant under this subsection, an 
 eligible entity shall--
 (A) submit an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Director 
 may require;
 (B) propose a set of activities to address social 
 determinants of health through evidence-based, cross-
 sector strategies, which activities may include--
 (i) collecting quantifiable data from 
 health care, social services, and other 
 entities regarding the most significant gaps in 
 health-promoting social, economic, and 
 environmental needs;
 (ii) identifying evidence-based approaches 
 to meeting the nonmedical, social needs of 
 populations identified by data collection 
 described in clause (i), such as unstable 
 housing or food insecurity;
 (iii) developing scalable methods to meet 
 patients' social needs identified in clinical 
 settings or other sites;
 (iv) convening entities such as local and 
 State governmental and nongovernmental 
 organizations, health systems, payors, and 
 community-based organizations to review, plan, 
 and implement community-wide interventions and 
 strategies to advance health-promoting social 
 conditions;
 (v) monitoring and evaluating the impact of 
 activities funded through the grant on the 
 health and well-being of the residents of the 
 target community and on the cost of health 
 care; and
 (vi) such other activities as may be 
 specified by the Director;
 (C) demonstrate how the eligible entity will 
 collaborate with--
 (i) health systems;
 (ii) payors, including, as appropriate, 
 Medicaid managed care organizations (as defined 
 in section 1903(m)(1)(A) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(m)(1)(A))), Medicare 
 Advantage plans under part C of title XVIII of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-21 et seq.), and 
 health insurance issuers and group health plans 
 (as such terms are defined in section 2791 of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-
 91));
 (iii) other relevant stakeholders and 
 initiatives in areas of need, such as the 
 Accountable Health Communities Model of the 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
 health homes under the Medicaid program under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396 et seq.), community-based organizations, 
 and human services organizations;
 (iv) other non-health care sector 
 organizations, including organizations focusing 
 on transportation, housing, or food access; and
 (v) local employers; and
 (D) identify key health inequities in the target 
 community and demonstrate how the proposed efforts of 
 the eligible entity would address such inequities.
 (6) Monitoring and evaluation.--As a condition of receipt 
 of a grant under this subsection, a grantee shall agree to 
 submit an annual report to the Director describing the 
 activities carried out through the grant and the outcomes of 
 such activities.
 (7) Independent national evaluation.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 first grants are awarded under this subsection, the 
 Director shall provide for the commencement of an 
 independent national evaluation of the program under 
 this subsection.
 (B) Report to congress.--Not later than 60 days 
 after receiving the results of such independent 
 national evaluation, the Director shall report such 
 results to Congress.
 (c) Research and Training.--The Director, as part of the Program--
 (1) shall award grants to nonprofit organizations and 
 public or other nonprofit institutions of higher education--
 (A) to conduct research on best practices to 
 improve social determinants of health;
 (B) to provide technical assistance, training, and 
 evaluation assistance to grantees under subsection (b); 
 and
 (C) to disseminate best practices to grantees under 
 subsection (b); and
 (2) may require a grantee under paragraph (1) to provide 
 technical assistance and capacity building to entities that are 
 eligible entities under subsection (b) but not receiving funds 
 through such subsection.
 (d) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to 
 carry out this section, $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2025 through 2030.
 (2) Allocation.--Of the amount made available to carry out 
 this section for a fiscal year, not less than 75 percent shall 
 be used for grants under subsections (b) and (c).

SEC. 10016. NOTIFICATION REGARDING SNAP FOR STUDENTS RECEIVING FEDERAL 
 WORK-STUDY ASSISTANCE.

 Section 443 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-53) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Notification Regarding SNAP.--
 ``(1) In general.--An institution receiving a grant under 
 this part shall send a notification (by email or other 
 electronic means) to each eligible student informing the 
 student of their potential eligibility for participation in 
 SNAP and the process for obtaining more information, confirming 
 eligibility, and accessing benefits under that program. The 
 notification shall be developed by the Secretary of Education 
 in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, and shall 
 include details on eligibility requirements for participation 
 in SNAP that a student must satisfy. The notification shall be, 
 to the extent practicable, specific to the student's State of 
 residence and shall provide contact information for the local 
 office where an application for SNAP may be made.
 ``(2) Evidence of participation in federally financed work-
 study program.--The notification under paragraph (1) shall 
 include an official document confirming that the recipient is 
 an eligible student sufficient for purposes of demonstrating 
 that the exclusion from ineligibility for participation in SNAP 
 under section 6(e)(4) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 
 U.S.C. 2015(e)(4)) applies to the student.
 ``(3) Guidance.--The Secretary of Education, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall provide 
 guidance to States and institutions of higher education on how 
 to identify and communicate with students who are likely to be 
 eligible for SNAP, including those eligible for a State or 
 federally financed work-study program.
 ``(4) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 ``(A) The term `eligible student' means a student 
 receiving work-study assistance under this part.
 ``(B) The term `SNAP' means the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program (as defined in section 
 3(t) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 
 2012(t))).''.

 Subtitle B--Gun Violence

SEC. 10101. REAFFIRMING RESEARCH AUTHORITY OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE 
 CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

 (a) In General.--Section 391 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 280b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``research relating 
 to the causes, mechanisms, prevention, diagnosis, treatment of 
 injuries, and rehabilitation from injuries;'' and inserting the 
 following: ``research, including data collection, relating to--
 ``(A) the causes, mechanisms, prevention, 
 diagnosis, and treatment of injuries, including with 
 respect to gun violence; and
 ``(B) rehabilitation from such injuries;''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) No Advocacy or Promotion of Gun Control.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to--
 ``(1) authorize the Secretary to give assistance, make 
 grants, or enter into cooperative agreements or contracts for 
 the purpose of advocating or promoting gun control; or
 ``(2) permit a recipient of any assistance, grant, 
 cooperative agreement, or contract under this section to use 
 such assistance, grant, agreement, or contract for the purpose 
 of advocating or promoting gun control.''.

SEC. 10102. NATIONAL VIOLENT DEATH REPORTING SYSTEM.

 The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, shall improve the National Violent 
Death Reporting System (as authorized by sections 301(a) and 391(a) of 
the Public Service Health Act (42 U.S.C. 241(a), 280b(a)), particularly 
through the inclusion of additional States and activities to increase 
the quality, type, and timeliness of reported data. Participation in 
the System by the States shall be voluntary.

SEC. 10103. REPORT ON EFFECTS OF GUN VIOLENCE ON PUBLIC HEALTH.

 Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
and annually thereafter, the Surgeon General shall submit to Congress a 
report on the effects on public health, including mental health, of gun 
violence in the United States during the preceding year, and the status 
of actions taken to address such effects.

SEC. 10104. REPORT ON EFFECTS OF GUN VIOLENCE ON MENTAL HEALTH IN 
 MINORITY COMMUNITIES.

 Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health shall submit to 
Congress a report on the effects of gun violence on public health, 
including mental health, in minority communities in the United States, 
and the status of actions taken to address such effects.

 Subtitle C--Nutrition for Women, Children, Families

 CHAPTER 1--SENIOR HUNGER PREVENTION

SEC. 10201. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Senior Hunger Prevention Act of 
2024''.

SEC. 10202. IMPROVING SNAP EFFICACY.

 (a) Certification Period.--Section 3(f) of the Food and Nutrition 
Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012(f)) is amended, in the second sentence, by 
striking ``24'' and inserting ``36''.
 (b) Standard Medical Expense Deduction.--Section 5(e)(5) of the 
Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2014(e)(5)) is amended--
 (1) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``Excess 
 medical'' and inserting ``Medical'';
 (2) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``an excess medical'' 
 and all that follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting ``a standard medical deduction or a medical expense 
 deduction of actual costs for the allowable medical expenses 
 incurred by the elderly or disabled member, exclusive of 
 special diets.'';
 (3) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking ``excess''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Standard medical expense deduction amount.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (ii), the standard medical expense 
 deduction shall be equal to--
 ``(I) for fiscal year 2024, $155; 
 and
 ``(II) for each subsequent fiscal 
 year, the applicable amount for the 
 immediately preceding fiscal year, as 
 adjusted to reflect changes for the 12-
 month period ending the preceding June 
 30 in the Consumer Price Index for All 
 Urban Consumers: Medical Care published 
 by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of 
 the Department of Labor.
 ``(ii) Exception.--For any fiscal year, a 
 State agency may establish a greater standard 
 medical expense deduction than the deduction 
 described in clause (i) if the greater 
 deduction satisfies the applicable cost-
 neutrality standards established by the 
 Secretary for that fiscal year.''.
 (c) Value of Allotment.--Section 8(a) of the Food and Nutrition Act 
of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2017(a)) is amended, in the proviso, by striking ``8 
percent'' and inserting ``\1/3\''.

SEC. 10203. STREAMLINING NUTRITION ACCESS FOR OLDER ADULTS AND ADULTS 
 WITH DISABILITIES.

 (a) Definition of Elderly and Disabled.--Section 3(j) of the Food 
and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012(j)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking the 
 subsection designation and all that follows through ``who'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(j) Elderly or Disabled.--The term `elderly or disabled', with 
respect to an individual or member of a household, means that the 
individual or member of the household''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting ``(which includes 
 medical assistance provided to an individual described in 
 section 1902(e)(14)(D)(i)(III) of that Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(e)(14)(D)(i)(III)))'' after ``(42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.)''.
 (b) Elderly Simplified Application Program.--The Food and Nutrition 
Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 31. ELDERLY SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a program, to 
be known as the `elderly simplified application program' (referred to 
in this section as `ESAP'), under which a State, in carrying out the 
supplemental nutrition assistance program, may elect to implement a 
streamlined application and certification process for households in 
which all adult members--
 ``(1) are elderly or disabled members; and
 ``(2) have no earned income.
 ``(b) Certification Period.--The certification period for 
participants in ESAP shall be 36 months.
 ``(c) Income and Other Data Verification.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State agency determining the 
 eligibility for an applicant household under ESAP shall, 
 notwithstanding section 11(e)(3)--
 ``(A) to the maximum extent practicable, use data 
 matching for income verification and household size; 
 and
 ``(B)(i) allow self-declaration by the applicant of 
 the information required under section 273.2(f) of 
 title 7, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor 
 regulation); but
 ``(ii) verify, prior to certification of the 
 household, factors of eligibility provided by the 
 applicant that the State agency determines are 
 questionable.
 ``(2) Accountability and fraud prevention.--In carrying out 
 paragraph (1), a State agency shall establish accountability 
 and fraud protection measures to deter fraud and ensure the 
 integrity of ESAP and the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program.
 ``(d) Interviews.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 11(e)(6)(A), for 
 recertification of a household under ESAP, a State agency shall 
 not require an interview unless requested by the household.
 ``(2) Virtual interviews.--An interview under paragraph (1) 
 may be conducted virtually.
 ``(e) Guidance.--Prior to the establishment of ESAP under 
subsection (a), the Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service 
shall develop guidance for States, including by consulting with States, 
to carry out ESAP, which shall include--
 ``(1) general implementation guidelines;
 ``(2) reporting requirements;
 ``(3) quality control requirements; and
 ``(4) best practices.''.
 (c) Combined Application Program.--The Food and Nutrition Act of 
2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) (as amended by subsection (b)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 32. COMBINED APPLICATION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary, in coordination with the 
Commissioner of Social Security, shall establish a program, to be known 
as the `combined application program' (referred to in this section as 
`CAP'), under which a State, in carrying out the supplemental nutrition 
assistance program, may elect to implement a streamlined application 
process for households in which all adult members are applicants for or 
recipients of benefits under title II of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 401 et seq.) on the basis of a disability or supplemental 
security income under title XVI of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1381 et seq.).
 ``(b) Purposes.--The purposes of CAP are--
 ``(1) to reduce the need for households described in 
 subsection (a) to have in-person interviews with State offices 
 administering the supplemental nutrition assistance program; 
 and
 ``(2) to increase participation in the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program by simplifying the application 
 process for the supplemental nutrition assistance program 
 through increased automation and simplified calculation of 
 benefits.
 ``(c) CAP Models.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
Commissioner of the Social Security Administration, shall offer, at a 
minimum, each of the following models for States to implement CAP:
 ``(1) Standard model.--
 ``(A) In general.--Under the standard model, the 
 Commissioner of the Social Security Administration and 
 the State agency administering the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program shall coordinate--
 ``(i) to develop a simplified joint 
 application process for the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program that uses 
 standardized benefit amounts or standardized 
 shelter expenses, in accordance with this 
 paragraph; and
 ``(ii) to conduct outreach to adult members 
 receiving supplemental security income under 
 title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1381 et seq.) that are not receiving benefits 
 under the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program.
 ``(B) Standardized benefit amounts.--
 ``(i) In general.--Under the standardized 
 model described in subparagraph (A), applicants 
 shall receive a standardized or automated 
 benefit level under the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program based on the shelter 
 expenses and other income of the applicants.
 ``(ii) Minimum standardized benefit 
 levels.--At a minimum, there shall be in effect 
 2 standardized benefit levels under clause (i), 
 including, as determined by the State--
 ``(I) a level for participants with 
 low shelter expenses; and
 ``(II) a level for participants 
 with high shelter expenses.
 ``(iii) Comparable amount.--A State shall 
 ensure that the amount provided under a 
 standardized benefit level under clause (i) is 
 comparable to an amount that a participant 
 would otherwise receive under the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program.
 ``(iv) Referral.--A State shall refer a 
 household described in subsection (a) to the 
 supplemental nutrition assistance program 
 instead of enrolling that household in CAP if 
 the standardized amount that the household 
 would receive under CAP would be significantly 
 less than the amount of benefits that the 
 household would receive under the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program.
 ``(C) Standardized shelter expenses.--In computing 
 an excess shelter expense deduction under section 
 5(e)(6), a State agency may use a standard utility 
 allowance in accordance with regulations promulgated by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(2) Modified model.--Under the modified model, a State 
 agency administering the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program shall--
 ``(A) conduct outreach to prospective participants 
 in the supplemental nutrition assistance program using 
 information from the Social Security Administration to 
 identify households described in subsection (a) that 
 are not participants in the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program; and
 ``(B) send to those households simplified 
 application forms for the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program.''.

SEC. 10204. ENROLLMENT AND OUTREACH PILOT PROGRAM FOR OLDER ADULTS, 
 KINSHIP FAMILIES, AND ADULTS WITH DISABILITIES.

 The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) (as 
amended by section 10203(c)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 33. ENROLLMENT AND OUTREACH PILOT PROGRAM FOR OLDER ADULTS, 
 KINSHIP FAMILIES, AND ADULTS WITH DISABILITIES.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Disability.--The term `disability' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102).
 ``(2) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) a State or local government agency;
 ``(B) an Indian tribe or Tribal organization;
 ``(C) a nonprofit organization, including a public 
 or nonprofit provider of services;
 ``(D) a community-based organization; and
 ``(E) an educational provider.
 ``(3) Kinship family.--The term `kinship family' means a 
 family in which a child resides with, and is being raised by, a 
 grandparent, another extended family member, or an adult with 
 whom the child has a close family-like relationship, such as a 
 godparent or a close family friend.
 ``(4) Older adult.--The term `older adult' has the meaning 
 given the term `older individual' in section 102 of the Older 
 Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3002).
 ``(5) Pilot program.--The term `pilot program' means the 
 Enrollment and Outreach Pilot Program for Older Adults, Kinship 
 Families, and Adults with Disabilities established under 
 subsection (b).
 ``(b) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a pilot 
program, to be known as the `Enrollment and Outreach Pilot Program for 
Older Adults, Kinship Families, and Adults with Disabilities', under 
which the Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities--
 ``(1) to raise awareness among older adults, kinship 
 families, and adults with disabilities of the availability, 
 eligibility requirements, application procedures, and benefits 
 of the supplemental nutrition assistance program; and
 ``(2) to support older adults, kinship families, and adults 
 with disabilities in enrolling in the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program.
 ``(c) Priority.--In awarding grants under the pilot program, the 
Secretary shall give priority to--
 ``(1) eligible entities that--
 ``(A) provide services to older adults or adults 
 with disabilities;
 ``(B) provide services to kinship families, 
 including kinship navigator programs;
 ``(C) have experience implementing programs that 
 receive funding under the Older Americans Act of 1965 
 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.);
 ``(D) have experience implementing programs 
 administered by the Food and Nutrition Service; or
 ``(E) receive, plan to receive, or demonstrate an 
 ability to partner with a program that receives, 
 funding under--
 ``(i) the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 
 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.);
 ``(ii) the Americans with Disabilities Act 
 of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.); or
 ``(iii) 1 or more nutrition programs 
 administered by the Secretary; and
 ``(2) projects that will--
 ``(A) serve communities with--
 ``(i) high rates of food insecurity or 
 malnutrition; or
 ``(ii) low food access;
 ``(B) serve rural communities, indigenous 
 communities, or communities of color;
 ``(C) serve members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
 transgender, and queer community;
 ``(D) serve adults with limited English 
 proficiency;
 ``(E) serve veterans;
 ``(F) serve residents in federally subsidized 
 housing, including federally subsidized housing units 
 for older adults and adults with disabilities;
 ``(G) serve residents living in housing serving 
 kinship families; and
 ``(H) incorporate nutrition education activities 
 that promote healthy eating and active lifestyles.
 ``(d) Eligible Activities.--An eligible entity receiving a grant 
under the pilot program shall use the grant to carry out 1 or more of 
the following activities:
 ``(1) Application assistance, including--
 ``(A) eligibility prescreening;
 ``(B) assistance in completing an application for 
 the supplemental nutrition assistance program;
 ``(C) assistance in obtaining application 
 verification documents;
 ``(D) medical expense deduction counseling; and
 ``(E) translation of materials and bilingual 
 accommodation.
 ``(2) Tailored dissemination of information relating to the 
 supplemental nutrition assistance program, including through--
 ``(A) community-based outreach workshops and 
 events;
 ``(B) a toll-free hotline to provide information 
 relating to Federal, State, and local food resources;
 ``(C) informational websites and other social media 
 sites; and
 ``(D) printed or digital informational content.
 ``(3) Transportation, including--
 ``(A) transportation to or from a local office of 
 the supplemental nutrition assistance program; and
 ``(B) administration of vouchers or similar items 
 for the transportation described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(4) Identification, implementation, analysis, and 
 dissemination of replicable and scalable models for increasing 
 enrollment in the supplemental nutrition assistance program 
 among older adults, kinship families, and adults with 
 disabilities.
 ``(e) Grants.--
 ``(1) Maximum amount.--A grant awarded under the pilot 
 program to an eligible entity for a fiscal year shall be--
 ``(A) not less than $50,000; and
 ``(B) not more than $250,000.
 ``(2) Duration.--An eligible entity may be awarded a grant 
 under the pilot program for not more than 5 years.
 ``(f) Evaluation.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
establishment of the pilot program, the Secretary shall conduct an 
evaluation of the pilot program.
 ``(g) Funding.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to amounts otherwise 
 available, there is appropriated, out of any funds in the 
 Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $12,250,000, to remain 
 available until expended, to carry out the pilot program, of 
 which not more than $250,000 shall be used to carry out the 
 evaluation under subsection (f).
 ``(2) Administrative costs.--Of the amounts made available 
 under paragraph (1) (excluding the amount made available to 
 carry out subsection (f)), not more than 3 percent may be used 
 by the Secretary for administrative costs.''.

SEC. 10205. FOOD DELIVERY UNDER SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE 
 PROGRAM.

 The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) (as 
amended by section 10204) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 34. FOOD DELIVERY.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Covered retail food store.--The term `covered retail 
 food store' means a retail food store, a public or private 
 nonprofit meal delivery service, or a public or nonprofit meal 
 delivery provider participating in the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program that is unable to cover the cost of food 
 delivery for participants of the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program.
 ``(2) Employee.--The term `employee' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 3 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 
 (29 U.S.C. 203).
 ``(b) Program Modifications.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) notify retail food stores participating in 
 the supplemental nutrition assistance program of 
 existing opportunities through which the retail food 
 stores can deliver food to program participants, 
 including by--
 ``(i) allowing an EBT card to be swiped 
 with a mobile device on delivery of food to the 
 home; and
 ``(ii) preparing food for pickup;
 ``(B) authorize public-private partnerships between 
 the Department of Agriculture, retail food stores 
 participating in the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program, and community-based organizations to provide 
 free or low-cost food delivery, including through the 
 use of private funds;
 ``(C) in the case of a covered retail food store, 
 use funds made available under subparagraph (E) of 
 paragraph (3) to provide, in accordance with that 
 paragraph, free grocery delivery for participants in 
 the supplemental nutrition assistance program who are 
 older adults or adults with disabilities (as those 
 terms are defined in section 33(a)) who are unable to 
 shop for food or lack safe and accessible 
 transportation options to the covered retail food 
 store; and
 ``(D) require each State to submit to the Secretary 
 a plan that describes the methods by which the State 
 will--
 ``(i) work with retail food stores 
 participating in the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program and other community-based 
 partners to establish a process for food 
 delivery for program participants;
 ``(ii) administer the reimbursements 
 described in paragraph (3), including timing, 
 eligibility, and distribution processes; and
 ``(iii) ensure that retail food stores 
 participating in the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program that are reimbursed for 
 delivery costs under paragraph (3) adhere to 
 the requirements described in subparagraph (B) 
 of that paragraph.
 ``(2) State plans.--Not later than 10 days after the date 
 on which the Secretary receives a State plan under paragraph 
 (1)(D), the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) determine whether to approve or disapprove 
 the State plan; and
 ``(B) make publicly available on the website of the 
 Department of Agriculture--
 ``(i) the State plan;
 ``(ii) the determination made under 
 subparagraph (A) with respect to that plan; and
 ``(iii) any guidance issued to the State 
 with respect to that plan.
 ``(3) Reimbursement of covered retail food stores.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law (including sections 274.7(f) and 
 278.2(b) of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 successor regulations), and any other regulations), 
 subject to the availability of funds, a State agency 
 shall reimburse a covered retail food store for the 
 cost of food delivery to participants described in 
 paragraph (1)(C) if--
 ``(i) the covered retail food store meets 
 the requirements under subparagraph (B); and
 ``(ii) the majority of the number of food 
 items delivered by the covered retail food 
 store are eligible for redemption using 
 benefits under the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program, regardless of whether the 
 delivery includes nonfood items, subject to the 
 condition that those nonfood items shall be of 
 de minimis value.
 ``(B) Requirements.--A covered retail food store 
 may receive reimbursement for the cost of food delivery 
 to participants described in paragraph (1)(C) if the 
 following requirements are met:
 ``(i) Food delivery is performed by 
 employees of the covered retail food store or 
 employees of an entity contracted by the 
 covered retail food store to perform 
 deliveries.
 ``(ii) Before any employee described in 
 clause (i) begins making food deliveries, that 
 employee receives employer-provided health and 
 safety training that reflects the most recent 
 guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention.
 ``(iii) All employees described in clause 
 (i) performing deliveries are paid at a rate 
 that is not less than the greater of--
 ``(I) the minimum wage rate 
 established under section 6(a)(1) of 
 the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 
 (29 U.S.C. 206(a)(1)); and
 ``(II) the minimum wage rate 
 established by the applicable State or 
 locality in which the employee works.
 ``(iv) The covered retail food store meets 
 the size standard determined by the Small 
 Business Administration for a supermarket or 
 other grocery retailer or a convenience 
 retailer under section 121.201 of title 13, 
 Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor 
 regulation).
 ``(v) The covered retail food store does 
 not--
 ``(I) charge the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program 
 participant for delivery costs for 
 which the covered retail food store 
 will be reimbursed;
 ``(II) require minimum purchase 
 thresholds in order to provide free 
 delivery;
 ``(III) restrict delivery times to 
 least-favorable windows for those 
 participants; or
 ``(IV) charge surge pricing.
 ``(C) Reimbursable costs.--Reimbursable costs under 
 subparagraph (A) include costs associated with 
 purchasing point-of-sale devices or receiving technical 
 assistance relating to point-of-sale devices.
 ``(D) Maximum reimbursement per delivery.--The 
 maximum amount of reimbursement under subparagraph (A) 
 for a food delivery fee shall be $10 per delivery, 
 which may be adjusted by the Secretary for inflation.
 ``(E) Authorization of appropriations.--There is 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary 
 $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, to remain available until expended, to 
 cover the cost of food delivery described in paragraph 
 (1)(C), to be distributed among States to fund 
 reimbursements by States under subparagraph (A).
 ``(4) Report.--Not later than April 30, 2026, and April 30 
 of each year thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of 
 Representatives a report that describes, for the period covered 
 by the report, as applicable--
 ``(A) the number of supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program participants using food delivery 
 services, including the percentage of those 
 participants that are older adults and adults with 
 disabilities (as those terms are defined in section 
 33(a));
 ``(B) the covered retail food stores that were 
 reimbursed under paragraph (3), including the amount of 
 each reimbursement;
 ``(C) any complications or difficulties experienced 
 by States in administering reimbursements under 
 paragraph (3); and
 ``(D) recommendations or best practices to assist 
 States in implementing food delivery programs similar 
 to the program under this section.''.

SEC. 10206. COMMODITY SUPPLEMENTAL FOOD PROGRAM.

 (a) Funds.--Section 4 of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection 
Act of 1973 (7 U.S.C. 612c note; Public Law 93-86) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``2023'' and inserting ``2028''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Funds.--In addition to amounts otherwise available, there is 
appropriated, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, to carry out the program under this section $10,000,000 
for each of fiscal years 2024 through 2028.''.
 (b) Adults With Disabilities.--Section 5 of the Agriculture and 
Consumer Protection Act of 1973 (7 U.S.C. 612c note; Public Law 93-86) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``2023'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2028'';
 (2) in subsection (g)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``to low-income 
 persons aged 60 and older.'' and inserting the 
 following: ``to--
 ``(A) low-income persons aged 60 and older; and
 ``(B) low-income adults with disabilities (as 
 defined in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102)).'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (3);
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Income eligibility.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a 
 low-income individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 that paragraph shall have a gross income level that is less 
 than 185 percent of the Federal poverty line.''; and
 (D) in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3) (as so 
 redesignated), in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 striking ``of--'' and all that follows through the 
 period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting ``of 36 
 months.''; and
 (3) in subsection (i), in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) by inserting ``or low-income adults with 
 disabilities described in subsection (g)(1)(B)'' after 
 ``elderly persons''; and
 (B) by striking ``to each elderly participant in, 
 or applicant for, the commodity supplemental food 
 program for the elderly'' and inserting ``to each 
 participant in, or applicant for, such a program''.

SEC. 10207. SENIORS FARMERS' MARKET NUTRITION PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 4402 of the Farm Security and Rural 
Investment Act of 2002 (7 U.S.C. 3007) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``Of the funds'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Mandatory funding.--Of the funds'';
 (B) in paragraph (1) (as so designated), by 
 inserting ``(referred to in this section as the 
 `Secretary')'' after ``Agriculture''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out and 
 expand the seniors farmers' market nutrition program--
 ``(A) not less than $60,000,000 for fiscal year 
 2024;
 ``(B) not less than $70,000,000 for fiscal year 
 2025; and
 ``(C) not less than $100,000,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2026 through 2028.'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``and adults with 
 disabilities (as defined in section 3 of the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102))'' before the 
 semicolon at the end;
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c) through (f) as 
 subsections (f) through (i), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Benefit Amounts.--Under the seniors farmers' market nutrition 
program--
 ``(1) the minimum individual benefit shall be $35; and
 ``(2) the maximum individual benefit shall be $80.
 ``(d) Certification Period.--The certification period for 
participants in the seniors farmers' market nutrition program shall be 
36 months.
 ``(e) Modernization Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of enactment of the Senior Hunger Prevention Act of 2024, the 
 Secretary shall establish a grant program under which the 
 Secretary shall award grants to State agencies, including 
 Tribal organizations (as defined in section 3 of the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2012)) and territories, that 
 administer the senior farmers' market nutrition program to 
 modernize program operations, including--
 ``(A) by transitioning from paper-based coupons to 
 an electronic transaction technology, such as a web-
 based service or installable software; and
 ``(B) by increasing benefit use at farmers' 
 markets.
 ``(2) Grant amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amount of a grant awarded 
 under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $350,000.
 ``(B) Supplies.--Not more than $25,000 may be used 
 to carry out subparagraph (F) of paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Eligible expenses.--An entity receiving a grant under 
 paragraph (1) may use the grant for--
 ``(A) costs associated with the procurement of 
 electronic transaction technology;
 ``(B) planning costs, including personnel costs, 
 relating to electronic transaction technology 
 procurement and implementation;
 ``(C) costs associated with evaluating the impact 
 of transitioning from coupon-based operations to an 
 electronic transaction technology;
 ``(D) training, outreach, and promotional material 
 costs, including the costs associated with translating 
 materials;
 ``(E) maintenance and operation of electronic 
 transaction technology procured using the grant during 
 the period of performance of the grant;
 ``(F) subject to paragraph (2)(B), the purchase of 
 supplies needed to perform electronic transactions 
 onsite; and
 ``(G) additional costs associated with modernizing 
 program operations, as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(4) Reports.--Each entity that receives a grant under 
 paragraph (1) shall submit to the Secretary and the 
 Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service quarterly 
 performance progress reports on the use of the grant.
 ``(5) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this 
 subsection $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal 
 year thereafter.''.
 (b) Income Guidelines.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall revise 
section 249.6(a)(3) of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, to ensure 
that income eligibility under that section is at or below 200 percent 
of the poverty income guidelines.

SEC. 10208. INFRASTRUCTURE FUNDING FOR FARMERS' MARKETS; LOCAL 
 PROCUREMENT PILOT PROGRAM.

 The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 is amended by 
inserting after section 4402 (7 U.S.C. 3007) the following:

``SEC. 4403. INFRASTRUCTURE FUNDING FOR FARMERS' MARKETS; LOCAL 
 PROCUREMENT PILOT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Disability.--The term `disability' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102).
 ``(2) Older adult.--The term `older adult' has the meaning 
 given the term `older individual' in section 102 of the Older 
 Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3002).
 ``(3) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 ``(b) Infrastructure Funding for Farmers' Markets.--
 ``(1) Definition of eligible entity.--In this subsection, 
 the term `eligible entity' means an entity that--
 ``(A) is--
 ``(i) an agricultural cooperative or other 
 agricultural business entity or a producer 
 network or association, including a community-
 supported agriculture network or association;
 ``(ii) a local or Tribal government;
 ``(iii) a nonprofit corporation;
 ``(iv) a public benefit corporation;
 ``(v) an economic development corporation;
 ``(vi) a regional farmers' market 
 authority;
 ``(vii) a food council; or
 ``(viii) any other entity as determined by 
 the Secretary; and
 ``(B) can demonstrate financial need, as determined 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of the Senior Hunger Prevention Act of 2024, 
 the Secretary shall establish a program under which the 
 Secretary shall provide financial assistance, in the form of 
 loans, loan guarantees, and grants, to eligible entities for--
 ``(A) the establishment of new farmers' markets;
 ``(B) the improvement or rehabilitation of existing 
 farmers' markets, including by adding or improving 
 payment technologies used in those farmers' markets; 
 and
 ``(C) the expansion of community supported 
 agriculture to serve older adults and adults with 
 disabilities.
 ``(3) Requirements.--An eligible entity that receives 
 financial assistance under paragraph (2) shall be required--
 ``(A) to host farmers' markets or related 
 activities at locations accessible--
 ``(i) by public transportation;
 ``(ii) by paratransit; or
 ``(iii) through transportation services 
 provided under the Older Americans Act of 1965 
 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.); and
 ``(B) to reserve not less than 50 percent of the 
 floor area of an applicable farmers' market for the 
 sale of products that are produced locally, as 
 determined by the Secretary, by--
 ``(i) farmers, ranchers, or aquaculture, 
 mariculture, or fisheries operators; or
 ``(ii) associations of farmers, ranchers, 
 or aquaculture, mariculture, or fisheries 
 operators.
 ``(4) Cost sharing.--The non-Federal share of a grant 
 provided under this subsection shall be 20 percent of the 
 amount of the grant, which may comprise transportation costs, 
 volunteer contributions, and in-kind staffing.
 ``(5) Funding.--Of the funds of the Commodity Credit 
 Corporation, the Secretary shall use to carry out this 
 subsection $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2024 through 
 2028.
 ``(c) Local Procurement Pilot Program.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Agricultural producer.--The term 
 `agricultural producer' includes--
 ``(i) an agricultural cooperative;
 ``(ii) a person engaged in farming, 
 ranching, or aquaculture;
 ``(iii) a person engaged in the packing of 
 a food product; and
 ``(iv) a person engaged in the minimal 
 processing of a food product, as determined by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' 
 means an entity that--
 ``(i)(I) coordinates enrollment in, and 
 distribution of, benefits under the seniors 
 farmers' market nutrition program; or
 ``(II) demonstrates an ability to partner 
 with an entity that coordinates enrollment in 
 and distribution of benefits under the seniors 
 farmers' market nutrition program; and
 ``(ii) is--
 ``(I) a public or nonprofit 
 provider of nutrition services or 
 support to older adults or adults with 
 disabilities, including--
 ``(aa) an Aging and 
 Disability Resource Center (as 
 defined in section 102 of the 
 Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 
 U.S.C. 3002));
 ``(bb) an area agency on 
 aging (as defined in that 
 section);
 ``(cc) a State health 
 insurance program;
 ``(dd) a State unit on 
 aging;
 ``(ee) a center for 
 independent living;
 ``(ff) a community health 
 center;
 ``(gg) a multipurpose 
 senior center; and
 ``(hh) federally subsidized 
 housing, including federally 
 subsidized housing units for 
 older adults and adults with 
 disabilities; or
 ``(II) a local, State, or national 
 parks and recreation department.
 ``(2) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of the Senior Hunger Prevention Act of 2024, 
 the Secretary shall establish a pilot program under which the 
 Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to contract 
 with agricultural producers that will grow produce to support 
 the local procurement and contracting of produce for eligible 
 entities.
 ``(3) Priority.--In awarding grants under paragraph (2), 
 the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity that 
 will use grant funds to benefit underserved communities, 
 including communities that are located in areas of concentrated 
 poverty with limited access to fresh locally or regionally 
 grown food.
 ``(4) Methods.--Under a contract described in paragraph 
 (2), an agricultural producer may grow produce through 
 traditional or controlled environmental agriculture.
 ``(5) Evaluation.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 establishment of the pilot program under paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the pilot program.
 ``(6) Funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--Of the funds of the Commodity 
 Credit Corporation, the Secretary shall use to carry 
 out this subsection $350,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2024 through 2028.
 ``(B) Administrative costs.--Of the amounts made 
 available under subparagraph (A) for a fiscal year, not 
 more than 5 percent may be used for administrative 
 costs.
 ``(C) Evaluation.--In addition to amounts made 
 available under subparagraph (A), there is appropriated 
 to the Secretary, out of any funds in the Treasury not 
 otherwise appropriated, $25,000 to carry out paragraph 
 (5).''.

 CHAPTER 2--CLOSING THE MEAL GAP

SEC. 10211. ELIMINATION OF TIME LIMIT.

 (a) In General.--Section 6 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 
U.S.C. 2015) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (o); and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (p) through (s) as 
 subsections (o) through (r), respectively.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 5(a) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 
 U.S.C. 2014(a)) is amended, in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``(r)'' and inserting ``(q)''.
 (2) Section 6(d)(4) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 
 (7 U.S.C. 2015(d)(4)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)(ii)(I)(bb)(DD), by striking 
 ``or subsection (o)''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (N), by striking ``or 
 subsection (o)'' each place it appears.
 (3) Section 7(i)(1) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 
 (7 U.S.C. 2016(i)(1)) is amended by striking ``section 6(o)(2) 
 of this Act or''.
 (4) Section 16(h) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 
 U.S.C. 2025(h)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by striking ``that--'' 
 and all that follows through the period at the 
 end of clause (ii) and inserting ``that is 
 determined and adjusted by the Secretary.'';
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (E);
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as 
 subparagraph (E); and
 (iv) in clause (ii)(III)(ee)(AA) of 
 subparagraph (E) (as so redesignated), by 
 striking ``, individuals subject to the 
 requirements under section 6(o),''; and
 (B) in paragraph (5)(C)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by adding ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (ii) in clause (iii), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a period; and
 (iii) by striking clause (iv).
 (5) Section 51(d)(8)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 is amended--
 (A) in subclause (I), by striking ``, or'' at the 
 end and inserting a period;
 (B) in the matter preceding subclause (I), by 
 striking ``family--'' and all that follows through 
 ``receiving'' in subclause (I) and inserting ``family 
 receiving''; and
 (C) by striking subclause (II).
 (6) Section 103(a)(2) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3113) is amended--
 (A) by striking subparagraph (D); and
 (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (K) 
 as subparagraphs (D) through (J), respectively.
 (7) Section 121(b)(2)(B) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3151) is amended--
 (A) by striking clause (iv); and
 (B) by redesignating clauses (v) through (vii) as 
 clauses (iv) through (vi), respectively.

SEC. 10212. INCLUSION OF PUERTO RICO IN SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITIONAL 
 ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 3 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 
(7 U.S.C. 2012) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (r), by inserting ``the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico,'' after ``Guam,''; and
 (2) in subsection (u)(3), by inserting ``the Commonwealth 
 of Puerto Rico,'' after ``Guam,''.
 (b) Eligible Households.--Section 5 of the Food and Nutrition Act 
of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2014) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,'' after ``Guam,'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and Guam,'' and 
 inserting ``Guam, and the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico,''; and
 (B) in the undesignated matter at the end, by 
 striking ``States or Guam'' and inserting ``States, 
 Guam, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico''; and
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ``the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,'' after ``Hawaii,'' each 
 place it appears; and
 (B) in paragraph (6)(B), in the matter preceding 
 clause (i), by inserting ``the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico,'' after ``Guam,''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and 
 (b) shall be effective with respect to the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico on the date described in paragraph (2) if the 
 Secretary of Agriculture submits to Congress a certification 
 under subsection (f)(2)(C) of section 19 of the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2028) (as added by subsection 
 (d)).
 (2) Date described.--The date referred to in paragraph (1) 
 is the date established by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in 
 the applicable plan of operation submitted to the Secretary of 
 Agriculture under subsection (f)(1) of section 19 of the Food 
 and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2028) (as added by 
 subsection (d)).
 (d) Transition of Puerto Rico to Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program.--Section 19 of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 
2028) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Transition of Puerto Rico to Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program.--
 ``(1) Request for participation.--The Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico may submit to the Secretary a request to 
 participate in the supplemental nutrition assistance program, 
 which shall include a plan of operation described in section 
 11(d), including a description of the date on which the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico intends to begin participation in 
 the supplemental nutrition assistance program.
 ``(2) Certification by secretary.--
 ``(A) In general.--On submission of a request by 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico under paragraph (1), 
 the Secretary shall certify the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico as qualified to participate in the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program if the Secretary--
 ``(i) approves the plan of operation 
 submitted with the request, in accordance with 
 this subsection; and
 ``(ii) approves the applications described 
 in paragraph (4) in accordance with that 
 paragraph.
 ``(B) Deadline.--The Secretary shall certify or 
 deny the request of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
 under paragraph (1) not later than 90 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary receives the request.
 ``(C) Submission to congress.--The Secretary shall 
 submit a certification under subparagraph (A) to 
 Congress.
 ``(3) Determination of plan of operation.--
 ``(A) Approval.--The Secretary shall approve a plan 
 of operation submitted with a request under paragraph 
 (1) if the plan satisfies the requirements under this 
 Act.
 ``(B) Disapproval.--If the Secretary does not 
 approve a plan of operation submitted with a request 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide a 
 statement that describes each requirement under this 
 Act that is not satisfied by the plan.
 ``(4) Approval of retail food stores.--If the Secretary 
 approves a plan of operation under paragraph (3)(A) for the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Secretary shall accept 
 applications from retail food stores located in the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to be authorized under section 9 to 
 participate in the supplemental nutrition assistance program.
 ``(5) Family market program.--Notwithstanding subsection 
 (g), the Secretary shall allow the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
 to continue to carry out under the supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program the Family Market Program established 
 pursuant to this section.
 ``(6) Temporary funding.--If the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico has a request under paragraph (1) pending before the 
 Secretary (including a plan of operation pending under 
 paragraph (3)), the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall receive 
 block grants under this section, in amounts determined by the 
 Secretary, until the date on which the Secretary certifies the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico under paragraph (2)(B).
 ``(7) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as are 
 necessary to carry out this subsection for fiscal year 2024, to 
 remain available until expended.
 ``(g) Technical Infrastructure Implementation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico may 
 request from the Secretary a 1-time grant to pay for the cost 
 of the technology infrastructure necessary to implement the 
 supplemental nutrition assistance program, including the cost 
 of information technology, information technology personnel, 
 and training relating to program implementation.
 ``(2) Application.--In making a request under paragraph 
 (1), the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall submit to the 
 Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
 including--
 ``(A) a description of the costs to be paid for by 
 the grant; and
 ``(B) a plan for implementing the technology 
 infrastructure described in paragraph (1)--
 ``(i) within 1 year of receiving the grant; 
 and
 ``(ii) that is reasonably cost efficient, 
 as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Determination.--
 ``(A) Time limit.--The Secretary shall approve or 
 deny an application submitted under paragraph (2) not 
 later than 90 days after the date on which the 
 application is submitted.
 ``(B) Denial.--If the Secretary denies an 
 application submitted under paragraph (2), the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico may amend the plan 
 described in subparagraph (B) of that paragraph, in 
 coordination with the Secretary, to resubmit to the 
 Secretary for approval.
 ``(4) Funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--There is appropriated to the 
 Secretary, out of funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, $112,500,000 to carry out this 
 subsection, to remain available until 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection.
 ``(B) Reversion of funds.--Any funds appropriated 
 to the Secretary under subparagraph (A) that remain 
 available by the date described in that subparagraph 
 shall revert to the Treasury.
 ``(h) Termination of Effectiveness.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsections (a) through (e) shall cease 
 to be effective with respect to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
 on the date described in paragraph (2) if the Secretary submits 
 to Congress a certification under subsection (f)(2)(C) for the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 ``(2) Date described.--The date referred to in paragraph 
 (1) is the date established by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
 in the applicable plan of operation submitted to the Secretary 
 under subsection (f)(1).''.

 Subtitle D--Universal School Meals

SEC. 10301. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Universal School Meals Program 
Act of 2024''.

SEC. 10302. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided, this subtitle, and the amendments 
made by this subtitle, take effect on the date that is 1 year after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

 CHAPTER 1--SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM

SEC. 10311. FREE SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 4(a) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 
(42 U.S.C. 1773(a)) is amended, in the first sentence--
 (1) by striking ``is hereby'' and inserting ``are''; and
 (2) by inserting ``to provide free breakfast to all 
 children enrolled at those schools'' before ``in accordance''.
 (b) Apportionment to States.--Section 4(b) of the Child Nutrition 
Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking subclause 
 (II) and inserting the following:
 ``(II) the national average payment 
 for free breakfasts, as specified in 
 subparagraph (B).'';
 (B) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) Payment amounts.--
 ``(i) In general.--The national average 
 payment for each free breakfast shall be $2.80, 
 adjusted annually for inflation in accordance 
 with clause (ii) and rounded in accordance with 
 clause (iii).
 ``(ii) Inflation adjustment.--
 ``(I) In general.--The annual 
 inflation adjustment under clause (i) 
 shall reflect changes in the cost of 
 operating the free breakfast program 
 under this section, as indicated by the 
 change in the Consumer Price Index for 
 food away from home for all urban 
 consumers.
 ``(II) Basis.--Each inflation 
 annual adjustment under clause (i) 
 shall reflect the changes in the 
 Consumer Price Index for food away from 
 home for the most recent 12-month 
 period for which those data are 
 available.
 ``(iii) Rounding.--On July 1, 2024, and 
 annually thereafter, the national average 
 payment rate for free breakfast shall be--
 ``(I) adjusted to the nearest 
 lower-cent increment; and
 ``(II) based on the unrounded 
 amounts for the preceding 12-month 
 period.'';
 (C) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (E); and
 (D) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as 
 subparagraph (C);
 (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3);
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs 
 (2) and (3), respectively; and
 (4) in paragraph (3) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``paragraph (3) or (4)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)''.
 (c) State Disbursement to Schools.--Section 4 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773) is amended by striking 
subsection (c) and inserting the following:
 ``(c) State Disbursement to Schools.--Funds apportioned and paid to 
any State for the purpose of this section shall be disbursed by the 
State educational agency to schools selected by the State educational 
agency to assist those schools in operating a breakfast program.''.
 (d) No Collection of Debt.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of the 
 Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.) or any 
 other provision of law, effective beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, as a condition of participation in the 
 breakfast program under section 4 of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1773), 
 a school--
 (A) shall not collect any debt owed to the school 
 for unpaid meal charges; and
 (B) shall continue to accrue debt for unpaid meal 
 charges--
 (i) for the purpose of receiving 
 reimbursement under section 10332; and
 (ii) until the effective date specified in 
 section 10302.
 (2) Child nutrition act of 1966.--
 (A) In general.--Section 4 of the Child Nutrition 
 Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773) is amended by striking 
 subsection (d) and inserting the following:
 ``(d) No Collection of Debt.--A school participating in the free 
breakfast program under this section shall not collect any debt owed to 
the school for unpaid meal charges.''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 23(a) of the 
 Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1793(a)) is 
 amended by striking ``a school in severe need, as 
 described in section 4(d)(1)'' and inserting the 
 following: ``a school--
 ``(1) participating in the free breakfast program under 
 section 4, or seeking to initiate a free breakfast program 
 under that section; and
 ``(2) not less than 40 percent of the students of which are 
 economically disadvantaged students (as identified under a 
 measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)))''.
 (e) Nutritional and Other Program Requirements.--Section 4(e) of 
the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773(e)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), in the second sentence, by 
 striking ``free or'' and all that follows through the period at 
 the end and inserting ``free to all children enrolled at a 
 school participating in the school breakfast program.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``the full charge to the student for a breakfast meeting the 
 requirements of this section or''.
 (f) Prohibition on Breakfast Shaming, Meal Denial.--
 (1) In general.--Effective beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, a school or school food authority--
 (A) shall not--
 (i) physically segregate for the purpose of 
 debt shaming or otherwise discriminate against 
 any child participating in the breakfast 
 program under section 4 of the Child Nutrition 
 Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773); or
 (ii) overtly identify a child described in 
 clause (i) by a special token or ticket, an 
 announced or published list of names, or any 
 other means; and
 (B) shall provide the program meal to each child 
 eligible under the program described in subparagraph 
 (A)(i).
 (2) Child nutrition act of 1966.--Section 4 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(f) Prohibition on Breakfast Shaming.--A school or school food 
authority shall not--
 ``(1) physically segregate for the purpose of debt shaming 
 or otherwise discriminate against any child participating in 
 the free breakfast program under this section; or
 ``(2) overtly identify a child described in paragraph (1) 
 by a special token or ticket, an announced or published list of 
 names, or any other means.''.
 (g) Department of Defense Overseas Dependents' Schools.--Section 
20(b) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1789(b)) is amended 
by striking ``by this section'' and all that follows through the period 
at the end and inserting ``by this section.''.
 (h) Conforming Amendments.--The Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 
U.S.C. 1771 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or reduced price'' each place it appears;
 (2) by striking ``and reduced price'' each place it 
 appears; and
 (3) by striking ``a reduced price'' each place it appears.

 CHAPTER 2--SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM

SEC. 10321. APPORTIONMENT TO STATES.

 Section 4(b) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1753(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``of this 
 Act''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``of this 
 subsection''; and
 (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(2) Payment amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--The national average payment for 
 each free lunch shall be $4.63, adjusted annually for 
 inflation in accordance with subparagraph (C) and 
 rounded in accordance with subparagraph (D).
 ``(B) Additional payment for local food.--
 ``(i) In general.--During a school year, a 
 school food authority shall receive an 
 additional payment described in clause (ii) if 
 the State certifies that the school food 
 authority served meals (including breakfasts, 
 lunches, suppers, and supplements) during the 
 preceding school year not less than 25 percent 
 of which were made with farm products that 
 were--
 ``(I) produced and distributed--
 ``(aa) in the State in 
 which the school food authority 
 is located; or
 ``(bb) not more than 250 
 miles from the location of the 
 school food authority; and
 ``(II) marketed to consumers--
 ``(aa) directly; or
 ``(bb) through an 
 intermediated channel (such as 
 a food hub or cooperative).
 ``(ii) Payment amount.--
 ``(I) In general.--The additional 
 payment amount under this subparagraph 
 shall be--
 ``(aa) $0.30 for each free 
 lunch and supper;
 ``(bb) $0.21 for each free 
 breakfast; and
 ``(cc) $0.08 for each free 
 supplement.
 ``(II) Adjustments.--Each 
 additional payment amount under 
 subclause (I) shall be adjusted 
 annually in accordance with 
 subparagraph (C) and rounded in 
 accordance with subparagraph (D).
 ``(iii) Disbursement.--The State agency 
 shall disburse funds made available under this 
 subparagraph to school food authorities 
 eligible to receive additional reimbursement.
 ``(C) Inflation adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--The annual inflation 
 adjustment under subparagraphs (A) and (B)(ii) 
 shall reflect changes in the cost of operating 
 the free lunch program under this Act, as 
 indicated by the change in the Consumer Price 
 Index for food away from home for all urban 
 consumers.
 ``(ii) Basis.--Each annual inflation 
 adjustment under subparagraphs (A) and (B)(ii) 
 shall reflect the changes in the Consumer Price 
 Index for food away from home for the most 
 recent 12-month period for which those data are 
 available.
 ``(D) Rounding.--On July 1, 2024, and annually 
 thereafter, the national average payment rate for free 
 lunch and the additional payment amount for free 
 breakfast, lunch, supper, and supplement under 
 subparagraph (B) shall be--
 ``(i) adjusted to the nearest lower-cent 
 increment; and
 ``(ii) based on the unrounded amounts for 
 the preceding 12-month period.''.

SEC. 10322. NUTRITIONAL AND OTHER PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Elimination of Free Lunch Eligibility Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 9 of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758) is amended by 
 striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
 ``(b) Eligibility.--All children enrolled in a school that 
participates in the school lunch program under this Act shall be 
eligible to receive free lunch under this Act.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 9 of the Richard B. Russell National 
 School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758) is amended--
 (i) in subsection (c), in the third 
 sentence, by striking ``or at a reduced cost''; 
 and
 (ii) in subsection (e), by striking ``, 
 reduced price,''.
 (B)(i) Section 18 of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1769) is amended--
 (I) in subsection (b), by striking ``(b)(1) 
 Upon'' and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Extension of Eligibility of Certain School Districts To 
Receive Cash or Commodity Letters of Credit Assistance for School Lunch 
Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--On'';
 (II) in subsection (c), by striking 
 ``(c)(1) The'' and inserting the following:
 ``(b) Alternative Counting and Claiming Procedures.--
 ``(1) In general.--The'';
 (III) in subsection (g), by striking the 
 subsection designation and heading and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(c) Access to Local Foods: Patrick Leahy Farm to School 
Program.--'';
 (IV) by striking subsection (j); and
 (V) by redesignating subsections (h), (i), 
 and (k) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), 
 respectively.
 (ii) Section 17(r)(5) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1766(r)(5)) is 
 amended by striking ``18(h)'' and inserting ``18(d)''.
 (iii) Section 19(i)(2) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1769a(i)(2)) is 
 amended by striking ``State that received funding under 
 section 18(f) on the day before the date of enactment 
 of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008'' and 
 inserting ``State that, on the day before the date of 
 enactment of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 
 2008 (Public Law 110-246; 122 Stat. 1651), received 
 funding under section 18(f) (as in effect on the day 
 before that date of enactment)''.
 (iv) Section 413(b)(2) of the Agricultural 
 Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 
 (7 U.S.C. 7633(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``section 
 18(g) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1769(g))'' and inserting ``subsection 
 (c) of section 18 of the Richard B. Russell National 
 School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1769)''.
 (C) Section 28 of the Richard B. Russell National 
 School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1769i) is amended--
 (i) by striking subsection (b); and
 (ii) by redesignating subsection (c) as 
 subsection (b).
 (D) Section 1154(a)(2)(A)(i) of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended by striking ``in accordance 
 with section 9(b)(1) of the Richard B. Russell National 
 School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758(b)(1)''.
 (E) Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is amended by striking paragraph (7) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(7) provide safeguards that restrict the use or 
 disclosure of information concerning applicants and recipients 
 to purposes directly connected with the administration of the 
 plan;''.
 (F) Section 4301 of the Food, Conservation, and 
 Energy Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. 1758a) is repealed.
 (G) Section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 
 (42 U.S.C. 1786) is amended--
 (i) in subsection (d)--
 (I) in paragraph (2)(A)--
 (aa) by striking clause 
 (i); and
 (bb) by redesignating 
 clauses (ii) and (iii) as 
 clauses (i) and (ii), 
 respectively; and
 (II) in paragraph (3)--
 (aa) by striking 
 subparagraph (D);
 (bb) by redesignating 
 subparagraphs (E) and (F) as 
 subparagraphs (D) and (E), 
 respectively; and
 (cc) in subparagraph (D) 
 (as so redesignated), by 
 striking ``clause (ii) or 
 (iii)'' and inserting ``clause 
 (i) or (ii)''; and
 (ii) in subsection (f)(17), by striking 
 ``Notwithstanding subsection (d)(2)(A)(i), not 
 later'' and inserting ``Not later''.
 (b) No Collection of Debt.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of the 
 Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et 
 seq.) or any other provision of law, effective beginning on the 
 date of enactment of this Act, as a condition of participation 
 in the school lunch program under that Act, a school--
 (A) shall not collect any debt owed to the school 
 for unpaid meal charges; and
 (B) shall continue to accrue debt for unpaid meal 
 charges--
 (i) for the purpose of receiving 
 reimbursement under section 10332; and
 (ii) until the effective date specified in 
 section 10302.
 (2) National school lunch act.--Section 9 of the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758) is amended 
 by striking subsection (d) and inserting the following:
 ``(d) No Collection of Debt.--A school participating in the school 
lunch program under this Act shall not collect any debt owed to the 
school for unpaid meal charges.''.

SEC. 10323. SPECIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 11 of the Richard B. Russell National 
School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1759a) is repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 6 of the Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1755) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``sections 11 
 and 13'' and inserting ``section 13''; and
 (B) in subsection (e)(1), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``section 4, this 
 section, and section 11'' and inserting ``this section 
 and section 4''.
 (2) Section 7(d) of the Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1756(d)) is amended by striking ``or 11''.
 (3) Section 8(g) of the Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1757(g)) is amended by striking ``and 
 under section 11 of this Act''.
 (4) Section 12(f) of the Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1760(f)) is amended by striking ``11,''.
 (5) Section 7(a) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 
 U.S.C. 1766(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``4, 11, and 
 17'' and inserting ``4 and 17''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``sections 4 
 and 11'' and inserting ``section 4''.
 (6) Section 1101(j)(3) of the Families First Coronavirus 
 Response Act (7 U.S.C. 2011 note; Public Law 116-127) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``or served under section 11(a)(1) 
 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1760(d), 1759(a)(1))'' and inserting ``of the 
 Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1760(d))''; and
 (B) by striking ``or reduced price''.

SEC. 10324. PRICE FOR PAID LUNCH.

 Section 12 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1760) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (l)(4)--
 (A) by striking subparagraph (D); and
 (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (M) 
 as subparagraphs (D) through (L), respectively;
 (2) by striking subsection (p); and
 (3) by redesignating subsections (q) and (r) as subsections 
 (p) and (q), respectively.

SEC. 10325. SUMMER FOOD SERVICE PROGRAM FOR CHILDREN.

 Section 13 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1761) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A)(i)--
 (i) in subclause (I), by striking ``have 
 been determined eligible for free or reduced 
 price school meals under this Act and the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et 
 seq.)'' and inserting ``are economically 
 disadvantaged students (as identified under a 
 measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (ii) in subclause (II), by striking ``are 
 eligible for free or reduced price school meals 
 under this Act and the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.)'' and inserting 
 ``are economically disadvantaged students (as 
 identified under a measure described in section 
 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (iii) in subclause (III)(bb), by striking 
 ``meet the income standards for free or reduced 
 price school meals under this Act and the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et 
 seq.)'' and inserting ``are economically 
 disadvantaged students (as identified under a 
 measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (iv) in subclause (IV), by striking ``are 
 eligible for free or reduced price school meals 
 under this Act and the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.)'' and inserting 
 ``are economically disadvantaged students (as 
 identified under a measure described in section 
 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)))''; and
 (v) in subclause (V), by striking ``are 
 eligible for free or reduced price school meals 
 under this Act and the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.)'' and inserting 
 ``are economically disadvantaged students (as 
 identified under a measure described in section 
 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(C) Waiver.--If the Secretary determines that a 
 program requirement under this section limits the 
 access of children to meals served under this section, 
 the Secretary may waive that program requirement.
 ``(D) Eligibility.--All children shall be eligible 
 to participate in the program under this section.'';
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking ``only for'' and 
 all that follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting ``for meals served to all children.''; and
 (D) in paragraph (13)--
 (i) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking 
 ``eligible for a free or reduced price lunch 
 under this Act or a free or reduced price 
 breakfast under section 4 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773)'' and 
 inserting ``an economically disadvantaged 
 student (as identified under a measure 
 described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)))''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)(ii), by striking 
 ``eligible for free or reduced price lunch 
 under this Act or free or reduced price 
 breakfast under section 4 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773)'' and 
 inserting ``economically disadvantaged students 
 (as identified under a measure described in 
 section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(2), by striking ``may only serve'' 
 and all that follows through ``migrant children'';
 (3) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following:
 ``(c) Payments.--
 ``(1) In general.--Payments shall be made to service 
 institutions for meals served--
 ``(A) during the months of May through September;
 ``(B) during school vacation at any time during an 
 academic school year;
 ``(C) during a teacher in-service day; and
 ``(D) on days that school is closed due to a 
 natural disaster, building repair, court order, or 
 similar cause, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Limitation on payments.--A service institution shall 
 receive payments under this section for not more than 3 meals 
 and 1 supplement per child per day.''; and
 (4) in subsection (f)(3), by striking ``, except that'' and 
 all that follows through ``of this section''.

SEC. 10326. SUMMER ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER FOR CHILDREN PROGRAM.

 Section 13A of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1762) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i), by striking ``$40'' and 
 inserting ``$60'';
 (2) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``directly 
 certified'' and all that follows through ``this 
 section'' and inserting ``an economically disadvantaged 
 student (as identified under a measure described in 
 section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)))'';
 (B) by striking subparagraph (B); and
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (E) 
 as subparagraphs (B) through (D), respectively;
 (3) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraph (3), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``processes--'' and all 
 that follows through ``to reliably'' in subparagraph 
 (B) and inserting ``processes to reliably''; and
 (B) in paragraph (4), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``by--'' and all that 
 follows through ``establishing'' in subparagraph (B) 
 and inserting ``by establishing''; and
 (4) in subsection (h), by striking paragraph (2) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(2) Eligible child.--The term `eligible child' means any 
 child residing in a State or on land under the jurisdiction of 
 a covered Indian Tribal organization that participates in the 
 program established under this section.''.

SEC. 10327. CHILD AND ADULT CARE FOOD PROGRAM.

 Section 17 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1766) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking subparagraph (B) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(B) any other private organization providing 
 nonresidential child care or day care outside school 
 hours for school children;'';
 (2) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following:
 ``(c) Free Meals.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law--
 ``(1) all meals and supplements served under the program 
 authorized under this section shall be provided for free to 
 participants of the program; and
 ``(2) an institution that serves those meals and 
 supplements shall be reimbursed--
 ``(A) in the case of breakfast, at the rate 
 established for free breakfast under section 
 4(b)(1)(B)(i) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 
 U.S.C. 1773(b)(1)(B)(i));
 ``(B) in the case of lunch, at the rate established 
 for free lunch under section 4(b)(2)(A); and
 ``(C) in the case of a supplemental meal, $1.20, 
 adjusted for inflation in accordance with section 
 4(b)(2)(C).'';
 (3) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraph (B) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(B) Limitation to reimbursements.--An institution 
 may claim reimbursement under this paragraph for not 
 more than 3 meals and 1 supplement per day per 
 child.'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (C) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
 (3);
 (4) in subsection (o)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (4); and
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as 
 paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; and
 (5) in subsection (r)--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``Program for At-risk School Children'' and inserting 
 ``Afterschool Meal and Snack Program'';
 (B) by striking ``at-risk school'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``eligible'';
 (C) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the paragraph heading, by striking 
 ``at-risk school'' and inserting ``eligible''; 
 and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``operated'' and all that follows through the 
 period at the end and inserting a period; and
 (D) in paragraph (4)(A), by striking ``only for'' 
 and all that follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting the following: ``for--
 ``(i) not more than 1 meal and 1 supplement 
 per child per day served on a regular school 
 day; and
 ``(ii) not more than 3 meals and 1 
 supplement per child per day served on any day 
 other than a regular school day.''.

SEC. 10328. MEALS AND SUPPLEMENTS FOR CHILDREN IN AFTERSCHOOL CARE.

 Section 17A of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1766a) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``meal 
 supplements'' and inserting ``meals and supplements'';
 (2) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``meal supplements'' 
 and inserting ``free meals and supplements'';
 (3) in subsection (b), by inserting ``meals and'' before 
 ``supplements''; and
 (4) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following:
 ``(c) Reimbursement.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Meals.--A free meal provided under this 
 section to a child shall be reimbursed at a rate of 
 $4.63, adjusted annually for inflation in accordance 
 with paragraph (3)(A) and rounded in accordance with 
 paragraph (3)(B).
 ``(B) Supplements.--A free supplement provided 
 under this section to a child shall be reimbursed at 
 the rate at which free supplements are reimbursed under 
 section 17(c)(2)(C).
 ``(2) Limitation to reimbursements.--An institution may 
 claim reimbursement under this section for not more than 1 meal 
 and 1 supplement per day per child served on a regular school 
 day.
 ``(3) Inflation; rounding.--
 ``(A) Inflation adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--The annual inflation 
 adjustment under paragraph (1)(A) shall reflect 
 changes in the cost of operating the program 
 under this section, as indicated by the change 
 in the Consumer Price Index for food away from 
 home for all urban consumers.
 ``(ii) Basis.--Each inflation annual 
 adjustment under paragraph (1)(A) shall reflect 
 the changes in the Consumer Price Index for 
 food away from home for the most recent 12-
 month period for which those data are 
 available.
 ``(B) Rounding.--On July 1, 2024, and annually 
 thereafter, the reimbursement rate for a free meal 
 under this section shall be--
 ``(i) adjusted to the nearest lower-cent 
 increment; and
 ``(ii) based on the unrounded amounts for 
 the preceding 12-month period.''.

SEC. 10329. PILOT PROJECTS.

 Section 18 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 
U.S.C. 1769) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by 
 section 10322(a)(2)(B)(i)(III)), by striking subparagraph (B) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(B) serve a high proportion of economically 
 disadvantaged students (as identified under a measure 
 described in section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)));''; and
 (2) in paragraph (1)(A)(ii) of subsection (d) (as 
 redesignated by section 10322(a)(2)(B)(i)(V)), by striking 
 ``eligible for free or reduced price meals under this Act'' and 
 inserting ``economically disadvantaged students (as identified 
 under a measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5)))''.

SEC. 10330. FRESH FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROGRAM.

 Section 19(d) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1769a(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``paragraph (2) of this subsection and'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding 
 clause (i), by striking ``school--'' and all that 
 follows through ``submits'' in clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``school that submits'';
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``schools'' 
 and all that follows through ``Act'' and inserting 
 ``high-need schools (as defined in section 2211(b) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6631(b)))''; and
 (D) in subparagraph (D)--
 (i) by striking clause (i); and
 (ii) by redesignating clauses (ii) through 
 (iv) as clauses (i) through (iii), 
 respectively; and
 (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(2) Outreach to high-need schools.--Prior to making 
 decisions regarding school participation in the program, a 
 State agency shall inform high-need schools (as defined in 
 section 2211(b) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6631(b))), including Tribal schools, of the 
 eligibility of the schools for the program.''.

SEC. 10331. TRAINING, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND FOOD SERVICE MANAGEMENT 
 INSTITUTE.

 Section 21(a)(1)(B) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1769b-1(a)(1)(B)) is amended, in the matter preceding 
clause (i), by striking ``certified to receive free or reduced price 
meals'' and inserting ``who are economically disadvantaged students (as 
identified under a measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
6313(a)(5)))''.

SEC. 10332. REIMBURSEMENT OF SCHOOL MEAL DELINQUENT DEBT PROGRAM.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Delinquent debt.--The term ``delinquent debt'' means 
 the debt owed by a parent or guardian of a child to a school--
 (A) as of the effective date specified in section 
 10302; and
 (B) for meals served by the school under--
 (i) the school breakfast program under 
 section 4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 
 (42 U.S.C. 1773);
 (ii) the school lunch program established 
 under the Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.); or
 (iii) both of the programs described in 
 clauses (i) and (ii).
 (2) Program.--The term ``program'' means the program 
 established under subsection (b)(1).
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 (b) Reimbursement Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 60 days after the 
 effective date specified in section 10302, the Secretary shall 
 establish a program under which the Secretary shall reimburse 
 each school participating in a program described in clause (i) 
 or (ii) of subsection (a)(1)(B) for all delinquent debt.
 (2) Form for reimbursement.--To carry out the program, the 
 Secretary shall design and distribute to State agencies a form 
 to collect data relating to all delinquent debt in applicable 
 schools in the State, organized by school food authority.
 (3) Completion date.--The Secretary shall provide all 
 reimbursements under the program not later than 180 days after 
 the effective date specified in section 10302.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the effective date 
specified in section 10302, the Comptroller General of the United 
States shall submit to Congress and make publicly available a report 
that describes the successes and challenges of the program.

SEC. 10333. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 The Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et 
seq.) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or reduced price'' each place it appears;
 (2) by striking ``or a reduced price'' each place it 
 appears;
 (3) by striking ``and reduced price'' each place it 
 appears; and
 (4) by striking ``a reduced price'' each place it appears.

 CHAPTER 3--ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION DATA

SEC. 10341. MEASURE OF POVERTY.

 Section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 6313(a)(5)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``the number of 
 children eligible for a free or reduced price lunch under the 
 Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et 
 seq.)'' and inserting ``the number of children from low-income 
 backgrounds, identified under subparagraph (D)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Identification of children from low-income 
 backgrounds.--
 ``(i) In general.--A local educational 
 agency or State agency, for the purpose of 
 identifying children from low-income 
 backgrounds enrolled in a school served by a 
 local educational agency, may--
 ``(I) maintain a record, with 
 respect to each student for whom the 
 local educational agency provides a 
 free public education that contains the 
 information collected from the survey 
 described in clause (iii);
 ``(II) distribute and collect a 
 student survey based on the template 
 developed under clause (iii) to 
 identify children from low-income 
 backgrounds; and
 ``(III) utilize direct 
 certification data described in clause 
 (iv)(I) to identify children from low-
 income backgrounds.
 ``(ii) Privacy.--
 ``(I) In general.--All individual 
 data collected under this subparagraph 
 shall be protected by the local 
 educational agency or State agency in a 
 manner consistent with all applicable 
 local, State, and Federal privacy laws.
 ``(II) Reporting data.--Only 
 aggregated data, which may include data 
 disaggregated at the school, local 
 educational agency, or State level, 
 shall be reported to the Secretary at 
 such time and in such manner as the 
 Secretary may reasonably require.
 ``(iii) Survey.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date of enactment of the Universal 
 School Meals Program Act of 2024, the 
 Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of Agriculture, shall develop a template 
 survey--
 ``(I) to identify children from 
 low-income backgrounds that contains 
 only the information necessary to 
 identify a child as a child from a low-
 income background by using the criteria 
 of eligibility for a free or reduced 
 priced lunch under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act, as 
 such criteria were in effect on 
 September 30, 2022; and
 ``(II) that shall be designed to be 
 easily accessible and in a user-
 friendly manner.
 ``(iv) Transition authority from frpl to 
 esea measures.--The Secretary, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall have 
 the authority to take such steps as are 
 necessary to provide for the orderly transition 
 to, and implementation of--
 ``(I) activities that are necessary 
 for the continuity of direct 
 certification carried out by local 
 educational agencies and State agencies 
 specified in paragraphs (4), (5), and 
 (15) section 9(b) of the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act, as 
 in effect on September 30, 2022, for 
 the purposes of identifying any child 
 eligible for free or reduced priced 
 lunch under such Act, as in effect on 
 such date, as a child from a low-income 
 background;
 ``(II) procedures for verification 
 of information collected under this 
 subparagraph, which may include 
 procedures modeled on the requirement 
 specified in section 9(b)(3) of the 
 Richard B. Russell National School 
 Lunch Act, as in effect on September 
 30, 2022; and
 ``(III) data privacy provisions for 
 information collected under this 
 subparagraph, in accordance with the 
 requirements specified in section 
 9(b)(6) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act, as in effect 
 on September 30, 2022.
 ``(v) Special rule.--For the purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), a local educational agency 
 may determine the number of children from low-
 income backgrounds enrolled in a school served 
 by such agency using one or more of the 
 following methods:
 ``(I) Results from surveys 
 specified in clause (i)(II).
 ``(II) Direct certification data 
 specified in clause (i)(III).
 ``(III) Utilization of both methods 
 described in subclauses (I) and 
 (II).''.

 CHAPTER 4--AMENDMENTS TO OTHER PROGRAMS AND LAWS

SEC. 10351. SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 (a) Agreement for Direct Certification.--
 (1) In general.--Section 11 of the Food and Nutrition Act 
 of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2020) is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (u); and
 (B) by redesignating subsections (v) through (x) as 
 subsections (u) through (w), respectively.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 11(e) of the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2020(e)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (8)(F), by striking ``or 
 subsection (u)''; and
 (B) in paragraph (26)(B), by striking ``(x)'' and 
 inserting ``(w)''.
 (b) Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Grant Program.--
Section 28(a) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2036a(a)) 
is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following:
 ``(1) an individual eligible for benefits under this 
 Act;''.

SEC. 10352. HIGHER EDUCATION ACT OF 1965.

 (a) Teacher Quality Enhancement.--Section 200(11) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1021(11)) is amended by striking 
subparagraph (A) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) In general.--The term `high-need school' 
 means a school that is in the highest quartile of 
 schools in a ranking of all schools served by a local 
 educational agency, ranked in descending order by 
 percentage of students from low-income families 
 enrolled in such schools, as determined by the local 
 educational agency based on one of the following 
 measures of poverty:
 ``(i) The percentage of students aged 5 
 through 17 in poverty counted in the most 
 recent census data approved by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) The percentage of students in 
 families receiving assistance under the State 
 program funded under the program of block 
 grants to States for temporary assistance for 
 needy families established under part A of 
 title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 601 et seq.).
 ``(iii) The percentage of students eligible 
 to receive medical assistance under the program 
 of medical assistance established under title 
 XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 
 et seq.).
 ``(iv) A composite of 2 or more of the 
 measures described in clauses (i) through 
 (iii).''.
 (b) GEAR Up.--Section 404B(d)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-22(d)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (A) 
and inserting the following:
 ``(A) provide services under this chapter to at 
 least one grade level of students, beginning not later 
 than 7th grade, in a participating school--
 ``(i) that has a 7th grade; and
 ``(ii) in which--
 ``(I) at least 50 percent of the 
 students enrolled are economically 
 disadvantaged students (as identified 
 under a measure described in section 
 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965); or
 ``(II) if an eligible entity 
 determines that it would promote the 
 effectiveness of a program, an entire 
 grade level of students, beginning not 
 later than the 7th grade, reside in 
 public housing, as defined in section 
 3(b)(1) of the United States Housing 
 Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(1)).''.
 (c) Simplified Application for Federal Student Financial Aid.--
 (1) In general.--Section 483(a)(2)(B)(ii)(XVII) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1090(a)(2)(B)(ii)(XVII)) is amended--
 (A) by striking item (cc); and
 (B) by redesignating items (dd) through (jj) as 
 items (cc) through (ii), respectively.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall take effect as if included in section 702 of division FF 
 of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public Law 116-
 260) and subject to the effective date of section 701(b) of 
 such FAFSA Simplification Act, as amended by section 102(a) of 
 the FAFSA Simplification Act Technical Corrections Act 
 (division R of Public Law 117-103) (including the authorization 
 provided under section 102(c)(1)(A) of such Act).
 (d) Early Federal Pell Grant Commitment Demonstration Program.--
Section 894(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161y(b)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``qualify for a free 
 or reduced price school lunch under the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) or the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.)'' and inserting 
 ``are economically disadvantaged students (as identified under 
 a measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965)''; and
 (2) in paragraph (5), by striking ``eligible for a free or 
 reduced price school lunch under the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) or the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.)'' and inserting 
 ``economically disadvantaged students (as identified under a 
 measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965)''.

SEC. 10353. ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ACT OF 1965.

 (a) Literacy Education for All.--Section 2221(b)(3)(B) of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
6641(b)(3)(B)) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (i); and
 (2) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as clauses (i) 
 and (ii), respectively.
 (b) Grants for Education Innovation and Research.--Section 
4611(d)(2) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 7261(d)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (B); and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), respectively.
 (c) Eligibility for Heavily Impacted Local Educational Agencies.--
Section 7003(b)(2)(B)(i)(III) of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7703(b)(2)(B)(i)(III)) is amended by striking 
item (bb) and inserting the following:
 ``(bb) has an enrollment of 
 children described in 
 subsection (a)(1) that 
 constitutes a percentage of the 
 total student enrollment of the 
 agency that is not less than 30 
 percent; and''.

SEC. 10354. AMERICA COMPETES ACT.

 Section 6122(3) of the America COMPETES Act (20 U.S.C. 9832(3)) is 
amended by striking ``data on children eligible for free or reduced-
price lunches under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
Act,''.

SEC. 10355. WORKFORCE INNOVATION AND OPPORTUNITY ACT.

 Section 3(36)(A) of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act 
(29 U.S.C. 3102(36)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (iv); and
 (2) by redesignating clauses (v) and (vi) as clauses (iv) 
 and (v), respectively.

SEC. 10356. NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION AUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2002.

 Section 4(8) of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act 
of 2002 (42 U.S.C. 1862n note; Public Law 107-368) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (A); and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively.

SEC. 10357. CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT.

 Section 658O(b) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act 
of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858m(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``school lunch 
 factor'' and inserting ``economically disadvantaged students 
 factor''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(3) Economically disadvantaged students factor.--In this 
 subsection, the term `economically disadvantaged students 
 factor' means the ratio of the number of children in the State 
 who are economically disadvantaged students (as identified 
 under a measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5))) to the number of such children in all the States 
 as determined annually by the Secretary of Education.''.

SEC. 10358. CHILDREN'S HEALTH ACT OF 2000.

 Section 1404(b) of the Children's Health Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 
9859c(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``school lunch 
 factor'' and inserting ``economically disadvantaged students 
 factor''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(3) Economically disadvantaged students factor.--In this 
 subsection, the term `economically disadvantaged students 
 factor' means the ratio of the number of children in the State 
 who are economically disadvantaged students (as identified 
 under a measure described in section 1113(a)(5) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6313(a)(5))) to the number of such children in all the States 
 as determined annually by the Secretary of Education.''.

SEC. 10359. JUVENILE JUSTICE AND DELINQUENCY PREVENTION.

 Section 252 of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
of 1974 (34 U.S.C. 11162) is amended by striking subsection (i) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(i) Free School Lunches for Incarcerated Juveniles.--
 ``(1) Definition of eligible juvenile detention center.--In 
 this subsection, the term `eligible juvenile detention center' 
 does not include any private, for-profit detention center.
 ``(2) Free lunch.--A juvenile who is incarcerated in an 
 eligible juvenile detention center is eligible to receive free 
 lunch under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.).
 ``(3) Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the Universal School Meals Program Act of 2024, 
 the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, shall provide guidance to States relating to the 
 options for school food authorities in the States to apply for 
 reimbursement for free lunches under the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) for 
 juveniles who are incarcerated.''.
 <all>