[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1467 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

105th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1467

 To address the declining health of forests on Federal lands in the 
 United States through a program of recovery and protection consistent 
 with the requirements of existing public land management and 
 environmental laws, to establish a program to inventory, monitor, and 
 analyze public and private forests and their resources, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 November 8, 1997

Mr. Smith of Oregon introduced the following bill; which was read twice 
 and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To address the declining health of forests on Federal lands in the 
 United States through a program of recovery and protection consistent 
 with the requirements of existing public land management and 
 environmental laws, to establish a program to inventory, monitor, and 
 analyze public and private forests and their resources, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Forest Recovery 
and Protection Act of 1997''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. National Program of Forest Recovery and Protection.
Sec. 5. Scientific Advisory Panel.
Sec. 6. Advance recovery projects.
Sec. 7. Forest Recovery and Protection Fund for National Forest System 
 lands.
Sec. 8. Expansion of purpose of Forest Ecosystems Health and Recovery 
 Fund for BLM lands.
Sec. 9. Effect of failure to comply with time limitations.
Sec. 10. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 11. Audit requirements.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) There are tradeoffs in values associated with 
 proactive, passive, or delayed forest management, but the 
 values gained by proactive management outweigh the values 
 gained by delayed or passive management of certain Federal 
 forest lands.
 (2) Increases in both the number and severity of wildfire, 
 insect infestation, and disease outbreaks on Federal forest 
 lands are occurring as a result of high tree densities, species 
 composition, and structure that are outside the historic range 
 of variability. These disturbances cause or contribute to 
 significant soil erosion, degradation of air and water quality, 
 loss of watershed values, habitat loss, and damage to other 
 forest resources.
 (3) Serious forest health problems occur in all regions of 
 the United States. Management activities to restore and protect 
 forest health are needed in each region and should be designed 
 to address region-specific needs.
 (4) Between 35,000,000 and 40,000,000 of the 191,000,000 
 acres of Federal forest lands managed by the Forest Service are 
 at an unacceptable risk of destruction by catastrophic 
 wildfire. Additional tens of millions of Bureau of Land 
 Management lands are in the same situation. The condition of 
 these forests can pose a significant threat of destruction to 
 human life as well as fish and wildlife habitats, public 
 recreation areas, timber, and other important forest resources.
 (5) Restoration of forest health requires active forest 
 management involving a range of management activities, 
 including thinning, salvage, prescribed fire (after appropriate 
 thinning), insect and disease control, riparian and other 
 habitat improvement, soil stabilization and other water quality 
 improvement, and seedling planting and protection.
 (6) A comprehensive, nationwide effort is needed to address 
 forest health decline in an organized, timely, and scientific 
 manner. There should be immediate action to improve the areas 
 of Federal forest lands where forest health decline has been 
 thoroughly inventoried and assessed or where serious resource 
 destruction or degradation by natural disturbance is imminent.
 (7) Frequent forest inventory and analysis of the status 
 and trends in the conditions of forests and their resources are 
 needed to identify and reverse declining forest health in a 
 timely and effective manner. The present average 12- to 15-year 
 cycle of forest inventory and analysis to comply with existing 
 statutory requirements is too prolonged to provide forest 
 managers with the data necessary to make timely and effective 
 management decisions, particularly decisions responsive to 
 changing forest health conditions.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) Federal forest lands.--The term ``Federal forest 
 lands'' means--
 (A) forested lands created from the public domain 
 that are under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land 
 Management; and
 (B) forested lands created from the public domain 
 that are within the National Forest System.
 (2) Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' 
 means--
 (A) with respect to Federal forest lands described 
 in paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary of the Interior or 
 the Secretary's designee; and
 (B) with respect to Federal forest lands described 
 in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary of Agriculture or 
 the Secretary's designee.
 (3) Land management plan.--The term ``land management 
 plan'' means--
 (A) a land use plan prepared by the Bureau of Land 
 Management pursuant to section 202 of the Federal Land 
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712), or 
 other multiple use plan in effect, for a unit of the 
 Federal forest lands described in paragraph (1)(A); or
 (B) a land and resource management plan (or, if no 
 final plan is in effect, a draft land and resource 
 management plan) prepared by the Forest Service 
 pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland 
 Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 
 1604) for Federal forest lands described in paragraph 
 (1)(B).
 (4) National program.--The term ``national program'' means 
 the National Program of Forest Recovery and Protection required 
 by section 4.
 (5) Scientific advisory panel.--The term ``Scientific 
 Advisory Panel'' means the advisory committee appointed under 
 section 5.
 (6) Recovery area.--The term ``recovery area'' means an 
 area of Federal forest lands, designated by the Secretary 
 concerned under section 4(c)--
 (A) that has experienced disturbances from 
 wildfires, insect infestations, wind, flood, or other 
 causes, which have caused or contributed to significant 
 soil erosion, degradation of water quality, loss of 
 watershed values, habitat loss, or damage to other 
 forest resources of the area; or
 (B) in which the forest structure, function, or 
 composition has been altered so as to increase 
 substantially the likelihood of wildfire, insect 
 infestation, or disease in the area and the consequent 
 risks of damage to soils, water quality, watershed 
 values, habitat, and other forest resources from 
 wildfire, insect infestation, or disease.
 (7) Recovery project.--The terms ``recovery project'' and 
 ``forest health recovery project'' mean a project designed by 
 the Secretary concerned to improve, preserve, or protect the 
 soils, water quality, watershed values, habitat, and other 
 forest resources within a designated recovery area, including 
 stand thinning, salvage, and other harvesting activities, as 
 well as activities in which the cutting of trees is not 
 primarily featured, such as prescribed burning (after 
 appropriate thinning), insect and disease control, riparian and 
 other habitat improvement, soil stabilization and other water 
 quality improvement, and seedling planting and protection.
 (8) Implementation date.--The term ``implementation date'' 
 means the first day of the first month beginning after the end 
 of the 18-month period beginning on the date of enactment of 
 this Act. However, if the implementation date would occur 
 within 6 months before August 31 of the same fiscal year in 
 which the implementation date would occur, the Secretary 
 concerned may deem that August 31 to be the implementation 
 date.
 (9) Fund.--The terms ``Fund'' and ``affected Fund'' mean--
 (A) with respect to implementation of the national 
 program on Federal forest lands described in paragraph 
 (1)(A), the revolving fund established under the 
 heading ``(revolving fund, special account)'' under the 
 heading ``forest ecosystems health and recovery'' under 
 the heading ``Bureau of Land Management'' in title I of 
 the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies 
 Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-381; 106 Stat. 
 1376; 43 U.S.C. 1736a); and
 (B) with respect to implementation of the national 
 program on Federal forest lands described in paragraph 
 (1)(B), the Forest Recovery and Protection Fund 
 established under section 7.

SEC. 4. NATIONAL PROGRAM OF FOREST RECOVERY AND PROTECTION.

 (a) National Program Required.--Not later than the implementation 
date, the Secretary concerned shall commence a national program to 
restore and protect the health of forests located on Federal forest 
lands in the United States through the performance of recovery projects 
in designated recovery areas.
 (b) Standards and Criteria.--
 (1) Initial publication.--Not later than the implementation 
 date, the Secretary concerned shall publish in the Federal 
 Register the standards and criteria to be used for the 
 designation of, and the assignment of management priority 
 rankings to, recovery areas. In establishing the standards and 
 criteria, the Secretary concerned shall consider the standards 
 and criteria recommended by the Scientific Advisory Panel under 
 section 5. The Secretary concerned shall include in the Federal 
 Register entry required by this paragraph an explanation of any 
 significant differences between the recommendations of the 
 Scientific Advisory Panel and the standards and criteria 
 actually established by the Secretary concerned.
 (2) Modification.--The Secretary concerned may modify the 
 standards and criteria established pursuant to paragraph (1). 
 Any such modification shall also be published in the Federal 
 Register.
 (c) Annual National Program Decision.--
 (1) Decision required.--To carry out the national program, 
 the Secretary concerned shall render a decision for each fiscal 
 year during the period of the national program regarding the 
 designation and ranking of recovery areas and the selection of 
 recovery projects for inclusion in the national program. In 
 rendering the decision, the Secretary concerned shall comply 
 with the requirements of subsections (d) and (e).
 (2) Proposed decision.--For each fiscal year during the 
 period of the national program, the Secretary concerned shall 
 publish in the Federal Register a proposed decision regarding 
 the designation and ranking of recovery areas and the selection 
 of recovery projects. The proposed decision shall be published 
 not later than the following:
 (A) In the case of the initial proposal, the 
 implementation date.
 (B) In the case of each subsequent proposed 
 decision, August 31 of each fiscal year after the 
 fiscal year in which the implementation date occurs.
 (3) Final decision.--Not later than 120 days after the date 
 on which the proposed decision of the Secretary concerned is 
 published for a fiscal year under paragraph (2), the Secretary 
 concerned shall publish in the Federal Register the final 
 decision of the Secretary concerned for that fiscal year 
 regarding the designation and ranking of recovery areas and the 
 selection of recovery projects (including the determinations 
 required under subsection (e)(3)).
 (d) Requirements for Area Designation and Ranking.--In making the 
annual decision required by subsection (c), the Secretary concerned 
shall, in accordance with the standards and criteria established and in 
effect under subsection (b)--
 (1) determine the total acreage requiring treatment under 
 the national program during the fiscal year;
 (2) identify recovery areas within which recovery projects 
 would be appropriate; and
 (3) rank the recovery areas for the purpose of determining 
 the order in which the recovery areas will receive recovery 
 projects.
 (e) Requirements for Recovery Project Selection.--
 (1) Compliance with land management plans.--In making the 
 annual decision required by subsection (c), the Secretary 
 concerned shall ensure that each recovery project selected is 
 consistent with the land management plan applicable to the 
 recovery area within which the project will occur.
 (2) Consideration of economic benefits.--In the selection 
 of forest health recovery projects, the Secretary concerned 
 shall consider the economic benefits to be provided to local 
 communities as a result of the forest health recovery projects, 
 but only to the extent that such considerations are consistent 
 with the standards and criteria for recovery areas established 
 and in effect under subsection (b) and the priorities for 
 ranking recovery areas under subsection (d)(3).
 (3) Treatment acreage and costs.--As part of the selection 
 of each forest project, the Secretary concerned shall determine 
 the total acreage requiring treatment and the estimated costs 
 for preparation and implementation of the project.
 (4) Total acreage.--The total acreage included in recovery 
 projects selected for a fiscal year under the national program 
 shall not be less than the total acreage determined by the 
 Secretary concerned under paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection 
 (c).
 (5) Prohibited project locations.--The Secretary concerned 
 may not select or implement a recovery project under the 
 authority of this Act in any unit of the National Wilderness 
 Preservation System, any roadless area on Federal forest lands 
 designated by Congress for study for possible inclusion in such 
 System, or any other area in which the implementation of 
 recovery projects is prohibited by law, a court order, or the 
 applicable land management plan.
 (f) Petition Process.--
 (1) Request for designation.--Not later than May 31 of each 
 fiscal year after the fiscal year in which the implementation 
 date occurs, any interested person may petition the Secretary 
 concerned to designate a specific area of the Federal forest 
 lands of at least 1,000 acres in size as a recovery area.
 (2) Content.--The petition shall contain a reasonably 
 precise description of the boundaries of the area included in 
 the petition and the reasons why the petitioner believes the 
 area meets the standards and criteria, established pursuant to 
 subsection (b), required for designation as a recovery area.
 (3) Determination.--If the Secretary concerned determines 
 that an area described in a petition under this subsection 
 warrants designation as a recovery area, the Secretary 
 concerned shall include the area in the proposed and final 
 decisions issued under paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection 
 (c). If the Secretary concerned determines that the area does 
 not warrant designation as a recovery area, the Secretary 
concerned shall provide the reasons therefor in the same Federal 
Register entry containing the proposed or final decision under such 
subsection.
 (g) Annual Report to Congress.--
 (1) Report required.--Not later than the implementation 
 date, and each August 31 thereafter, the Secretary concerned 
 shall submit to Congress a report on the proposed decision 
 regarding the designation and ranking of recovery areas and the 
 selection of recovery projects to be published pursuant to 
 subsection (c)(2).
 (2) Report contents.--Each report required by paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) The reasons for each proposed designation of a 
 recovery area and each proposed selection of a recovery 
 project.
 (B) The total acreage requiring treatment 
 nationally during the fiscal year and the acreage 
 proposed to be treated during that fiscal year by each 
 proposed recovery project.
 (C) The estimated preparation and implementation 
 costs of each proposed recovery project.
 (3) Additional requirements.--After the initial report 
 required by paragraph (1), each subsequent report shall also 
 include the following:
 (A) A description of the improvements to forest 
 health achieved by each completed recovery project.
 (B) An explanation of why any proposed recovery 
 projects covered by the previous report were not begun, 
 undertaken, or completed as scheduled.
 (C) A comparison of projected and actual 
 preparation and implementation costs for each completed 
 recovery project.
 (D) A description of the economic benefits to local 
 communities achieved by each completed recovery 
 project.
 (4) Notice of availability.--The Federal Register entry 
 required for each fiscal year under subsection (c)(2) shall 
 contain a notice of availability of the most recent report to 
 Congress required by this subsection.
 (h) Exceptions to Agency Action.--The following do not constitute 
agency action for purposes of implementing or carrying out the 
provisions of this Act:
 (1) The establishment and publication in the Federal 
 Register of standards and criteria to be used for the 
 designation and ranking of recovery areas under subsection (b).
 (2) The proposed decision of the Secretary to designate and 
 rank recovery areas and to select recovery projects under 
 subsection (c) and the publication of such proposed decision in 
 the Federal Register.
 (3) The preparation and submission of the annual report to 
 Congress under subsection (g).
 (i) Rulemaking.--To ensure commencement of the national program by 
the implementation date, the Secretary concerned shall promulgate rules 
governing operation of the national program by that date. The rules 
shall address the development of procedures that, within the discretion 
provided by other laws, would permit the Secretary concerned to make 
the final decision on the designation and ranking of recovery areas and 
the selection of recovery projects within the 120-day period required 
by subsection (c)(3).

SEC. 5. SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a panel of scientific 
advisers to the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the 
Interior to be known as the ``Scientific Advisory Panel''.
 (b) Membership.--The Scientific Advisory Panel shall consist of the 
following members:
 (1) 2 members, consisting of 1 scientist specializing in 
 natural resources and 1 State forester (or an individual with 
 similar management or supervisory experience), appointed 
 jointly by the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and the 
 Chairman of the Committee on Resources of the House of 
 Representatives, in consultation with their respective ranking 
 Minority Members.
 (2) 2 members, consisting of 1 scientist specializing in 
 natural resources and 1 State forester (or an individual with 
 similar management or supervisory experience), appointed 
 jointly by the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, 
 Nutrition, and Forestry and the Chairman of the Committee on 
 Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, in consultation 
 with their respective ranking Minority Members.
 (3) 2 members, consisting of 1 scientist specializing in 
 natural resources and 1 State forester (or an individual with 
 similar management or supervisory experience), appointed by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture.
 (4) 2 members, consisting of 1 scientist specializing in 
 natural resources and 1 State forester (or individual with 
 similar management or supervisory experience), appointed by the 
 Secretary of the Interior.
 (5) 1 member, consisting of a scientist specializing in 
 natural resources, appointed by the National Academy of 
 Sciences.
 (c) Appointment.--
 (1) Time for appointment.--Appointments shall be made 
 within 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act. 
 Appointments shall be published in the Federal Register.
 (2) Term.--A member of the Scientific Advisory Panel shall 
 be appointed for a term beginning on the date of the 
 appointment and ending on the implementation date. A vacancy on 
 the Scientific Advisory Panel shall be filled within 90 days in 
 the manner in which the original appointment was made.
 (d) Qualifications.--
 (1) Natural resource scientists.--Scientists who are 
 appointed as members of the Scientific Advisory Panel shall be 
 required to have expertise in, and experience with, matters 
 related to forest health, taking into account their breadth of 
 knowledge in the natural sciences as such sciences relate to 
 Federal forest lands and their familiarity with specific issues 
 regarding Federal forest lands likely to be designated as 
 recovery areas.
 (2) Other members.--State foresters (or individuals with 
 similar management or supervisory experience) who are appointed 
 as members of the Scientific Advisory Panel shall be required 
 to have expertise with, and experience in, matters relating to 
 forest management, taking into account their breadth of 
 knowledge in management science and their familiarity with 
 specific issues regarding Federal forest lands likely to be 
 designated as recovery areas.
 (e) Chairperson; Initial Meeting.--The Scientific Advisory Panel 
shall conduct its initial meeting as soon as possible after the first 4 
members of the Panel are appointed. At the initial meeting, the members 
of the Scientific Advisory Panel shall select 1 member to serve as 
chairperson.
 (f) Duties In Connection With Implementation.--During the period 
beginning on the initial meeting of the Scientific Advisory Panel and 
ending on the implementation date, the Scientific Advisory Panel shall 
be responsible for the following:
 (1) The preparation and submission to the Secretary 
 concerned and the Congress of recommendations regarding the 
 standards and criteria that should be used to designate 
 recovery areas.
 (2) The preparation and submission to the Secretary 
 concerned and the Congress of recommendations regarding the 
 ranking of recovery areas in the order in which the areas 
 should host recovery projects.
 (3) The preparation of and submission to the Secretary 
 concerned and the Congress of a monitoring plan for the 
 national program of sufficient duration to determine the long-
 term impacts of the national program.
 (g) Considerations.--In the development of its recommendations 
under subsection (f), the Scientific Advisory Panel shall consider--
 (1) the most current scientific literature regarding the 
 duties undertaken by the Panel; and
 (2) information gathered during the implementation of the 
 advance recovery projects required under section 6.
 (h) Allocation of Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management 
Personnel.--The Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management shall 
allocate administrative support staff to the Scientific Advisory Panel 
to assist the Panel in the performance of its duties as outlined in 
this section.
 (i) Federal Advisory Committee Act Compliance.--The Scientific 
Advisory Panel shall be subject to sections 10 through 14 of the 
Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.).

SEC. 6. ADVANCE RECOVERY PROJECTS.

 (a) Selection of Advance Projects.--During the 18-month period 
beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned 
shall conduct a limited number (as determined by the Secretary 
concerned) of advance recovery projects on Federal forest lands. 
Subject to the approval of the Secretary concerned, advance recovery 
projects shall be selected by--
 (1) regional foresters of the Forest Service, in 
 consultation with State foresters of the States in which the 
 projects will be conducted, with respect to recovery projects 
 on Federal forest lands described in section 3(1)(B); and
 (2) State directors of the Bureau of Land Management, in 
 consultation with State foresters of the States in which the 
 projects will be conducted, with respect to recovery projects 
 on Federal forest lands described in section 3(1)(A).
 (b) Selection Criteria.--To be eligible for selection as an advance 
recovery project, a proposed project shall be required to satisfy the 
requirements of section 4(e) for recovery projects conducted under the 
national program. Priority shall be given to those Federal forest 
lands--
 (1) that pose a significant risk of loss to human life and 
 property or serious resource degradation or destruction due to 
 wildfire, disease epidemic, or severe insect infestation; or
 (2) for which thorough forest health assessments and 
 inventories have been completed, including Federal forest lands 
 in the Pacific Northwest, the Interior Columbia Basin, the 
 Sierra Nevada, the Southern Appalachian Region, and the 
 Northern Forests of Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, and New 
 York.
 (c) Time Periods for Selection, Implementation, and Completion.--
Final selection of advance recovery projects shall be completed within 
the 90-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, and 
the Secretary concerned shall publish the list of selected advance 
recovery projects in the Federal Register by the end of that period. An 
advance recovery project shall be initiated (if the project is to be 
conducted by Federal employees) or awarded (if the project is to be 
conducted by an outside party) within 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act.
 (d) Reporting Requirements.--Not later than the implementation 
date, and annually thereafter until completion of all advance recovery 
projects, the Secretary concerned shall submit to Congress a report on 
the implementation of advance recovery projects. The report shall 
consist of a description of the accomplishments of each advance 
recovery project and incorporate the requirements under paragraphs (2) 
and (3) of section 4(g).
 (e) Rulemaking.--No new rulemaking is required in order for the 
Secretary concerned to carry out this section.

SEC. 7. FOREST RECOVERY AND PROTECTION FUND FOR NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM 
 LANDS.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established on the books of the 
Treasury a revolving fund to be known as the ``Forest Recovery and 
Protection Fund''. The Chief of the Forest Service shall be responsible 
for administering the Fund.
 (b) Credits to Fund.--There shall be credited to the Fund the 
following:
 (1) Amounts authorized for and appropriated to the Fund.
 (2) Unobligated amounts in the roads and trails fund 
 provided for in the fourteenth paragraph under the heading 
 ``FOREST SERVICE.'' of the Act of March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 843, 
 chapter 145; 16 U.S.C. 501) as of the date of enactment of this 
 Act, and all amounts that would otherwise be deposited in such 
 fund after such date.
 (3) A 1-time transfer of $50,000,000 from amounts 
 appropriated for fire operations under the heading ``wildland 
 fire management'' under the heading ``Bureau of Land 
 Management'' in title I of the Department of the Interior and 
 Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1998.
 (4) Subject to subsection (e), revenues generated by 
 recovery projects undertaken pursuant to sections 4 and 6.
 (5) Amounts required to be deposited in the Fund under 
 section 9.
 (c) Use of Fund.--During the time period specified in section 
10(a), amounts in the Fund shall be available to the Chief of the 
Forest Service, without further appropriation, to carry out the 
national program, to plan, carry out, and administer recovery projects 
under sections 4 and 6, and to administer the Scientific Advisory 
Panel.
 (d) Limitation on Overhead Expenses.--Overhead expenses for a 
fiscal year for administration of the national program, including the 
cost of preparation of reports required by this Act and administration 
of the Fund, shall not exceed 12 percent of the amounts made available 
from the Fund for that fiscal year. In addition, not more than 
$1,000,000 may be expended from the Fund to finance the operation of 
the Scientific Advisory Panel.
 (e) Treatment of Revenues as Moneys Received.--Revenues generated 
by recovery projects undertaken pursuant to sections 4 and 6 shall be 
considered to be money received for purposes of the sixth paragraph 
under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE.'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (35 
Stat. 260, chapter 192; 16 U.S.C. 500), and section 13 of the Act of 
March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Act'') (36 Stat. 963, 
chapter 186; 16 U.S.C. 500).
 (f) Conforming Amendment.--The fourteenth paragraph under the 
heading ``FOREST SERVICE.'' of the Act of March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 843, 
chapter 145; 16 U.S.C. 501), is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``During the term of the Forest Recovery and Protection 
Fund, as established by section 7 of the Forest Recovery and Protection 
Act of 1997, amounts reserved under the authority of this paragraph 
shall be deposited into that Fund.''.

SEC. 8. EXPANSION OF PURPOSE OF FOREST ECOSYSTEMS HEALTH AND RECOVERY 
 FUND FOR BLM LANDS.

 The first paragraph under the heading ``(revolving fund, special 
accounts)'' under the heading ``forest ecosystems health and recovery'' 
under the heading ``Bureau of Land Management'' in title I of the 
Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 
1993 (Public Law 102-381; 106 Stat. 1376; 43 U.S.C. 1736a), is amended 
by adding at the end the following: ``During the term of the National 
Program of Forest Recovery and Protection established by the Forest 
Recovery and Protection Act of 1997, unobligated amounts in the fund 
shall be available to carry out the national program and to plan, carry 
out, and administer recovery projects under sections 4 and 6 of that 
Act.''.

SEC. 9. EFFECT OF FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TIME LIMITATIONS.

 (a) National Program.--If the final selection of a recovery project 
under the national program is not made within the time period specified 
in section 4(c)(3), the Secretary concerned may not use amounts in the 
affected Fund to carry out the project and shall promptly reimburse the 
affected Fund for any expenditures previously made from that Fund in 
connection with the project.
 (b) Advance Recovery Projects.--In the case of an advance recovery 
project under section 6, if the project is not selected, implemented, 
and completed within the time periods specified in subsection (c) of 
that section, the Secretary concerned may not use amounts in the 
affected Fund to carry out the project and shall promptly reimburse the 
affected Fund for any expenditures previously made from that Fund in 
connection with the project.

SEC. 10. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions 
of this Act for fiscal year 1998 and each fiscal year thereafter 
through the fifth full fiscal year following the implementation date.
 (b) Deposit in Fund.--All sums appropriated pursuant to this 
section for implementation of the national program on Federal forest 
lands described in section 3(1)(B) shall be deposited in the Forest 
Recovery and Protection Fund established under section 7. All sums 
appropriated pursuant to this section for implementation of the 
national program on Federal forest lands described in section 3(1)(A) 
shall be deposited in the revolving fund established under the heading 
``(revolving fund, special accounts)'' under the heading ``forest 
ecosystems health and recovery'' under the heading ``Bureau of Land 
Management'' in title I of the Department of the Interior and Related 
Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-381; 106 Stat. 1376; 
43 U.S.C. 1736a).
 (c) Effect on Existing Projects.--Any contract regarding a recovery 
project entered into before the end of the final fiscal year specified 
in subsection (a), and still in effect at the end of such fiscal year, 
shall remain in effect until completed pursuant to the terms of the 
contract.

SEC. 11. AUDIT REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Audit Required.--The Comptroller General shall conduct an audit 
of the national program at the end of the fourth-full fiscal year of 
the national program and submit such audit to the Congress by June 1 of 
the next fiscal year.
 (b) Elements.--The audit shall include an analysis of--
 (1) whether the program was carried out in a manner 
 consistent with the provisions of this Act;
 (2) the impact on the development and implementation of the 
 national program of the advance recovery projects conducted 
 under section 6;
 (3) the extent to which the recommendations of the 
 Scientific Advisory Panel were used to develop and implement 
 the national program;
 (4) the current and projected future financial status of 
 each Fund; and
 (5) the cost savings and efficiencies achieved under the 
 national program.
 <all>