S 1854 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1854
Establishing the Aviation Policy Board for the purpose of setting air fares
and routes, and requiring the Secretary of Transportation to take certain
actions to improve service and promote safety in airline travel.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 8 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 6), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself and Mr. BYRD) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
Establishing the Aviation Policy Board for the purpose of setting air fares
and routes, and requiring the Secretary of Transportation to take certain
actions to improve service and promote safety in airline travel.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
TITLE I--AVIATION POLICY BOARD
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Airline Reregulation Act of 1989'.
SEC. 102. AVIATION POLICY BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established in the executive branch of the Federal Government as
 an independent agency the Aviation Policy Board (hereinafter referred to
 as the `Board').
SEC. 103. COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
 (a) The Board shall be composed of 5 members appointed by the President,
 by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for terms of 6 years. Any
 person appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of
 the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall be appointed
 only for the remainder of such term. Upon the expiration of his or her term
 of office, a member shall continue to serve until his or her successor is
 appointed and shall have qualified.
 (b) The members of the Board may be removed by the President for
 inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. No more than
 three of the members shall be appointed from the same political party. The
 President shall designate annually one of the members of the Board to
 serve as chairperson and one of the members to serve as vice chairperson,
 who shall act as chairperson in the absence or incapacity of the chairperson.
 (c) The members of the Board shall be appointed with due regard to their
 fitness for the efficient dispatch of the powers and duties vested in and
 imposed upon the Board by this title. Each member of the Board shall be
 a citizen of the United States and no member of the Board shall have any
 pecuniary interest in or own any stock in or bonds of any civil aeronautics
 enterprise. No member of the Board shall engage in any other business,
 vocation, or employment.
 (d) Three of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Board. The
 principal office of the Board shall be in the District of Columbia where its
 general sessions shall be held, but whenever the convenience of the public
 or of the parties may be promoted, or delay or expense may be prevented,
 the Board may hold hearings or other proceedings at any other place. The
 Board shall have an official seal which shall be judicially noticed and
 which shall be preserved in the custody of the secretary of the Board.
SEC. 104. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
 (a) The Board is authorized, without regard to the civil-service and
 classification laws, to appoint and prescribe the duties and fix the
 compensation of a secretary of the Board, and to fix the compensation of
 a secretary and an administrative assistant for each member, and subject
 to the civil-service and classification laws, to select, employ, appoint,
 and fix the compensation of such officers, employees, attorneys, and
 agents as shall be necessary to carry out the provisions of this title,
 and to define their authority and duties.
 (b) The Board may, from time to time, without regard to the provisions of
 the civil-service laws, engage for temporary service such duly qualified
 consulting engineers or agencies, or other qualified persons as are
 necessary in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of
 each, and fix the compensation of such engineers, agencies, or persons
 without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5,
 and the expenses of such employment shall be paid out of sums appropriated
 for the expenses of the Board.
 (c) The Board is authorized to use, with their consent, the available
 services, equipment, personnel, and facilities of other agencies and
 instrumentalities of the Federal Government, on a reimbursable basis when
 appropriate, and on a similar basis to cooperate with such other agencies
 and instrumentalities in the establishment and use of services, equipment,
 and facilities of the Board.
SEC. 105. AUTHORIZATION OF EXPENDITURES AND TRAVEL.
 The Board is empowered to make such expenditures at the seat of government
 and elsewhere as may be necessary for the exercise and performance of the
 powers and duties vested in and imposed upon the Board by law, and as from
 time to time may be appropriated for by Congress, including expenditures for
 (1) rent and personal services at the seat of government and elsewhere;
 (2) travel expenses; (3) office furniture, equipment and supplies,
 law books, newspapers, periodicals, and books of reference (including
 the exchange thereof); (4) printing and binding; (5) membership in and
 cooperation with such organizations as are related to, or are part of,
 the civil-aeronautics industry or the art of aeronautics in the United
 States or in any foreign country; (6) making investigations and conducting
 studies in matters pertaining to aeronautics; and (7) acquisition (including
 exchange), operation, and maintenance of passenger-carrying automobiles
 and aircraft, and such other property as is necessary in the exercise
 and performance of the powers and duties of the Board: Provided, That no
 aircraft or motor vehicle purchased under the provisions of this section,
 shall be used otherwise than for official business.
SEC. 106. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
 (a) The Board is empowered to perform such acts, to conduct such
 investigations, to issue and amend such orders, and to make and amend
 such general or special rules, regulations, and procedure, pursuant to and
 consistent with the provisions of this title, as it shall deem necessary
 to carry out the provisions of, and to exercise and perform its powers
 and duties under, this title.
 (b) The Board is empowered to confer with or to hold joint hearings with
 any State aeronautical agency, or other State agency, in connection with
 any matter arising under this title within its jurisdiction, and to avail
 itself of the cooperation, services, records, and facilities of such
 State agencies as fully as may be practicable in the administration and
 enforcement of this title.
SEC. 107. FUNCTIONS.
 In order to protect the public interest, it shall be the function of the
 Board to regulate the air fares and air routes of United States air carriers.
SEC. 108. AUTHORIZATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to
 carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 109. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The foregoing provisions of this title shall take effect upon the expiration
 of the 180-day period following the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--CONSUMER RIGHTS
SEC. 201. IMPROVING AIR SERVICE.
 (a) Within 90 days following the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary of Transportation, by regulation, shall require each United
 States air carrier to disclose on each ticket jacket a statement that the
 individual receiving such jacket can obtain the on-time performance record
 of the flight or flights on which a passenger has secured a reservation
 by calling the air carrier's reservation number or the travel agent of
 such individual.
 (b) The Secretary, within 90 days following the date of the enactment of
 this Act, shall establish a 24-hour toll-free consumer hotline to provide
 consumer information on air carrier performance records, information as to
 the rights of consumers and responsibilities of air carriers, and assistance
 in resolving disputes between consumers and air carriers. Information with
 respect to the availability of such hotline and its purposes, together with
 the telephone number of such hotline, shall be printed on each ticket jacket,
 and shall be prominently displayed in appropriate locations at airports.
 (c)(1) Within 90 days following the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary, by regulation, shall prohibit any air carrier from cancelling,
 on the basis of any economic reason, any flight unless such carrier--
 (A) made a reasonable effort to notify each passenger of such cancellation
 at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled departure time for such flight; and
 (B) makes available to each such passenger similar services within a
 reasonable time as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `economic reason' does
 not refer to the cancellation of a flight in order to use the equipment
 assigned to that flight to replace other equipment, or the timely departure
 of which has been prevented due to mechanical failure or other factors
 related to safety.
 (d)(1) Within 90 days following the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary, by regulation, shall prohibit any United States air carrier
 from advertising a fare for any flight at a particular price, unless the
 air carrier offers at least one-third of the seats for such flight at such
 advertised price, or makes a general disclosure in the advertisement that
 fewer than one-third of the seats for such flight at such advertised price
 are available on a particular day, time of day, or destination.
 (2) Such regulation shall require any advertisement referred to in paragraph
 (1) to disclose all restrictions with respect to advanced purchases of
 tickets, refundability of money, minimum stay requirements, and all other
 restrictions and conditions with respect thereto.
TITLE III--AIR SAFETY
SEC. 301. SAFETY.
 Within 90 days following the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary of Transportation, by regulation, shall--
 (1) prohibit United States air carriers from pairing inexperienced captains
 and co-pilots;
 (2) require United States air carriers to improve training of cockpit and
 cabin crew personnel;
 (3) require United States air carriers to provide infant safety seats on
 all aircraft; and
 (4) take all necessary steps to better identify and remedy aging
 aircraft problems, including, but not limited to, improving certification
 requirements, maintenance programs, and data gathering and analysis systems.