HR 5973 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5973
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave, to treat the costs of
the Head Start program and other programs for children as emergency funding
requirements, to provide aid to parents in providing the best possible
learning environment for children, to promote investments in child welfare
and family preservation, to reduce violence and improve the safety of children
and their families, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 17, 1992
Mrs. SCHROEDER (for herself, Mr. WHEAT, Mr. GILMAN, Mr. GREEN of New York,
Mr. LEHMAN of Florida, Mr. MARTINEZ, Mrs. COLLINS of Michigan, and Mr. DOWNEY)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees
on Education and Labor, House Administration, Post Office and Civil Service,
and Ways and Means
A BILL
To grant employees family and temporary medical leave, to treat the costs of
the Head Start program and other programs for children as emergency funding
requirements, to provide aid to parents in providing the best possible
learning environment for children, to promote investments in child welfare
and family preservation, to reduce violence and improve the safety of children
and their families, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Family Investment Act
 of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
TITLE I--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
Subtitle A--Short Title; Findings and Purposes
Sec. 101. Short title.
Sec. 102. Findings and purposes.
Subtitle B--General Requirements for Leave
Sec. 111. Definitions.
Sec. 112. Leave requirement.
Sec. 113. Certification.
Sec. 114. Employment and benefits protection.
Sec. 115. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 116. Investigative authority.
Sec. 117. Enforcement.
Sec. 118. Special rules concerning employees of local educational agencies.
Sec. 119. Notice.
Sec. 120. Regulations.
Subtitle C--Leave for Civil Service Employees
Sec. 131. Leave requirement.
Subtitle D--Commission on Leave
Sec. 141. Establishment.
Sec. 142. Duties.
Sec. 143. Membership.
Sec. 144. Compensation.
Sec. 145. Powers.
Sec. 146. Termination.
Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 151. Effect on other laws.
Sec. 152. Effect on existing employment benefits.
Sec. 153. Encouragement of more generous leave policies.
Sec. 154. Regulations.
Sec. 155. Effective dates.
Subtitle F--Coverage of Congressional Employees
Sec. 161. Leave for certain Senate employees.
Sec. 162. Leave for certain congressional employees.
TITLE II--HEAD START, CHILD IMMUNIZATION, AND WIC PROGRAMS AS EMERGENCY
FUNDING FOR BUDGET PURPOSES
Sec. 201. Treatment of costs of Head Start, child immunizations, and WIC as
emergency funding requirements.
TITLE III--PARENTS AS TEACHERS
Sec. 301. Establishment of programs.
TITLE IV--FAMILY PRESERVATION
Subtitle A--References to Social Security Act
Sec. 401. Amendatory references.
Subtitle B--Child Welfare Services
Sec. 411. Entitlement funding for child welfare services designed to strengthen
and preserve families.
Sec. 412. Required protections for foster children.
Sec. 413. Reports on child welfare services and expenditures.
Sec. 414. Grant program for State court systems to assess and improve
procedures in child welfare cases.
Sec. 415. State directory of services.
Sec. 416. States required to report on measures taken to comply with the
Indian Child Welfare Act.
Subtitle C--Foster Care and Adoption Assistance
Sec. 421. Comprehensive service projects.
Sec. 422. Abandoned children.
Sec. 423. Clarification of removal from home requirement.
Sec. 424. Dissolved adoptions.
Sec. 425. Respite care.
Sec. 426. Extension of definition of children with special needs.
Sec. 427. Study of reasonable efforts requirement by advisory committee.
Sec. 428. Automated systems.
Sec. 429. Periodic reevaluation of foster care maintenance payments.
Sec. 430. Accelerated dispositional hearing.
Sec. 431. Periodic review of children free for adoption.
Sec. 432. Time frame for judicial determinations on voluntary placements.
Sec. 433. Placement accountability.
Sec. 434. Treatment of assets of youth participating in independent living
program.
Sec. 435. Elimination of foster care ceilings and of authority to transfer
unused foster care funds to child welfare services programs.
Sec. 436. Regulations for training of agency staff and of foster and adoptive
parents.
Sec. 437. Publication of program data.
Sec. 438. Review of child welfare activities.
Subtitle D--Social Services Block Grant
Sec. 441. Title XX social services block grant.
Subtitle E--Research, Demonstration, and Evaluation Activities
Sec. 451. Advisory Commission on Children and Families.
Sec. 452. Research and evaluations to be conducted by the advisory commission
on children and families.
Sec. 453. Other research and evaluations.
Sec. 454. Child welfare demonstration projects.
Sec. 455. Technical assistance.
Subtitle F--Miscellaneous Human Resources Amendments
Sec. 461. State option to use retrospective budgeting without monthly
reporting under AFDC program.
Sec. 462. Increase in stepparent income disregard under AFDC program.
Sec. 463. Extension of period for demonstration projects for evaluating
model procedures for reviewing child support awards.
Sec. 464. Technical corrections related to the income security and human
resources provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.
Sec. 465. Technical corrections related to the human resource and income
security provisions of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989.
TITLE V--SAFE CHILDREN AND COMMUNITIES
Sec. 501. Short title.
Sec. 502. Grants for community projects.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) children need strong, stable families and enduring supportive
 relationships with their parents if the children are to grow and thrive;
 (2) parents need time together with their children to establish strong bonds
 and provide special care immediately following the birth or adoption of the
 children and when family and medical emergencies arise, and parents should
 not have to sacrifice their jobs to meet these family responsibilities;
 (3) children need a nutritious diet, immunizations against preventable
 diseases, and early childhood experiences that lead to success in school
 and later life;
 (4) children are often the victims of the frustration and despair of their
 parents when families experience the strains of poverty, absent parents,
 mental illness, substance abuse, and social isolation, and children are
 often placed in the custody of a State when supports and services are
 unavailable that can keep families safely together;
 (5) parents struggle to protect their children and teach the children
 how to be responsible, productive adults in communities where crime and
 violence are commonplace; and
 (6) it is in the interest of the Nation to ensure that all families live
 in safe, supportive communities and are able to raise healthy, competent
 children.
TITLE I--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
Subtitle A--Short Title; Findings and Purposes
SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Family and Medical Leave Act of 1992'.
SEC. 102. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) the number of single-parent households and two-parent households in
 which the single parent or both parents work is increasing significantly;
 (2) it is important for the development of children and the family unit
 that fathers and mothers be able to participate in early childrearing and
 the care of family members who have serious health conditions;
 (3) the lack of employment policies to accommodate working parents can
 force individuals to choose between job security and parenting;
 (4) there is inadequate job security for employees who have serious health
 conditions that prevent them from working for temporary periods;
 (5) due to the nature of the roles of men and women in our society,
 the primary responsibility for family caretaking often falls on women,
 and such responsibility affects the working lives of women more than it
 affects the working lives of men; and
 (6) employment standards that apply to one gender only have serious potential
 for encouraging employers to discriminate against employees and applicants
 for employment who are of that gender.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this title--
 (1) to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families,
 to promote the stability and economic security of families, and to promote
 national interests in preserving family integrity;
 (2) to entitle employees to take reasonable leave for medical reasons,
 for the birth or adoption of a child, and for the care of a child, spouse,
 or parent who has a serious health condition;
 (3) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1) and (2) in a
 manner that accommodates the legitimate interests of employers;
 (4) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1) and (2) in a
 manner that, consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
 Amendment, minimizes the potential for employment discrimination on the
 basis of sex by ensuring generally that leave is available for eligible
 medical reasons (including maternity-related disability) and for compelling
 family reasons, on a gender-neutral basis; and
 (5) to promote the goal of equal employment opportunity for women and men,
 pursuant to such clause.
Subtitle B--General Requirements for Leave
SEC. 111. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this subtitle:
 (1) COMMERCE- The terms `commerce' and `industry or activity affecting
 commerce' mean any activity, business, or industry in commerce or in
 which a labor dispute would hinder or obstruct commerce or the free flow
 of commerce, and include `commerce' and any `industry affecting commerce',
 as defined in paragraphs (3) and (1), respectively, of section 120 of the
 Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 142 (3) and (1)).
 (2) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The term `eligible employee' means any `employee', as defined
 in section 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)),
 who has been employed--
 (i) for at least 12 months by the employer with respect to whom leave is
 requested under section 112; and
 (ii) for at least 1,250 hours of service with such employer during the
 previous 12-month period.
 (B) EXCLUSIONS- The term `eligible employee' does not include--
 (i) any Federal officer or employee covered under subchapter V of chapter
 63 of title 5, United States Code (as added by subtitle C of this title); or
 (ii) any employee of an employer who is employed at a worksite at which such
 employer employs less than 50 employees if the total number of employees
 employed by that employer within 75 miles of that worksite is less than 50.
 (C) DETERMINATION- For purposes of determining whether an employee meets
 the hours of service requirement specified in subparagraph (A)(ii), the
 legal standards established under section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 207) shall apply.
 (3) EMPLOY; STATE- The terms `employ' and `State' have the same meanings
 given such terms in subsections (g) and (c), respectively, of section 3
 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203 (g) and (c)).
 (4) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means any individual employed by an
 employer.
 (5) EMPLOYER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The term `employer'--
 (i) means any person engaged in commerce or in any industry or activity
 affecting commerce who employs 50 or more employees for each working day
 during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding
 calendar year;
 (ii) includes--
 (I) any person who acts, directly or indirectly, in the interest of an
 employer to any of the employees of such employer; and
 (II) any successor in interest of an employer; and
 (iii) includes any `public agency', as defined in section 3(x) of the Fair
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(x)).
 (B) PUBLIC AGENCY- For purposes of subparagraph (A)(iii), a public agency
 shall be considered to be a person engaged in commerce or in an industry
 or activity affecting commerce.
 (6) EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS- The term `employment benefits' means all benefits
 provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group
 life insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave,
 annual leave, educational benefits, and pensions, regardless of whether
 such benefits are provided by a practice or written policy of an employer
 or through an `employee benefit plan', as defined in section 3(3) of the
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(3)).
 (7) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means--
 (A) a doctor of medicine or osteopathy who is authorized to practice medicine
 or surgery (as appropriate) by the State in which the doctor practices; or
 (B) any other person determined by the Secretary to be capable of providing
 health care services.
 (8) PARENT- The term `parent' means the biological parent of an employee or
 an individual who stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee
 was a son or daughter.
 (9) PERSON- The term `person' has the same meaning given such term in
 section 3(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(a)).
 (10) REDUCED LEAVE SCHEDULE- The term `reduced leave schedule' means leave
 that reduces the usual number of hours per workweek, or hours per workday,
 of an employee.
 (11) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
 (12) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- The term `serious health condition' means an
 illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves--
 (A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 (B) continuing treatment by a health care provider.
 (13) SON OR DAUGHTER- The term `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted,
 or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing
 in loco parentis, who is--
 (A) under 18 years of age; or
 (B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a mental
 or physical disability.
SEC. 112. LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE- Subject to section 113, an eligible employee
 shall be entitled to a total of 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month
 period for one or more of the following:
 (A) Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in order
 to care for such son or daughter.
 (B) Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
 adoption or foster care.
 (C) In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent,
 of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious
 health condition.
 (D) Because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable
 to perform the functions of the position of such employee.
 (2) EXPIRATION OF ENTITLEMENT- The entitlement to leave under subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) for a birth or placement of a son or daughter
 shall expire at the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date of
 such birth or placement.
 (3) INTERMITTENT LEAVE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall
 not be taken by an employee intermittently unless the employee and the
 employer of the employee agree otherwise. Subject to subparagraph (B),
 subsection (e), and section 113(b)(5), leave under subparagraph (C) or
 (D) of paragraph (1) may be taken intermittently when medically necessary.
 (B) ALTERNATIVE POSITION- If an employee requests intermittent leave
 under subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (1) that is foreseeable based
 on planned medical treatment, the employer may require such employee to
 transfer temporarily to an available alternative position offered by the
 employer for which the employee is qualified and that--
 (i) has equivalent pay and benefits; and
 (ii) better accommodates recurring periods of leave than the regular
 employment position of the employee.
 (b) REDUCED LEAVE- On agreement between the employer and the employee,
 leave under subsection (a) may be taken on a reduced leave schedule. Such
 reduced leave schedule shall not result in a reduction in the total amount
 of leave to which the employee is entitled under subsection (a).
 (c) UNPAID LEAVE PERMITTED- Except as provided in subsection (d), leave
 granted under subsection (a) may consist of unpaid leave.
 (d) RELATIONSHIP TO PAID LEAVE-
 (1) UNPAID LEAVE- If an employer provides paid leave for fewer than 12
 workweeks, the additional weeks of leave necessary to attain the 12 workweeks
 of leave required under this subtitle may be provided without compensation.
 (2) SUBSTITUTION OF PAID LEAVE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- An eligible employee may elect, or an employer may require
 the employee, to substitute any of the accrued paid vacation leave, personal
 leave, or family leave of the employee for leave provided under subparagraph
 (A), (B), or (C) of subsection (a)(1) for any part of the 12-week period
 of such leave under such subsection.
 (B) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- An eligible employee may elect, or an
 employer may require the employee, to substitute any of the accrued paid
 vacation leave, personal leave, or medical or sick leave of the employee
 for leave provided under subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1)
 for any part of the 12-week period of such leave under such subsection,
 except that nothing in this title shall require an employer to provide paid
 sick leave or paid medical leave in any situation in which such employer
 would not normally provide any such paid leave.
 (e) FORESEEABLE LEAVE-
 (1) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based
 on an expected birth or adoption, the employee shall provide the employer
 with not less than 30 days notice, before the date the leave is to begin,
 of the employee's intention to take leave under such subparagraph, except
 that if the date of the birth or adoption requires leave to begin in less
 than 30 days, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.
 (2) DUTIES OF EMPLOYEE- In any case in which the necessity for leave
 under subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based
 on planned medical treatment, the employee--
 (A) shall make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment so as not to
 disrupt unduly the operations of the employer, subject to the approval of
 the health care provider of the employee or the health care provider of
 the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee; and
 (B) shall provide the employer with not less than 30 days notice, before
 the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take leave
 under such subparagraph, except that if the date of the treatment requires
 leave to begin in less than 30 days, the employee shall provide such notice
 as is practicable.
 (f) SPOUSES EMPLOYED BY THE SAME EMPLOYER- In any case in which a husband
 and wife entitled to leave under subsection (a) are employed by the same
 employer, the aggregate number of workweeks of leave to which both may
 be entitled may be limited to 12 workweeks during any 12-month period,
 if such leave is taken--
 (1) under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1); or
 (2) to care for a sick parent under subparagraph (C) of such subsection.
SEC. 113. CERTIFICATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An employer may require that a request for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 112(a)(1) be supported by a certification
 issued by the health care provider of the eligible employee or of the son,
 daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee, as appropriate. The employee
 shall provide, in a timely manner, a copy of such certification to the
 employer.
 (b) SUFFICIENT CERTIFICATION- Certification provided under subsection (a)
 shall be sufficient if it states--
 (1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 (2) the probable duration of the condition;
 (3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the health care
 provider regarding the condition;
 (4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 112(a)(1)(C), a statement that
 the eligible employee is needed to care for the son, daughter, spouse,
 or parent and an estimate of the amount of time that such employee is
 needed to care for the son, daughter, spouse, or parent; and
 (B) for purposes of leave under section 112(a)(1)(D), a statement that
 the employee is unable to perform the functions of the position of the
 employee; and
 (5) in the case of certification for intermittent leave for planned medical
 treatment, the dates on which such treatment is expected to be given and
 the duration of such treatment.
 (c) SECOND OPINION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the employer has reason to doubt the
 validity of the certification provided under subsection (a) for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 112(a)(1), the employer may require, at
 the expense of the employer, that the eligible employee obtain the opinion
 of a second health care provider designated or approved by the employer
 concerning any information certified under subsection (b) for such leave.
 (2) LIMITATION- A health care provider designated or approved under paragraph
 (1) shall not be employed on a regular basis by the employer.
 (d) RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTING OPINIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the second opinion described in
 subsection (c) differs from the opinion in the original certification
 provided under subsection (a), the employer may require, at the expense of
 the employer, that the employee obtain the opinion of a third health care
 provider designated or approved jointly by the employer and the employee
 concerning the information certified under subsection (b).
 (2) FINALITY- The opinion of the third health care provider concerning
 the information certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be
 final and shall be binding on the employer and the employee.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT RECERTIFICATION- The employer may require that the eligible
 employee obtain subsequent recertifications on a reasonable basis.
SEC. 114. EMPLOYMENT AND BENEFITS PROTECTION.
 (a) RESTORATION TO POSITION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any eligible employee who takes leave under section 112
 for the intended purpose of the leave shall be entitled, on return from
 such leave--
 (A) to be restored by the employer to the position of employment held by
 the employee when the leave commenced; or
 (B) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment
 benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 (2) LOSS OF BENEFITS- The taking of leave under section 112 shall not
 result in the loss of any employment benefit accrued prior to the date on
 which the leave commenced.
 (3) LIMITATIONS- Nothing in this section shall be construed to entitle
 any restored employee to--
 (A) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave; or
 (B) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right,
 benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled had
 the employee not taken the leave.
 (4) CERTIFICATION- As a condition of restoration under paragraph (1),
 the employer may have a uniformly applied practice or policy that requires
 each employee to receive certification from the health care provider of the
 employee that the employee is able to resume work, except that nothing in
 this paragraph shall supersede a valid State or local law or a collective
 bargaining agreement that governs the return to work of employees taking
 leave under section 112(a)(1)(D).
 (5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
 an employer from requiring an employee on leave under section 112 to report
 periodically to the employer on the status and intention of the employee
 to return to work.
 (b) EXEMPTION CONCERNING CERTAIN HIGHLY COMPENSATED EMPLOYEES-
 (1) DENIAL OF RESTORATION- An employer may deny restoration under subsection
 (a) to any eligible employee described in paragraph (2) if--
 (A) such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic
 injury to the operations of the employer;
 (B) the employer notifies the employee of the intent of the employer to
 deny restoration on such basis at the time the employer determines that
 such injury would occur; and
 (C) in any case in which the leave has commenced, the employee elects not
 to return to employment after receiving such notice.
 (2) AFFECTED EMPLOYEES- An eligible employee described in paragraph (1)
 is a salaried eligible employee who is among the highest paid 10 percent
 of the employees employed by the employer within 75 miles of the facility
 at which the employee is employed.
 (c) MAINTENANCE OF HEALTH BENEFITS-
 (1) COVERAGE- Except as provided in paragraph (2), during any period that an
 eligible employee takes leave under section 112, the employer shall maintain
 coverage under any `group health plan' (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for the duration of such leave at
 the level and under the conditions coverage would have been provided if
 the employee had continued in employment continuously from the date the
 employee commenced the leave until the date the employee is restored under
 subsection (a).
 (2) FAILURE TO RETURN FROM LEAVE- The employer may recover the premium
 that the employer paid for maintaining coverage for the employee under such
 group health plan during any period of unpaid leave under section 112 if--
 (A) the employee fails to return from leave under section 112 after the
 period of leave to which the employee is entitled has expired; and
 (B) the employee fails to return to work for a reason other than--
 (i) the continuation, recurrence, or onset of a serious health condition
 that entitles the employee to leave under subparagraph (C) or (D) of
 section 112(a)(1); or
 (ii) other circumstances beyond the control of the employee.
 (3) CERTIFICATION-
 (A) ISSUANCE- An employer may require that a claim that an employee is unable
 to return to work because of the continuation, recurrence, or onset of the
 serious health condition described in paragraph (2)(B)(i) be supported by--
 (i) a certification issued by the health care provider of the eligible
 employee, in the case of an employee unable to return to work because of
 a condition specified in section 112(a)(1)(D); or
 (ii) a certification issued by the health care provider of the son, daughter,
 spouse, or parent of the employee in the case of an employee unable to
 return to work because of a condition specified in section 112(a)(1)(C).
 (B) COPY- The employee shall provide, in a timely manner, a copy of such
 certification to the employer.
 (C) SUFFICIENCY OF CERTIFICATION-
 (i) LEAVE DUE TO SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION OF EMPLOYEE- The certification
 described in subparagraph (A)(i) shall be sufficient if the certification
 states that a serious health condition prevented the employee from being
 able to perform the functions of the position of the employee on the date
 that the leave of the employee expired.
 (ii) LEAVE DUE TO SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION OF FAMILY MEMBER- The
 certification described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be sufficient if
 the certification states that the employee is needed to care for the son,
 daughter, spouse, or parent who has a serious health condition on the date
 that the leave of the employee expired.
SEC. 115. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 (a) INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS-
 (1) EXERCISE OF RIGHTS- It shall be unlawful for any employer to interfere
 with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any
 right provided under this subtitle.
 (2) DISCRIMINATION- It shall be unlawful for any employer to discharge or
 in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any
 practice made unlawful by this subtitle.
 (b) INTERFERENCE WITH PROCEEDINGS OR INQUIRIES- It shall be unlawful for
 any person to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any
 individual because such individual--
 (1) has filed any charge, or has instituted or caused to be instituted
 any proceeding, under or related to this subtitle;
 (2) has given, or is about to give, any information in connection with any
 inquiry or proceeding relating to any right provided under this subtitle; or
 (3) has testified, or is about to testify, in any inquiry or proceeding
 relating to any right provided under this subtitle.
SEC. 116. INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To ensure compliance with the provisions of this subtitle,
 or any regulation or order issued under this subtitle, the Secretary shall
 have, subject to subsection (c), the investigative authority provided under
 section 11(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (b) OBLIGATION TO KEEP AND PRESERVE RECORDS- Any employer shall keep
 and preserve records in accordance with section 11(c) of the Fair Labor
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(c)) and in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Secretary.
 (c) REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS GENERALLY LIMITED TO AN ANNUAL BASIS- The
 Secretary shall not under the authority of this section require any
 employer or any plan, fund, or program to submit to the Secretary any
 books or records more than once during any 12-month period, unless the
 Secretary has reasonable cause to believe there may exist a violation of
 this subtitle or any regulation or order issued pursuant to this subtitle,
 or is investigating a charge pursuant to section 117(b).
 (d) SUBPOENA POWERS- For the purposes of any investigation provided for
 in this section, the Secretary shall have the subpoena authority provided
 for under section 9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).
SEC. 117. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) CIVIL ACTION BY EMPLOYEES-
 (1) LIABILITY- Any employer who violates section 115 shall be liable to
 any eligible employee affected--
 (A) for damages equal to--
 (i) the amount of--
 (I) any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied
 or lost to such employee by reason of the violation; or
 (II) in a case in which wages, salary, employment benefits, or other
 compensation have not been denied or lost to the employee, any actual
 monetary losses sustained by the employee as a direct result of the
 violation, such as the cost of providing care, up to a sum equal to 12
 weeks of wages or salary for the employee;
 (ii) the interest on the amount described in clause (i) calculated at the
 prevailing rate; and
 (iii) an additional amount as liquidated damages equal to the sum of the
 amount described in clause (i) and the interest described in clause (ii),
 except that if an employer who has violated section 115 proves to the
 satisfaction of the court that the act or omission which violated section
 115 was in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for
 believing that the act or omission was not a violation of section 115,
 such court may, in the discretion of the court, reduce the amount of the
 liability to the amount and interest determined under clauses (i) and
 (ii), respectively; and
 (B) for such equitable relief as may be appropriate, including, without
 limitation, employment, reinstatement, and promotion.
 (2) STANDING- An action to recover the damages or equitable relief prescribed
 in paragraph (1) may be maintained against any employer (including a public
 agency) in any Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction by any
 one or more employees for and in behalf of--
 (A) the employees; or
 (B) the employees and other employees similarly situated.
 (3) FEES AND COSTS- The court in such an action shall, in addition to
 any judgment awarded to the plaintiff, allow a reasonable attorney's fee,
 reasonable expert witness fees, and other costs of the action to be paid
 by the defendant.
 (4) LIMITATIONS- The right provided by paragraph (1) to bring an action
 by or on behalf of any employee shall terminate, unless such action is
 dismissed without prejudice on motion of the Secretary, on--
 (A) the filing of a complaint by the Secretary of Labor in an action under
 subsection (d) in which--
 (i) restraint is sought of any further delay in the payment of the damages
 described in paragraph (1)(A) to such employee by an employer liable under
 paragraph (1) for the damages; or
 (ii) equitable relief is sought as a result of alleged violations of
 section 115; or
 (B) the filing of a complaint by the Secretary in an action under subsection
 (b) in which a recovery is sought of the damages described in paragraph
 (1)(A) owing to an eligible employee by an employer liable under paragraph
 (1).
 (b) ACTION BY THE SECRETARY-
 (1) ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION- The Secretary shall receive, investigate, and
 attempt to resolve complaints of violations of section 115 in the same
 manner that the Secretary receives, investigates, and attempts to resolve
 complaints of violations of sections 6 and 7 of the Fair Labor Standards
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206 and 207).
 (2) CIVIL ACTION- The Secretary may bring an action in any court of
 competent jurisdiction to recover on behalf of an eligible employee the
 damages described in subsection (a)(1)(A).
 (3) SUMS RECOVERED- Any sums recovered by the Secretary on behalf of an
 employee pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be held in a special deposit account
 and shall be paid, on order of the Secretary, directly to each employee
 affected. Any such sums not paid to an employee because of inability to
 do so within a period of 3 years shall be deposited into the Treasury of
 the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
 (c) LIMITATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action may be brought
 under subsection (a) or (b) not later than 2 years after the date of the last
 event constituting the alleged violation for which the action is brought.
 (2) WILLFUL VIOLATION- In the case of such action brought for a willful
 violation of section 115, such action may be brought within 3 years of
 the date of the last event constituting the alleged violation for which
 such action is brought.
 (3) COMMENCEMENT- In determining when an action is commenced by the
 Secretary under subsection (b) for the purposes of this subsection, it
 shall be considered to be commenced on the date when the complaint is filed.
 (d) ACTION FOR INJUNCTION BY SECRETARY- The district courts of the United
 States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, over an action brought by
 the Secretary to restrain violations of section 115, including actions to
 restrain the withholding of payment of wages, salary, employment benefits,
 or other compensation, plus interest, found by the court to be due to
 eligible employees.
SEC. 118. SPECIAL RULES CONCERNING EMPLOYEES OF LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
 (a) APPLICATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rights
 (including the rights under section 114, which shall extend throughout
 the period of leave of any employee under this section), remedies, and
 procedures under this title shall apply to--
 (A) any `local educational agency' (as defined in section 1471(12) of
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 2891(12)))
 and an eligible employee of the agency; and
 (B) any private elementary and secondary school and an eligible employee
 of the school.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of the application described in paragraph (1):
 (A) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE- The term `eligible employee' means an eligible
 employee of an agency or school described in paragraph (1); and
 (B) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' means an agency or school described in
 paragraph (1).
 (b) LEAVE DOES NOT VIOLATE CERTAIN OTHER FEDERAL LAWS- A local educational
 agency and a private elementary and secondary school shall not be in
 violation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400
 et seq.), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794),
 or title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.),
 solely as a result of an eligible employee of such agency or school
 exercising the rights of such employee under this Act.
 (c) INTERMITTENT LEAVE FOR INSTRUCTIONAL EMPLOYEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), in any case in which an eligible
 employee employed principally in an instructional capacity by any such
 educational agency or school requests leave under subparagraph (C) or (D)
 of section 112(a)(1) that is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment
 and the employee would be on leave for greater than 20 percent of the total
 number of working days in the period during which the leave would extend,
 the agency or school may require that such employee elect either--
 (A) to take leave for periods of a particular duration, not to exceed the
 duration of the planned medical treatment; or
 (B) to transfer temporarily to an available alternative position offered
 by the employer for which the employee is qualified, and that--
 (i) has equivalent pay and benefits; and
 (ii) better accommodates recurring periods of leave than the regular
 employment position of the employee.
 (2) APPLICATION- The elections described in subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (1) shall apply only with respect to an eligible employee
 who complies with section 112(e)(2).
 (d) RULES APPLICABLE TO PERIODS NEAR THE CONCLUSION OF AN ACADEMIC TERM-
 The following rules shall apply with respect to periods of leave near
 the conclusion of an academic term in the case of any eligible employee
 employed principally in an instructional capacity by any such educational
 agency or school:
 (1) LEAVE MORE THAN 5 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the eligible employee
 begins leave under section 112 more than 5 weeks prior to the end of the
 academic term, the agency or school may require the employee to continue
 taking leave until the end of such term, if--
 (A) the leave is of at least 3 weeks duration; and
 (B) the return to employment would occur during the 3-week period before
 the end of such term.
 (2) LEAVE LESS THAN 5 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the eligible employee
 begins leave under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 112(a)(1)
 during the period that commences 5 weeks prior to the end of the academic
 term, the agency or school may require the employee to continue taking
 leave until the end of such term, if--
 (A) the leave is of greater than 2 weeks duration; and
 (B) the return to employment would occur during the 2-week period before
 the end of such term.
 (3) LEAVE LESS THAN 3 WEEKS PRIOR TO END OF TERM- If the eligible employee
 begins leave under paragraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 112(a)(1) during
 the period that commences 3 weeks prior to the end of the academic term
 and the duration of the leave is greater than 5 working days, the agency
 or school may require the employee to continue to take leave until the
 end of such term.
 (e) RESTORATION TO EQUIVALENT EMPLOYMENT POSITION- For purposes of
 determinations under section 114(a)(1)(B) (relating to the restoration
 of an eligible employee to an equivalent position), in the case of a
 local educational agency or a private elementary and secondary school,
 such determination shall be made on the basis of established school
 board policies and practices, private school policies and practices,
 and collective bargaining agreements.
 (f) REDUCTION OF THE AMOUNT OF LIABILITY- If a local educational agency
 or a private elementary and secondary school that has violated subtitle
 B proves to the satisfaction of the administrative law judge or the court
 that the agency, school, or department had reasonable grounds for believing
 that the underlying act or omission was not a violation of such subtitle,
 such judge or court may, in the discretion of the judge or court, reduce
 the amount of the liability provided for under section 117(a)(1)(A) to the
 amount and interest determined under clauses (i) and (ii), respectively,
 of such section.
SEC. 119. NOTICE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each employer shall post and keep posted, in conspicuous
 places on the premises of the employer where notices to employees and
 applicants for employment are customarily posted, a notice, to be prepared
 or approved by the Secretary, setting forth excerpts from, or summaries
 of, the pertinent provisions of this subtitle and information pertaining
 to the filing of a charge.
 (b) PENALTY- Any employer that willfully violates this section shall be
 assessed a civil money penalty not to exceed $100 for each separate offense.
SEC. 120. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this subtitle, the
 Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out
 this subtitle.
Subtitle C--Leave for Civil Service Employees
SEC. 131. LEAVE REQUIREMENT.
 (a) Civil Service Employees-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subchapter:
`SUBCHAPTER V--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
`Sec. 6381. Definitions
 `For the purpose of this subchapter--
 `(1) the term `employee' means an individual who has been employed for at
 least 12 months on other than a temporary or intermittent basis--
 `(A) as an employee as defined by section 6301(2) (excluding an individual
 employed by the Government of the District of Columbia); or
 `(B) in a position referred to in clause (v) or (ix) of such section;
 `(2) the term `health care provider' means--
 `(A) a doctor of medicine or osteopathy who is authorized to practice
 medicine or surgery (as appropriate) by the State in which the doctor
 practices; and
 `(B) any other person determined by the Director of the Office of Personnel
 Management to be capable of providing health care services;
 `(3) the term `parent' means the biological parent of an employee, or an
 individual who stood in loco parentis to an employee, when the employee
 was a son or daughter;
 `(4) the term `reduced leave schedule' means leave that reduces the usual
 number of hours per workweek, or hours per workday, of an employee;
 `(5) the term `serious health condition' means an illness, injury,
 impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves--
 `(A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care
 facility; or
 `(B) continuing treatment by a health care provider; and
 `(6) the term `son or daughter' means a biological, adopted, or foster
 child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing in loco
 parentis, who is--
 `(A) under 18 years of age; or
 `(B) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a
 mental or physical disability.
`Sec. 6382. Leave requirement
 `(a)(1) An employee shall be entitled, subject to section 6383, to a total
 of 12 administrative workweeks of leave during any 12-month period for
 one or more of the following:
 `(A) Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in
 order to care for such son or daughter.
 `(B) Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
 adoption or foster care.
 `(C) In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent,
 of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious
 health condition.
 `(D) Because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable
 to perform the functions of the employee's position.
 `(2) The entitlement to leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph
 (1) based on the birth or placement of a son or daughter shall expire at the
 end of the 12-month period beginning on the date of such birth or placement.
 `(3)(A) Leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall not be
 taken by an employee intermittently unless the employee and the employing
 agency of the employee agree otherwise. Subject to subparagraph (B),
 subsection (e), and section 6383(b)(5), leave under subparagraph (C) or
 (D) of paragraph (1) may be taken intermittently when medically necessary.
 `(B) If an employee requests intermittent leave under subparagraph (C) or
 (D) of paragraph (1) that is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment,
 the employing agency may require such employee to transfer temporarily
 to an available alternative position offered by the employing agency for
 which the employee is qualified and that--
 `(i) has equivalent pay and benefits; and
 `(ii) better accommodates recurring periods of leave than the regular
 employment position of the employee.
 `(b) On agreement between the employing agency and the employee, leave
 under subsection (a) may be taken on a reduced leave schedule. In the
 case of an employee on a reduced leave schedule, any hours of leave taken
 by such employee under such schedule shall be subtracted from the total
 amount of leave remaining available to such employee under subsection (a),
 for purposes of the 12-month period involved, on an hour-for-hour basis.
 `(c) Except as provided in subsection (d), leave granted under subsection
 (a) shall be leave without pay.
 `(d) An employee may elect to substitute for leave under subparagraph (A),
 (B), (C), or (D) of subsection (a)(1) any of the employee's accrued or
 accumulated annual or sick leave under subchapter I for any part of the
 12-week period of leave under such subparagraph, except that nothing in
 this subchapter shall require an employing agency to provide paid sick
 leave in any situation in which such employing agency would not normally
 provide any such paid leave.
 `(e)(1) In any case in which the necessity for leave under subparagraph
 (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based on an expected birth
 or placement, the employee shall provide the employing agency with not
 less than 30 days' notice, before the date the leave is to begin, of the
 employee's intention to take leave under such subparagraph, except that
 if the date of the birth or adoption requires leave to begin in less than
 30 days, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.
 `(2) In any case in which the necessity for leave under subparagraph (C) or
 (D) of subsection (a)(1) is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment,
 the employee--
 `(A) shall make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment so as not
 to disrupt unduly the operations of the employing agency, subject to the
 approval of the health care provider of the employee or the health care
 provider of the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee; and
 `(B) shall provide the employing agency with not less than 30 days' notice,
 before the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take
 leave under such subparagraph, except that if the date of the treatment
 requires leave to begin in less than 30 days, the employee shall provide
 such notice as is practicable.
`Sec. 6383. Certification
 `(a) An employing agency may require that a request for leave under
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 6382(a)(1) be supported by certification
 issued by the health care provider of the employee or of the son, daughter,
 spouse, or parent of the employee, as appropriate. The employee shall
 provide, in a timely manner, a copy of such certification to the employing
 agency.
 `(b) A certification provided under subsection (a) shall be sufficient if
 it states--
 `(1) the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
 `(2) the probable duration of the condition;
 `(3) the appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the health care
 provider regarding the condition;
 `(4)(A) for purposes of leave under section 6382(a)(1)(C), a statement that
 the employee is needed to care for the son, daughter, spouse, or parent,
 and an estimate of the amount of time that such employee is needed to care
 for such son, daughter, spouse, or parent; and
 `(B) for purposes of leave under section 6382(a)(1)(D), a statement that
 the employee is unable to perform the functions of the position of the
 employee; and
 `(5) in the case of certification for intermittent leave for planned
 medical treatment, the dates on which such treatment is expected to be
 given and the duration of such treatment.
 `(c)(1) In any case in which the employing agency has reason to doubt
 the validity of the certification provided under subsection (a) for leave
 under subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 6382(a)(1), the employing agency
 may require, at the expense of the agency, that the employee obtain the
 opinion of a second health care provider designated or approved by the
 employing agency concerning any information certified under subsection
 (b) for such leave.
 `(2) Any health care provider designated or approved under paragraph (1)
 shall not be employed on a regular basis by the employing agency.
 `(d)(1) In any case in which the second opinion described in subsection
 (c) differs from the original certification provided under subsection (a),
 the employing agency may require, at the expense of the agency, that the
 employee obtain the opinion of a third health care provider designated or
 approved jointly by the employing agency and the employee concerning the
 information certified under subsection (b).
 `(2) The opinion of the third health care provider concerning the information
 certified under subsection (b) shall be considered to be final and shall
 be binding on the employing agency and the employee.
 `(e) The employing agency may require, at the expense of the agency,
 that the employee obtain subsequent recertifications on a reasonable basis.
`Sec. 6384. Employment and benefits protection
 `(a) Any employee who takes leave under section 6382 for the intended
 purpose of the leave shall be entitled, upon return from such leave--
 `(1) to be restored by the employing agency to the position held by the
 employee when the leave commenced; or
 `(2) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent benefits,
 pay, status, and other terms and conditions of employment.
 `(b) The taking of leave under section 6382 shall not result in the loss
 of any employment benefit accrued prior to the date on which the leave
 commenced.
 `(c) Except as otherwise provided by or under law, nothing in this section
 shall be construed to entitle any restored employee to--
 `(1) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave; or
 `(2) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right,
 benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled had
 the employee not taken the leave.
 `(d) As a condition to restoration under subsection (a), the employing
 agency may have a uniformly applied practice or policy that requires each
 employee to receive certification from the health care provider of the
 employee that the employee is able to resume work.
 `(e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an employing
 agency from requiring an employee on leave under section 6382 to report
 periodically to the employing agency on the status and intention of the
 employee to return to work.
`Sec. 6385. Prohibition of coercion
 `(a) An employee shall not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or
 coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce, any other employee
 for the purpose of interfering with the exercise of the rights of the
 employee under this subchapter.
 `(b) For the purpose of this section, `intimidate, threaten, or coerce'
 includes promising to confer or conferring any benefit (such as appointment,
 promotion, or compensation), or taking or threatening to take any reprisal
 (such as deprivation of appointment, promotion, or compensation).
`Sec. 6386. Health insurance
 `An employee enrolled in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 who is
 placed in a leave status under section 6382 may elect to continue the
 health benefits enrollment of the employee while in such leave status
 and arrange to pay currently into the Employees Health Benefits Fund
 (described in section 8909), the appropriate employee contributions.
`Sec. 6387. Regulations
 `The Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations necessary
 for the administration of this subchapter. The regulations prescribed
 under this subchapter shall be consistent with the regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary of Labor under subtitle B of the Family and Medical Leave
 Act of 1992.'.
 (2) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for chapter 63 of title 5,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
`SUBCHAPTER V--FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
`6381. Definitions.
`6382. Leave requirement.
`6383. Certification.
`6384. Employment and benefits protection.
`6385. Prohibition of coercion.
`6386. Health insurance.
`6387. Regulations.'.
 (b) EMPLOYEES PAID FROM NONAPPROPRIATED FUNDS- Section 2105(c)(1) of title
 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of subparagraph (C); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) subchapter V of chapter 63, which shall be applied so as to construe
 references to benefit programs to refer to applicable programs for employees
 paid from nonappropriated funds; or'.
Subtitle D--Commission on Leave
SEC. 141. ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Leave
 (hereinafter referred to in this subtitle as the `Commission').
SEC. 142. DUTIES.
 The Commission shall--
 (1) conduct a comprehensive study of--
 (A) existing and proposed policies relating to leave;
 (B) the potential costs, benefits, and impact on productivity of such
 policies on employers; and
 (C) alternative and equivalent State enforcement of this title with respect
 to employees described in section 118(a); and
 (2) not later than 2 years after the date on which the Commission first
 meets, prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress,
 a report concerning the subjects listed in paragraph (1).
SEC. 143. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) COMPOSITION-
 (1) APPOINTMENTS- The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members
 and 2 ex officio members to be appointed not later than 60 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act as follows:
 (A) SENATORS- One Senator shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of
 the Senate, and one Senator shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of
 the Senate.
 (B) MEMBERS OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES- One Member of the House
 of Representatives shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives, and one Member of the House of Representatives shall be
 appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
 (C) ADDITIONAL MEMBERS-
 (i) APPOINTMENT- Two Members each shall be appointed by--
 (I) the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
 (II) the Majority Leader of the Senate;
 (III) the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; and
 (IV) the Minority Leader of the Senate.
 (ii) EXPERTISE- Such members shall be appointed by virtue of demonstrated
 expertise in relevant family, temporary disability, and labor-management
 issues and shall include representatives of employers.
 (2) EX OFFICIO MEMBERS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services and
 the Secretary of Labor shall serve on the Commission as nonvoting ex
 officio members.
 (b) VACANCIES- Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the manner
 in which the original appointment was made. The vacancy shall not affect
 the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (c) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall elect a
 chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
 (d) QUORUM- Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
 all purposes, except that a lesser number may constitute a quorum for the
 purpose of holding hearings.
SEC. 144. COMPENSATION.
 (a) PAY- Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
 (b) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Members of the Commission shall be allowed reasonable
 travel expenses, including a per diem allowance, in accordance with
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, when performing duties of
 the Commission.
SEC. 145. POWERS.
 (a) MEETINGS- The Commission shall first meet not later than 30 days after
 the date on which all members are appointed, and the Commission shall meet
 thereafter on the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
 (b) HEARINGS AND SESSIONS- The Commission may hold such hearings, sit
 and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such
 evidence as the Commission considers appropriate. The Commission may
 administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
 (c) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The Commission may secure directly from any
 Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this
 Act, if the information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5,
 United States Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of
 the chairperson or vice chairperson of the Commission, the head of such
 agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
 (d) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR- The Commission may appoint an Executive Director
 from the personnel of any Federal agency to assist the Commission in
 carrying out the duties of the Commission. Any appointment shall not
 interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of
 the employee appointed.
 (e) USE OF FACILITIES AND SERVICES- Upon the request of the Commission,
 the head of any Federal agency may make available to the Commission any
 of the facilities and services of such agency.
 (f) PERSONNEL FROM OTHER AGENCIES- On the request of the Commission, the
 head of any Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of such agency
 to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission. Any
 detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status
 or privileges of the Federal employee.
 (g) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the chairperson of the Commission may accept for the Commission
 voluntary services provided by a member of the Commission.
SEC. 146. TERMINATION.
 The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of the submission
 of the report of the Commission to Congress.
Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Provisions
SEC. 151. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 (a) FEDERAL AND STATE ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAWS- Nothing in this title or
 any amendment made by this title shall be construed to modify or affect
 any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race,
 religion, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability.
 (b) STATE AND LOCAL LAWS- Nothing in this title or any amendment made
 by this title shall be construed to supersede any provision of any State
 and local law that provides greater employee leave rights than the rights
 established under this title or any amendment made by this title.
SEC. 152. EFFECT ON EXISTING EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.
 (a) MORE PROTECTIVE- Nothing in this title or any amendment made by this
 title shall be construed to diminish the obligation of an employer to comply
 with any collective bargaining agreement or any employment benefit program or
 plan that provides greater family and medical leave rights to employees than
 the rights provided under this title or any amendment made by this title.
 (b) LESS PROTECTIVE- The rights provided to employees under this title or
 any amendment made by this title shall not be diminished by any collective
 bargaining agreement or any employment benefit program or plan.
SEC. 153. ENCOURAGEMENT OF MORE GENEROUS LEAVE POLICIES.
 Nothing in this title or any amendment made by this title shall be construed
 to discourage employers from adopting or retaining leave policies more
 generous than any policies that comply with the requirements under this
 title or any amendment made by this title.
SEC. 154. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary
 to carry out sections 151 through 153 not later than 60 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 155. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) SUBTITLE D- Subtitle D shall take effect on the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (b) OTHER SUBTITLES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), subtitles B, C,
 and F and this subtitle shall take effect 6 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- In the case of a collective bargaining
 agreement in effect on the effective date prescribed by paragraph (1),
 subtitle B shall apply on the earlier of--
 (A) the date of the termination of such agreement; or
 (B) the date that occurs 12 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
Subtitle F--Coverage of Congressional Employees
SEC. 161. LEAVE FOR CERTAIN SENATE EMPLOYEES.
 (a) COVERAGE- The rights and protections established under sections 101
 through 105 shall apply with respect to a Senate employee and an employing
 office. For purposes of such application, the term `eligible employee'
 means a Senate employee and the term `employer' means an employing office.
 (b) CONSIDERATION OF ALLEGATIONS-
 (1) APPLICABLE PROVISIONS- The provisions of sections 304 through 313 of
 the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991 (2 U.S.C. 1204-1213) shall,
 except as provided in subsections (d) and (e)--
 (A) apply with respect to an allegation of a violation of a provision of
 sections 111 through 115, with respect to Senate employment of a Senate
 employee; and
 (B) apply to such an allegation in the same manner and to the same extent
 as such sections of the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991 apply with
 respect to an allegation of a violation under such Act.
 (2) ENTITY- Such an allegation shall be addressed by the Office of Senate
 Fair Employment Practices or such other entity as the Senate may designate.
 (c) RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES- The Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices
 shall ensure that Senate employees are informed of their rights under
 sections 101 through 105.
 (d) LIMITATIONS- A request for counseling under section 305 of such Act
 by a Senate employee alleging a violation of a provision of sections 101
 through 105 shall be made not later than 2 years after the date of the
 last event constituting the alleged violation for which the counseling
 is requested, or not later than 3 years after such date in the case of a
 willful violation of section 105.
 (e) APPLICABLE REMEDIES- The remedies applicable to individuals who
 demonstrate a violation of a provision of sections 101 through 105 shall
 be such remedies as would be appropriate if awarded under paragraph (1)
 or (3) of section 107(a).
 (f) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- The provisions of subsections (b), (c),
 (d), and (e), except as such subsections apply with respect to section
 309 of the Government Employees Rights Act of 1991 (2 U.S.C. 1209),
 are enacted by the Senate as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the
 Senate, with full recognition of the right of the Senate to change its
 rules, in the same manner, and to the same extent, as in the case of any
 other rule of the Senate. No Senate employee may commence a judicial
 proceeding with respect to an allegation described in subsection (b)(1),
 except as provided in this section.
 (g) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 (1) EMPLOYING OFFICE- The term `employing office' means the office with the
 final authority described in section 301(2) of such Act (2 U.S.C. 1201(2)).
 (2) SENATE EMPLOYEE- The term `Senate employee' means an employee
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 301(c)(1) of such Act (2
 U.S.C. 1201(c)(1)) who has been employed for at least 12 months on other
 than a temporary or intermittent basis by any employing office.
SEC. 162. LEAVE FOR CERTAIN CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The rights and protections under sections 102 through 105
 (other than section 104(b)) shall apply to any employee in an employment
 position and any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (b) ADMINISTRATION- In the administration of this section, the remedies and
 procedures under the Fair Employment Practices Resolution shall be applied.
 (c) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `Fair Employment Practices
 Resolution' means the resolution in rule LI of the Rules of the House
 of Representatives.
TITLE II--HEAD START, CHILD IMMUNIZATION, AND WIC PROGRAMS AS EMERGENCY
FUNDING FOR BUDGET PURPOSES
SEC 201. TREATMENT OF COSTS OF HEAD START, CHILD IMMUNIZATIONS, AND WIC AS
EMERGENCY FUNDING REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 251(b)(2)(D) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control
 Act of 1985 is amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) For fiscal years 1992, 1993, 1994, and 1995, the costs of carrying
 out the Head Start Act, making grants authorized under section 317(j)(1)
 of the Public Health Service Act for immunizations, and carrying out the
 special supplemental food program as authorized by section 17 of the Child
 Nutrition Act of 1966 are to be treated as emergency funding requirements
 not subject to the discretionary spending limits. Funding for such activities
 shall be provided through the normal legislative process.'.
TITLE III--PARENTS AS TEACHERS
SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAMS.
 Title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended
 by inserting at the end the following new part:
`PART G--PARENTS AS TEACHERS
`SEC. 4701. SHORT TITLE.
 `This part may be cited as the `Parents as Teachers: the Family Involvement
 in Education Act of 1992'.
`SEC. 4702. FINDINGS.
 `The Congress finds--
 `(1) increased parental involvement in the education of their children
 appears to be the key to long-term gains for youngsters;
 `(2) providing seed money is an appropriate role for the Federal Government
 to play in education;
 `(3) children participating in the parents as teachers program in Missouri
 are found to have increased cognitive or intellectual skills, language
 ability, social skills and other predictors of school success;
 `(4) most early childhood programs begin at age 3 or 4 when remediation
 may already be necessary; and
 `(5) many children receive no health screening between birth and the
 time they enter school, thus such children miss the opportunity of having
 developmental delays detected early.
`SEC. 4703. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
 `It is the purpose of this part to encourage States to develop and expand
 parent and early childhood education programs in an effort to--
 `(1) increase parents' knowledge of and confidence in child-rearing
 activities, such as teaching and nurturing their young children;
 `(2) strengthen partnerships between parents and schools; and
 `(3) enhance the developmental progress of participating children.
`SEC. 4704. DEFINITIONS.
 `For the purposes of this part--
 `(1) the term `developmental screening' means the process of measuring
 the progress of children to determine if there are problems or potential
 problems or advanced abilities in the areas of understanding and use of
 language, perception through sight, perception through hearing, motor
 development and hand-eye coordination, health, and physical development;
 `(2) the term `eligible family' means any parent with one or more children
 between birth and 3 years of age, or any parent expecting a child;
 `(3) the term `lead agency' means the office or agency in a State designated
 by the Governor to administer the parents as teachers program authorized
 by this part;
 `(4) the term `parent education' includes parent support activities,
 the provision of resource materials on child development and parent-child
 learning activities, private and group educational guidance, individual and
 group learning experiences for the parent and child, and other activities
 that enable the parent to improve learning in the home;
 `(5) the term `parent educator' means a person hired by the lead agency of
 a State or designated by local entities who administers group meetings, home
 visits and developmental screening for eligible families, and is trained by
 the Parents As Teachers National Center established under section 4708; and
 `(6) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Education.
`SEC. 4705. PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) The Secretary is authorized to make grants to States to pay the Federal
 share of the cost of establishing, expanding, and operating parents as
 teachers programs.
 `(2) In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give special
 consideration to applicants whose programs primarily serve hard-to-serve
 populations, including--
 `(A) teenage parents,
 `(B) illiterate parents,
 `(C) economically disadvantaged parents,
 `(D) offenders and their families,
 `(E) unemployed parents,
 `(F) learning disabled parents, and
 `(G) non-English speaking parents.
 `(3) In determining the amount of a grant under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall take into consideration the size of the population to be served,
 the size of the area to be served, and the financial resources of such
 population and area.
 `(b) SPECIAL RULE- Any State operating a parents as teachers program
 which is associated with the Parents As Teachers National Center located
 in St. Louis, Missouri, shall be eligible to receive a grant under this part.
`SEC. 4706. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) Each State receiving a grant under section 4705(a)
 shall conduct a parents as teachers program which--
 `(A) establishes and operates parent education programs including programs
 of developmental screening of children; and
 `(B) designates a lead State agency which shall--
 `(i) hire parent educators who have had supervised experience in the care
 and education of children;
 `(ii) establish the number of group meetings and home visits required to
 be provided each year for each participating family, with a minimum of 4
 group meetings and 8 home visits for each participating family;
 `(iii) be responsible for administering the periodic screening of
 participating children's educational, hearing and visual development,
 using the Denver Developmental Test, Zimmerman Preschool Language Scale,
 or other approved screening instruments; and
 `(iv) develop recruitment and retention programs for hard-to-reach
 populations.
 `(2) Grants awarded section 4705(a) shall only be used for parents as
 teachers programs which serve families during the period of time beginning
 with the last 3 months of a mother's pregnancy and ending when a child
 attains the age of 3.
`SEC. 4707. PARENTS AS TEACHERS NATIONAL CENTER.
 `The Secretary shall establish a Parents As Teachers National Center to
 disseminate information to, and provide technical and training assistance
 to, States establishing and operating parents as teachers programs.
`SEC. 4708. EVALUATIONS.
 `The Secretary shall complete an evaluation of the State parents as teachers
 programs within 4 years from the date of enactment of this part.
`SEC. 4709. APPLICATION.
 `Each State desiring a grant under section 4705(a) shall submit an
 application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner and accompanied
 by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require. Each such
 application shall describe the activities and services for which assistance
 is sought.
`SEC. 4710. PAYMENTS AND FEDERAL SHARE.
 `(a) PAYMENTS- The Secretary shall pay to each State having an application
 approved under section 4709 the Federal share of the cost of the activities
 described in the application.
 `(b) FEDERAL SHARE- (1) The Federal share--
 `(A) for the first year for which a State receives assistance under this
 part shall be 100 percent;
 `(B) for the second such year shall be 100 percent;
 `(C) for the third such year shall be 75 percent;
 `(D) for the fourth such year shall be 50 percent; and
 `(E) for the fifth such year 25 percent.
 `(2) The non-Federal share of payments under this part may be in cash or
 in kind fairly evaluated, including planned equipment or services.
`SEC. 4711. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of the fiscal
 years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out this Act.'.
TITLE IV--FAMILY PRESERVATION
Subtitle A--References to Social Security Act
SEC. 401. AMENDATORY REFERENCES.
 Except as otherwise expressly provided, wherever in this title an amendment
 or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section
 or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a
 section or other provision of the Social Security Act.
Subtitle B--Child Welfare Services
SEC. 411. ENTITLEMENT FUNDING FOR CHILD WELFARE SERVICES DESIGNED TO STRENGTHEN
AND PRESERVE FAMILIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part B of title IV (42 U.S.C. 620-628) is amended--
 (1) by striking the heading and inserting the following:
`PART B--CHILD WELFARE AND FAMILY PRESERVATION SERVICES
`Subpart 1--Child Welfare Services';
 (2) in section 423(a), by striking `this part' and inserting `this subpart';
 (3) in section 428(b), by inserting `or 432, as appropriate' after `421'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
`Subpart 2--Family Preservation Services
`SEC. 430. ENTITLEMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- For payments to which States are entitled under this
 subpart, there shall be available to the Secretary an amount equal to the
 sum of--
 `(1) the basic entitlement amount for the fiscal year; and
 `(2) the additional entitlement amount for the fiscal year.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- As used in subsection (a):
 `(1) BASIC ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT- The term `basic entitlement amount' means--
 `(A) for fiscal year 1993, $200,000,000;
 `(B) for fiscal year 1994, $350,000,000;
 `(C) for fiscal year 1995, $450,000,000;
 `(D) for fiscal year 1996, $550,000,000;
 `(E) for fiscal year 1997, $600,000,000; and
 `(F) for fiscal year 1998 and each succeeding fiscal year, $600,000,000,
 increased by the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(i) the average of the Consumer Price Index (as defined in section 1(f)(5)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for the 12-month period ending on
 July 31 of the immediately preceding fiscal year; exceeds
 `(ii) the average of the Consumer Price Index (as so defined) for the
 12-month period ending on July 31, 1995.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT- The term `additional entitlement amount'
 means, with respect to a fiscal year, 60 percent of the amount (if any) by
 which the adjusted baseline amount for the fiscal year exceeds the sum of--
 `(A) the aggregate amount of Federal outlays under part E for the fiscal
 year; and
 `(B) the aggregate of the amounts calculated pursuant to section 441(d)(1)(B)
 with respect to any State for the fiscal year.
 `(3) ADJUSTED BASELINE AMOUNT- The term `adjusted baseline amount' means,
 with respect to a fiscal year, the sum of--
 `(A) the baseline amount for the fiscal year; and
 `(B) the adjustment amount for the fiscal year.
 `(4) BASELINE AMOUNT- The term `baseline amount' means--
 `(A) for fiscal year 1993, $2,775,000,000;
 `(B) for fiscal year 1994, $3,122,000,000;
 `(C) for fiscal year 1995, $3,519,000,000;
 `(D) for fiscal year 1996, $3,952,000,000;
 `(E) for fiscal year 1997, $4,416,000,000; and
 `(F) for each of fiscal years 1998 and 1999, $4,416,000,000, increased by
 the percentage (if any) by which the GDP deflator for the 12-month period
 ending on March 31 of the calendar year in which the fiscal year begins
 exceeds the GDP deflator for the 12-month period ending on March 31, 1997.
 `(5) ADJUSTMENT AMOUNT- The term `adjustment amount' means--
 `(A) for fiscal year 1993, $227,000,000;
 `(B) for fiscal year 1994, $222,000,000;
 `(C) for fiscal year 1995, $181,000,000;
 `(D) for fiscal year 1996, $261,000,000;
 `(E) for fiscal year 1997, $336,000,000; and
 `(F) for each of fiscal years 1998 and 1999, $336,000,000, increased by
 the percentage (if any) by which the GDP deflator for the 12-month period
 ending on March 31 of the calendar year in which the fiscal year begins
 exceeds the GDP deflator for the 12-month period ending on March 31, 1997.
 `(6) GDP DEFLATOR- The term `GDP deflator' means the GDP deflator published
 by the Department of Commerce.
`SEC. 431. ANNUAL SUBMISSION OF STATE PLAN AMENDMENTS.
 `To be eligible to receive its share of the funds available for expenditure
 under this subpart for a fiscal year after fiscal year 1993, a State shall
 annually submit to the Secretary, as an amendment to the State plan under
 this part, and in such form as the Secretary may require by regulation,
 a comprehensive family services plan that contains--
 `(1) an assessment, as of the beginning of the fiscal year, of--
 `(A) the service needs of families in the State any child of which has
 been or is at risk of being placed outside the home; and
 `(B) the need for substance abuse treatment services for such families;
 `(2) a description of the service programs available in the State, as
 of the beginning of the fiscal year, that address the service needs of
 such families;
 `(3) the State's goals for the 5-year period beginning with the fiscal
 year for increasing the number and capacity of such service programs;
 `(4) a strategy for the fiscal year to improve the coordination of services
 to such families with other State programs and services;
 `(5) a certification from the Governor of the State that the State has
 provided for appropriate coordination of State substance abuse treatment
 programs and such service programs;
 `(6) an assurance that the State will not use any funds provided under this
 subpart to supplant Federal, State, or local funds used for similar purposes;
 `(7) an explanation of how the Federal assistance provided under this
 section will, during the fiscal year, expand services available to such
 families, including--
 `(A) a description of the service programs to be provided with funds
 provided under this section;
 `(B) the goals of such programs; and
 `(C) a description of the populations to which the programs will be targeted,
 with an assurance that such populations will consist of--
 `(i) families any child of which is, has been, or is at risk of being
 placed, in foster care; and
 `(ii) at the option of the State, families any child of which is, has been,
 or is at risk of being placed, in the care of a mental health or juvenile
 justice agency; and
 `(8) such other information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
`SEC. 432. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.
 `The Secretary shall allot the sum made available pursuant to section 430
 for any fiscal year, for use by cooperating State public welfare agencies
 which have plans developed jointly by the State agency and the Secretary
 and which are located in States that are in compliance with section 431,
 as follows:
 `(1) ALLOTMENTS TO TERRITORIES- The allotment for any fiscal year to each
 of the jurisdictions of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern
 Mariana Islands, and American Samoa shall be determined in the same manner
 in which the allotment to the jurisdiction was determined under section 421.
 `(2) OTHER ALLOTMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The allotment for any fiscal year to each other State
 shall be the amount equal to--
 `(i) the sum made available pursuant to section 430 for the fiscal year
 that remains unallotted after the application of paragraph (1) of this
 section; multiplied by
 `(ii) the food stamp percentage of the State for the fiscal year.
 `(B) FOOD STAMP PERCENTAGE DEFINED- As used in subparagraph (A)(ii), the
 term `food stamp percentage' means, with respect to a State and a fiscal
 year, the average number of children receiving food stamp benefits in the
 State for the 4th, 3rd, and 2nd preceding fiscal years, as determined from
 sample surveys made under section 16(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977,
 expressed as a percentage of the average number of children receiving
 food stamp benefits in all of the States (to which this paragraph applies)
 for such preceding fiscal years, as so determined.
`SEC. 433. REALLOTMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The amount of any allotment to a State under section
 432 for any fiscal year which the State certifies will not be required
 for carrying out the State plan under this part shall be available for
 reallotment, from time to time, on such dates as the Secretary may fix,
 to other States which the Secretary determines--
 `(1) are in compliance with section 431 for the fiscal year;
 `(2) need sums exceeding the sums allotted to such States under sections
 421 and 432, in carrying out their State plans under this part; and
 `(3) will be able to use such excess sums during the fiscal year.
 `(b) DISTRIBUTION FORMULA- Any amount available for reallotment shall be
 reallotted among the other States referred to in subsection (a) on the
 same basis as allotments are made under section 432.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF REALLOTMENTS- Any amount reallotted to a State under this
 section is deemed to be part of the allotment of the State under section 432.
`SEC. 434. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 `(a) BASIC ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- From the sums appropriated therefor not exceeding the basic
 entitlement amount (as defined in section 430(b)(1)) and the allotment under
 this subpart of the basic entitlement amount, each State which has a plan
 developed in accordance with section 422 and is in compliance with section
 431 for a fiscal year shall be entitled to receive from the Secretary, and
 the Secretary shall from time to time pay to each such State, an amount
 equal to 75 percent of the total amount expended by the State during the
 fiscal year under the plan (including administrative costs) in accordance
 with section 435.
 `(2) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS-
 `(A) ESTIMATES- Before each calendar quarter, the Secretary shall estimate
 the amount to be paid to each State under this subsection for the quarter.
 `(B) PAYMENTS- From that portion of the allotment of each State that is
 attributable to the basic entitlement amount, the Secretary shall pay
 the amount estimated under subparagraph (A), reduced or increased, as the
 case may be, by any sum (not previously adjusted under this subsection)
 by which the Secretary finds that any such estimate for a prior quarter
 was greater or less than the amount which should have been paid to the
 State under this subsection for such prior quarter.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT- From the sums appropriated therefor
 equal to the additional entitlement amount (as defined in section 430(b)(2))
 and the allotment under this subpart of the additional entitlement amount,
 each State which has a plan developed in accordance with section 422 and
 is in compliance with section 431 for a fiscal year shall be entitled to
 receive from the Secretary, and the Secretary shall, within 3 months after
 the end of the fiscal year, pay to each such State, the amount allotted
 to the State from the additional entitlement amount.
`SEC. 435. USE OF FUNDS.
 `(a) BASIC ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT- Each State which receives funds paid to
 the State under section 434(a) shall--
 `(1) use part (but not all) of such funds to develop or expand specialized
 child welfare service programs, to families in crisis due to substance
 abuse, that--
 `(A) emphasize comprehensive services;
 `(B) are geared toward the whole family; and
 `(C) encourage or expand the availability of programs for pregnant
 women and programs which allow mothers to reside with their children
 (and other caretaker relatives to reside with the children in their care)
 while receiving services or treatment; and
 `(2) use the remaining part of such funds to develop or expand--
 `(A) service programs designed to help children--
 `(i) where appropriate, return to families (including adoptive families)
 from which they have been removed; or
 `(ii) be placed for adoption, with a legal guardian, or, if adoption or
 legal guardianship is determined not to be appropriate for a child, in
 some other planned, permanent living arrangement;
 `(B) preplacement preventive services programs, such as intensive family
 preservation programs (as defined in section 1144(c)(1)(B)(i)), that are
 designed to help children at risk of foster care placement remain with
 their families (including adoptive families); or
 `(C) service programs designed to provide follow-up care to families
 (including adoptive families) to whom a child has been returned after a
 foster care placement.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL ENTITLEMENT AMOUNT- Each State which receives funds paid
 to the State under section 434(b) may use such funds for any purpose for
 which funds may be used under this part.
 `(c) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT- Notwithstanding section 434, the amount that
 would otherwise be paid to a State under this subpart shall be reduced by
 the sum of--
 `(1) any amount paid to the State under this subpart which is used to
 supplant any Federal, State, or local funds used for similar purposes;
 `(2) the amount (if any) by which the total amount expended by the State
 and the political subdivisions thereof from State and local sources for
 the provision of child welfare services (excluding foster care maintenance
 payments and adoption assistance payments) during any fiscal year is less
 than the total amount so expended during fiscal year 1992; and
 `(3) the amount (if any) by which the total amount expended by the State
 and the political subdivisions thereof from State and local sources for
 the provision of child welfare services during any fiscal year is less
 than the total amount so expended during fiscal year 1992.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part B of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 412. REQUIRED PROTECTIONS FOR FOSTER CHILDREN.
 (a) ELIMINATION OF INCENTIVE FUNDING MECHANISMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) REPEAL- Section 427 (42 U.S.C. 627) is hereby repealed.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 423(a) (42 U.S.C. 623(a)) is amended by
 striking `and in section 427'.
 (2) STATE PLAN REQUIRED TO PROVIDE FOR FOSTER CARE PROTECTIONS OF REPEALED
 SECTION 427- Section 422(b) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (7);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 `(9) provide that the State must--
 `(A) conduct or have conducted an inventory of all children who have been
 in foster care under the responsibility of the State for a period of 6
 months preceding the inventory, and determine or have determined--
 `(i) the appropriateness of, and necessity for, the foster care placement;
 `(ii) whether the child can or should be returned to the parents of the
 child or should be freed for adoption; and
 `(iii) the services necessary to facilitate either the return of the child
 or the placement of the child for adoption or legal guardianship; and
 `(B) implement and operate, to the satisfaction of the Secretary--
 `(i) a statewide information system from which the status, demographic
 characteristics, location, and goals for the placement of every child who
 is in foster care, or who has been in such care within the preceding 12
 months, can be readily determined;
 `(ii) a case review system (as defined in section 475(5)) for each child
 receiving foster care under the supervision of the State; and
 `(iii) a service program designed to help children--
 `(I) where appropriate, return to families from which they have been
 removed; or
 `(II) be placed for adoption, with a legal guardian, or in some other
 planned, permanent living arrangement.'.
 (3) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 472(d) (42 U.S.C. 672(d)) is amended by striking `427(b)'
 and inserting `422(b)(9)'.
 (B) Section 425(a)(2) (42 U.S.C. 625(a)(2)) is amended by inserting `to
 comply with section 422(b)(9) or' before `to comply'.
 (4) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments and repeal made by this subsection
 shall take effect on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under
 part B of title IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to
 such payments for any succeeding fiscal year.
 (5) CONSTRUCTION OF SUBSECTION- The amendments and repeal made by this
 subsection shall not be construed to permit any State to interrupt the
 provision of the foster care protections described in section 427 of the
 Social Security Act, as in effect before fiscal year 1993.
 (b) ADDITIONAL PROTECTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 422(b)(9) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)(9)), as added by
 subsection (a)(2) of this section, and as amended by sections 103(c)(1)(B)
 and 105(a)(1) of this Act, is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (A)(iii); and
 (B) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (B)(ii);
 (C) by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (B)(iii); and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 `(iv) a preplacement preventive services program designed to help children
 at risk of foster care placement remain with their families; and
 `(C)(i) review or have reviewed State laws, State administrative and judicial
 procedures, and agency legal representation in effect for children abandoned
 at or shortly after birth; and
 `(ii) develop and implement such laws and procedures as the State determines
 are necessary to enable lasting permanent decisions to be made expeditiously
 with respect to the placement of such children;'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall take
 effect on October 1, 1994, and shall apply to payments under parts B and
 E of title IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1995 and to such
 payments for any succeeding fiscal year.
 (3) CONSTRUCTION OF SUBSECTION- The amendments made by this subsection
 shall not be construed to permit any State to interrupt the provision of the
 foster care protections described in section 427 of the Social Security Act
 (as in effect before fiscal year 1993).
SEC. 413. REPORTS ON CHILD WELFARE SERVICES AND EXPENDITURES.
 (a) PRE-EXPENDITURE REPORTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 422(b)(5) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)(5)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(5) include a report--
 `(A) on the intended use of payments made to the State under this part,
 including information on the types of services to be provided and the
 geographic areas where such services will be available; and
 `(B) which shall be made public within the State in such manner as to
 facilitate comment by any person (including any Federal or other public
 agency) during each stage of the development of the report.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to
 State plans under part B of title IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal
 year 1994 and such plans for any succeeding fiscal year.
 (b) POST-EXPENDITURE REPORTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Part B of title IV (42 U.S.C. 620-628) is amended by
 inserting after section 426 the following:
`SEC. 427. REPORT ON EXPENDITURES.
 `(a) PREPARATION- Each State shall prepare annual reports on the services
 provided with funds made available under this part during the most
 recently completed fiscal year, which shall be in such form and contain
 such information as the State finds necessary to--
 `(1) provide an accurate description of such services;
 `(2) secure a complete record of the purposes for which the funds were
 spent; and
 `(3) enable a determination of the extent to which the funds were spent
 in a manner consistent with the reports required by section 422(b)(5).
 `(b) DISSEMINATION- Not later than the date prescribed by the Secretary as
 the due date for each report required by subsection (a), each State shall--
 `(1) transmit to the Secretary a copy of each such report;
 `(2) make copies of each such report available for public inspection in
 the State; and
 `(3) provide copies of each such report, upon request, to any interested
 public agency, which may provide to the Congress the views of such agency
 on any such report.
 `(c) ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIFORM DEFINITIONS- The Secretary shall establish
 uniform definitions of services for use by the States in preparing the
 reports required by subsection (a) of this section, taking into consideration
 the uniform definitions established for the reports required by section
 2006, and shall take such other steps as may be necessary or appropriate
 to ensure that compliance with this section will not be unduly burdensome
 on the States.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply to expenditures under State plans under
 part B of title IV of the Social Security Act in or after fiscal year 1994.
 (c) COMPARATIVE FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION REPORTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 422(b) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)), as amended by section
 412(a)(2) of this Act, is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (8), by striking `and' at the end;
 (B) in paragraph (9), by striking the period and inserting `; and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 `(10) include information for the fiscal year second preceding the fiscal
 year covered by the plan, in such form as the Secretary may prescribe by
 regulation, on--
 `(A) the aggregate amount expended by the State and the political
 subdivisions thereof for the provision of child welfare services (other
 than foster care maintenance payments and adoption assistance payments),
 broken down in a manner that shows the extent to which such amount was
 expended from funds provided by each of Federal, State, or local sources; and
 `(B) the aggregate amount expended by the State and the political
 subdivisions thereof for foster care maintenance payments and adoption
 assistance payments, broken down in a manner that shows the extent to
 which such amount was expended from funds provided by each of Federal,
 State, or local sources.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to
 State plans under part B of title IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal
 year 1993 and to such plans for any succeeding fiscal year.
 (3) REPORTS TO THE CONGRESS- Section 422 (42 U.S.C. 622) is amended by
 adding at the end the following:
 `(c) The Secretary shall annually transmit to the Committee on Ways and
 Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of
 the Senate a summary of the information received from States pursuant to
 subsection (b)(10), and shall make available to the public copies of the
 summary at a charge equal to the cost of printing.'.
SEC. 414. GRANT PROGRAM FOR STATE COURT SYSTEMS TO ASSESS AND IMPROVE
PROCEDURES IN CHILD WELFARE CASES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this
 section referred to as the `Secretary') shall make grants in accordance
 with this section to the highest State courts to conduct assessments of the
 procedures and functions of the State courts in carrying out parts B and
 E of title IV of the Social Security Act, and to implement recommendations
 for improvements in such procedures and functions based on the assessments.
 (b) ASSESSMENTS- The assessment described in this subsection is designed
 to assess how the State courts are performing the activities required of
 them by or under State laws enacted pursuant to parts B and E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act, and to make recommendations on how to improve
 the implementation of such parts, which shall include the following:
 (1) A list of the requirements imposed on the State courts by or under
 State laws enacted pursuant to such parts, and a list of the State
 laws, regulations, and policies that govern the implementation of such
 requirements.
 (2) A description of the extent to which State law requires procedural
 safeguards for children and their parents with respect to each type of
 proceeding held by State courts pursuant to the State laws referred to in
 paragraph (1).
 (3) A quantitative and qualitative evaluation of how each requirement of
 such parts is being carried out in the State, including the following:
 (A) The circumstances under which, and the frequency with which, the
 procedural safeguards described pursuant to paragraph (2) are provided.
 (B) Whether, during court proceedings, evidence is presented and arguments
 are made that address the findings and determinations required by the State
 laws referred to in paragraph (1), and, if so, the amount and sufficiency
 of time devoted to the presentation of such evidence and the making of
 such arguments.
 (C) The extent to which the procedures and practices of the State courts are
 reasonably in accord with recommended standards of national organizations
 concerned with permanent placement for foster children.
 (4) The effect of judicial caseloads and case assignments on the quality
 of court proceedings.
 (5) Recommendations on how to better meet the requirements of such parts, and
 to improve the implementation by the State courts of the State laws enacted
 pursuant to such parts, including any changes in law, regulation, procedure,
 judicial manpower, judicial case assignments, judicial caseloads, judicial
 data collection, judicial education, and requirements for court-appointed
 legal representatives for parents and children.
 (c) APPLICATIONS-
 (1) FISCAL YEAR 1994- In order for a highest State court to become eligible
 for a grant under this section for fiscal year 1994, the court shall submit
 to the Secretary an application which, at a minimum, contains the following:
 (A) A timetable for conducting and completing the assessment described in
 subsection (b) during fiscal year 1994.
 (B) A budget for the assessment described in subsection (b), the method
 which is to be used to conduct the assessment, and a statement of how
 courts are to be selected for inclusion in the assessment.
 (C) A certification that the head of the State agency responsible for
 children in State-supervised foster care, and, if applicable, the State
 foster care citizen review board or the State organization of citizen
 review boards, has had an opportunity to review and comment on a draft of
 the application before its submission. Such certification must include a
 copy of such comments.
 (D) A description of how the court is to consult and cooperate with the
 head of the State agency responsible for children in State-supervised
 foster care, and, if applicable, the State foster care citizen review
 board or the State organization of citizen review boards, in developing
 and conducting the assessment described in subsection (b).
 (E) Such other information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
 (2) FISCAL YEAR 1995- In order for a highest State court to become eligible
 for a grant under this section for fiscal year 1995, the court shall submit
 to the Secretary an application which contains the following:
 (A) A copy of the assessment described in subsection (b) that was conducted
 and completed with funds provided under this section.
 (B) A description of the steps that were taken during the conduct of the
 assessment described in subsection (b), and that will be taken in the fiscal
 year for which the application is submitted, to consult and cooperate with
 the State agency responsible for children in State-supervised foster care
 and, if applicable, the State foster care citizen review board or the
 State organization of citizen review boards.
 (C) A specification of the steps that will be taken to implement the
 recommendations described in subsection (b)(5) made in the assessment
 described in subsection (b), and to make other improvements in the judicial
 handling of child welfare and foster care cases.
 (D) Assurances that the applicant will--
 (i) coordinate with the head of the State agency responsible for children
 in State-supervised foster care, and provide the agency with a report on
 the actions to be taken by the applicant to implement the recommendations
 of the assessment;
 (ii) after completion of the assessment described in subsection (b),
 use funds received under this section to--
 (I) implement the recommendations of the assessment; and
 (II) establish new activities or programs, or strengthen existing activities
 or programs, to carry out such recommendations; and
 (iii) not use funds received under this section to supplant State or local
 funds used for similar purposes.
 (E) Such other information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
 (3) FISCAL YEARS 1996, 1997, AND 1998- In order for a highest State court
 to become eligible for a grant under this section for fiscal year 1996 or
 thereafter, the court shall submit to the Secretary an application which
 contains the following:
 (A) A description and evaluation of the activities of the State courts under
 the grant made with respect to an application submitted under paragraph
 (2) in improving their implementation of parts B and E of title IV of the
 Social Security Act.
 (B) A description of the steps that were taken during the previous fiscal
 year, and that will be taken in the year for which the application is
 submitted, to consult and cooperate with the head of the State agency
 responsible for children in State-supervised foster care and, if applicable,
 the State foster care citizen review board or the State organization of
 citizen review boards, in implementing the recommendations made in the
 assessment described in subsection (b).
 (C) A specification of the remaining steps that will be taken to implement
 the recommendations described in subsection (b)(5) made in the assessment
 described in subsection (b), and to make other related improvements in
 the judicial handling of child welfare and foster care cases.
 (D) A reaffirmation of the assurances made pursuant to paragraph (2)(D).
 (E) Such other information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
 (d) GRANT AMOUNTS-
 (1) FISCAL YEAR 1994- Of the amounts made available to carry out this section
 for fiscal year 1994, each highest State court that submits an application
 which meets the requirements of subsection (c)(1) shall be entitled to,
 and the Secretary shall pay such court, a grant in an amount equal to--
 (A) $150,000; plus
 (B) the amount which bears the same ratio to the remainder of such available
 amounts as the number of individuals in the State who have not attained the
 age of 21 years bears to the number of individuals who have not attained
 such age in the States the highest State courts of which have so submitted
 such applications.
 (2) FISCAL YEARS 1995, 1996, 1997, AND 1998- Of the amounts made available
 to carry out this section for each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, and
 1998, each highest State court that submits an application which meets the
 requirements of paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (c) shall be entitled
 to, and the Secretary shall pay such court, a grant in an amount equal to--
 (A) $190,000; plus
 (B) the amount which bears the same ratio to the remainder of the amounts
 available for the fiscal year as the number of individuals in the State who
 have not attained the age of 21 years bears to the number of individuals
 who have not attained such age in the States the highest State courts of
 which have so submitted such applications.
 (3) NO STATE MATCH REQUIRED FOR FISCAL YEARS 1994 AND 1995; REDISTRIBUTION
 OF UNUSED FUNDS- Grant amounts under this section shall be paid to, and
 redistributed among, highest State courts in the same manner in which
 funds made available pursuant to section 420(b) of the Social Security
 Act are paid to, and reallotted among, the States pursuant to sections
 423 and 424 of such Act, except that--
 (A) for each of fiscal years 1994 and 1995, section 423(a) of such Act
 shall be applied by substituting `100 percentum' for `75 percentum'; and
 (B) amounts shall be redistributed on the same basis as amounts are
 distributed under paragraph (1)(B) or (2)(B), and amounts so redistributed
 shall be treated as part of the amounts distributed under paragraph (1)(B)
 or (2)(B), whichever is applicable.
 (e) USE OF GRANTS-
 (1) FISCAL YEAR 1994-
 (A) CONDUCT ASSESSMENT- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), each highest
 State court which receives a grant applied for under subsection (c)(1)
 shall use such grant to conduct the assessment described in subsection (b).
 (B) AUTHORITY TO USE EXCESS GRANT FUNDS TO IMPLEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS-
 Any highest State court which has grant funds remaining after completing
 the assessment may use the remainder of the grant to implement the
 recommendations made as part of the assessment, in fiscal year 1994 or
 fiscal year 1995.
 (2) FISCAL YEARS 1995, 1996, 1997, AND 1998- Each highest State court which
 receives a grant applied for under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (c)
 for a fiscal year shall--
 (A) use the grant to implement the recommendations made as part of the
 assessment described in subsection (b); and
 (B) expend such grant in the fiscal year or in the immediately succeeding
 fiscal year.
 (f) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS-
 (1) GUIDELINES FOR GRANT APPLICATIONS- Within 90 days after the effective
 date of this section, the Secretary shall issue guidelines for grant
 applications under subsection (c)(1) and transmit such guidelines to each
 highest State court.
 (2) PROMPT ACTION ON APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall take prompt action
 on each application for a grant under this section.
 (g) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 (1) HIGHEST STATE COURT- The term `highest State court' means, with respect
 to a State, the State court with final appellate jurisdiction over civil
 matters in which State courts perform a function assigned by or under
 State laws enacted pursuant to part B or E of the Social Security Act.
 (2) STATE- The term `State' shall have the same meaning such term has for
 purposes of parts B and E of title IV of the Social Security Act.
 (h) REPORTS TO THE CONGRESS- The Secretary shall submit to the Congress
 an interim report not later than September 30, 1996, and a final report
 not later than September 30, 1999, on--
 (1) the information obtained from the assessments conducted with grants
 made under this section; and
 (2) the impact of the grant program under this section on the procedures
 and functions of the State courts in carrying out parts B and E of title
 IV of the Social Security Act.
 (i) GRANTS FUNDED THROUGH SET ASIDE OF PORTION OF CHILD WELFARE ENTITLEMENT
 FUNDS FOR CERTAIN FISCAL YEARS-
 (1) FISCAL YEAR 1994- $15,000,000 of the sums made available pursuant
 to section 430 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1994 shall be
 used solely to make grants to highest State courts under this section,
 before applying section 432 of such Act.
 (2) FISCAL YEARS 1995, 1996, 1997, AND 1998- $25,000,000 of the sums
 made available pursuant to section 430 of the Social Security Act for
 each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 shall be used solely to
 make grants to highest State courts under this section, before applying
 section 432 of such Act.
 (j) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on October 1, 1993.
SEC. 415. STATE DIRECTORY OF SERVICES.
 (a) STATE PLAN REQUIREMENT- Section 422(b) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)), as amended
 by sections 102(a)(2) and 103(c)(1) of this Act, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (9);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(11) require the agency administering or supervising the administration
 of the plan, not less frequently than every 2 years, to--
 `(A) compile a detailed directory of those service programs made available
 by the agency or by local child welfare agencies to families served by
 such agencies that are--
 `(i) preplacement preventive services programs that are designed to help
 children at risk of foster care placement remain with their families;
 `(ii) service programs designed to help children--
 `(I) where appropriate, return to families from which they have been
 removed; or
 `(II) be placed for adoption, with a legal guardian, or in some other
 planned, permanent living arrangement; or
 `(iii) service programs designed to provide follow-up care to families to
 whom a child has been returned after a foster care placement;
 `(B) identify in such directory which of the programs referred to in
 subparagraph (A) provides specialized child welfare services to families
 in crisis due to substance abuse;
 `(C) include in such directory such information as the Secretary may
 require by rule;
 `(D) include in such directory, for each of such programs--
 `(i) the name and address of the program and the agency or organization
 that administers the program;
 `(ii) a description of the services offered by the program;
 `(iii) the number of individuals the program is capable of serving at one
 time; and
 `(iv) a description of the criteria for eligibility for services under
 the program, including any priorities with respect to who will receive
 such services;
 `(E) arrange the information in the directory geographically; and
 `(F) provide a copy of such directory to the Secretary and to all judges
 and other judicial administrators, and all State agencies, that are involved
 in child protection, foster care, and adoption cases.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply to payments under part B of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1994 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 416. STATES REQUIRED TO REPORT ON MEASURES TAKEN TO COMPLY WITH THE
INDIAN CHILD WELFARE ACT.
 (a) STATE PLAN REQUIREMENT- Section 422(b) (42 U.S.C. 622(b)), as amended
 by sections 102(a)(2), 103(c)(1), and 105(a) of this Act, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (10);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(12) contain a description, developed after consultation with tribal
 organizations (as defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination
 and Education Assistance Act) in the State, of the specific measures taken
 by the State to comply with the Indian Child Welfare Act.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply to payments under part B of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1994 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
Subtitle C--Foster Care and Adoption Assistance
SEC. 421. COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROJECTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title IV (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) is amended by inserting
 after part B the following:
`PART C--COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROJECTS
`SEC. 441. COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROJECTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to grant States the flexibility
 and resources necessary to develop comprehensive and coordinated services
 designed--
 `(A) to preserve and strengthen families with children at risk of placement
 outside their home;
 `(B) to reunite children with their families expeditiously if an out-of-home
 placement is found to be necessary; and
 `(C) to place children in adoptive homes or other permanent arrangements
 in a timely fashion if reunification with their families is not appropriate.
 `(2) METHOD- The method of this section is to permit any State to apply
 to the Secretary for permission--
 `(A) to conduct a comprehensive service project in accordance with this
 section in such area or areas of the State as the State may select; and
 `(B) to suspend certain requirements of parts B and E with respect to the
 activities of the State in such area or areas during the project.
 `(3) ENTITLEMENT- For payments to which States authorized to conduct projects
 under this section are entitled under this part, there shall be available
 to the Secretary for each fiscal year an amount equal to 10 percent of the
 aggregate of the amounts that would have been paid to such States under
 section 423 for the fiscal year, and the amounts that would have been
 paid to such States under section 434 for the fiscal year if the total
 sum available for such payments were equal to the basic entitlement amount
 (as defined in section 430(b)(1)), if the Secretary had approved the State
 plans of such States under part B for the fiscal year and had not authorized
 such States to conduct projects under this section for the fiscal year.
 `(b) APPLICATIONS- Not later than 3 months before the fiscal year in which
 a State intends to commence a comprehensive services project under this
 section, the State may submit to the Secretary an application to conduct
 the project which shall contain the following:
 `(1) A plan and a timetable for assessing by the end of the fiscal year--
 `(A) whether procedures and policies of the child welfare agency of the
 State, or of the area or areas of the State in which the project is to be
 conducted, provide for the coordinated delivery of services to children
 and their families, and the specific barriers that must be overcome to
 ensure such coordination;
 `(B) the service needs of families in the area or areas of the State
 in which the project is to be conducted whose child or children are at
 imminent risk of placement outside their home or are in an out-of-home
 placement in the child welfare, juvenile justice, or mental health system;
 `(C) specific service programs available in the area or areas of the State
 in which the project is to be conducted that address the service needs of
 such families; and
 `(D) the extent to which common practices, policies, and procedures among
 the child welfare, juvenile justice, and mental health systems in the area
 or areas of the State in which the project is to be conducted govern the
 assessment of children and their families, the provision of case plans,
 the delivery of services to children and their families, and the periodic
 reviews of the services provided, particularly with regard to families
 whose child or children are at imminent risk of placement outside their
 home or are in an out-of-home placement;
 `(2) a plan and a timetable for implementing--
 `(A) procedures and policies of the child welfare agency of the State, or
 of the area or areas of the State in which the project is to be conducted,
 that will result in the coordinated and efficient delivery of the range
 of child welfare services to families in the child welfare system;
 `(B) a comprehensive services program designed to--
 `(i) preserve and strengthen families with children at imminent risk of
 placement outside their home;
 `(ii) reunite children with their families expeditiously if an out-of-home
 placement is found to be necessary;
 `(iii) place children in adoptive homes or other permanent arrangements
 in a timely fashion if reunification with their families is not appropriate;
 `(iv) meet the primary service needs of targeted families in the area or
 areas of the State in which the project is to be conducted who are in the
 child welfare, juvenile justice, or mental health system and whose child
 or children are at imminent risk of placement outside their home or are
 in an out-of-home placement; and
 `(v) include, at a minimum, access to substance abuse treatment, parenting
 education, health, mental health, crisis managment, and counseling services;
 `(C) a common assessment tool for targeting which children and families who
 come to the attention of the child welfare, juvenile justice, and mental
 health systems will participate in the program described in subparagraph (B);
 `(D) joint training of staff from the child welfare, mental health, and
 juvenile justice systems who will be involved in the program described in
 subparagraph (B);
 `(E) a system for delivering services under the program described in
 subparagraph (B) to families targeted for the program which ensures a
 single point of entry and uses a unified case management approach, and
 thereby minimizes unnecessary and duplicative assessments and services;
 `(F) an information system to track children and families across systems who
 participate in the program described in subparagraph (B), which provides
 data, not less frequently than annually, on the number of children and
 families served from each system and the nature of the services provided; and
 `(G) a mechanism by which to ensure that relevant information on the
 service and treatment needs and outcomes of children and their families
 which is developed through their participation in the program described
 in subparagraph (B) is made available, as appropriate, to case managers
 and service providers in the relevant agencies who are charged with making
 service, placement, and other decisions with respect to the children and
 their families;
 `(3) a statement of the specific outcomes the State expects by conducting
 the project, which shall include outcomes in at least the following areas--
 `(A) an increase in the well-being of children;
 `(B) a reduction in placements and expenditures for out-of-home care
 relative to what would have occurred otherwise;
 `(C) an increase in the level and mix of preventive services available
 to families in the child welfare, juvenile justice, and mental health
 systems; and
 `(D) an increase in coordination and cooperation among the child welfare,
 juvenile justice, and mental health agencies;
 `(4) an assurance that, in developing the application, the State consulted
 with and received technical assistance from the Advisory Commission on
 Children and Families established under section 1144;
 `(5) a statement from the Advisory Commission on Children and Families
 containing its recommendation to the Secretary regarding the application;
 `(6) a specification of the area or areas of the State in which the project
 is to be conducted, in which must reside not fewer than 300,000 individuals
 in the aggregate at the time the application is submitted;
 `(7) a certification that all cost savings resulting from the project will
 be used to provide child welfare services to families;
 `(8) a certification that the State will provide the Secretary with such
 information about the project and the State programs carried out pursuant
 to parts B and E as the Secretary may request, and will cooperate with the
 Advisory Commission on Children and Families if the Commission evaluates
 the project;
 `(9) a certification that--
 `(A) the State will not use any funds provided under this section to
 supplant any Federal, State, or local funds used for similar purposes;
 `(B) the aggregate amount expended from State and local sources by the
 State and the political subdivisions thereof for the provision of child
 welfare services (excluding foster care maintenance payments and adoption
 assistance payments) during any fiscal year will be not less than the
 aggregate amount so expended during fiscal year 1992; and
 `(C) the aggregate amount expended from State and local sources by the
 State and the political subdivisions thereof for the provision of child
 welfare services during any fiscal year will be not less than the aggregate
 amount so expended during fiscal year 1992;
 `(10) a certification that the individual or agency referred to in
 section 422(b)(1)(A) shall have lead responsibility for the operation and
 administration of the project under this section;
 `(11) a certification by the Governor of the State that project activities
 will be coordinated among the State child welfare, juvenile justice,
 and mental health agencies, and other appropriate State agencies; and
 `(12) a list of those requirements of parts B and E which are to apply
 to the project, in addition to the requirements imposed by the provisions
 specified in subsection (c)(6)(A) of this section.
 `(c) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS-
 `(1) NOTIFICATION TO STATES OF APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS- Not later than
 6 months after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary
 shall prepare and transmit to each State a detailed explanation of the
 requirements for conducting a project under this section.
 `(2) CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall consider all
 applications (and amendments thereto) received from States desiring to
 conduct a project under this section.
 `(3) AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS- A State may, at any time and for any fiscal
 year, submit to the Secretary 1 or more amendments to any application
 submitted to the Secretary under this section.
 `(4) NOTIFICATION TO ADVISORY COMMISSION IF ITS RECOMMENDATIONS ARE NOT
 FOLLOWED- If the Secretary takes action on an application submitted under
 this section in a manner contrary to a recommendation of the Advisory
 Commission on Children and Families established under section 1144, the
 Secretary shall provide the Commission with the reasons therefor.
 `(5) APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall approve any application of a State
 to conduct a project under this section, and any amendment thereto, that
 meets the requirements of this section to the satisfaction of the Secretary.
 `(B) CERTAIN APPLICATIONS DEEMED APPROVED- Except as provided in subsection
 (h)(2), any application to conduct a project under this section, and any
 amendment thereto, that is received by the Secretary from a State, is not
 withdrawn by the State, and is not disapproved by the Secretary within 45
 days after receipt shall be deemed to have been approved by the Secretary.
 `(C) FREEDOM OF STATES TO SELECT AREAS IN WHICH TO CONDUCT THE PROJECT-
 The Secretary may not, as a condition of approval of a State application to
 conduct a project under this section or of any amendment thereto, require
 the State to select any particular area or areas of the State in which to
 conduct the project.
 `(D) FREEDOM OF STATES TO SELECT PROVISIONS OF PARTS B AND E TO APPLY TO
 THE PROJECT- The Secretary may not, as a condition of approval of a State
 application to conduct a project under this section or of any amendment
 thereto, require the project to comply with any provision of part B or E
 not specified in paragraph (6)(A) of this subsection.
 `(6) AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT PROJECT; GRANT AUTHORITY- If the Secretary approves
 the application of a State to conduct a project under this section, then--
 `(A) the Secretary shall authorize the State to conduct the project
 in accordance with the approved application therefor and any approved
 amendments thereto, and the requirements of section 422(b)(9), the
 provision of section 471(a)(1) requiring the State plan to provide for
 adoption assistance in accordance with section 473, paragraphs (8), (9),
 (10), (12), (13), (15), and (16) of section 471(a), and sections 472(h),
 473, and 479 shall apply to the project; and
 `(B) in lieu of receiving the funds that would otherwise be provided to
 the State for any fiscal year pursuant to sections 423, 434(a), and 474
 (other than with respect to adoption assistance) with respect to the
 activities of the State in the area or areas of the State in which the
 project is to be conducted, the State shall be entitled to receive a grant,
 in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, for each fiscal year,
 from the amount allotted to the State for the fiscal year under section
 421, the amount allotted to the State for the fiscal year under section
 432 from the basic entitlement amount (as defined in section 430(b)(1)),
 the amount to which the State is entitled for the fiscal year under part E,
 and the amount made available pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section.
 `(d) ANNUAL GRANTS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF GRANT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The amount of the grant to be paid under this subsection
 to a State for a fiscal year shall be the amount determined by the Secretary
 to be--
 `(i) the sum of--
 `(I) 110 percent of the aggregate of the amount that would have been paid to
 the State under section 423 for the fiscal year, and the amount that would
 have been paid to such States under section 434 for the fiscal year if the
 total sum available for such payments were equal to the basic entitlement
 amount (as defined in section 430(b)(1)), if the Secretary had approved
 the State plan under part B for the fiscal year and had not authorized
 the State to conduct a project under this section for the fiscal year; and
 `(II) the aggregate of the expenses for which the State would properly
 have submitted a claim for reimbursement under section 474 (other than
 with respect to adoption assistance) for the fiscal year if the Secretary
 had approved the State plan under part E for the fiscal year and had
 not authorized the State to conduct a project under this section for the
 fiscal year;
multiplied by
 `(ii) the quotient equal to--
 `(I) the number of children in the area or areas in which the project is to
 be conducted under this section with respect to whom the State would have
 made foster care maintenance payments under section 472 for the fiscal year
 if the Secretary had approved the State plan under part E for the fiscal
 year and had not authorized the State to conduct the project; divided by
 `(II) the total number of children in the State with respect to whom the
 State would have so made such payments for the fiscal year.
 `(B) CALCULATION OF GRANT AMOUNT- The Secretary shall calculate the expenses
 for which a State would properly have submitted a claim for reimbursement
 under section 474 (other than with respect to adoption assistance) for a
 fiscal year by--
 `(i) determining the amount paid to the State with respect to such expenses
 for the fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year in which the
 State commenced (or is to commence) the project under this section;
 `(ii) adjusting such amount annually by a rate which reflects the average
 annual rate at which expenditures by the State on behalf of foster care
 children under part E have increased for the 3-year period ending with
 the commencement of the project; and
 `(iii) increasing such amount, to the extent the Secretary deems appropriate,
 by taking into account--
 `(I) any estimate made by the State of the expenses for which the State would
 properly have submitted such a claim for reimbursement for the fiscal year;
 `(II) the projected rate of inflation for the fiscal year;
 `(III) the rate at which the number of children on whose behalf the Federal
 Government has reimbursed foster care maintenance payments made by States
 not participating in the project has recently increased (emphasizing those
 nonparticipating States which have similar child welfare programs and similar
 foster care caseload characteristics), as determined by the Secretary;
 `(IV) changes in State laws or procedures that have the effect of changing
 the rate at which children are placed in foster care or changing the costs
 of maintaining children in foster care;
 `(V) the amount (if any) by which--
 `(aa) the national average number of children per State who, as of the end
 of the fiscal year immediately preceding the commencement of the project,
 have not attained the age of 18 years and were eligible for benefits
 under the respective State plan under part E (expressed as a percentage
 of the total population of children in the respective State who have not
 so attained such age); exceeds
 `(bb) the number of such children in the State (expressed as a similar
 percentage); and
 `(VI) other factors deemed appropriate by the Secretary.
 `(2) NOTIFICATION TO STATES OF AMOUNT OF GRANTS- The Secretary shall notify
 each State of the amount of the grant to be made to the State for a fiscal
 year under this subsection, not later than--
 `(A) in the case of the first grant with respect to an approved application,
 the later of--
 `(i) 45 days after the Secretary receives the application therefor; or
 `(ii) August 1 of the fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year
 for which the grant is to be made; and
 `(B) in any other case, August 1 of such immediately preceding fiscal year.
 `(3) GRANTS TO BE PAID IN EQUAL QUARTERLY INSTALLMENTS- The Secretary
 shall pay each grant under this subsection in equal quarterly installments.
 `(e) PRESERVATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- During the period in which a State
 is conducting a project under this section--
 `(1) the State may not carry out the project in a manner which impairs
 the entitlement of any child to--
 `(A) the foster care benefits the child would have received under a State
 plan approved under part E if the Secretary had approved the State plan
 under part E for the fiscal year and had not authorized the State to
 conduct a project under this section for the fiscal year; or
 `(B) any other benefit to which the child is entitled by law; and
 `(2) the State shall, for purposes of section 402(a)(20), be deemed to
 have in effect a State plan approved under part E.
 `(f) REPORT ON EXPENDITURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than April 1 of the fiscal year immediately
 following each fiscal year for which a State conducts a project under
 this section, the State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary and the
 Advisory Commission on Children and Families established under section
 1144 a report on the funds expended under the project.
 `(2) FORM AND CONTENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The report required by paragraph (1) shall be in such
 form and contain such information as the State finds necessary to--
 `(i) accurately describe how the grant made under this section for the
 fiscal year was used;
 `(ii) provide a complete record of how the grant funds were expended; and
 `(iii) enable a determination of the extent to which the funds were spent
 in a manner consistent with the application therefor.
 `(B) INCLUSION OF INFORMATION ON COMPARATIVE FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS-
 The report required by paragraph (1) for a fiscal year shall include
 the information described in section 422(b)(10) for the 2nd preceding
 fiscal year.
 `(g) ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES FOR UNSUCCESSFUL PROJECTS- If the Secretary has
 determined that the State is not conducting the project in accordance with
 this section or is not making satisfactory progress toward the achievement
 of the plans of the State, the Secretary may--
 `(1) provide technical assistance to the project;
 `(2) require the State to take corrective action with respect to the
 project; or
 `(3) after notice and opportunity for hearing, reduce the payments that
 would otherwise be due the State under this section by an amount which
 the Secretary determines is appropriate.
 `(h) TERMINATION OF PROJECTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any State authorized to conduct a project under this
 section shall discontinue the project at the end of a fiscal year--
 `(A) if the State has notified the Secretary that the State intends to
 discontinue the project at the end of the fiscal year; or
 `(B) if the Secretary has determined that the State is not conducting
 the project in accordance with this section or is not making satisfactory
 progress toward the achievement of the plans of the State, and the Secretary
 does not plan to take action under subsection (g) during the fiscal year
 with respect to the project.
 `(2) EFFECT OF PROJECT TERMINATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- On the discontinuance of a project of a State under this
 section, parts B and E shall apply with respect to the population of,
 and the activities of the State in, the area or areas of the State in
 which the project was conducted.
 `(B) PROJECT MAY NOT BE RESUMED FOR 5 YEARS- A State may not conduct a
 project under this section during the 5-year period beginning with the
 discontinuance of a project of the State under this section.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992.
SEC. 422. ABANDONED CHILDREN.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY FOR FOSTER CARE MAINTENANCE PAYMENTS- Section 472 (42
 U.S.C. 672), as amended by section 424(a) of this Act, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `or (i)' and inserting `, (i), or
 (j)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(j) Any State with a plan approved under this part may make foster care
 maintenance payments with respect to any child in the State entering foster
 care on or after October 1, 1993--
 `(1) who has been abandoned by his or her parents, as determined by a
 court of competent jurisdiction;
 `(2) for whom the State child welfare agency cannot, despite diligent
 efforts, determine the financial circumstances and living arrangements of
 the parents of the child; and
 `(3) who meets the requirements of subsection (a)(2).'.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY FOR ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS- Section 473(a)(7) (42
 U.S.C. 673(a)(7)), as added by the amendment made by section 424(b) of
 this Act, is amended by striking `section 472(i)' and inserting `subsection
 (i) or (j) of section 472'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act in or after fiscal year 1994.
SEC. 423. CLARIFICATION OF REMOVAL FROM HOME REQUIREMENT.
 (a) FOSTER CARE MAINTENANCE PAYMENTS PROGRAM- Section 472 (42 U.S.C. 672)
 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting `or from the legal
 custody' after `removal from the home';
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting `or from such legal custody, as the case may be' after
 `from the home'; and
 (ii) by striking `therein' and inserting `in the home or of such legal
 custody, as the case may be,';
 (C) in paragraph (2), by inserting `and' after the semicolon;
 (D) in paragraph (3), by striking `; and' and inserting a period; and
 (E) in paragraph (4), by inserting `or from the legal custody' after
 `removal from the home';
 (2) in the second sentence of subsection (a), by inserting `or from the legal
 custody of a relative (specified in section 406(a))' after `from the home';
 (3) in subsection (d), by inserting `or from the legal custody of their
 relatives' after `their homes';
 (4) in subsection (e), by inserting `or from the legal custody of his or
 her relative' after `his or her home'; and
 (5) in subsection (g)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by inserting `or into their legal custody or into
 the legal custody of a relative' before the comma; and
 (B) in the matter following paragraph (2), by inserting `or into such
 legal custody, as the case may be,' after `such home'.
 (b) ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM- Section 473 (42 U.S.C. 673) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)(i)--
 (i) by inserting `or from the legal custody' after `removal from the
 home'; and
 (ii) by striking `therein' and inserting `in the home or of such legal
 custody, as the case may be,'; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(i), by inserting `or from such legal custody,
 as the case may be' after `removal from the home'; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting `or legal custody' after `home'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
 (d) RETROACTIVE APPLICATION OF CLARIFIED REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any State may, in accordance with paragraph (2), submit
 to the Secretary of Health and Human Services a claim for reimbursement
 of amounts expended by the State during the 10-year period that begins
 with October 1, 1982--
 (A) with respect to children placed in foster care or for adoption; and
 (B) for which the State would have received reimbursement under section
 474 of the Social Security Act had the amendments made by this section
 been in effect at the time of the expenditure.
 (2) DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION OF CLAIM-
 (A) OLDER EXPENDITURES- Any claim described in paragraph (1) with respect to
 an amount expended during the period beginning October 1, 1982, and ending
 1 year before the date of the enactment of this Act shall be submitted
 not later than 1 year after such date of enactment.
 (B) NEWER EXPENDITURES- Any claim described in paragraph (1) with respect
 to an amount expended during the period beginning 1 year before the date
 of the enactment of this Act and ending on September 30, 1992, shall be
 submitted not later than 2 years after the date of the expenditure.
SEC. 424. DISSOLVED ADOPTIONS.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY FOR FOSTER CARE MAINTENANCE PAYMENTS- Section 472 (42
 U.S.C. 672) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by inserting `or (i)' after `subsection (a)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(i) Any State with a plan approved under this part may make foster care
 maintenance payments under this part on behalf of a child--
 `(1) with respect to whom such payments were previously made;
 `(2) whose adoption has been set aside by a court;
 `(3) who meets the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection
 (a); and
 `(4) who fails to meet the requirements of subsection (a)(4) but would
 meet such requirements if--
 `(A) the child were treated as if the child were in the same financial and
 other circumstances the child was in the last time the child was determined
 eligible for such payments; and
 `(B) the adoption were treated as having never occurred.'.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY FOR ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS- Section 473(a) (42
 U.S.C. 673(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(7) Any State with a plan approved under this part may enter into an
 adoption assistance agreement with the adoptive parents of any child with
 respect to whom the State may make foster care maintenance payments under
 section 472(i).'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act in or after fiscal year 1993.
SEC. 425. RESPITE CARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) STATE PLAN OPTION- Section 471(a) (42 U.S.C. 671(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (16);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (17) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 `(18) at the option of the State, provides for respite care in accordance
 with section 480, and specifies the factors and conditions used by the
 State to identify children with special needs.'.
 (2) RESPITE CARE PROGRAM- Part E of title IV (42 U.S.C. 670-679) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 480. RESPITE CARE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each State with a plan approved under this part that
 provides for respite care shall provide such care to any family which
 operates a foster family home for 1 or more foster children who the State
 determines have special needs (whether or not foster care maintenance
 payments are made under the State plan with respect to such child or
 children), in accordance with all applicable State and local standards
 and guidelines and in the least restrictive setting consistent with the
 special needs of such child or children.
 `(b) RESPITE CARE DEFINED- As used in this section, the term `respite care'
 means, with respect to the family of a foster child, care authorized by
 a State, or provided by a public or private agency designated by a State,
 to provide temporary relief for the foster parent caregiver or caregivers
 of the child.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON EXPENSES ELIGIBLE FOR REIMBURSEMENT- Expenditures for
 only the first 14 days of respite care provided during a fiscal year with
 respect to a child are eligible for reimbursement under section 474(a). As
 used in the preceding sentence, the term `day' means any period of 24
 consecutive hours.'.
 (3) PAYMENTS TO STATES- Section 474(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 674(a)(1)) is amended by
 inserting `plus the amount expended during such quarter for the provision
 of respite care that is eligible for reimbursement under section 480'
 before the semicolon.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV of
 the Social Security Act for expenditures made in or after fiscal year 1994.
SEC. 426. EXTENSION OF DEFINITION OF CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 473(c) (42 U.S.C. 673(c)), as amended by section
 423(b)(2) of this Act, is amended to read as follows:
 `(c)(1) For purposes of this section, a child shall not be considered a
 child with special needs unless the State determines that the child meets
 the requirements of subparagraph (A) or (B):
 `(A) A child meets the requirements of this subparagraph if all of the
 following clauses apply to the child:
 `(i) The child cannot or should not be returned to the home or the legal
 custody of the parents of the child.
 `(ii) There exists a specific factor or condition (such as his ethnic
 background, age, or membership in a minority or sibling group, or the
 presence of factors such as medical conditions or physical, mental, or
 emotional handicaps), or information available and known about the child's
 genetic or social history indicating a high risk of medical conditions or
 physical, mental, or emotional handicaps, which makes it reasonable to
 conclude that the child cannot be placed for adoption without providing
 adoption assistance under this section or medical assistance under title XIX.
 `(iii) Except where it would be against the best interests of the child
 because of such factors as the existence of significant emotional ties
 with prospective adoptive parents while in their care as a foster child or
 a relative, a reasonable but unsuccessful effort has been made to place
 the child with appropriate adoptive parents without providing adoption
 assistance or medical assistance under title XIX.
 `(B) A child meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the child--
 `(i) has been adopted;
 `(ii) immediately before the adoption was under the care and responsibility
 of the State agency administering or supervising the administration of
 the State programs under this part; and
 `(iii) has a mental, physical, or emotional handicap that--
 `(I) existed before the adoption but was not diagnosed until after the
 adoption; or
 `(II) first manifests itself after the adoption but is congenital or was
 caused before the adoption.
 `(2) Each State shall submit to the Secretary the factors and conditions
 used by the State to identify children with special needs for purposes of
 this section, and any modifications to such factors and conditions.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993, and shall apply with respect to children who are adopted
 after September 30, 1993, and who become eligible for adoption assistance
 payments under section 473 of the Social Security Act in or after fiscal
 year 1994.
SEC. 427. STUDY OF REASONABLE EFFORTS REQUIREMENT BY ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this
 section referred to as the `Secretary') shall establish an Advisory
 Committee on Foster Care Placement (in this section referred to as the
 `Advisory Committee') to study and make recommendations concerning the
 implementation of the requirements imposed under section 471(a)(15) of
 the Social Security Act.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Advisory Committee shall consist of not fewer than 9
 members. In appointing persons to the Advisory Committee, the Secretary shall
 include representatives of the following types of organizations and agencies:
 (1) Private, nonprofit organizations with an interest in child welfare
 (including such organizations that provide child protective services,
 foster care services, adoption services, or family support services).
 (2) Agencies of States and political subdivisions thereof responsible for
 child protective services, foster care services, or adoption services.
 (3) Judicial bodies of States and political subdivisions thereof responsible
 for adjudicating issues of family law (as defined and determined by the
 Secretary).
 (4) Attorneys and others who represent children and their parents.
 (c) COMPENSATION OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS-
 (1) MEMBERS WHO ARE NOT FULL-TIME FEDERAL OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES- Each member
 of the Advisory Committee who is not a full-time officer or employee of
 the United States shall, while engaging in the business of the Advisory
 Committee (including travel time) be entitled to receive compensation at a
 rate fixed by the Secretary, but not exceeding the daily rate specified at
 the time of such service under GS-18 of the General Schedule established
 under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) PROHIBITION AGAINST COMPENSATION OF FULL-TIME FEDERAL OFFICERS
 OR EMPLOYEES- Each member of the Advisory Committee who is a full-time
 officer or employee of the United States may not receive additional pay,
 allowances, or benefits by reason of service on the Commission.
 (3) TRAVEL EXPENSES- While away from their homes or regular places of
 business and on the business of the Advisory Committee, the members of
 the Advisory Committee may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem
 in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United
 States Code, for persons employed intermittently in Government service.
 (d) HIRING AUTHORITY- The Advisory Committee may employ and fix the level
 of compensation for 1 individual.
 (e) REPORT- Not later than April 1, 1994, the Advisory Committee shall submit
 a report to the Secretary and to the Congress that includes legislative
 or other recommendations concerning the implementation of the requirements
 imposed under section 471(a)(15) of the Social Security Act.
SEC. 428. AUTOMATED SYSTEMS.
 (a) ENHANCED MATCH-
 (1) PAYMENTS TO STATES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 474(a)(3) (42 U.S.C. 674(a)(3)) is amended--
 (i) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (B);
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (E); and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following:
 `(C) 90 percent of so much of such expenditures as are for the planning,
 design, development, or installation of statewide mechanized data collection
 and information retrieval systems (including 90 percent of the full amount
 of expenditures for hardware components for such systems) but only to the
 extent that such systems--
 `(i) meet the requirements imposed by regulations promulgated pursuant to
 section 479(b)(2);
 `(ii) to the extent practicable, are capable of interfacing with the State
 data collection system that collects information relating to child abuse
 and neglect; and
 `(iii) are determined by the Secretary to be likely to provide more
 efficient, economical, and effective administration of the programs carried
 out under the State plan approved under part B or the State plan approved
 under this part; and
 `(D) 50 percent of so much of such expenditures as are for the operation
 of the statewide mechanized data collection and information retrieval
 systems referred to in subparagraph (C); and'.
 (B) TREATMENT OF STATE EXPENDITURES FOR DATA COLLECTION AND INFORMATION
 RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS- Section 474 (42 U.S.C. 674) is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
 `(e) The Secretary shall treat as necessary for the proper and efficient
 administration of the State plan approved under this part all expenditures
 of a State that are necessary in order for the State to plan, design,
 develop, install, and operate data collection and information retrieval
 systems described in subsection (a)(3)(C), without regard to whether the
 systems may be used with respect to foster or adoptive children other
 than those on behalf of whom foster care maintenance payments or adoption
 assistance payments may be made under this part.'.
 (C) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 473(a)(6)(B) (42 U.S.C. 673(a)(6)(B)), as
 amended by section 465(b) of this Act, is amended by striking `474(a)(3)(C)'
 and inserting `474(a)(3)(E)'.
 (D) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this paragraph shall apply
 to payments under part E of title IV of the Social Security Act for
 expenditures made on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) TERMINATION OF ENHANCED MATCH-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 474(a)(3)(C) (42 U.S.C. 674(a)(3)(C)), as amended
 by paragraph (1)(A)(iii) of this subsection, is amended by striking `90'
 each place such term appears and inserting `50'.
 (B) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subparagraph (A) shall take
 effect at the end of the calendar quarter in which occurs the end of the
 3-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (C) CONSTRUCTION- The amendment made by subparagraph (A) of this paragraph
 shall not be construed to affect any right, entitlement, or duty granted
 or imposed by, or arising by reason of, the amendments made by paragraph (1).
 (b) IMPLEMENTATION OF AUTOMATED SYSTEMS-
 (1) DEFERRAL OF IMPLEMENTATION DEADLINE- Section 479(b)(2) (42
 U.S.C. 679(b)(2)) is amended by striking `October 1, 1991' and inserting
 `1 year after the date such regulations are promulgated'.
 (2) ESTABLISHMENT OF GROUP TO ADVISE SECRETARY ON PLANNING AND
 IMPLEMENTATION- Section 479 (42 U.S.C. 679) is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(d) The Secretary shall establish a work group to advise the Secretary on
 the planning and implementation of the system to be used for the collection
 of data relating to adoption and foster care in the United States. Such
 group shall include representatives of--
 `(1) organizations described in subsection (a)(4)(B)(ii); and
 `(2) other appropriate groups.'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall take
 effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 429. PERIODIC REEVALUATION OF FOSTER CARE MAINTENANCE PAYMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 471(a)(11) (42 U.S.C. 671(a)(11)) is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(11)(A) provides for periodic review of the standards referred to in
 paragraph (10) to assure their continuing appropriateness; and
 `(B) provides for the review, not less frequently than once every 3 years,
 of the amounts paid as foster care maintenance payments and adoption
 assistance to assure their continuing appropriateness, and a report to
 the Secretary and the public on the results of such review at such time
 and in such form and manner as the Secretary may by regulation require,
 which contains, at a minimum--
 `(i) a statement of the manner in which the foster care maintenance payment
 level is determined, including information on the cost of foster care with
 respect to which such payments are made;
 `(ii) information with respect to the basic foster care maintenance payment
 level, whether such payment level includes an amount to cover the cost of
 clothing, and whether such payment level varies by the type of care or the
 special needs or age of the child, and if so, the payment levels for each
 special needs, care, or age category;
 `(iii) if such payments are not made at a different rate for children with
 special needs who test positive for human immunodeficiency virus, have
 acquired immune deficiency syndrome, are addicted to drugs, or suffer from
 complications due to exposure to drugs or alcohol, the reasons therefor; and
 `(iv) information on any limitations imposed by the State on adoption
 assistance payments levels;'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 430. ACCELERATED DISPOSITIONAL HEARING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 475(5)(C) (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(C)) is amended by
 striking `eighteen months' and inserting `12 months'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1994, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1995 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 431. PERIODIC REVIEW OF CHILDREN FREE FOR ADOPTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 475(5)(C) (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(C)) is amended by
 striking `which hearing shall determine' and all that follows through
 `independent living; and' and inserting `which hearing shall--
 `(i) determine the future status of the child, including whether the child
 should be returned to the parent, should be continued in foster care for
 a specified period, should be placed for adoption, or should (because of
 the child's special needs or circumstances) be continued in foster care
 on a permanent or long-term basis;
 `(ii) if the hearing determines that the child should be placed for adoption,
 determine and document the measures needed to enhance the likelihood of
 making the child legally eligible for adoption and of finding an adoptive
 home for the child;
 `(iii) if the child is legally eligible for adoption, determine and
 document--
 `(I) the specific measures which have been taken, and the specific measures
 which need to be taken, to make an adoptive placement; or
 `(II) a finding that placement of the child in an adoptive family would
 be inappropriate; and
 `(iv) if the child has attained age 16, determine the services needed to
 assist the child to make the transition from foster care to independent
 living; and'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1994, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1995 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 432. TIME FRAME FOR JUDICIAL DETERMINATIONS ON VOLUNTARY PLACEMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 472(e) (42 U.S.C. 6762(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `No' and inserting `(1) Except as provided in paragraph
 (2), no'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) If the judicial determination referred to in paragraph (1) is made after
 the 180-day period described therein, the payments referred to therein may
 not be made for the period that begins at the end of the 180-day period
 and ends 180 days after the date of the judicial determination, but may
 be made for periods thereafter.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, shall apply to payments under part E of title IV of
 the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for any
 succeeding fiscal year, and shall apply to foster care placements made on
 or after October 1, 1992.
SEC. 433. PLACEMENT ACCOUNTABILITY.
 (a) CASE PLAN PROVISIONS REQUIRED FOR CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-STATE FOSTER
 CARE PLACEMENTS- Section 475(1) (42 U.S.C. 675(1)) is amended by inserting
 after subparagraph (C) the following:
 `(D) In the case of a child receiving foster care maintenance payments under
 section 472 who is placed in a facility outside the State, a finding that--
 `(i) efforts have been made to place the child in a facility in the State;
 `(ii) the child needs services not available in the State;
 `(iii) the placement is in the least restrictive (most family like) setting
 available, consistent with the best interest and the special needs of the
 child; and
 `(iv) the placement has been approved by--
 `(I) a court; or
 `(II) a committee (such as a foster care review board), established by the
 State, that reviews placements outside the State and that, in addition
 to the appropriate State personnel, includes child advocates, parents,
 and other individuals the State deems appropriate.'.
 (b) STATUS OF CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-STATE FOSTER CARE PLACEMENTS TO BE
 JUDICIALLY REVIEWED ANNUALLY WITH THE CHILD PRESENT- Section 475(5)(B)
 (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `and in the case of a child who is placed by a State in a foster care
 facility outside the State, the status of the child shall be reviewed
 by a court, not less frequently than annually, with the child present,
 unless the court determines that due to the age or condition of the child,
 or for some other good cause, the presence of the child would be detrimental
 to the child or would not accomplish a useful purpose,'.
 (c) STATE PLAN REQUIREMENT- Section 471(a) (42 U.S.C. 671(a)), as amended
 by section 425(a)(1) of this Act, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (17);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (18) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(19) provides that the State agency must ensure that any facility outside
 the State in which a child eligible for foster care maintenance payments
 under section 472 is placed meets all originating State standards applicable
 to child care facilities, or is operated in accord with recommended standards
 of national organizations concerned with standards for such facilities,
 including standards of the types described in paragraph (10).'.
 (d) COLLECTION OF DATA ON NUMBERS OF CHILDREN IN OUT-OF-STATE FOSTER CARE
 PLACEMENTS- Section 479(c)(3)(C) (42 U.S.C. 679(c)(3)(C)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(iii) children placed in foster care outside the State, and'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) CASE PLAN AND STATE PLAN CHANGES- The amendments made by subsections
 (a), (b), and (c) shall take effect on October 1, 1993 and shall apply
 to payments under part E of title IV of the Social Security Act for
 expenditures made in or after fiscal year 1994.
 (2) DATA COLLECTION- The amendments made by subsection (d) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1994 and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV of
 the Social Security Act for expenditures made in or after fiscal year 1995.
 (f) STUDY OF REASONS FOR MAKING OUT-OF-STATE FOSTER CARE PLACEMENTS-
 In order for a State to receive payments under section 474 of the Social
 Security Act for amounts expended after fiscal year 1994 for foster care
 maintenance payments under section 472 of such Act made with respect to
 children placed by the State in foster care outside the State, the State
 shall, by the end of such fiscal year, conduct and submit to the Secretary
 a study designed to identify--
 (1) the number of such children and the characteristics (if any) common
 to such children; and
 (2) the reasons why such children were not placed in foster care in
 the State.
SEC. 434. TREATMENT OF ASSETS OF YOUTH PARTICIPATING IN INDEPENDENT LIVING
PROGRAM.
 (a) ACCUMULATION OF ASSETS- Section 477 (42 U.S.C. 677) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following:
 `(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, with respect to
 a child who is included in a program established under subsection (a),
 an amount of the assets of the child which would otherwise be regarded as
 resources for the purposes of determining eligibility for programs under
 this title may be disregarded for the purpose of allowing the child to
 establish a household. Such amount may not exceed an amount determined
 by the State agency responsible for the administration of the program as
 reasonable for the purpose of establishing a household.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 435. ELIMINATION OF FOSTER CARE CEILINGS AND OF AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER
UNUSED FOSTER CARE FUNDS TO CHILD WELFARE SERVICES PROGRAMS.
 (a) REPEAL- Subsections (b) and (c) of section 474 (42 U.S.C. 674 (b) and
 (c)) are hereby repealed.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 474 (42 U.S.C. 674), as amended by
 sections 428(a)(1)(B) and 438(f)(1) of this Act, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking `subsections (a), (b), and (c)' and inserting `subsection
 (a)'; and
 (B) by striking `the provisions of such subsections' and inserting
 `subsection (a)'; and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (b),
 (c), and (d), respectively.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part E of title IV
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and to such payments for
 any succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 436. REGULATIONS FOR TRAINING OF AGENCY STAFF AND OF FOSTER AND ADOPTIVE
PARENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish an
 advisory committee which shall include representatives of--
 (1) nonprofit organizations with an interest in child welfare (including
 organizations that train professional social workers in the field of child
 welfare services); and
 (2) organizations representing State and local governmental agencies with
 responsibility for foster care and adoption services.
 (b) FINAL REGULATIONS- Not later than 9 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall,
 after consultation with the advisory committee established under subsection
 (a), issue final regulations setting forth detailed guidelines to assist
 States in using Federal matching funds authorized to be provided under
 section 474(a)(3) of the Social Security Act for the purpose of training
 for--
 (1) individuals who are employed, or preparing for employment, by the
 agencies with responsibility for administering the foster care and adoption
 assistance programs of the States under part E of title IV of such Act; and
 (2) foster and adoptive parents.
SEC. 437. PUBLICATION OF PROGRAM DATA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 479 (42 U.S.C. 679) is amended by adding after
 the subsection added by section 428(b)(2) of this Act the following:
 `(e) Not later than January 31 of each year, the Secretary shall submit
 to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and
 the Committee on Finance of the Senate, and shall make available to the
 public at a charge equal to the cost of printing, a report containing the
 following information, at least for the most recent fiscal year for which
 such information is available:
 `(1) A detailed summary, and a breakdown by State, of--
 `(A) the expenditures of each State for the program during the fiscal
 year for each of the programs funded under part B, part C, or this part,
 broken down in a manner that shows the extent to which such expenditures
 were made from funds provided by each of Federal or State sources; and
 `(B) to the extent available, the number of children or families
 participating in each of such programs.
 `(2) Information detailing the schedule and result of the reviews conducted
 under the regulatory review system established in accordance with section
 491, including information on payments withheld, reduced, or sought, or
 intended by the Secretary to be withheld, reduced, or sought, from each
 State as a result of such reviews.
 `(3) The information described in clauses (ii) and (iii) of section
 471(a)(11)(B).
 `(4) An analysis of the services provided with funds made available under
 part B.
 `(5) A listing and summary of ongoing research, training, and demonstration
 projects funded under section 426 or 1144(c) of this Act or under section
 504 of the Family Preservation Act of 1992, and the expected date for the
 publication of any evaluations of, conclusions based on, or analyses of
 such projects.
 `(6) Any other information the Secretary deems useful to monitor the
 operations of the program.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992.
SEC. 438. REVIEW OF CHILD WELFARE ACTIVITIES.
 (a) NEW SYSTEM FOR REVIEWING CHILD WELFARE ACTIVITIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Title IV (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
`PART G--CHILD WELFARE REVIEW SYSTEM
`SEC. 491. CHILD WELFARE REVIEW SYSTEM.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT BY REGULATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish, by regulation, a system for--
 `(A) the review of each State child welfare program for the purposes of--
 `(i) assessing whether the program is being carried out as required by
 parts B and E;
 `(ii) identifying any area in which the program is not being carried out
 as so required, and the degree to which the program is not being so carried
 out; and
 `(iii) in cases of a substantial failure to comply with certain requirements
 of part B or E, imposing financial penalties proportional to the degree of
 such failure to comply, unless action is taken to correct such failure; and
 `(B) the provision of technical assistance to any such program.
 `(2) STATE CHILD WELFARE PROGRAM DEFINED- As used in this section, the term
 `child welfare program' means, with respect to a State--
 `(A) all activities engaged in by, or under contract with, the State for
 the purpose of carrying out the State plan for child welfare services
 under part B; and
 `(B) all activities engaged in by, or under contract with, the State for
 the purpose of carrying out the State plan approved by the Secretary under
 part E.
 `(b) CONTENT OF REGULATIONS- The regulations required by subsection
 (a) shall--
 `(1) require each State child welfare program to be reviewed on a fiscal
 year basis to determine--
 `(A) whether and, where appropriate, the degree to which, the program
 complies with the requirements of the State plans referred to in subsection
 (a)(2); and
 `(B) the extent to which the amounts claimed to have been expended by the
 State for foster care maintenance payments under section 472 and for adoption
 assistance payments under section 473 are eligible for reimbursement under
 part E;
 `(2) specify the criteria that are to be used to assess, with respect to
 each subparagraph of paragraph (1)--
 `(A) whether the program has complied with the requirements that apply to
 the matters described in such subparagraph; and
 `(B) the degree of such compliance;
 `(3)(A) after taking into account the average performance of all States in
 carrying out the State plans referred to in subsection (a)(2), establish,
 with respect to each subparagraph of paragraph (1) of this subsection (and,
 for each subparagraph, with respect to such conduct as the Secretary may
 deem especially important)--
 `(i) thresholds beyond which the program will be determined to have failed
 to comply with the requirements that apply to the matters described in
 such subparagraph; and
 `(ii) thresholds beyond which a failure of the program to comply with such
 applicable requirements will be determined to be substantial; and
 `(B) notwithstanding subparagraph (A), for the first review of any State
 under this section, establish and apply such initial thresholds of the
 types described in subparagraph (A) as the Secretary deems appropriate;
 `(4) require the thresholds established under paragraph (3)(A) to be
 periodically reviewed and, if necessary, revised to take into account
 information from completed reviews under such regulations and changes in
 State performance;
 `(5) require that the procedures used to determine the degree to which
 a State child welfare program is carried out in compliance with the
 applicable requirements--
 `(A) enable a single, integrated, and timely review of all matters referred
 to in paragraph (1);
 `(B) include the sampling of foster care maintenance payments made under
 section 472, adoption assistance payments made under section 473, and
 payments for such other activities under the State plan approved under
 part E as the Secretary deems appropriate;
 `(C) be applied uniformly to each State program; and
 `(D) be periodically reviewed and, if necessary, revised to take into
 account information from completed reviews under such regulations;
 `(6) provide that a deficiency or error in the State child welfare program
 is not to be taken into account if the deficiency or error is--
 `(A) due to the State's failure to properly implement changes in Federal
 statute within the 6-month period beginning with the date the statute
 takes effect or, if later, within the 6-month period beginning with the
 date the regulation is issued if the regulation is reasonably necessary
 to construe or apply the statute;
 `(B) due to the State's reliance upon and correct use of erroneous
 information provided by the Secretary about matters or fact;
 `(C) due to the State's reliance upon and correct use of written statements
 of Federal policy provided to the State by the Secretary; or
 `(D) of a technical nature and does not materially affect the performance
 of the program or the protection of children who are in, or at risk of
 being placed in, foster care;
 `(7) establish the method by which a financial penalty is to be calculated,
 with respect to each subparagraph of subsection (b)(1), if a failure of the
 State child welfare program to comply with the requirements that apply to the
 matters described in such subparagraph is determined to be substantial; and
 `(8) provide that the financial penalty to be imposed for a failure
 described in paragraph (7) is--
 `(A) proportional to the degree of the failure; and
 `(B) to the extent appropriate, based on the formula used to determine
 the amount of a disallowance under section 408(f).
 `(c) FREQUENCY OF REVIEWS- Not less frequently than once every 3 years,
 the Secretary shall complete a review of each State child welfare program
 for the most recently completed fiscal year under the regulatory review
 system established in accordance with this section.
 `(d) EFFECTS OF DETERMINATIONS OF NONCOMPLIANCE-
 `(1) NOTIFICATION- The Secretary shall provide timely notification to any
 State of any determination under this section that the State child welfare
 program has failed, with respect to any subparagraph of subsection (b)(1),
 to comply with the requirements that apply to the matters described in
 such subparagraph, and shall include with such notice--
 `(A) the basis for the determination; and
 `(B) the amount of the financial penalty (if any) imposed on the State
 under the regulations issued under this section.
 `(2) ACTIONS AUTHORIZED IN CASES OF NONCOMPLIANCE OTHER THAN SUBSTANTIAL
 NONCOMPLIANCE- If, under the regulatory review system established in
 accordance with this section, a State child welfare program is determined
 to have failed, with respect to any subparagraph of subsection (b)(1),
 to comply with the requirements that apply to the matters described in
 such subparagraph, and the failure is not substantial, the Secretary--
 `(A) may require the State to submit to the Secretary a plan and a timetable
 for taking action to correct the deficiencies or errors constituting the
 failure to comply;
 `(B) may annually review the progress of the State in carrying out the
 corrective action plan; and
 `(C) shall offer to the State technical assistance in such areas of the
 program as the Secretary may deem appropriate.
 `(3) ACTIONS REQUIRED IN CASES OF SUBSTANTIAL NONCOMPLIANCE- If, under the
 regulatory review system established in accordance with this section, the
 failure of a State child welfare program is determined to be substantial
 with respect to any subparagraph of subsection (b)(1), the Secretary shall--
 `(A) impose upon the State the financial penalty required by the regulatory
 review system;
 `(B) make available to the State technical assistance designed to enable
 the State to carry out the program in compliance with the requirements
 that apply to the matters described in such subparagraph; and
 `(C) annually review the progress of the State in complying with such
 requirements, until the State carries out the program in substantial
 compliance with such requirements.
 `(e) SUSPENSION OF FINANCIAL PENALTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall suspend any financial penalty that
 the Secretary has imposed on a State under this section--
 `(A) if the State submits to the Secretary a plan and a timetable for taking
 action to correct the deficiencies or errors constituting the failure to
 comply with respect to which the penalty was imposed, and the Secretary
 approves the corrective action plan and timetable; and
 `(B) for so long as the Secretary finds that the plan is being fully
 implemented in accordance with the timetable.
 `(2) AUTHORITY TO REVISE CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN AND TIMETABLE- The
 Secretary may approve such changes to any corrective action plan and
 timetable submitted by a State under paragraph (1) as the Secretary deems
 appropriate to enable the State to correct the deficiencies or errors with
 respect to which the plan and timetable were submitted.
 `(f) RESCISSION OF FINANCIAL PENALTIES- The Secretary shall rescind any
 financial penalty that the Secretary has imposed on a State under this
 section, upon a finding by the Secretary that--
 `(1) the State has fully implemented the plan in accordance with the
 timetable; and
 `(2) the State is in substantial compliance with the requirements with
 respect to which the penalty was imposed.
 `(g) ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Within a reasonable time after a State is notified of a
 determination under this section that the failure of a State child welfare
 program to comply with applicable requirements is substantial, and of the
 amount of the financial penalty imposed on the State under this section
 with respect to such failure, the State may appeal the determination and
 the imposition of the penalty (in whole or in part) to the Departmental
 Appeals Board established in the Department of Health and Human Services,
 by filing an appeal with the Board.
 `(2) AUTHORITY OF BOARD TO ADJUST PENALTY- The Board may adjust the amount of
 the financial penalty to be imposed under this section, taking into account--
 `(A) the amount of the financial penalty imposed by the Secretary;
 `(B) the proportionality of the penalty to the degree of the failure; and
 `(C) where appropriate, whether the failure materially affected the
 protection of children who are in, or at risk of being placed in, foster
 care.
 `(h) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Within a reasonable time after a decision by the
 Departmental Appeals Board with respect to the imposition of a penalty under
 the regulatory review system established in accordance with this section,
 the State may obtain judicial review of the decision by filing an action in--
 `(A) the district court of the United States for the judicial district in
 which the principal or headquarters office of the agency responsible for
 administering the State child welfare program is located; or
 `(B) the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
 `(2) PROCEDURAL RULES- The district court shall review the decision of
 the Board on the record established in the proceedings before the Board,
 in accordance with the standards of review prescribed by subparagraphs
 (A) through (E) of section 706(2) of title 5, United States Code.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) FINAL REGULATIONS-
 (1) DEADLINE FOR ISSUANCE- Not later than April 1, 1993, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall issue, in final form, the regulations
 required by section 491 of the Social Security Act.
 (2) APPLICABILITY- Such regulations shall apply to conduct occurring on
 or after October 1, 1993.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 471(b) (42 U.S.C. 671(b)) is amended by striking
 all that follows the first sentence.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1993.
 (d) ALL STATE CHILD WELFARE PROGRAMS TO BE REVIEWED BY THE END OF FISCAL YEAR
 1997- Not later than September 30, 1997, the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall complete at least one review of each State child welfare
 program (as defined in section 491 of the Social Security Act) under the
 regulatory review system established in accordance with such section.
 (e) PROHIBITION AGAINST COLLECTING DISALLOWANCES IMPOSED FOR NONCOMPLIANCE
 WITH CHILD WELFARE SERVICES REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall not--
 (1) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, reduce any payment to,
 withhold any payment from, or seek any repayment from, any State under part
 B or E of title IV of the Social Security Act by reason of a determination
 made in connection with any review of State compliance with--
 (A) the foster care protections of section 427 of the Social Security Act
 (as in effect before fiscal year 1993) for any fiscal year before fiscal
 year 1993; or
 (B) section 422(b)(9) of such Act for fiscal year 1993 or 1994;
 (2) before October 1, 1994, reduce any payment to, withhold any payment
 from, or seek any repayment from, any State under part E of title IV of
 the Social Security Act by reason of a determination made in connection
 with any on-site Federal financial review, or any audit conducted by the
 Inspector General using similar methodologies.
 (f) TREATMENT OF DEFERRAL ACTIONS UNDER PART E-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 474 (42 U.S.C. 674) is amended by adding after
 the subsection added by section 428(a)(1)(B) of this Act the following:
 `(f)(1) The Secretary may not take any action to suspend payment with
 respect to any claim for reimbursement under this part, after the end
 of the 30-day period that begins with the date the Secretary receives
 the quarterly statement of expenditures required under section 403 that
 contains the report of the claim.
 `(2) Within 10 months after the Secretary takes any action to suspend
 payment with respect to such a claim, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) determine the allowability of the claim; or
 `(B) if unable to make such a determination, make payment with respect to
 the claim, subject to a later determination of allowability.'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply to actions taken
 before, on, or after such date.
Subtitle D--Social Services Block Grant
SEC. 441. TITLE XX SOCIAL SERVICES BLOCK GRANT.
 (a) INCREASE IN FUNDING- Section 2003 (42 U.S.C. 1397b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking `and';
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking `fiscal year after fiscal year 1989.' and
 inserting `of fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, 1995, 1996, and 1997;'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 `(6) $2,900,000,000, for each of fiscal years 1993 and 1994; and
 `(7) the amount calculated under subsection (d) for fiscal year 1998 and
 each succeeding fiscal year.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(d) The amount calculated under this subsection for a fiscal year is
 $2,800,000,000, increased by the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(1) the average of the Consumer Price Index (as defined in section 1(f)(5)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for the 12-month period ending on
 July 31 of the immediately preceding fiscal year; exceeds
 `(2) the average of the Consumer Price Index (as so defined) for the
 12-month period ending on July 31, 1996.'.
 (b) ALLOCATION OF FUNDS TO INDIAN TRIBES AND TRIBAL ORGANIZATIONS- Section
 2003 (42 U.S.C. 1397b) is amended by adding after the subsection added by
 subsection (a) of this section the following:
 `(e)(1) If, with respect to any State--
 `(A) the Secretary receives a request from a tribal organization in the
 State that assistance under this title be provided directly to the tribal
 organization for a fiscal year; and
 `(B) the tribal organization has submitted an application for the fiscal
 year that meets such criteria as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation,
the Secretary shall reserve from the amounts that would otherwise be allotted
to the State for the fiscal year not less than the amount that bears the same
ratio to the allotment for the State for the fiscal year under subsection (b)
(before the application of this subsection) as the population of Indians
residing in the State on the reservation or reservations of the tribal
organization, or on trust lands adjacent to such reservation or reservations,
bears to the population of the State, and shall pay to the tribal organization
an amount equal to the amount so reserved.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, the terms `tribal organization'
 and `Indian' have the meaning given such terms by section 4 of the Indian
 Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.'.
Subtitle E--Research, Demonstration, and Evaluation Activities
SEC. 451. ADVISORY COMMISSION ON CHILDREN AND FAMILIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part A of title XI of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1301-1320b-13) is amended by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 1144. ADVISORY COMMISSION ON CHILDREN AND FAMILIES.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Director of the Office of Technology Assessment (in
 this section referred to as the `Director' and the `Office', respectively)
 shall establish a commission to be known as the `Advisory Commission on
 Children and Families' (in this section referred to as the `Commission').
 `(b) GENERAL DUTIES- The Commission shall identify cost-effective approaches
 to protect and enhance the physical, mental, emotional, and financial
 well-being of children and their families, by--
 `(1) collecting and assessing information on--
 `(A) measures of the economic, social, and physical well-being of children;
 `(B) the causes and effects of maltreatment of children;
 `(C) the effectiveness of social services and income supports in
 strengthening the family unit;
 `(D) the effects of substitute care on the well-being of children;
 `(E) the adequacy and effectiveness of cash assistance and tax policies
 in maintaining family incomes;
 `(F) the incentive effects of family policies;
 `(G) the effect of family breakup on family economics;
 `(H) ways to promote the parental support of children;
 `(I) participation in Federal programs supporting children and their
 families;
 `(J) program management and service delivery by public organizations
 working with families and children; and
 `(K) such other issues related to children and their families as the
 Commission deems it appropriate to study; and
 `(2) in collecting and assessing such information--
 `(A) use existing information, whether or not published, where possible,
 collected and assessed by Commission staff or under arrangements made in
 accordance with this paragraph;
 `(B) carry out or award grants or contracts for original research and
 experimentation where existing information is inadequate for the development
 of useful and valid information by the Commission; and
 `(C) adopt procedures to allow any interested person to submit to the
 Commission information on issues relating to social and support services,
 and income security, for children and their families, which information
 the Commission shall consider in making reports and recommendations to
 the Secretary and to the Congress.
 `(c) MEMBERSHIP-
 `(1) NUMBER; APPOINTMENT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall be composed of 15 individuals
 appointed by the Director, not later than April 1, 1993.
 `(B) DIRECTOR REQUIRED TO SOLICIT NOMINATIONS- The Director shall solicit
 nominations to the Commission from a wide variety of individuals and
 groups, including--
 `(i) national organizations representing State welfare directors;
 `(ii) national organizations representing children or families, or both; and
 `(iii) public and private organizations which provide services directly
 to children and their families.
 `(C) QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS- The Director shall appoint individuals
 to the Commission from among those who are able to provide expertise and
 experience in the evaluation and administration of programs and policies
 relating to social and support services, and income security, for children
 and their families, including issues relating to child welfare, foster care
 and adoption assistance, preventive and supportive services, child support,
 and cash assistance.
 `(2) TERMS OF OFFICE- Each member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years,
 except that the Director may provide initially for such shorter terms to
 ensure that (on a continuing basis) the terms of not more than 7 members
 expire in any 1 year.
 `(d) COMMISSION POWERS, COMPENSATION, ACCESS TO INFORMATION, AND SUPERVISION-
 The first sentence of subparagraph (C), the first and third sentences of
 subparagraph (D), subparagraph (F) (except with respect to the conduct
 of medical studies), subparagraph (G), and subparagraph (H) of section
 1886(e)(6) shall apply to the Commission in the same manner in which such
 provisions apply to the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission.
 `(e) EXEMPTION FROM TERMINATION REQUIREMENT OF THE FEDERAL ADVISORY
 COMMITTEE ACT- Section 14(a)(2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act
 shall not apply to the Commission.
 `(f) ANNUAL STATUS REPORTS- The Office shall report annually to the
 Congress on--
 `(1) the functioning and progress of the Commission; and
 `(2) the status of the assessment by the Commission of issues relating
 to social and support services, and income security, for children and
 their families.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 452. RESEARCH AND EVALUATIONS TO BE CONDUCTED BY THE ADVISORY COMMISSION
ON CHILDREN AND FAMILIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1144, as added by section 451(a) of this Act, is
 amended by redesignating subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f) as subsections
 (d), (e), (f), and (g), respectively, and by inserting after subsection
 (b) the following:
 `(c) RESEARCH AND EVALUATION PROJECTS-
 `(1) EVALUATION OF CHILD WELFARE SERVICES PROGRAMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall, directly or under contract with
 1 or more independent research organizations, evaluate child welfare
 services programs receiving funds under part B, including programs of
 each of the 3 types described in the subparagraphs of section 435(a)(2),
 in accordance with such criteria as the Commission deems appropriate. To
 the maximum extent practicable, the evaluations shall use treatment and
 control groups of statistically appropriate sample sizes to measure the
 effects of the program. The evaluations shall consider short-term and
 long-term program effects.
 `(B) INTENSIVE FAMILY PRESERVATION PROGRAMS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- An appropriate portion of the evaluations referred to in
 subparagraph (A) shall be of intensive family preservation programs. For
 purposes of this subsection, the term `intensive family preservation
 programs' means family-based crisis intervention programs which are--
 `(I) designed to maintain children safely in their homes and prevent the
 need for foster care; and
 `(II) characterized by small caseloads for workers, limited duration
 of services, 24-hour-a-day availability of staff, and the provision of
 services primarily in the child's home or in another environment familiar
 to the child.
 `(ii) EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS- (I) The evaluation of any intensive family
 preservation program shall provide information on the extent (if any)
 to which the success of the program depends on--
 `(aa) the philosophical approach of the program;
 `(bb) the types of services provided by the various kinds of programs;
 `(cc) the administrative techniques employed by the various kinds of
 programs;
 `(dd) the characteristics of families participating in the various kinds
 of programs; and
 `(ee) other relevant factors.
 `(II) Only programs that have a plan for targeting families that are at
 imminent risk of a foster care placement shall be evaluated, and a portion
 (deemed appropriate by the Commission) of the programs evaluated must
 target families in crisis due to substance abuse.
 `(III) A control group and a treatment group shall be established consisting
 of families at imminent risk of a foster care placement.
 `(IV) Families in the control group shall receive the array of preplacement
 preventive services available to families in the areas in which the programs
 are located.
 `(V) The services received by the families in the control group and
 the services received by the families in the treatment group shall be
 described, and an assessment of the need for post-program services for
 families participating in the programs shall be made.
 `(VI) Each group of families shall be monitored for at least 3 years
 after participation in the programs to determine the effectiveness of
 such programs.
 `(VII) The effectiveness of any program shall be determined by using
 specific outcome measures deemed appropriate by the Commission, including--
 `(aa) whether the program resulted in the placement of fewer children in
 foster care over the short- and long-term;
 `(bb) whether the program increased the well-being of children and improved
 family functioning;
 `(cc) whether the program provided valuable diagnostic information and
 promoted earlier and more successful permanent placements; and
 `(dd) whether the benefits of the program exceeded the costs of the program.
 `(2) FOSTER CARE EVALUATIONS- In order to promote more appropriate and
 effective foster care for children in need of long-term foster care, the
 Commission shall, directly or under contract with 1 or more independent
 research organizations, and in accordance with such criteria as the
 Commission deems appropriate, evaluate the effects of alternative foster
 care arrangements and services on the well-being of children who--
 `(A) have little prospect of being reunited with their families, or of
 being adopted; and
 `(B) represent a challenging group of foster children who are in need of
 specialized services or care.
 `(3) LONGITUDINAL CHILD WELFARE DATA BASES; STUDIES OF CHILD WELFARE
 POPULATION DYNAMICS-
 `(A) CONTRACT AUTHORITY- In order to develop more appropriate and effective
 intervention strategies with respect to children and their families who
 are referred or reported to the child welfare system, the Commission
 shall, directly or under contract with 1 or more independent research
 organizations--
 `(i) plan, design, develop, and implement not more than 5 child welfare
 data bases that provide detailed longitudinal information on children
 and their families to whom the local public child welfare system provides
 services, from the time such children are first referred or reported to
 such system; and
 `(ii) using data from such data bases, conduct such studies on children and
 their families served by public child welfare systems, as the Commission
 deems appropriate, including a study of the extent to which a lack of
 affordable housing is a factor in the placement of children in foster care,
 and (at the option of the Commission) studies of--
 `(I) the movements of subgroups of children and their families into,
 through, and out of the various parts of the child welfare system;
 `(II) the characteristics of those children or families who stay in the
 system or various parts of the system for short time periods versus those
 who stay for long time periods;
 `(III) the type and intensity of, and effectiveness of, services that
 families receive in the system;
 `(IV) the frequency of contact between and among foster children, their
 parents, and caseworkers;
 `(V) the factors associated with repeat occurrences of child abuse and
 neglect, and other outcomes; and
 `(VI) the condition of children in the system in areas that may include
 educational performance, health, and personal and social adjustment.
 `(B) AGREEMENTS WITH STATES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1, 1993, the Secretary shall,
 taking into account recommendations made by the Commission, enter into
 agreements with not more than 5 States or localities to--
 `(I) participate in the planning, design, development, and operation of a
 longitudinal child welfare data base described in subparagraph (A) in the
 participating State or locality involved; and
 `(II) reimburse such States or localities for expenditures incurred with
 respect to such activities.
 `(ii) PAYMENTS TO STATES- Under each such agreement, the Secretary shall be
 obligated to pay the State or locality participating in the establishment
 of the data base--
 `(I) from amounts available for payments under section 474(a)(3)(C), 90
 percent of such expenditures as are incurred during the 3-year period
 beginning on October 1, 1993, for the planning, design, development,
 installation, or operation of the data base; and
 `(II) from amounts available for payments under section 474(a)(3)(D), 50
 percent of such expenditures as are incurred after the end of such 3-year
 period for the operation of the data base.
 `(C) DATA BASE REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall ensure that each
 longitudinal data base established under this paragraph--
 `(i) includes information on the receipt, by children and their families
 in the data base, of particular child welfare services, including--
 `(I) child protective services;
 `(II) services designed to strengthen and preserve families;
 `(III) foster care and adoption services; and
 `(IV) other services made available by the child welfare system;
 `(ii) to the extent feasible, includes information on the receipt of
 services, or the placement of children, through the public mental health
 or juvenile justice agencies;
 `(iii) includes only data that are reliable and developed using uniform
 definitions and methodologies that are consistent over time and, to the
 extent feasible, among jurisdictions; and
 `(iv) to the extent appropriate, is implemented with the State data
 collection and information retrieval systems described in section
 474(a)(3)(C).
 `(4) COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROJECTS EVALUATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall, directly or under contract with
 1 or more independent research organizations, evaluate the effectiveness
 of 1 or more comprehensive service projects authorized under section 441
 that the Commission considers likely to yield significant information not
 available elsewhere, in accordance with such criteria as the Commission
 deems appropriate.
 `(B) EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS- Each such evaluation shall measure, using
 criteria the Commission deems appropriate, the extent to which the project--
 `(i) increased the well-being of children and their families;
 `(ii) resulted in cost savings due to a reduction in the number of
 placements of children outside their homes or in the length of stay in
 out-of-home placements;
 `(iii) increased coordination within the child welfare agency, and among
 the child welfare, mental health, and juvenile justice agencies;
 `(iv) increased the level and mix of preventive services available to
 children and their families in the child welfare, mental health, and
 juvenile justice systems; and
 `(v) resulted in such other outcomes as the Commission deems it appropriate
 to measure.
 `(C) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Commission shall provide technical
 assistance, upon request, to any State preparing an application to conduct
 a comprehensive services project, and shall provide to any State, upon
 request, a statement containing the Commission's recommendations to the
 Secretary with respect to the application.
 `(5) CHILD SEPARATION GUIDELINES STUDY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall conduct a study designed to answer
 the following questions:
 `(i) How do the criteria for removal of children from the home, and the tools
 for assessing the risk to the child if not removed from the home, vary from
 State to State? In considering this question, the Commission should examine--
 `(I) the decisionmaking process at the caseworker level in at least 3 States,
 at least 1 of which has a significantly higher than average rate of removing
 children from the home, at least 1 of which has an approximately average
 rate of removing children from the home, and at least 1 of which has a
 significantly lower than average rate of removing children from the home; and
 `(II) other factors that may affect placement rates such as State laws
 and policies, interpretations by the State child welfare agency of the
 reasonable efforts requirement of section 471(a)(15), and the tendency to
 place or not place children as a result of economic incentives provided
 by various State and Federal funding sources.
 `(ii) What guidelines should be used to assess such risk and determine
 the need for removal of children from the home, and what kind of training
 would ensure the consistent application of such guidelines? The Commission
 should review and compile all current research relevant to this question.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 453. OTHER RESEARCH AND EVALUATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 426(a) (42 U.S.C. 626(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `and' the second place such term appears;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(3) to enable the Secretary--
 `(A) under contract with an independent research organization, to conduct
 a study to assess the prevalence and nature of risks to the safety of
 employees of child welfare systems, under which empirical information
 shall be obtained on--
 `(i) the incidence of violence toward, or harassment of, such employees;
 `(ii) the types of such employees exposed to the greatest risk;
 `(iii) the types of harm threatened or inflicted;
 `(iv) the characteristics of perpetrators of such violence or threats;
 `(v) the most dangerous child welfare settings; and
 `(vi) the differences (if any) between urban and rural areas in the above
 respects; and
 `(B) to make the results and recommendations of the study described in
 subparagraph (A) available for dissemination;
 `(4) to enable the Secretary--
 `(A) to enter into a contract with an organization or organizations with
 demonstrated experience in the field of workload measurement for human
 service agencies--
 `(i) under which the organization is to conduct a 3-year study to examine
 methodologies for measuring the workloads of providers of child welfare
 services and providers of community mental health services; and
 `(ii) which, at a minimum, requires the organization to--
 `(I) examine and document which methodologies are used to measure caseworker
 and supervisor workloads;
 `(II) develop general standards for measurement and size of workloads;
 `(III) apply and validate standards for measurement and size of workloads;
 and
 `(IV) develop software that enables agencies to use appropriate methodologies
 to measure workloads; and
 `(B) to consult with an advisory body selected by the Secretary, in planning
 and carrying out the study described in subparagraph (A); and
 `(C) to make the results and recommendations of the study described in
 subparagraph (A) available for dissemination; and
 `(5) to enable the Secretary--
 `(A) under contract with an independent research organization, to conduct
 a study that--
 `(i) is designed to evaluate strategies for the recruitment and retention
 of foster parents, and the effects of foster parent training programs on
 the retention of foster parents; and
 `(ii) shall identify successful recruitment techniques and recommend steps
 which could be taken at the Federal, State, or local level to improve the
 recruitment, retention, and training of foster parents; and
 `(B) to make the results and recommendations of the study described in
 subparagraph (A) available for dissemination.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 426 (42 U.S.C. 626) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (b); and
 (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (b).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 454. CHILD WELFARE DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
 (a) GENERAL PROVISIONS-
 (1) MINIMUM NUMBER OF PROJECTS OF EACH TYPE- The Secretary of Health and
 Human Services (in this section referred to as the `Secretary') shall
 authorize at least 1 demonstration project to be conducted under each
 paragraph of subsection (b), and at least 1 demonstration project to be
 conducted under each clause of subsection (b)(2)(A), during the 4-year
 period beginning with fiscal year 1994.
 (2) LIMITATION ON AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For demonstration projects
 approved by the Secretary under this section, there are authorized to be
 appropriated to the Secretary not to exceed $45,000,000 for each of fiscal
 years 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997.
 (b) SPECIFIC TYPES OF PROJECTS-
 (1) EXPEDITIOUS PERMANENT PLACEMENT OF CHILDREN-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make no more than 10 grants to States
 or localities to conduct demonstration projects, throughout the State or
 in areas selected by the State as having the greatest need, designed to--
 (i) review statutes, administrative and judicial procedures, and agency
 legal representation, in effect in the State or locality, that govern
 determinations of abandonment of children, termination of parental rights,
 and permanent placement of children, particularly with respect to children
 abandoned at or shortly after birth;
 (ii) assess which of such procedures or laws cause delays in the permanent
 placement of such children or the consideration of termination of parental
 rights;
 (iii) assess the extent, or lack, of training of judges and child protection
 service workers on the timelines for determinations involving termination
 of parental rights or permanent placement of such children;
 (iv) assess the provision of (and the impact of providing) coordinated
 comprehensive social services, particularly in relation to reunification
 or maintenance of families;
 (v) assess the impact of the designation of entities or individuals that
 have or could be granted standing to initiate placement or termination of
 parental rights proceedings with respect to children who have been placed
 under protective care or public supervision;
 (vi) assess the extent of the current presence of individuals either employed
 by a social service agency or a private entity, who are specifically
 responsible for expediting consideration of the termination of parental
 rights and permanent placement, particularly with respect to children
 abandoned at or shortly after birth, and the impact of such individuals
 on the timelines for such considerations;
 (vii) assess the success of programs which concurrently provide planning
 for, and services to, preadoptive and natural parents; and
 (viii) implement new procedures or make other improvements (as determined
 by the assessments conducted pursuant to this paragraph) that ensure more
 timely hearing of, and final decisions on, cases involving termination of
 parental rights and the permanent placement of children, with the goal of
 substantially reducing the amount of time that elapses from the time the
 child is removed from a home setting and is permanently placed in a stable
 adoption placement, including, at the option of the State or locality,
 improvements that include activities that--
 (I) provide additional personnel identified as necessary under any provision
 of this paragraph to pursue or process cases involving termination of
 parental rights or expeditious permanent placements;
 (II) expand the standing of foster parents and others to bring actions
 involving the termination of parental rights and permanent placements; and
 (III) require certain children to be placed in foster care in homes that
 are likely to become permanent adoptive homes of such children.
 (B) APPLICATION- Each State or locality desiring to conduct a demonstration
 project under this paragraph shall submit to the Secretary an application
 containing--
 (i) an assurance that the State or locality will develop and carry out
 the project jointly with appropriate judicial administrators, and with
 appropriate agencies of the State or locality that provide services to
 children abandoned at or shortly after birth; and
 (ii) such other information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
 (C) APPROVAL OF CERTAIN APPLICATIONS-
 (i) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall approve not more than 10 applications
 to conduct projects which appear likely to contribute significantly to the
 achievement of the purpose of this paragraph, particularly as they relate
 to changes in the legislative, judicial, and administrative practices with
 respect to permanent placement and termination of parental rights.
 (ii) DISTRIBUTION CRITERION- In determining whether to approve applications
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall ensure that grants under this
 paragraph are made to applicants whose positions on consideration of
 parental rights and the termination of such rights reflect the range of
 statutory and judicial positions taken by States on such matters.
 (iii) GRANT PERIOD- Subject to the availability of appropriations therefor,
 the Secretary shall make grants under this paragraph for a period of 4 years.
 (D) EVALUATIONS; REPORT- Each State and locality that conducts a
 demonstration project under this paragraph shall develop and carry out a
 plan for evaluating the effects of the project, and shall submit to the
 Secretary a report on such evaluation.
 (E) DISSEMINATION OF REPORTS- The Secretary shall make available to the
 Congress and the public the reports submitted pursuant to subparagraph (D).
 (F) REVIEW AND EVALUATION BY THE SECRETARY- The Secretary shall periodically
 review and evaluate the conduct of each demonstration project conducted
 under this paragraph.
 (G) AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND OR TERMINATE PROJECTS- Notwithstanding subparagraph
 (C)(iii), the Secretary may suspend for any period or terminate the
 authority to conduct a demonstration project under this paragraph, and may
 discontinue the provision of grants under this paragraph for the project,
 if the Secretary determines that the project has not been conducted in a
 satisfactory manner.
 (2) CULTURALLY SENSITIVE AND SPECIAL NEEDS CHILD WELFARE WORKER TRAINING
 DEMONSTRATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL-
 (i) TRAINING TO DELIVER CHILD WELFARE SERVICES IN BORDER REGIONS- The
 Secretary shall authorize not more than 5 eligible institutions to conduct
 demonstration projects to train eligible individuals to deliver culturally
 sensitive and bilingual child welfare services in areas of the United
 States that border on Mexico.
 (ii) TRAINING TO DELIVER CHILD WELFARE SERVICES TO HISTORICALLY UNSERVED
 OR UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS IN CERTAIN URBAN CENTERS- In addition,
 the Secretary may make no more than 5 grants to eligible institutions
 to conduct projects to train eligible individuals to deliver culturally
 sensitive and bilingual welfare services in urban centers which have a
 high proportion of historically unserved or underserved populations.
 (B) APPLICATIONS-
 (i) APPLICATIONS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (A)(i)- The Secretary shall approve
 an application of an eligible institution to conduct a demonstration
 project under subparagraph (A)(i) for a fiscal year if the Secretary has
 approved not more than 4 other such applications for the fiscal year and
 the application meets the following requirements:
 (I) HISTORY OF, OR PLAN FOR, TRAINING STUDENTS TO DELIVER CHILD WELFARE
 SERVICES IN BORDER AREAS- The application demonstrates that the applicant
 has a history of, or a plan for, training students to deliver child welfare
 services in an area of the United States that borders on Mexico.
 (II) TRAINING CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS- The application describes the
 curriculum of the training program. Such curriculum must be sensitive to
 the culture of the area that borders on Mexico and the State in which the
 applicant is located, and must include training for the identification
 of health problems of children and their families and of child abuse
 and neglect.
 (III) SCOPE AND LENGTH OF TRAINING- The application includes an assurance
 that the training program meets all requirements established under
 subparagraph (C) governing the scope and length of the training to be
 provided.
 (IV) PLAN FOR PLACING INDIVIDUALS COMPLETING THE TRAINING IN BORDER AREA
 FAMILY ASSISTANCE AGENCIES- The application contains a plan for placing
 each eligible individual who completes the training under the project in
 a family assistance agency that provides services directly to residents
 of the border county in which the agency is located.
 (V) COMMITMENT TO CONSULT WITH STATE CHILD WELFARE AGENCY- The application
 contains a commitment by the applicant to consult with the child welfare
 agency of the State in which the applicant is located to ensure that the
 project is designed to provide individuals with child welfare skills that
 are needed for work with disadvantaged individuals in the area of the
 State that borders on Mexico.
 (ii) APPLICATIONS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (A)(ii)- The Secretary shall approve an
 application of an eligible institution to conduct a demonstration project
 under subparagraph (A)(ii) for a period of 4 fiscal years (subject to
 the availability of funds and satisfactory performance) if the Secretary
 has not approved more than 4 other applications for such projects and the
 application meets the following requirements:
 (I) The applicant demonstrates that it has a history of, expertise in,
 and commitment to, providing training for individuals to deliver child
 welfare services to historically unserved or underserved populations in
 urban centers.
 (II) The applicant describes how the application was developed in
 consultation with State and local child welfare agencies, community-based
 organizations serving the area to be affected, and the residents of the
 area, including public notice and opportunity to comment on the training
 program to be offered, and a plan for a continuing consultation process
 with these entities.
 (III) The curriculum to be offered includes the broad range of Federal,
 State, and local programs available to provide services to historically
 unserved or underserved populations in urban centers, and the identification
 of health problems in children and their families which may lead to child
 abuse or neglect and the presence of such conditions.
 (IV) The application includes an assurance that the training program meets
 all the requirements of subparagraph (C) governing the scope and length
 of the training to be provided.
 (V) The application includes a plan for placing each eligible individual who
 completes the training under the project in a public or private nonprofit
 family assistance agency that provides services directly to unserved
 or underserved populations in urban centers with high concentrations of
 such populations.
 (iii) GRANTS SUBJECT TO APPROPRIATIONS- The Secretary shall make grants for
 projects authorized under subparagraph (A)(ii) subject to the availability
 of appropriations therefor.
 (iv) REVIEW AND EVALUATION BY THE SECRETARY- The Secretary shall periodically
 review and evaluate the conduct of each demonstration project authorized
 to be conducted under subparagraph (A)(ii).
 (v) AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND OR TERMINATE PROJECTS- The Secretary may suspend for
 any period or terminate the authority to conduct a demonstration project
 under subparagraph (A)(ii), and may discontinue the provision of grants
 under subparagraph (A)(ii) for the project, if the Secretary determines
 that the project has not been conducted in a satisfactory manner.
 (C) TRAINING REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary, in consultation with the State
 child welfare agencies of the eligible States, shall develop criteria
 regarding the scope and length of the training program to be provided
 under any demonstration project conducted under this paragraph to ensure
 that training under the program adequately prepares trainees for the work
 they will perform after completion of the training program. The Secretary
 shall treat participation in a program leading to a bachelor's or a master's
 degree in social work as providing such adequate preparation.
 (D) GRANTS-
 (i) ALLOCATION AMONG STATES WITH APPROVED PROJECTS- Each eligible State
 in which is located an eligible institution whose application to conduct
 a demonstration project under subparagraph (A)(i) for a fiscal year has
 been approved by the Secretary shall be allocated for the fiscal year
 that portion of the funds available to carry out subparagraph (A)(i)
 for the fiscal year that is represented by--
 (I) the number of disadvantaged individuals who, as of the close of the
 second preceding fiscal year, resided in the border counties of the State;
 divided by
 (II) the total number of disadvantaged individuals who, as of the close
 of the second preceding fiscal year, resided in the border counties of
 all such eligible States.
 (ii) GRANT AUTHORITY- The Secretary shall make a grant to each eligible
 institution that the Secretary authorizes to conduct a demonstration
 project under subparagraph (A)(i) for a fiscal year in an amount equal to--
 (I) the amount allocated for the fiscal year under clause (i) to the State
 in which the institution is located; divided by
 (II) the number of eligible institutions in the State that are so authorized.
 (E) USE OF GRANTS- Each eligible institution that receives a grant under
 this paragraph--
 (i) shall use the grant to equip eligible individuals with the knowledge
 and skills necessary to perform the range of child welfare work, from case
 management to supervisory skills; and
 (ii) may use the grant to pay the tuition, room and board, travel, and
 other living expenses of eligible individuals.
 (F) DEFINITIONS- As used in this paragraph:
 (i) BORDER COUNTY- The term `border county' means--
 (I) in the State of Texas, the counties of Cameron, Brooks, Hidalgo,
 Kenedy, Willacy, Jim Hogg, Starr, Webb, Zapata, Duval, LaSalle, Maverick,
 Dimmit, Zavala, Uvalde, Kinney, Val Verde, Edwards, Crockett, Terrell,
 Pecos, Brewster, Presidio, Jeff Davis, Reeves, Culberson, Hudspeth, Bexar,
 and El Paso;
 (II) in the State of New Mexico, the counties of Otero, Sierra, Dona Ana,
 Luna, Hidalgo, Grant, Lea, Roosevelt, Chaves, Eddy, and Lincoln;
 (III) in the State of Arizona, the counties of Cochise, Graham, Greenlee,
 Maricopa, Pinal, Pima, Yuma, La Paz, and Santa Cruz; and
 (IV) in the State of California, the counties of Imperial, San Diego,
 Riverside, and Orange.
 (ii) CHILD WELFARE AGENCY- The term `child welfare agency' means, with
 respect to a State, the individual or agency that administers or supervises
 the administration of the State plan for child welfare services under part
 B of title IV of the Social Security Act.
 (iii) DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUAL- The term `disadvantaged individual'
 means an individual whose income does not exceed 130 percent of the income
 official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget,
 and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size of
 the individual's family.
 (iv) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' means any
 individual who--
 (I) is, or intends to become, an employee of a family assistance agency
 in an eligible State; and
 (II) enters into an agreement with an eligible institution in the State
 under which--
 (aa) the institution agrees to train the individual to deliver culturally
 sensitive and bilingual child welfare services in the area of the United
 States that borders on Mexico; and
 (bb) the individual agrees to so deliver such services at or from a
 site approved by the child welfare agency of the State for at least 1
 year beginning within a reasonable time after the individual completes
 the training under a project conducted under subparagraph (A)(i), or for a
 period of 1 year for each year of assistance or training received beginning
 upon completion of the training under a project conducted under subparagraph
 (A)(ii).
 (v) ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION- The term `eligible institution' means any
 institution of higher education that is located in an eligible State.
 (vi) ELIGIBLE STATE- The term `eligible State' means Texas, New Mexico,
 Arizona, and California.
 (vii) FAMILY ASSISTANCE AGENCY- The term `family assistance agency'
 means a child welfare agency, family planning agency, hospital, clinic,
 community mental health facility, or drug and alcohol treatment program.
 (viii) INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION- The term `institution of higher
 education' means--
 (I) an institution of higher education (as defined in section 1201(a)
 or 481(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965); and
 (II) an area vocational education school (as defined in subparagraph (C)
 or (D) of section 521(3) of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education Act).
 (ix) The term `urban centers' means an area in a metropolitan statistical
 area, as designated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget,
 which has a high incidence of individuals in historically unserved or
 underserved populations who are in need of social services, as determined by
 the Secretary using the most recent and best available information. A list
 of such urban centers shall be published by the Secretary in the Federal
 Register no more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (x) The term `historically unserved or underserved populations' includes--
 (I) minority populations;
 (II) persons with limited English proficiency;
 (III) populations residing in urban areas and exhibiting a high incidence
 of child abuse, neglect, or abandonment, as determined by the Secretary;
 (IV) homeless persons (within the meaning of section 103 of the Stewart
 B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act);
 (V) persons who are, or are in danger of becoming, infected with the human
 immunodeficiency virus; and
 (VI) persons who abuse alcohol or drugs.
 (G) RECOVERY OF ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN CASES- Any individual participating
 in a project conducted under subparagraph (A) who breaches the agreement
 referred to in subparagraph (F)(iv)(II) shall repay to the Secretary
 an amount equal to the amount or value of assistance received by the
 individual under the project, ratably reduced, if applicable, by a proportion
 representing that portion of the year during which the individual complied
 with the agreement. The Secretary shall establish guidelines and repayment
 schedules to carry out this subparagraph.
 (3) STAFF RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION DEMONSTRATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make grants under this paragraph to not
 more than 10 State or local government agencies to conduct demonstration
 projects designed to develop and implement innovative recruitment or
 retention strategies for trained staff in public and private nonprofit
 agencies working with children and adolescents at risk of being placed in
 foster care.
 (B) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to conduct a demonstration project under
 this paragraph, a State or local government agency shall submit to the
 Secretary a 3-year plan for the recruitment and retention of trained direct
 services staff (for public and private nonprofit agencies that contract for
 the care of children in the custody of public agencies), which contains
 such information as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation, including
 a description of the planned outreach activities and the steps that will
 be taken to encourage recruitment and retention of staff.
 (C) GRANT REQUIRED TO BE MADE FOR ELIGIBLE PROJECT DESIGNED FOR MINORITY
 COMMUNITY SERVICE- The Secretary shall make a grant under this paragraph to
 at least 1 State or local government agency which submits to the Secretary
 an application for a demonstration project designed to expand the capacity
 of minorities to provide services within their communities if the application
 otherwise meets the requirements of this paragraph.
 (D) PRIORITY TO BE GIVEN TO CERTAIN PROJECTS- In considering proposed
 demonstration projects under this paragraph, the Secretary shall give
 priority to--
 (i) proposed projects that demonstrate intersystem cooperation among child
 welfare, juvenile justice, mental health, or substance abuse agencies; and
 (ii) proposed projects that are designed to test urban and rural strategies
 in a variety of geographic areas.
 (E) APPROVAL OF CERTAIN APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall approve not more
 than 10 applications to conduct projects which appear likely to contribute
 significantly to the achievement of the purpose of this paragraph.
 (F) USE OF GRANTS- Each agency that receives a grant under this paragraph
 shall use the grant to carry out the plan submitted to the Secretary as
 described in subparagraph (B).
 (G) STATE REQUIRED TO PARTIALLY MATCH GRANTS MADE FOR CONSECUTIVE YEARS-
 Each agency which receives a grant under this paragraph for 2 or more
 consecutive years shall provide from non-Federal sources--
 (i) for the 2nd consecutive year, an amount equal to 20 percent of the
 grant made for such year; and
 (ii) for the 3rd consecutive year, an amount equal to 25 percent of the
 grant made for such year.
 (H) EVALUATIONS; REPORT- Each State and locality that conducts a
 demonstration project under this paragraph shall develop and carry out a
 plan for evaluating the effects of the project, and shall submit to the
 Secretary a report on such evaluation.
 (I) DISSEMINATION OF REPORTS- The Secretary shall make available to the
 Congress and the public the reports submitted pursuant to subparagraph (H).
 (4) JOINT TRAINING DEMONSTRATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make grants under this paragraph,
 on a competitive basis, to not more than 10 State or local government
 agencies to conduct demonstration projects designed to test the effect
 of joint training programs for the staff of child welfare, mental health,
 and juvenile justice agencies, and for judicial personnel and judges.
 (B) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible for a grant under this paragraph, a
 State or local government agency shall designate a public agency which
 provides services to children in the State and demonstrate that at least
 2 such agencies will participate in the project by contributing financial
 resources, staff resources, and trainees.
 (C) APPROVAL OF CERTAIN APPLICATIONS- The Secretary shall approve not more
 than 10 applications to conduct projects which appear likely to contribute
 significantly to the achievement of the purpose of this paragraph.
 (D) USE OF GRANT- Each State or local government agency that receives a
 grant under this paragraph shall use the grant to train staff (including
 supervisors) of public and private agencies who provide services to children
 or adolescents at risk of requiring foster care or to the families of such
 children or adolescents. Such training shall be designed to--
 (i) educate staff about the special needs of, and service programs for,
 certain populations of children or adolescents, such as those who have been
 sexually abused, suffer from serious emotional disturbances, are substance
 abusers, have acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or are infected with
 a human immunodeficiency virus;
 (ii) coordinate the interagency delivery of services (including family
 preservation services, family reunification services, independent living
 services, and supportive services) to children at risk of being placed in
 foster care; and
 (iii) provide training for judges or other administrative personnel, who
 are authorized to make final determinations as to termination of parental
 rights or placement of children in either temporary or permanent situations,
 to determine and incorporate into their decisions factors relating to the
 physical, mental, and social interests of the child.
 (E) EVALUATIONS; REPORT- Each State or local government agency that conducts
 a demonstration project under this paragraph shall develop and carry out a
 plan for evaluating the effects of the training provided under the project,
 and shall submit to the Secretary a report on such evaluation.
 (F) DISSEMINATION OF REPORTS- The Secretary shall make available to the
 Congress and the public the reports submitted pursuant to subparagraph (E).
 (c) FOSTER CARE AND ADOPTION ASSISTANCE DEMONSTRATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may authorize not more than 5 States to
 conduct demonstration projects designed to test, for not more than 6 years,
 the feasibility of eliminating the requirements in sections 472 and 473
 of the Social Security Act that relate to the income and resources of
 the child or of the family from which a child originated, and allowing
 States to receive reimbursement for foster care maintenance payments and
 for adoption assistance payments made with respect to children without
 regard to such income and resources.
 (2) APPLICATION- Each State desiring to conduct a demonstration project under
 this subsection shall submit to the Secretary an application in such form
 and containing such information as the Secretary may require by regulation.
 (3) AGREEMENT ON FEDERAL MATCHING PAYMENTS AND STRATEGY FOR EVALUATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- As a condition precedent to approving any application to
 conduct a demonstration project under this subsection, the Secretary and
 the State shall reach agreement on--
 (i) the rates at which the various types of expenditures under the project
 shall be reimbursed, in lieu of the rates at which such expenditures would
 otherwise be reimbursed under section 474 of the Social Security Act; and
 (ii) a strategy for evaluating the effects of the project.
 (B) LIMITATION- The Secretary may not agree to any set of reimbursement
 rates under subparagraph (A)(i) of this paragraph, unless the Secretary
 determines that the set of rates is likely to result in an amount of
 Federal payments to the State under section 474 of the Social Security
 Act that does not exceed the amount that would have been so paid to the
 State if the State were not conducting the demonstration project.
 (4) APPROVAL OF CERTAIN APPLICATIONS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall approve not more than 5 applications
 to conduct projects which appear likely to contribute significantly to
 the achievement of the purpose of this subsection.
 (B) PROJECT LIFETIME-
 (i) 3 YEARS- Each agreement under paragraph (3) shall be for a term of
 3 years.
 (ii) AUTHORITY TO RENEW PROJECT FOR 3 YEARS- Upon the request of the State,
 the Secretary shall extend for 3 additional years the term of any agreement
 under paragraph (3).
 (5) EVALUATIONS; REPORT- Each State that conducts a demonstration project
 under this subsection shall develop and carry out a plan for evaluating
 the effects of the project, and shall submit to the Secretary a report on
 such evaluation.
 (6) DISSEMINATION OF REPORTS- The Secretary shall make available to the
 Congress and the public the reports submitted pursuant to paragraph (5).
SEC. 455. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 476 (42 U.S.C. 676) is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(c) The Secretary shall provide technical assistance to the States to
 assist the States in--
 `(1) interpreting and implementing part B, part C, and this part;
 `(2) disseminating information on innovative child welfare practices;
 `(3) correcting problems identified through Federal audits and reviews,
 and carrying out corrective action plans required by this part;
 `(4) implementing the foster care and adoption data collection system
 described in section 479; and
 `(5) addressing such other matters as the Secretary may identify.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992.
Subtitle F--Miscellaneous Human Resources Amendments
SEC. 461. STATE OPTION TO USE RETROSPECTIVE BUDGETING WITHOUT MONTHLY
REPORTING UNDER AFDC PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 402(a)(13) (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(13)) is amended--
 (1) by striking all that precedes subparagraph (A) and inserting the
 following:
 `(13) provide, at the option of the State and with respect to such category
 or categories as the State may select and identify in the State plan,
 that--'; and
 (2) in each of subparagraphs (A) and (B), by striking `, in the case of
 families who are required to report monthly to the State agency pursuant
 to paragraph (14)'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part A of title
 IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and such payments for
 succeeding fiscal years.
SEC. 462. INCREASE IN STEPPARENT INCOME DISREGARD UNDER AFDC PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 402(a)(31) (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(31)) is amended by
 striking `$75' and inserting `$90'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on October 1, 1992, and shall apply to payments under part A of title
 IV of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1993 and such payments for
 succeeding fiscal years.
SEC. 463. EXTENSION OF PERIOD FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR EVALUATING
MODEL PROCEDURES FOR REVIEWING CHILD SUPPORT AWARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 103(e)(4) of the Family Support Act of 1988 is
 amended by striking `2-year' and inserting `3-year'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 464. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS RELATED TO THE INCOME SECURITY AND HUMAN
RESOURCES PROVISIONS OF THE OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT OF 1990.
 (a) AMENDMENT RELATED TO SECTION 5057- Section 5057 of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508), and the amendment made
 by such section, are hereby repealed, and section 1139(d) of the Social
 Security Act shall be applied and administered as if such section 5057
 had never been enacted.
 (b) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 5060(a)- Clause (II) of section
 402(g)(1)(A)(vi) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 602(g)(1)(A)(vi)(II))
 is amended by moving such subclause 2 ems to the right so that the left
 margin of such subclause is aligned with the left margin of subclause (I)
 of such section.
 (c) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 5061(a)(3)- Section 407(b)(1)(B)(v) of
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(b)(1)(B)(v)) is amended by striking
 `parents' needs' and inserting `parent's needs'.
 (d) AMENDMENT RELATED TO SECTION 5081(a)- Section 402(i)(6)(D) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 602(i)(6)(D)) is amended by striking `as as'
 and inserting `as'.
 (e) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 5105(a)(1)(B)(ii)(I)- Section
 1631(a)(2)(C)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1383(a)(2)(C)(i))
 is amended by inserting `a' before `representative'.
 (f) AMENDMENT RELATED TO SECTION 5105(d)(1)(B)- Section 5105(d)(1)(B)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(B) TITLE XVI- Section 1631(a)(2)(F) (42 U.S.C. 1383(a)(2)(F)), as so
 redesignated by subsection (c)(2) of this section, is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(F) The Secretary shall include as a part of the annual report required
 under section 704, information with respect to the implementation of the
 preceding provisions of this paragraph, including--
 `(i) the number of cases in which the representative payee was changed;
 `(ii) the number of cases discovered where there has been a misuse of funds;
 `(iii) how any such cases were dealt with by the Secretary;
 `(iv) the final disposition of such cases (including any criminal penalties
 imposed); and
 `(v) such other information as the Secretary determines to be
 appropriate.'.'.
 (g) AMENDMENTS RELATED TO SECTION 5105(b)- Section 1631(a)(2)(C) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1383(a)(2)(C)) is amended--
 (1) by striking clause (ii);
 (2) by redesignating clauses (iii), (iv), and (v) as clauses (ii), (iii),
 and (iv), respectively; and
 (3) in clause (iv) (as so redesignated), by striking `(iii), and (iv)'
 and inserting `and (iii)'.
 (h) AMENDMENTS RELATED TO SECTION 5107(a)(2)(B)- Section 1631(c)(1)(B) of
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1383(c)(1)(B)) is amended by striking
 `paragraph (1)' each place such term appears and inserting `subparagraph
 (A)'.
 (i) AMENDMENT RELATED TO SECTION 5109(a)(2)- Section 1631 of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1383) is amended by redesignating the subsection
 (n) added by section 5109(a)(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
 of 1990, as subsection (o).
 (j) AMENDMENTS RELATED TO SECTION 1115(b)(2)- Section 1613(a) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1382b(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (9), by striking `and';
 (2) in the first paragraph (10), by striking the period and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by redesignating the second paragraph (10) as paragraph (11).
 (k) EFFECTIVE DATE- Each amendment made by this section shall take effect
 as if the amendment had been included in the provision of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 to which the amendment relates, at the
 time the provision became law.
SEC. 465. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS RELATED TO THE HUMAN RESOURCE AND INCOME
SECURITY PROVISIONS OF OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT OF 1989.
 (a) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 8004(a)- Section 408(m)(2)(A) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(m)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `a
 fiscal' and inserting `the fiscal'.
 (b) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 8006(a)- Section 473(a)(6)(B) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 673(a)(6)(B)) is amended by striking
 `474(a)(3)(B)' and inserting `474(a)(3)(C)'.
 (c) AMENDMENT RELATING TO SECTION 8007(b)(3)- Subparagraph (D) of section
 475(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(D)) is amended by
 moving such subparagraph 2 ems to the right so that the left margin of
 such subparagraph is aligned with the left margin of subparagraph (C)
 of such section.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- Each amendment made by this section shall take effect
 as if the amendment had been included in the provision of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 to which the amendment relates, at the
 time the provision became law.
TITLE V--SAFE CHILDREN AND COMMUNITIES
SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Safe Children and Communities Act of 1992'.
SEC. 502. GRANTS FOR COMMUNITY PROJECTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants
 to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out
 projects to improve the safety of the residents of communities in which--
 (1) a significant number of low-income families with children reside; and
 (2) there is a significant incidence of violence or related conditions
 that jeopardize the safety of the residents of the community.
 (b) CONSULTATION WITH OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES- In carrying out this section,
 the Secretary shall consult with the Attorney General, the Secretary
 of Education, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and the
 Secretary of Labor.
 (c) COMMUNITY PARTNERSHIP-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if
 the applicant for the grant has entered into agreements with each of the
 entities specified in paragraph (2) for the purpose of providing for the
 participation of the entities in the project for which the grant is sought.
 (2) SPECIFICATION OF PARTICIPANTS- The entities referred to in paragraph
 (1) are health care providers, local educational agencies, providers
 of social services, and law enforcement agencies, that operate in the
 community involved.
 (d) CERTAIN EXPENDITURES OF GRANT- With respect to improving the safety
 of the residents of a community, the purposes for which a grant under
 subsection (a) may be expended include--
 (1) activities to prevent the abuse of alcohol and other drugs;
 (2) activities to prevent youth gangs;
 (3) other activities regarding juvenile justice;
 (4) education and training programs for disadvantaged youths;
 (5) child care for school-aged children; and
 (6) health services for children (other than inpatient services).
 (e) MATCHING FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- With respect to the costs of the project to be carried out
 under subsection (a) by an applicant, the Secretary may make a grant under
 such subsection only if the applicant agrees to make available (directly or
 through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions
 toward such costs in an amount that--
 (A) for the first fiscal year for which the applicant receives payments under
 subsection (a) for the project, is not less than 25 percent of such costs;
 (B) for any second such fiscal year, is not less than 50 percent of such
 costs; and
 (C) for any subsequent fiscal year, is not less than 75 percent of such
 costs.
 (2) DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT CONTRIBUTED- Non-Federal contributions
 required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated,
 including plant, equipment, or services. Amounts provided by the Federal
 Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent
 by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount
 of such non-Federal contributions.
 (f) DURATION OF GRANT- The period during which payments are made to
 an entity from a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed 3 years. The
 provision of such payments are subject to annual approval by the Secretary
 of the payments and subject to the availability of appropriations for the
 fiscal year involved to make the payments. The preceding sentence may not
 be construed as establishing a limitation on the number of grants under
 such subsection that may be made to an entity.
 (g) AMOUNT OF GRANT- The Secretary may not make a grant under subsection
 (a) in an amount less than $25,000.
 (h) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, the term `Secretary' means
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services, unless the context indicates
 otherwise.
 (i) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purpose of carrying out this
 section, there is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for each of
 the fiscal years 1993 through 1998.