HR 1303 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 1303
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer
protection and to promote increased competition in the cable television and
related markets, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 6, 1991
Mr. MARKEY (for himself and Mr. DINGELL) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
March 30, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. VANDER JAGT, Mr. KLECZKA, Mr. WILSON, Mr. DONNELLY,
Mr. MAZZOLI, Mr. RAHALL, Mr. STARK, Mr. GORDON, and Mr. Downey
A BILL
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to provide increased consumer
protection and to promote increased competition in the cable television and
related markets, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Cable Television Consumer Protection and
 Competition Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Section 601 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 521) is amended--
 (1) by striking the heading of such section and inserting the following:
`PURPOSES; FINDINGS';
 (2) by inserting `(a) PURPOSES- ' after `SEC. 601.'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 `(1) Fair competition in the delivery of television programming should
 foster the greatest possible choice of programming and should result in
 lower prices for consumers.
 `(2) Between the passage of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984
 and July 1990, rates for cable television services have been deregulated
 in 96 percent of all franchises. A minority of cable operators have abused
 their deregulated status and their market power and have unreasonably
 raised cable subscriber rates.
 `(3) In order to protect consumers, it is necessary for the Congress to
 establish a means for the Federal Communications Commission to identify
 such cable operators and, in those individual cases, to prevent them from
 imposing rates upon consumers that are unreasonable or abusive.
 `(4) There is a substantial governmental and first amendment interest in
 promoting a diversity of views provided through multiple technology media.
 `(5) The Federal Government has a compelling interest in making all
 nonduplicative local public television services available on cable systems
 because--
 `(A) public television provides educational and informational programming
 to the Nation's citizens, thereby advancing the Government's compelling
 interest in educating its citizens;
 `(B) public television is a local community institution, supported
 through local tax dollars and voluntary citizen contributions in excess
 of $10,800,000,000 between 1972 and 1990 that provides public service
 programming that is responsive to the needs and interests of the local
 community;
 `(C) the Federal Government, in recognition of public television's integral
 role in serving the educational and informational needs of local communities,
 has invested more than $3,000,000,000 in public broadcasting between 1969
 and 1990; and
 `(D) absent carriage requirements there is a substantial likelihood that
 citizens, who have supported local public television services, will be
 deprived of those services.
 `(6) The Federal Government also has a compelling interest in having cable
 systems carry the signals of local commercial television stations because
 the carriage of such signals--
 `(A) promotes localism and provides a significant source of news, public
 affairs, and educational programming;
 `(B) is necessary to serve the goals contained in section 307(b) of this
 Act of providing a fair, efficient, and equitable distribution of broadcast
 services; and
 `(C) will enhance the access to such signals by Americans living in areas
 where the quality of reception of broadcast stations is poor.
 `(7) Broadcast television programming is supported by revenues generated
 from advertising. Such programming is otherwise free to those who own
 television sets and do not require cable transmission to receive broadcast
 signals. There is a substantial governmental interest in promoting the
 continued availability of such free television programming, especially
 for viewers who are unable to afford other means of receiving programming.
 `(8) Because television broadcasters and cable television operators compete
 directly for the television viewing audience, for programming material,
 and for advertising revenue, in order to ensure that such competition
 is fair and operates to the benefit of consumers, the Federal interest
 requires that local broadcast stations be made available on cable systems
 as a separate and distinct purchase option for subscribers.
 `(9) Most subscribers to cable television systems do not or cannot maintain
 antennas to receive broadcast television services, do not have input
 selector switches to convert from a cable to antenna reception system,
 or cannot otherwise receive broadcast television services. A Government
 mandate for a substantial societal investment in alternative distribution
 systems for cable subscribers, such as the `A/B' input selector antenna
 system, is not an enduring or feasible method of distribution and is not
 in the public interest.
 `(10) Cable systems should be encouraged to carry low power television
 stations licensed to the communities served by those systems where the
 low power station creates and broadcasts, as a substantial part of its
 programming day, local programming.
 `(11) Secure carriage and channel positioning on cable television systems
 are the most effective means through which off-air broadcast television
 can access cable subscribers. In the absence of rules mandating carriage
 and channel positioning of broadcast television stations, some cable
 system operators have denied carriage or repositioned the carriage of some
 television stations.
 `(12) Cable television systems and broadcast television stations increasingly
 compete for television advertising revenues and audience. A cable system
 has a direct financial interest in promoting those channels on which it
 sells advertising or owns programming. As a result, there is an economic
 incentive for cable systems to deny carriage to local broadcast signals,
 or to reposition broadcast signals to disadvantageous channel positions,
 or both. Absent reimposition of must carry and channel positioning
 requirements, such activity could occur, thereby threatening diversity,
 economic competition, and the Federal television broadcast allocation
 structure in local markets across the country.
 `(13) Cable systems provide the most effective access to television
 households that subscribe to cable. As a result of the cable operators
 provision of this access and the operator's economic incentives described
 in paragraph (12), negotiations between cable operators and local broadcast
 stations have not been an effective mechanism for securing carriage and
 channel positioning.
 `(14) The public interest will be served by the development of competition in
 the marketplace for video programming and by encouraging new multichannel
 video programming distribution technologies. Prohibiting video program
 vendors in which a multichannel video system operator has an attributable
 interest from unreasonably refusing to deal with other multichannel video
 system operators with respect to provision of video programming is necessary
 to help establish a competitive marketplace.
 `(15) It is necessary and appropriate to promote competition between
 cable operators and other multichannel video system operators by
 facilitating access of such other multichannel video system operators to
 video programming, subject to exclusive contractual arrangements between
 programmers and cable operators that do not have the effect of significantly
 impeding competition.'.
SEC. 3. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROVISION AND REGULATION OF BASIC SERVICE TIER.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended
 to read as follows:
`REGULATION OF RATES
 `SEC. 623. (a) IN GENERAL; LIMITATIONS- No Federal agency or State may
 regulate the rates for the provision of cable service except to the extent
 provided under this section. Any franchising authority may regulate the
 rates for the provision of cable service, or any other communications
 service provided over a cable system to cable subscribers, but only to
 the extent provided under this section.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIC SERVICE TIER RATE LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) COMMISSION REGULATIONS- Within 120 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish the following:
 `(A) BASIC SERVICE TIER RATES- A formula to establish the maximum price
 of the basic service tier, which formula--
 `(i) shall take into account only--
 `(I) the number of signals required to be carried on the basic service
 tier pursuant to paragraph (2);
 `(II) the direct costs of obtaining, transmitting, and otherwise providing
 such signals, and changes in such costs;
 `(III) such portion of the joint and common costs of the cable operator as
 is determined, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commission,
 to be properly allocable to obtaining, transmitting, and otherwise providing
 such signals, and changes in such costs; and
 `(IV) a reasonable profit (as defined by the Commission) on the provision
 of the basic service tier; and
 `(ii) shall not take into account--
 `(I) any additional video programming services carried on the basic service
 tier pursuant to paragraph (4);
 `(II) any costs of obtaining, transmitting, marketing, or otherwise providing
 any such additional video programming services or any other signal not
 required to be carried on the basic service tier pursuant to paragraph (2);
 `(III) any amount assessed as a franchise fee, tax, or charge of any kind
 imposed by any State or local authority on the transactions between cable
 operators and cable subscribers or any fee, tax, or assessment of general
 applicability which is applied in an unduly discriminatory manner against
 cable operators or cable subscribers; or
 `(IV) any amount required to satisfy franchise requirements to support
 public, educational, or governmental channels or the use of such channels.
 `(B) EQUIPMENT- A formula to establish the price for installation and
 lease of the equipment necessary for subscribers to receive the basic
 service tier, including a converter box and a remote control.
 `(C) CONVERTER BOXES AND REMOTES- Standards concerning the availability
 for lease or purchase and pricing of converter boxes and remote controls.
 `(D) COSTS OF FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS- (i) A formula to identify and allocate
 costs attributable to satisfying franchise requirements to support public,
 educational, and governmental channels or the use of such channels or any
 other services required under the franchise, and (ii) procedures by which
 the cable operator will recover from subscribers--
 `(I) the costs described in clause (i) of this subparagraph, and
 `(II) the costs of any amounts assessed as a franchise fee, tax, or charge of
 any kind imposed by any State or local authority on the transactions between
 cable operators and cable subscribers and any fee, tax, or assessment of
 general applicability which is applied in an unduly discriminatory manner
 against cable operators or cable subscribers.
 `(E) IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT- Additional standards, guidelines, and
 procedures concerning the implementation and enforcement of the regulations
 prescribed by the Commission under this subsection, which shall include--
 `(i) procedures by which cable operators may implement and franchising
 authorities may oversee the administration of the formulas, standards,
 guidelines, and procedures established by the Commission under this
 subsection; and
 `(ii) standards and procedures to prevent unreasonable charges for changes
 in the subscriber's selection of services or equipment subject to regulation
 under this section, which standards shall require that charges for changing
 the service tier selected shall not exceed nominal amounts when the system's
 configuration permits changes in service tier selection to be effected solely
 by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple method.
 `(F) EFFECTIVE DATES- An effective date or dates for compliance with the
 formulas, standards, guidelines, and procedures established under this
 subsection.
 `(2) COMPONENTS OF BASIC TIER SUBJECT TO RATE REGULATION- Each cable
 operator of a cable system shall provide its subscribers a separately
 available basic service tier to which the rates prescribed under paragraph
 (1) shall apply and to which subscription is required for access to all
 other tiers of service. Such basic service tier shall, except as provided
 in paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6), consist only of the following:
 `(A) All signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of sections
 614 and 615.
 `(B) Any public, educational, and governmental access programming required
 by the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers.
 `(3) SMALL SYSTEM EXCEPTION- The requirements of this subsection shall not
 apply to any cable system with 12 or fewer usable activated channels that
 has 300 or fewer subscribers, so long as such system does not delete any
 signal of a broadcast television station from carriage by that system.
 `(4) ADDITIONS TO BASIC TIER PROHIBITED- (A) No cable operator may add any
 video programming to the basic tier that is not a signal or programming
 required to be included in such tier pursuant to paragraph (2). Any
 obligation imposed by a franchise that is inconsistent with this paragraph
 is preempted and may not be enforced. A contract or other agreement that
 requires carriage on the basic service tier, or that establishes a rate for
 carriage (as part of the basic service tier), of a signal or programming
 that is not required to be included in such tier pursuant to paragraph
 (2) may not be enforced by a video programming vendor (as such term is
 defined in section 705A(g) of this Act) unless such contract or agreement
 is applied to require carriage of such signal or programming on the next
 most widely subscribed level of service.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph and paragraph (2) shall not prohibit
 a cable operator from carrying on the basic tier nationally distributed
 public and government affairs cable networks that are provided by nonprofit
 organizations that are exempt from Federal income tax, that do not carry
 advertising, and that were so distributed on or before January 1, 1990.
 `(5) RATE REGULATION AGREEMENTS- The provisions of this subsection (and
 the regulations thereunder) shall not apply to the cable system of a
 cable operator who has, before July 1, 1990, entered into an agreement
 with a franchising authority that authorizes the franchising authority to
 regulate the rates of such cable system for basic cable service where such
 system was not subject to effective competition pursuant to the rules of
 the Commission in effect on July 1, 1990.
 `(6) TREATMENT OF EXISTING BROADCAST TIERS-
 `(A) CONTINUED CARRIAGE PERMITTED- In the case of any cable operator
 that offered to subscribers a tier of programming as of January 1, 1990,
 consisting of not more than--
 `(i) the signals of any broadcast television station carried on the system;
 `(ii) any public, educational, or governmental access or local origination
 programming; and
 `(iii) any nationally distributed public and government affairs cable
 network provided by a nonprofit organization exempt from Federal income tax,
 and that does not carry advertising,
the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (4) of this subsection shall not prohibit
such operator from continuing to provide such tier.
 `(B) RATE FORMULA ADJUSTMENT; RETIERING- Any cable operator providing a
 tier of programming described in subparagraph (A) may--
 `(i) continue to provide such tier to subscribers, subject to a formula
 for a maximum price established by the Commission, which formula shall
 comply with the requirements of paragraph (1), except that the Commission
 shall take into account additional costs described in subclauses (II) and
 (III) of paragraph (1)(A)(i) with respect to the signal of any broadcast
 television station not required by paragraph (2) to be offered on the
 basic service tier; or
 `(ii) delete such programming from the tier described in subparagraph (A)
 as may be necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
 `(c) REGULATION OF UNREASONABLE OR ABUSIVE RATES-
 `(1) COMMISSION REGULATIONS- Within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish the following:
 `(A) criteria prescribed in accordance with paragraph (2) for identifying, in
 individual cases, rates for cable programming services that are unreasonable
 or abusive;
 `(B) fair and expeditious procedures for the receipt, consideration, and
 resolution of complaints from any franchising authority or other relevant
 State or local government entity alleging that a rate for cable programming
 services charged by a cable operator violates the criteria prescribed under
 subparagraph (A), which procedures shall set forth the minimum showing
 that shall be required for a complaint to establish a prima facie case
 that the rate in question is unreasonable or abusive; and
 `(C) the procedures to be used to reduce rates for cable programming
 services that are determined by the Commission to be unreasonable or abusive.
 `(2) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In establishing the criteria for determining
 in individual cases whether rates for cable programming services are
 unreasonable or abusive under paragraph (1)(A), the Commission shall
 consider, among other factors--
 `(A) rates for similarly situated cable systems offering comparable cable
 programming services, taking into account similarities in facilities,
 regulatory and governmental costs, the number of subscribers, and other
 relevant factors;
 `(B) the history of the rates for cable programming services of the system;
 `(C) the rates, as a whole, for all the cable programming, equipment,
 and services provided by the system;
 `(D) capital and operating costs of the cable system; and
 `(E) the quality and costs of the customer service provided by the cable
 system.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON COMPLAINTS CONCERNING EXISTING RATES- On and after 180
 days after the effective date of the regulations prescribed by the Commission
 under paragraph (1), the procedures established under subparagraph (B) of
 such paragraph shall be available only with respect to complaints filed
 within a reasonable period of time following a change in rates that is
 initiated after that effective date.
 `(d) DISCRIMINATION; SERVICES FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED- Nothing in this
 title shall be construed as prohibiting any Federal agency, State, or a
 franchising authority from--
 `(1) prohibiting discrimination among customers of basic cable service, or
 `(2) requiring and regulating the installation or rental of equipment
 which facilitates the reception of basic cable service by hearing impaired
 individuals.
 `(e) REVIEW OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION-
 `(1) COLLECTION OF INFORMATION- The Commission shall, by regulation, require
 cable operators to file, within 60 days after the effective date of the
 regulations prescribed under subsection (c)(1) and annually thereafter,
 such financial information as may be needed for purposes of administering
 and enforcing this section.
 `(2) CONGRESSIONAL REPORT- The Commission shall submit to each House of
 the Congress, by January 1, 1994, a report on the financial condition,
 profitability, rates, and performance of the cable industry and making
 such recommendations as the Commission considers appropriate in light of
 such information.
 `(f) PREVENTION OF EVASIONS- Within 120 days after the date of enactment
 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991,
 the Commission shall, by regulation, establish standards, guidelines,
 and procedures to prevent evasions of the rates, services, and other
 requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section.
 `(g) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `cable programming
 service' means any video programming provided over a cable system,
 regardless of service tier, other than video programming required to be
 carried under subsection (b)(2) and video programming offered on a per
 channel or per program basis.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) of this section
 shall take effect 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 4. CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS.
 Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new section:
`CARRIAGE OF NONCOMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS
 `SEC. 614. (a) CABLE OPERATOR OBLIGATIONS- For the purposes of providing a
 basic service tier pursuant to section 623, each cable operator shall carry,
 on the cable system of that operator, the signals of qualified noncommercial
 television stations in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS TO CARRY QUALIFIED STATIONS-
 `(1) GENERAL REQUIREMENT TO CARRY EACH QUALIFIED STATION- Subject to
 paragraph (2) of this subsection and subsection (e), each cable operator
 shall carry, on the cable system of that operator, each qualified local
 noncommercial television station requesting carriage.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS TO GENERAL REQUIREMENT-
 `(A) SYSTEMS WITH 12 OR FEWER CHANNELS- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of this subsection, a cable operator of a cable system with 12 or fewer
 usable activated channels shall carry on that system only one qualified
 local noncommercial television station, but such operator shall comply
 with subsection (c) and may, in its discretion, carry on that system other
 qualified noncommercial television stations.
 `(B) SYSTEMS WITH 13 TO 36 CHANNELS- Subject to subsection (c), a cable
 operator of a cable system with 13 to 36 usable activated channels--
 `(i) shall carry on that system at least 1 qualified local noncommercial
 television station but shall not be required to carry more than 3 such
 stations; and
 `(ii) may, in its discretion, carry on that system additional such stations.
 `(C) DUPLICATION OF AFFILIATES OF STATE PUBLIC TELEVISION NETWORKS NOT
 REQUIRED- The operator of a cable system described in this paragraph which
 carries a qualified local noncommercial station affiliated with a State
 public television network shall not be required to carry any additional
 qualified local noncommercial television station affiliated with the
 same network if the programming of such additional station substantially
 duplicates the programming of the qualified local noncommercial television
 station receiving carriage.
 `(D) DISTANT STATIONS- In the case of any cable system with 36 or fewer
 activated channels which operates beyond the presence of any qualified
 local noncommercial television station--
 `(i) the cable operator of such system shall carry on that system one
 signal of a qualified noncommercial television station;
 `(ii) the selection for carriage of such a station shall be at the election
 of the cable operator; and
 `(iii) in order to satisfy the requirements for carriage specified in
 this subsection, a cable operator of such system shall not be required
 to remove any other programming service actually provided to subscribers
 on January 1, 1990, except that such cable operator shall use the first
 channel available to satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
 `(3) CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASE IN NUMBER OF CHANNELS- A cable operator of
 a system described in paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection which increases
 the usable activated channel capacity of the cable system to more than
 36 channels on or after January 1, 1990, shall, in accordance with the
 other provisions of this section, carry on that system each qualified local
 noncommercial television station requesting carriage, subject to subsection
 (e).
 `(c) CONTINUED CARRIAGE OF EXISTING STATIONS; WAIVER- Notwithstanding any
 other provision of this section, all cable operators shall continue to
 provide carriage to all qualified local noncommercial television stations
 carried on their systems as of January 1, 1990. The requirements of this
 subsection may be waived upon the written consent of the cable operator
 and any such station.
 `(d) USE OF PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL CHANNELS- A cable
 operator required to add the signals of qualified local noncommercial
 television stations to a cable system under this section may, with the
 approval of the franchising authority, do so by placing such additional
 stations on public, educational, or governmental channels not in use for
 their designated purposes.
 `(e) DUPLICATION NOT REQUIRED ON SYSTEMS CARRYING 3 QUALIFIED STATIONS-
 A cable operator of a cable system with a capacity of more than 36
 usable activated channels which is required to carry three qualified
 local noncommercial television stations shall not be required to carry
 additional such stations if the programming of such additional stations
 substantially duplicates the programming broadcast by another qualified
 local noncommercial television station requesting carriage. For purposes
 of this subsection and subsection (b)(2)(C), substantial duplication shall
 be defined by the Commission by regulation in a manner that promotes access
 to distinctive noncommercial educational television services.
 `(f) STATIONS CARRIED PROHIBITED FROM ASSERTING NONDUPLICATION RIGHTS-
 A qualified local noncommercial television station carried by a cable
 operator shall not assert any network nonduplication rights it may have
 pursuant to section 76.92 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, as in
 effect on January 1, 1990, to require the deletion of programs aired on other
 qualified local noncommercial television stations carried by that operator.
 `(g) CARRIAGE STANDARDS-
 `(1) CARRIAGE OF ENTIRE SIGNAL- A cable operator shall carry in its entirety,
 on the cable system of that operator, the primary video and accompanying
 audio transmission of each qualified local noncommercial television
 station carried on the cable system (unless otherwise agreed upon by the
 cable operator and the station), and, to the extent technically feasible,
 program-related material carried in the vertical blanking interval, or on
 subcarriers, that may be necessary for receipt of programming by handicapped
 persons or for educational or language purposes. Retransmission of other
 material in the vertical blanking interval or on subcarriers shall be
 within the discretion of the cable operator.
 `(2) SIGNAL STRENGTH, BANDWIDTH, AND QUALITY- A cable operator shall provide
 each qualified local noncommercial television station carried in accordance
 with this section with bandwidth and technical capacity equivalent to that
 provided to commercial television broadcast stations carried on the cable
 system and shall carry the signal of each qualified local noncommercial
 educational television station without material degradation.
 `(3) CHANNEL ASSIGNMENTS- A qualified local noncommercial television
 station may be repositioned to a different channel in accordance with the
 requirements of section 623, but shall not be repositioned to a different
 channel by a cable operator unless the cable operator, at least 30 days in
 advance of such repositioning, has provided written notice to the station
 and all subscribers of the cable system. For purposes of this paragraph,
 repositioning includes assignment of a qualified local noncommercial
 television station to a cable system channel number different from the
 cable system channel number to which the station was assigned as of January
 1, 1990.
 `(4) SIGNAL QUALITY RESPONSIBILITIES OF STATION- Notwithstanding any other
 provisions of this section, a cable operator shall not be required to
 carry any qualified local noncommercial television station which does not
 deliver to the cable system's principal headend a signal of good quality,
 as may be defined by the Commission by regulation.
 `(h) PAYMENTS FOR CARRIAGE-
 `(1) GENERAL PROHIBITION ON PAYMENT FOR CARRIAGE; SIGNAL QUALITY COSTS
 PERMITTED- A cable operator shall not request or accept monetary payment or
 other valuable consideration in exchange for carriage of the signal of any
 qualified local noncommercial television station carried in fulfillment
 of the requirements of this section, except that such a station may be
 required to bear the cost associated with delivering a good quality signal
 to the headend of the cable system.
 `(2) PAYMENT OF COPYRIGHT CHARGES FOR CARRIAGE OF DISTANT SIGNALS-
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a cable operator
 shall not be required to add a qualified local noncommercial television
 station not already carried under the provisions of subsection (c), where
 such station would be considered as a distant signal for copyright purposes,
 unless such station reimburses the operator for the incremental copyright
 costs assessed against such operator as a result of such carriage.
 `(i) LISTING OF STATIONS PURSUANT TO REQUIREMENTS- A cable operator shall
 identify, upon request by any person, those signals carried in fulfillment
 of the requirements of this section.
 `(j) REMEDIES-
 `(1) COMPLAINTS BY BROADCAST STATIONS- Whenever a qualified local
 noncommercial television station believes that a cable operator has failed
 to meet its obligations under this section, such station shall notify the
 operator, in writing, of the alleged failure and identify its reasons
 for believing that the cable operator is obligated to carry the signal
 of such station. The cable operator shall, within 30 days thereafter,
 respond in writing to such notice and either commence to carry the
 signal of such station or state its reasons for believing that it is
 not obligated to carry such signal. A broadcast station that is denied
 carriage of a cable operator may obtain review of such denial by filing
 a complaint with the Commission. Such complaint shall allege the manner
 in which such cable operator has failed to meet its obligations and the
 basis for such allegations.
 `(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND- The Commission shall afford such cable operator
 an opportunity to present data, views, and arguments to establish that
 there has been no failure to meet its obligations under this section.
 `(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL- Within 120 days after the date a complaint
 is filed, the Commission shall determine whether the cable operator has
 met its obligations under this section. If the Commission determines that
 the cable operator has failed to meet such obligations, the Commission
 shall state with particularity the basis for such findings and order the
 cable operator to take such remedial action as is necessary to meet the
 requirements of this section. If the Commission determines that the cable
 operator has fully met such obligations, it shall dismiss the complaint.
 `(k) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED NONCOMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION- The term `qualified
 noncommercial television station'--
 `(A) means any television broadcast station which--
 `(i)(I) under the regulations of the Commission in effect on January
 1, 1990, is licensed by the Commission as a noncommercial educational
 television broadcast station and is owned and operated by a public agency
 or a nonprofit foundation, corporation, or association; or
 `(II) is owned or operated by a municipality and transmits only noncommercial
 programs for educational purposes; and
 `(ii) has as its licensee an entity which has been qualified by the
 Corporation for Public Broadcasting, or any successor organization thereto,
 to receive a community service grant, or any successor grant thereto, on
 the basis of the formula set forth in section 396(k)(6)(B) of this Act; and
 `(B) includes any translator, as defined in section 74.701(a) of title
 47, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1990), or any
 successor regulation thereto, which operates with five watts or higher power
 and which rebroadcasts the signal of a station described in subparagraph
 (A) or this subparagraph.
 `(2) QUALIFIED LOCAL NONCOMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION- The term `qualified
 local noncommercial television station' means a qualified noncommercial
 television station--
 `(A) which is licensed to a principal community whose reference point,
 as defined in section 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations
 (as in effect on January 1, 1990), or any successor regulations thereto,
 is within 50 miles of the principal headend of the cable system; or
 `(B) whose grade B service contour, as defined in section 73.683(a) of
 such title (as in effect on January 1, 1990), or any successor regulations
 thereto, encompasses the principal headend of the cable system.'.
SEC. 5. CARRIAGE OF QUALIFIED LOCAL TELEVISION SIGNALS.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is
 further amended by inserting after section 614 (as added by section 4 of
 this Act) the following new section:
`CARRIAGE OF QUALIFIED LOCAL TELEVISION STATIONS
 `SEC. 615. (a) CARRIAGE OBLIGATIONS- For the purposes of providing a
 basic service tier pursuant to the provisions of section 623, each cable
 operator shall carry, on the cable system of that operator, the signals
 of qualified local television stations as provided by section 614 and the
 following provisions of this section:
 `(1) MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SIGNALS REQUIRED- A cable operator of a cable system
 with more than 12 usable activated channels shall carry the signals of
 qualified local television stations up to the maximum number determined
 by the following table:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Number of usable activated channels Maximum number of signals required to
 be carried
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 13 to 20 5
 21 to 29 7
 30 to 33 8
 34 to 37 9
 38 to 41 10
 42 to 45 11
 46 to 49 12
 50 to 53 13
 54 to 57 14
 58 to 61 15
 62 to 65 16
 66 to 69 17
 70 to 73 18
 74 to 77 19
 78 to 81 20
 82 to 85 21
 86 to 89 22
 90 to 93 23
 94 to 97 24
 98 to 101 25
 102 to 105 26
 106 to 109 27
 110 to 113 28
 114 to 117 29
 118 to 121 30
 122 to 125 31
 Above 125 25% of channel capacity.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carriage of additional broadcast television stations on such system shall
be at the discretion of such operator. Beginning five years after the date
of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1991, cable systems with 12 or fewer usable activated channels shall
be required to carry up to a maximum of three qualified local television
stations, except that if such a system has 300 or fewer subscribers, such
system shall not be subject to any requirements under this section so long
as such system does not delete any signal of a broadcast television station
from carriage by that system.
 `(2) SELECTION OF SIGNALS- Whenever the number of qualified local television
 stations for any cable system exceeds the maximum number of signals the
 system is required to carry under paragraph (1), the cable operator shall
 have complete discretion in selecting which such stations' signals shall
 be carried on its cable system, except that--
 `(A) in fulfilling the requirements of paragraph (1)--
 `(i) a cable system of 53 or fewer usable activated channels may count only
 one qualified local noncommercial television station carried pursuant to
 section 614;
 `(ii) a cable system of 54 or more usable activated channels may count only
 two qualified local noncommercial television stations carried pursuant to
 section 614; and
 `(iii) additional qualified local noncommercial television stations carried
 pursuant to section 614 may not be counted; and
 `(B) if the cable operator elects to carry an affiliate of a broadcast
 network (as such term is defined by the Commission), such cable operator
 shall carry the affiliate of such broadcast network whose city of license
 reference point, as defined in section 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal
 Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1990), or any successor regulation
 thereto, is closest to the principal headend of the cable system.
 `(3) CONTENT TO BE CARRIED- (A) A cable operator shall carry in its entirety,
 on the cable system of that operator, the primary video and accompanying
 audio transmission of each of the qualified local commercial television
 stations carried on the cable system (unless otherwise agreed upon by the
 cable operator and the station), and, to the extent technically feasible,
 program-related material carried in the vertical blanking interval,
 or on subcarriers, that may be necessary for receipt of programming by
 handicapped persons or for educational or language purposes, including
 use of separate audio program channels, or that relates to or enhances the
 primary video and audio signal (such as closed-captioning or multichannel
 sound). Retransmission of other material in the vertical blanking interval or
 other enhancements of the primary video and audio signal (including teletext
 and other subscription and advertiser-supported information or service,
 and material carried on subcarriers) shall be left to the discretion of
 the cable operator. Where appropriate and feasible, operators may strip
 signal enhancements, such as ghost-canceling, from the broadcast signal
 and employ such enhancements at the system headend. The Commission may
 study technological enhancements contained in broadcast signals and adjust
 cable system obligations consistent with this paragraph as necessary.
 `(B) A cable operator is required to carry the entirety of the program
 schedule of such a station unless carriage of specific programming is
 prohibited pursuant to section 76.67 or subpart F of part 76 of title
 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1990),
 or any successor regulations thereto.
 `(4) SIGNAL QUALITY-
 `(A) NONDEGRADATION; TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS- The signals of qualified
 local commercial television stations that a cable operator carries shall be
 carried without material degradation. The Commission shall adopt carriage
 standards, as necessary, to ensure that, to the extent technically feasible,
 the quality of signal processing and carriage provided by a cable system
 for the carriage of qualified local commercial television stations will
 be no less than that provided by the system for carriage of any other
 comparable type of retransmitted signal.
 `(B) ADVANCED TELEVISION- At any time that the Commission prescribes
 modifications of the standards for television broadcast signals, the
 Commission shall--
 `(i) initiate a proceeding to consider technical standards applicable to
 cable carriage of broadcast signals; or
 `(ii) consider submission to the Congress of suggestions for legislative
 changes necessary to ensure cable carriage of the new broadcast standard.
 `(5) DUPLICATION NOT REQUIRED- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a cable
 operator shall not be required to carry the signal of any qualified local
 commercial television station that substantially duplicates the signal of
 another qualified local commercial station or to carry the signals of more
 than one qualified commercial television station affiliated with a particular
 broadcast network entity (as such term is defined by the Commission). If a
 cable operator elects to carry a signal which substantially duplicates the
 signal of another qualified local commercial television station carried
 on the cable system, or to carry the signals of more than one qualified
 local commercial television station affiliated with a particular broadcast
 network entity, all such signals shall be counted toward the number of
 signals the operator is required to carry under paragraph (1).
 `(6) CHANNEL POSITIONING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), each signal of a
 qualified local commercial television station carried in fulfillment of the
 requirements of this subsection shall be carried on the cable system, at
 the option of the licensee of the station, on one of the following channels:
 `(i) The channel on which that signal was carried on June 26, 1990.
 `(ii) The channel corresponding to the station's broadcast channel number,
 as assigned by the Commission, unless that channel on the cable system was
 occupied by another qualified local commercial television station on June
 26, 1990, that does not wish to relinquish that channel position.
 `(iii) A channel mutually agreed upon by the broadcast station and the
 cable operator.
 `(B) EXCEPTION- A cable operator may make a single election to carry all
 the signals of qualified local commercial television stations carried
 in fulfillment of the requirements of this section on channel numbers
 2 through 13, inclusive. The channel position of any qualified local
 commercial television station carried on channels 2 through 13, inclusive,
 on June 26, 1990, shall not be changed without the consent of the station.
 `(7) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNALS CARRIED- A cable operator shall identify,
 upon request by any person, those signals carried in fulfillment of the
 requirements of this section.
 `(8) NOTIFICATION- A cable operator shall provide written notice
 to a qualified local commercial television station at least 30 days
 prior to either deleting from carriage or repositioning that qualified
 local commercial television station. No deletion or repositioning of a
 qualified local commercial television station shall occur during a period
 in which major television rating services measure the size of audiences of
 local commercial television stations. The notification provisions of this
 paragraph shall not be used to undermine or evade the channel positioning
 or carriage requirements imposed upon cable operators under this section.
 `(9) COMPENSATION FOR CARRIAGE PROHIBITED- A cable operator shall not accept
 or request monetary payment or other valuable consideration in exchange
 for carriage of the signal of any qualified local commercial television
 station carried in fulfillment of the requirements of this section, or
 in exchange for carriage on the channel of carriage as of June 26, 1990,
 or the channel corresponding to the station's broadcast channel number,
 except that--
 `(A) any such station may be required to bear the costs associated with
 delivering to the headend of the cable system a signal of the quality
 defined in subsection (c)(2)(A)(ii) of this section; and
 `(B) a cable operator may continue to accept monetary payment or other
 valuable consideration in exchange for carriage or channel positioning of
 the signal of any qualified local commercial television station carried in
 fulfillment of the requirements of this section, through, but not beyond,
 the date of expiration of an agreement thereon between a cable operator
 and a qualified local commercial television station entered into prior to
 June 26, 1990.
 `(b) REMEDIES-
 `(1) COMPLAINTS BY BROADCAST STATIONS- Whenever a qualified local commercial
 television station believes that a cable operator has failed to meet its
 obligations under this section, such station shall notify the operator, in
 writing, of the alleged failure and identify its reasons for believing that
 the cable operator is obligated to carry the signal of such station or has
 otherwise failed to comply with the channel positioning or repositioning
 requirements of this section. The cable operator shall, within 30 days
 thereafter, respond in writing to such notice and either commence to carry
 the signal of such station or state its reasons for believing that it is
 not obligated to carry such signal or is in compliance with the channel
 positioning or repositioning requirements of this section. A broadcast
 station that is denied carriage or channel positioning or repositioning
 by a cable operator may obtain review of such denial by filing a complaint
 with the Commission. Such complaint shall allege the manner in which such
 cable operator has failed to meet its obligations and the basis for such
 allegations.
 `(2) OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND- The Commission shall afford such cable operator
 an opportunity to present data, views, and arguments to establish that
 there has been no failure to meet its obligations under this section.
 `(3) REMEDIAL ACTIONS; DISMISSAL- Within 120 days after the date a complaint
 is filed, the Commission shall determine whether the cable operator has met
 its obligations under this section. If the Commission determines that the
 cable operator has failed to meet such obligations, the Commission shall
 state with particularity the basis for such findings and order the cable
 operator to reposition such station or, in the case of an obligation to
 carry a station, to commence carriage of the station within a reasonable
 period, as specified by the Commission, and shall continue such carriage
 for at least 12 months. If the Commission determines that the cable operator
 has fully met such obligations, it shall dismiss the complaint.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) QUALIFIED LOCAL TELEVISION STATION- The term `qualified local television
 station' means any qualified local commercial television station, and
 any qualified noncommercial educational television station as defined in
 section 614.
 `(2) QUALIFIED LOCAL COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS- (A) The term `qualified
 local commercial television station' means any full service commercial
 television station licensed and operating on a channel regularly assigned
 to its community by the Commission (except where such station would be
 considered a distant signal under section 111 of title 17, United States
 Code) and that, with respect to a particular cable system--
 `(i) is licensed to a community whose reference point, as defined in section
 76.53 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1,
 1990), or any successor regulations thereto, is within 50 miles of the
 principal headend of the cable system;
 `(ii) delivers to the principal headend of the cable system a signal of
 good technical quality that is either a signal level of -45 dBm for UHF
 signals or -49 dBm for VHF signals at the input terminals of the video
 processing equipment, or a baseband video signal; and
 `(iii) meets the television viewership standards specified in paragraph
 (3) of this subsection.
 `(B) The term `qualified local commercial television station' shall not
 include low-power television stations, television translator stations,
 and other passive repeaters which operate pursuant to part 74 of title
 47, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on January 1, 1990), or any
 successor regulations thereto.
 `(3) VIEWERSHIP STANDARD-
 `(A) MINIMUM VIEWERSHIP REQUIRED- Except as provided in subparagraphs (C)
 and (D), the viewership standard that must be achieved by a qualified local
 commercial television station, as determined in accordance with subsection
 (d) of this section, is an average share of total viewing hours of at
 least 2 percent and a net weekly circulation of at least 5 percent.
 `(B) LOSS OF VIEWERSHIP- Once a commercial station has demonstrated that,
 on the basis of a full one-year television survey season, it meets the
 viewership standard specified in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph,
 it will be deemed to have met such standard until such time as the cable
 system operator demonstrates, using the methodology specified in subsection
 (d) of this section, that the station no longer meets such standard.
 `(C) NEW STATIONS- If a station commenced operations, as defined in
 subsection (d)(3), after December 11, 1987, and otherwise meets the
 requirements of paragraph (2) of this subsection, it shall be a qualified
 local commercial television station for one year after the date the
 station commenced operations or the date the carriage obligations imposed
 in this section become effective, whichever is later, regardless of
 whether the station achieves the viewership standard in subparagraph (A)
 of this paragraph. For purposes of this subparagraph, a station shall be
 deemed to have initially commenced operations as of the date it initially
 commences operations under program test authority. A station which changes
 station operations, upgrades facilities, transfers or assigns its license,
 or recommences its operations after operations have ceased shall not be
 deemed to have initially commenced operations.
 `(D) MINORITY-OWNED OR MINORITY-ORIENTED STATIONS- The viewership standard
 in subparagraph (A) of this section shall not apply with respect to
 carriage of a minority-owned or minority-oriented station (as defined in
 subparagraph (E)) that otherwise meets the requirements of paragraph (2)
 of this subsection, but in no case shall this subparagraph require a cable
 operator to delete from carriage any signal carried on the system of that
 operator on July 26, 1990. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
 require a cable operator to delete from carriage the signal of any such
 special format or minority station that was carried on the system of that
 operator on July 26, 1990.
 `(E) DEFINITIONS OF SPECIAL FORMAT AND MINORITY STATIONS- For purposes
 of subparagraph (E), a minority-owned or minority-oriented station' is a
 station that provides, as a substantial portion of its program schedule,
 programming in foreign languages or programming directed at minority
 groups, or that is over 50 percent minority-owned, as the term `minority'
 is defined in section 309(i)(3)(C)(ii) of this Act.
 `(d) SURVEY OF BROADCAST AUDIENCE- Compliance with the viewership standard
 specified in subsection (c)(3) shall be demonstrated on the basis of an
 independent professional survey of noncable homes. Such survey shall cover
 4 separate, consecutive 4-week periods, including one in each of April
 through June, July through September, October through December and January
 through March, pursuant to the methodology used to compile Appendix B of
 the Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsideration of Cable Television,
 Federal Communications Commission Report and Order (in C.T. Docket 72-530;
 36 FCC 2d 326 (1972)), except that such methodology shall be modified, as
 necessary, to encompass all households or all cable homes when a station
 chooses to rely on viewing in such households and cable subscribership
 reaches 70 percent of the homes in the county.
 `(e) INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH RULES ABOLISHED- No cable operator shall be
 required--
 `(1) to provide or make available any input selector switch as defined in
 section 76.5(mm) of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any comparable
 device, or
 `(2) to provide information to subscribers about input selector switches
 or comparable devices.
 `(f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The provisions of this section shall take effect on
 the effective date of regulations promulgated by the Commission pursuant
 to section 623(b) of this Act as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
 Protection and Competition Act of 1991.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 602 of the Communications Act of 1934
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (13), (14), (15), and (16) as paragraphs
 (14), (15), (16), and (18), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 `(13) the term `principal headend' means a single location at which
 is located the cable system equipment used to receive and process the
 signals of local television broadcast stations for redistribution to
 subscribers. Where more than one location meets this definition, the
 cable operator shall designate to the Commission a single location as the
 principal headend for purposes of section 614 and 615. No designation of
 the location of the cable system's principal headend shall be made in
 a manner which will undermine or evade the signal carriage obligations
 imposed upon cable operators under this Act;';
 (3) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (16) (as redesignated); and
 (4) by inserting after such paragraph (16) the following new paragraph:
 `(17) the term `usable activated channels'--
 `(A) means channels engineered at the head end of the cable system for the
 provision of services generally available to residential subscribers of the
 cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided; and
 `(B) includes any channel designated for public, educational, or governmental
 use but excluding channels whose use for the distribution of broadcast
 signals would conflict with technical and safety regulations as defined
 by the Commission; and'.
SEC. 6. CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE.
 Section 632 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 552) is amended
 to read as follows:
`CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
 `SEC. 632. (a) FRANCHISING AUTHORITY ENFORCEMENT- A franchising authority
 may require, as part of a franchise (including a modification, renewal,
 or transfer thereof), provisions for enforcement of--
 `(1) customer service requirements of the cable operator; and
 `(2) construction schedules and other construction-related requirements,
 including construction-related performance requirements, of the cable
 operator.
 `(b) COMMISSION STANDARDS- The Commission shall, within 180 days of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1991, establish standards by which cable operators may fulfill their
 customer service requirements. Such standards shall include, at a minimum,
 requirements governing--
 `(1) cable system office hours and telephone availability;
 `(2) installations, outages, and service calls; and
 `(3) communications between the cable operator and the customer (including
 standards governing bills and refunds).
 `(c) AVAILABILITY OF TECHNOLOGY; PROCEEDING REQUIRED- The Federal
 Communications Commission shall--
 `(1) within 60 days after the date of enactment of the Cable Television
 Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991, initiate a proceeding
 to determine--
 `(A) whether equipment standards are necessary to permit the commercial
 availability, from cable operators or retail vendors that are not affiliated
 with cable systems, of converter boxes and remote controls compatible with
 cable systems; and
 `(B) the feasibility of including converter and addressability technology for
 cable systems and other multichannel video systems in television receivers
 shipped in interstate commerce or imported from any foreign country into
 the United States for sale or resale to the public, taking into account
 (i) the impact on domestic manufacturers of including such technology in
 such television receivers, and (ii) the need for cable operators and other
 multichannel video systems to protect their signals against unauthorized
 reception; and
 `(2) prescribe any standards determined to be necessary under paragraph (1).
 `(d) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS- Nothing in this title shall be construed to
 prohibit any State or any franchising authority from enacting or enforcing
 any consumer protection law, to the extent not specifically preempted by
 this title.
 `(2) CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENT AGREEMENTS- Nothing in this section
 shall be construed to preclude a franchising authority and a cable operator
 from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards
 established by the Commission under subsection (b).'.
SEC. 7. TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
 Section 624(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 544(e)) is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(e) Within one year after the date of enactment of the Cable Television
 Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991, the Commission shall
 prescribe regulations which establish minimum technical standards relating
 to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality. The Commission
 periodically shall update such standards to reflect improvements in
 technology. A franchising authority may require as part of a franchise
 (including a modification, renewal, or transfer thereof) provisions for
 the enforcement of the standards prescribed under this subsection. A
 franchising authority may apply to the Commission for a waiver to impose
 standards that are more stringent than the standards prescribed by the
 Commission under this subsection.'.
SEC. 8. COMPETITION AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT.
 (a) PROHIBITION ON UNREASONABLE REFUSALS TO DEAL WITH MULTICHANNEL VIDEO
 SYSTEM OPERATORS- Title VII of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended
 by inserting after section 705 (47 U.S.C. 605) the following new section:
`PROGRAMMING ACCESS TO PROMOTE COMPETITION AND CONTINUING TECHNOLOGICAL
DEVELOPMENT
 `SEC. 705A. (a) UNREASONABLE REFUSALS TO DEAL PROHIBITED- Within 180 days
 after the date of enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection
 and Competition Act of 1990, the Commission shall, in order to promote
 competition and diversity in the multichannel video programming market
 and continuing development of communications technologies, prescribe
 regulations to prohibit any video programming vendor--
 `(1) in which a multichannel video system operator has an attributable
 interest, and
 `(2) that licenses video programming for national or multistate regional
 distribution,
from unreasonably refusing to deal with any multichannel video system
operator with respect to the provision of video programming in accordance
with such regulations. Entering into or abiding by the terms of an exclusive
contract that does not have the effect of significantly impeding competition
shall not be considered an unreasonable refusal to deal. Nothing contained
in this subsection shall require any person who licenses video programming
for national or multistate regional distribution to make such programming
available in any geographic area beyond which such programming has been
authorized or licensed for distribution.
 `(b) REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS- Any multichannel video system operator
 aggrieved by conduct that it alleges constitutes a violation of the
 regulations prescribed under this section may commence an adjudicatory
 proceeding at the Commission. Upon completion of such proceeding, the
 Commission shall have the power to order appropriate remedies, including,
 if necessary, the power to establish price, terms, and conditions of sale
 of programming to the aggrieved multichannel video system operator.
 `(c) PROCEDURES- The Commission shall prescribe regulations to implement
 this section. The Commission's regulations shall--
 `(1) provide for an expedited review of any complaints made pursuant to
 this section;
 `(2) establish procedures for the Commission to collect such data as the
 Commission requires to carry out this section with respect to exclusive
 contracts or other practices and their effects on competitors, competition,
 or the video programming distribution market or on the development of new
 video distribution technologies; and
 `(3) provide for penalties to be assessed against any person filing a
 frivolous complaint pursuant to this section.
 `(d) SUNSET- The regulations prescribed under subsection (a)(1) of this
 section shall cease to be effective 9 years after the date of enactment of
 the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991, or on
 such earlier date as the Commission determines that a competitive national
 market for the delivery of video programming exists. Such regulations
 shall cease to be effective for any local market on such earlier date as
 the Commission determines that a competitive market for the delivery of
 such programming exists in such local market.
 `(e) REPORTS- The Commission shall, beginning not later than 18 months after
 promulgation of the regulations required by subsection (a), annually report
 to Congress on the status of competition in the market for the delivery
 of video programming.
 `(f) EXEMPTIONS FOR PRIOR CONTRACTS- Nothing in this section shall
 affect any contract (or the renewal or extension of any contract) that
 grants exclusive distribution rights to any person with respect to video
 programming and that was entered into on or before June 1, 1990.
 `(g) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `multichannel video system operator' includes an operator
 of any cable system, multichannel multipoint distribution service, direct
 broadcast satellite distribution service, television receive-only satellite
 distribution service, or other comparable system for the distribution of
 video programming.
 `(2) The term `video programming vendor'--
 `(A) means any person who licenses video programming for distribution by
 any multichannel video system operator;
 `(B) includes satellite delivered programming networks and other programming
 networks and services;
 `(C) does not include a network or service distributing video programming
 intended for broadcast by a television station affiliated with a broadcasting
 network; and
 `(D) does not include a network or service distributing video programming
 that is carried as a secondary transmission of a signal broadcast by a
 television station.
 `(3) The terms `cable system' and `video programming' have the meanings
 provided by section 602 of this Act.'.
 (b) REGULATION OF CARRIAGE AGREEMENTS-
 (1) REGULATIONS- Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Commission shall establish regulations governing program carriage
 agreements and related practices between cable operators and video
 programming vendors. Such regulations shall--
 (A) include provisions designed to prevent a cable operator or other
 multichannel video system operator from requiring a financial interest
 in a program service as a condition for carriage on one or more of such
 operator's systems;
 (B) include provisions designed to prohibit a cable operator or other
 multichannel video system operator from coercing a video programming
 vendor to provide exclusive rights against other multichannel video system
 operators as a condition of carriage on a system;
 (C) contain provisions designed to prevent a multichannel video system
 operator from engaging in conduct the effect of which is to unreasonably
 restrain the ability of an unaffiliated video programming vendor to compete
 fairly by discriminating in video programming distribution on the basis
 of affiliation or nonaffiliation in the selection, terms, or conditions
 for carriage of video programming vendors;
 (D) provide for expedited review of any complaints made by a video
 programming vendor pursuant to this section;
 (E) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for violations of this
 subsection, including carriage; and
 (F) provide penalties to be assessed against any person filing a frivolous
 complaint pursuant to this section.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subsection, the terms `video programming
 vendor' and `multichannel video system operator' have the meanings provided
 by section 705A(g) of the Communications Act of 1934 (as added by subsection
 (a) of this section).
SEC. 9. MARKETING OF CERTAIN SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) many satellite-delivered programming services have unnecessarily
 restricted options for consumers wishing to choose between competing
 television programming distributors;
 (2) presently 3,000,000 Americans own C-band home satellite television
 systems and the number is growing at a rate of 350,000 to 400,000 each year;
 (3) there is disparity in wholesale pricing between programming services
 offered to cable operators and to satellite programming distributors;
 (4) independent, noncable third-party packaging of C-band direct broadcast
 satellite delivered programming will encourage the availability of
 programming to C-band direct broadcast home satellite television systems; and
 (5) in order to promote the development of direct-to-home satellite service,
 Congress must act to ensure that video programming vendors provide access
 on fair and nondiscriminatory terms.
 (b) AMENDMENTS- Section 705 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 605)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (f) as added by section 204 of the Satellite
 Home Viewer Act of 1988;
 (2) by striking `subsection (d)' each place it appears in subsections
 (d)(6) and (e)(3)(A) and inserting `subsection (f)';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c) through (g) as subsections (d) through
 (h), respectively;
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c)(1) Any person who encrypts any satellite delivered programming shall--
 `(A) make such programming available for private viewing by home satellite
 antenna users;
 `(B) when making such programming available through any other person for
 distribution through any medium, establish reasonable and nondiscriminatory
 financial, character, technical, and service criteria and requirements under
 which noncable distributors shall qualify to distribute such programming
 for private viewing by home satellite antenna users; and
 `(C) when making such programming available through any other person for
 distribution through any medium, establish by the effective date of this
 subparagraph or January 1, 1992, whichever is later, price, terms, and
 conditions for the wholesale distribution of such programming which do not
 discriminate between the distribution of such programming to distributors
 for cable television subscribers and distributors to home satellite antenna
 users, nor among different distributors to home satellite antenna users,
 except that this subparagraph shall not prohibit rate differentials
 which are--
 `(i) attributable to actual and reasonable differences in the costs of the
 creation, sale, delivery, or transmission of such programming as between
 different delivery media;
 `(ii) attributable to reasonable volume discounts; or
 `(iii) attributable to bona fide agreements for the distribution of such
 programming which were in effect prior to the enactment date of this
 subparagraph.
 `(2) Where a person who encrypts satellite delivered programming has
 established a separate subsidiary for distribution to satellite antenna
 users, such person shall not be required to establish or license any entity
 on the same terms and conditions as such separate subsidiary; except that
 for purposes of any claim of discrimination under this section, a party
 aggrieved may, as evidence of discrimination, compare the prices, terms,
 and conditions established by the person who encrypts.
 `(3) Nothing contained in this subsection shall require any person who
 encrypts satellite delivered programming to authorize or license any
 distributor for a secondary satellite retransmission of such programming,
 but, if any person who encrypts satellite delivered programming authorizes
 or licenses such a distributor, such person shall, consistent with
 the provisions of paragraph (1)(B) and (1)(C), establish criteria to
 qualify to distribute such programming through such secondary satellite
 retransmissions, and further establish nondiscriminatory price, terms,
 and conditions for such distribution. Nothing contained in this subsection
 shall require any person who encrypts satellite delivered programming to
 make such programming available in any geographic area beyond which such
 programming has been authorized or licensed for distribution.
 `(4) Any person aggrieved by any violation of paragraph (1)(A) of this
 subsection may bring a civil action in a United States district court or in
 any other court of competent jurisdiction. Such court may grant temporary
 and final injunctions or other equitable relief on such terms as it may
 deem reasonable and appropriate to prevent or restrain such violations.
 `(5) Any person aggrieved by any violation of paragraph (1)(B), (1)(C),
 or (2) of this subsection may bring a civil action in the United States
 district court or other court of competent jurisdiction. Such court may
 grant temporary and final injunctions on such terms as it may deem reasonable
 and appropriate to prevent or restrain such violations; and (i) direct the
 recovery of damages to a prevailing plaintiff, including actual damages,
 or statutory damages for all violations in a sum of not more than $500,000,
 as the court considers just; and (ii) direct the recovery of full costs,
 including reasonable attorney's fees, to a prevailing party.
 `(6) As used in this subsection--
 `(A) the term `satellite delivered programming' means video programming
 transmitted by a domestic C-band direct broadcast communications satellite
 intended for reception by cable television systems or home satellite antenna
 users and does not include any satellite communication of any broadcaster
 or broadcast network;
 `(B) the term `home satellite antenna users' means individuals who own or
 operate C-band direct broadcast satellite television receive-only equipment
 for the reception of satellite delivered programming for viewing in such
 individual's single family dwelling unit; and
 `(C) the term `person who encrypts' means the party who holds the rights to
 the satellite delivered programming or who establishes the prices, terms,
 and conditions for the wholesale distribution thereof.
 `(7) This subsection shall cease to be effective 7 years after the date
 of enactment of this subsection.'; and
 (5) in subsection (h) (as redesignated) by striking `, based on the
 information gathered from the inquiry required by subsection (f),'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (b) of this section
 shall take effect 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 10. C-BAND SATELLITE REGULATION.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) under existing technical regulations of the Federal Communications
 Commission, the development of the C-band home satellite television market
 is likely to be adversely affected in the future by interference caused
 by adjacent satellites;
 (2) current home dishes, which are commonly 8 to 10 feet in diameter,
 might receive interference from new satellites that the Commission has
 authorized and assigned to orbital slots but which have not yet been
 constructed or launched; and
 (3) future C-band home dishes, which might be as small as 4 feet in diameter
 and still receive good picture quality from higher power C-band satellites
 than are used today, may be unable to reject interference from adjacent
 satellites spaced as close as 2 degrees.
 (b) TECHNICAL REGULATION OF C-BAND SATELLITES- Section 303 of the
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 303) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(v) Have authority to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary
 to assure that satellite Earth stations receiving signals in the 3700-4200
 MHz band used for private viewing pursuant to section 705 are not unduly
 restricted from being used for the reception of television programming
 services, including regulations to assure that such receivers are protected
 from interference caused by unwanted satellite emissions.'.
 (c) BARRIERS TO USE OF SMALLER SATELLITE DISH RECEIVERS- Section 705 of
 the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) The Federal Communications Commission shall, within 45 days after
 the date of enactment of this subsection, initiate a combined inquiry and
 rulemaking proceeding for the purpose of--
 `(A) determining the technical feasibility of using smaller C-band home
 dish receivers than are commonly used on such date of enactment,
 `(B) determining the extent to which existing rules and regulations of the
 Commission in effect on such date act as a barrier to the use of smaller
 dish receivers,
 `(C) determining the extent to which local zoning, construction, or other
 regulations have acted as barriers to the successful development of the
 C-band satellite television delivery service,
 `(D) determining the extent to which smaller dish sizes might overcome
 such local barriers, and
 `(E) evaluating the impact that any proposed regulation changes would
 have on the users, operators, or licensees of existing or authorized
 fixed satellite services (FSS) satellites, taking into account any Act,
 treaty, or convention binding on the United States which the Commission
 is authorized to administer.
 `(2) If the Commission finds--
 `(A) that any of its policies, rules, or regulations relating to two degree
 satellite spacing requirements act as barriers to the use of smaller C-band
 home satellite dishes,
 `(B) that such dishes would be technically feasible but for the Commission's
 policies, rules, or regulations,
 `(C) that modification of the such policies, rules, or regulations would be
 in the interest of current and future C-band home satellite dish users, and
 `(D) that, considering the Commission's evaluation pursuant to paragraph
 (1)(E) of this subsection, such modifications would nevertheless be in
 the public interest,
the Commission shall initiate a rulemaking to remove such barriers and
complete such rulemaking within 360 days of the initiation of the inquiry.'.
SEC. 11. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) despite the existence of present legislation governing equal employment
 opportunity, females and minorities are not employed in significant numbers
 in positions of management authority in the cable television and broadcast
 industries;
 (2) increased numbers of females and minorities in positions of management
 authority in the cable television and broadcast industries advances the
 Nation's policy favoring diversity in the expression of views in the
 electronic media; and
 (3) rigorous enforcement of equal employment opportunity rules and
 regulations is required in order to effectively deter racial and gender
 discrimination.
 (b) STANDARDS- Section 634(d)(1) of the Communication Act of 1934 (47
 U.S.C. 554(d)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d)(1) Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of the
 Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1991, of this
 section, and after notice and opportunity for hearing, the Commission shall
 prescribe revisions in the rules under this section in order to implement
 the amendments made to this section by such Act. Such revisions shall
 be designed to promote equality of employment opportunities for females
 and minorities in each of the job categories itemized in paragraph (3)
 of this subsection.'.
 (c) CONTENTS OF ANNUAL STATISTICAL REPORTS- Section 634(d)(3) of the
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 554(d)(3)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(3)(A) Such rules also shall require an entity specified in subsection (a)
 with more than 5 full-time employees to file with the Commission an annual
 statistical report identifying by race, sex, and job title the number of
 employees in each of the following full-time and part-time job categories:
 `(i) Corporate officers.
 `(ii) General Manager.
 `(iii) Chief Technician.
 `(iv) Comptroller.
 `(v) General Sales Manager.
 `(vi) Production Manager.
 `(vii) Managers.
 `(viii) Professionals.
 `(ix) Technicians.
 `(x) Sales.
 `(xi) Office and Clerical.
 `(xii) Skilled Craftspersons.
 `(xiii) Semiskilled Operatives.
 `(xiv) Unskilled Laborers.
 `(xv) Service Workers.
 `(B) The report required by subparagraph (A) shall be made on separate
 forms, provided by the Commission, for full-time and part-time employees. The
 Commission's rules shall sufficiently define job categories (i) through (vi)
 of such subparagraph so as to ensure that only employees who are principal
 decisionmakers and that have supervisory authority are reported for such
 categories. The Commission shall adopt rules that define job categories
 (vii) through (xv) in a manner that is consistent with the Commission
 policies in effect on June 1, 1990. The Commission shall prescribe the
 method by which entities shall be required to compute and report the number
 of minorities and women in job categories (i) through (x) and the number
 of minorities and women in job categories (i) through (xv) in proportion
 to the total number of qualified minorities and women in the relevant
 labor market. The report shall include information on hiring, promotion,
 and recruitment practices necessary for the Commission to evaluate the
 efforts of entities to comply with the provisions of paragraph (2) of this
 subsection. The report shall be available for public inspection at the
 entity's central location and at every location where 5 or more full-time
 employees are regularly assigned to work. Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed as prohibiting the Commission from collecting or continuing
 to collect statistical or other employment information in a manner that
 it deems appropriate to carry out this section.'.
 (d) PENALTIES- Section 634(f)(2) of such Act is amended by striking `$200'
 and inserting `$500'.
 (e) APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS- Section 634(h)(1) of such Act is further
 amended by inserting before the period the following: `and any multichannel
 video system operator (as that term is defined in section 705A(g) of
 this Act)'.
 (f) STUDY AND REPORT REQUIRED- Not later than 240 days after the date of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1991, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report pursuant to a
 proceeding to review and obtain public comment on the effect and operation
 of its procedures, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines
 concerning equal employment opportunity in the broadcasting industry. In
 conducting such review, the Commission shall consider the effectiveness
 of such procedures, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines in
 promoting equality of employment opportunity and promotion opportunity, and
 particularly the effectiveness of such procedures, regulations, policies,
 standards, and guidelines in promoting the congressional policy favoring
 increased employment opportunity for women and minorities in positions of
 management authority. In conducting such proceeding the Commission also
 shall review the effectiveness of penalties and remedies for violation
 of existing regulations and policies concerning equality of employment
 opportunity in the broadcasting industry. The Commission shall forward to
 the Congress such legislative recommendations to improve equal employment
 opportunity in the broadcasting industry as it deems necessary.
SEC. 12. HOME WIRING.
 Section 624 of the Communications Act of 1934 (17 U.S.C. 544) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(g) Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the
 Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations concerning the disposition,
 after a subscriber to a cable system terminates service, of any cable
 installed by the cable operator within the premises of such subscriber.'.
SEC. 13. SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS.
 Part II of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SALES OF CABLE SYSTEMS
 `SEC. 616. (a) 3-YEAR HOLDING PERIOD REQUIRED- Except as provided in this
 section, no cable operator may sell or otherwise transfer ownership in a
 cable system within a 36-month period following either the acquisition or
 initial construction of such system by such operator.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF MULTIPLE TRANSFERS- In the case of a sale of multiple
 systems, if the terms of the sale require the buyer to subsequently transfer
 ownership of one or more such systems to one or more third parties, such
 transfers shall be considered a part of the initial transaction.
 `(c) EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to--
 `(1) any transfer of ownership interest in any cable system which is not
 subject to Federal income tax liability,
 `(2) any sale required by operation of any law or any act of any Federal
 agency, any State or political subdivision thereof, or any franchising
 authority, or
 `(3) any sale, assignment, or transfer, to one or more purchasers, assignees,
 or tranferees controlled by, controlling, or under common control with,
 the seller, assignor, or transferror.
 `(d) WAIVER AUTHORITY- The Commission may, consistent with the public
 interest, waive the requirement of subsection (a), except that, if
 the franchise requires franchise authority approval of a transfer, the
 Commission shall not waive such requirements unless the franchise authority
 has approved the transfer.
 `(e) LIMITATION ON DURATION OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY POWER TO DISAPPROVE
 TRANSFERS- In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of any cable
 system after the 36-month period following acquisition of such system, a
 franchising authority shall, if the franchise requires franchising authority
 approval of a sale or transfer, have 120 days to act upon any request for
 approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such
 information as is required in accordance with Commission regulations. If
 the franchising authority fails to render a final decision on the request
 within 120 days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting
 party and the franchising authority agree to an extension of time.'.
SEC. 14. CABLE CHANNELS FOR COMMERCIAL USE.
 (a) RATES, TERMS, AND CONDITIONS- Section 612(c) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 532(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `consistent with the purpose of this section' in paragraph
 (1) and inserting `consistent with regulations prescribed by the Commission
 under paragraph (4)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) The Commission shall, not later than 180 days after the date of
 enactment of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
 of 1991, by regulation establish--
 `(A) a formula to determine the maximum rates which a cable operator may
 establish under paragraph (1) of this subsection;
 `(B) standards concerning the terms and conditions which may be so
 established; and
 `(C) standards concerning methods for collection and billing for commercial
 use of channel capacity made available under this section.'.
 (b) ACCESS FOR MINORITY PROGRAMMING SOURCES- Section 612 of such Act is
 further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), a
 cable operator required by this section to designate channel capacity
 for commercial use may use any such channel capacity for the provision of
 programming from a qualified minority programming source, whether or not
 such source is affiliated with the cable operator. The channel capacity
 used to provide programming from a qualified minority programming source
 pursuant to this subsection may not exceed 33 percent of the channel
 capacity designated pursuant to this section. No programming provided
 over a cable system on July 1, 1990, may qualify as minority programming
 on that cable system under this subsection.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified minority
 programming source' means a programming source which devotes significantly
 all of its programming to coverage of minority viewpoints, or to
 programming directed at members of minority groups, and which is over
 50 percent minority-owned, as the term `minority' is defined in section
 309(i)(3)(C)(ii) of this Act.'.
SEC. 15. CABLE FOREIGN OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) restrictions on alien or foreign ownership of broadcasting and common
 carriers first were enacted by Congress in the Radio Act of 1912;
 (2) cable television service currently is available to more than 80 percent
 of American households, more than 59 percent of American households subscribe
 to such services, and the majority of viewers rely on cable as the conduit
 through which they receive terrestrial broadcast signals;
 (3) many Americans receive a significant portion of their daily news,
 information, and entertainment programming from cable television systems,
 and such systems should not be controlled by foreign entities; and
 (4) the policy justifications underlying restrictions on alien ownership
 of broadcast or common carrier licenses have equal application to alien
 ownership of cable television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems,
 and multipoint distribution services.
 (b) AMENDMENT TO COMMUNICATIONS ACT- Section 310(b) of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 310(b)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (4) as subparagraphs (A)
 through (D);
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `(b)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(2)(A) No cable system (as such term is defined in section 602) in
 the United States shall be owned or otherwise controlled by any alien,
 representative, or corporation described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C),
 or (D) of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be applied--
 `(i) to require any such alien, representative, or corporation to sell or
 dispose of any ownership interest held or contracted for on or before June
 1, 1990, or acquired in accordance with clause (ii); or
 `(ii) to prohibit any such alien, representative, or corporation that
 owns, has contracted on or before June 1, 1990, to acquire ownership, or
 otherwise control, any cable system from acquiring ownership or control of
 additional cable systems if the total number of households passed by all
 the cable systems that such alien, representative, or corporation would,
 as a result of such acquisition, own or control does not exceed 2,000,000.
 `(3)(A) For purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection, a license or
 authorization for any of the following services shall be deemed to be a
 broadcast station license:
 `(i) cable auxiliary relay services;
 `(ii) multipoint distribution services;
 `(iii) direct broadcast satellite services; and
 `(iv) other services the licensed facilities of which may be substantially
 devoted toward providing programming or other information services within
 the editorial control of the licensee.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be applied to any cable
 operator to the extent that such operator is eligible for the exemptions
 contained in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2).'.
SEC. 16. THEFT OF CABLE SERVICE.
 Section 633(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 533(b))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking `$25,000' and inserting `$50,000';
 (B) by striking `1 year' and inserting `2 years';
 (C) by striking `$50,000' and inserting `$100,000'; and
 (D) by striking `2 years' and inserting `5 years'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) For purposes of all penalties and remedies established for violations
 of subsection (a)(1), the prohibited activity established herein as it
 applies to each such device shall be deemed a separate violation.'.
SEC. 17. STUDIES.
 (a) STUDY OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING DIVERSITY AND COMPETITION-
 (1) COMMISSION STUDY- The Commission shall conduct a review and study to
 determine whether it is necessary or appropriate in the public interest
 to prohibit or constrain acts and practices that may unreasonably restrict
 diversity and competition in the market for video programming. In conducting
 such review and study, the Commission shall consider the necessity and
 appropriateness of--
 (A) imposing limitations on the degree to which multichannel video
 programming distributors may engage in the creation or production of such
 programming; and
 (B) imposing limitations on the proportion of the market, at any stage
 in the distribution of video programming, which may be controlled by any
 multichannel video programming distributor or other person engaged in
 such distribution.
 (2) REPORT- Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Commission shall submit a report on the review and study required
 by paragraph (1) to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
 of the Senate. Thereafter, the Commission shall continue to monitor (and
 summarize in the Commission's annual reports) the status of diversity and
 competition in the marketplace for video programming.
 (3) PROCEEDING REQUIRED TO REVIEW DBS RESPONSIBILITIES- The Federal
 Communications Commission shall, within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, initiate a rulemaking proceeding to impose, with respect to
 any direct broadcast satellite system that is not regulated as a common
 carrier under title II of the Communications Act of 1934, public interest
 or other requirements on direct broadcast satellite systems providing video
 programming. Any regulations prescribed pursuant to such rulemaking shall,
 at a minimum, apply the access to broadcast time requirement of section
 312(a)(7) of the Communications Act of 1934 and the use of facilities
 requirements of section 315 of such Act to direct broadcast satellite
 systems providing video programming. Such proceeding also shall examine
 the opportunities that the establishment of such systems provide for
 the principle of localism under such Act, and the methods by which such
 principle may be served through technological and other developments in,
 or regulation of, such systems.
 (4) PUBLIC SERVICE USE REQUIREMENTS- (A) The Federal Communications
 Commission shall require, as a condition of any initial authorization,
 or renewal thereof, for a direct broadcast satellite service providing
 video programming, that the provider of such service reserve not less than
 4 percent or more than 7 percent of the channel capacity of such service
 exclusively for noncommercial public service uses. A provider of such
 service may use any unused channel capacity designated pursuant to this
 paragraph until the use of such channel capacity is obtained, pursuant to
 a written agreement, for public service use. As used in this paragraph,
 the term `public service uses' includes--
 (i) programming produced by public telecommunications entities, including
 programming furnished to such entities by independent production services;
 (ii) programming produced by public or private educational institutions
 or entities for educational, instructional, or cultural purposes; and
 (iii) programming produced by any entity to serve the disparate needs of
 specific communities of interest, including linguistically distinct groups,
 minority and ethnic groups, and other groups.
 (B) There is established a study panel which shall be comprised of a
 representative of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the National
 Telecommunications and Information Administration, and the Office of
 Technology Assessment selected by the head of each such entity. Such study
 panel shall within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit
 a report to the Congress containing recommendations on--
 (i) methods and strategies for promoting the development of programming for
 transmission over the public use channels reserved pursuant to subparagraph
 (A);
 (ii) methods and criteria for selecting programming for such channels that
 avoids conflicts of interest and the exercise of editorial control by the
 direct broadcast satellite service provider; and
 (iii) identifying existing and potential sources of funding for
 administrative and production costs for such public use programming.
 (5) DEFINITION- As used herein, the term `direct broadcast satellite
 systems' includes (A) satellite systems licensed under Part 100 of the
 Federal Communications Commission's rules, and (B) high power Ku-band fixed
 service satellite systems providing video service directly to the home
 and licensed under Part 25 of the Federal Communications Commission's rules.
 (b) STUDY OF PROGRAMMING MARKET- On or before January 1, 1996, the
 Commission shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
 Transportation of the Senate a report concerning the effects of exclusive
 licensing arrangements for video programming on competition between
 classes of multichannel video system operators. The Commission shall
 evaluate whether grantors or holders of exclusive licensing arrangements
 for video programming discriminate against classes of multichannel video
 system operators in a manner that deprives the public of access to diverse
 sources of programming. Such report shall include such recommendations
 for legislation as the Commission deems appropriate.
 (c) STUDY OF THE FUTURE OF THE UNITED STATES VIDEO MARKETPLACE-
 (1) STUDY REQUIRED- Not later than one year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report regarding
 the status, direction, and future of the video marketplace in the United
 States. Such report shall identify and address the principal financial,
 competitive, consumer, and other factors that are influencing, and will
 continue to influence, the development of the video marketplace for the
 remainder of this century. The Commission shall conduct such study in
 conjunction with an inquiry that elicits the views of the participants in
 the video marketplace and interested members of the public.
 (2) SUBJECTS OF STUDY- Among the issues to be reported upon, and upon which
 the Commission shall, if necessary, make recommendations for legislation,
 are the following--
 (A) the promotion of full and fair competition among all participants in
 the video marketplace, including particularly the roles of terrestrial
 broadcasting, cable television, and other multichannel video services;
 (B) the preservation of local news, public affairs, and other types of
 public service programming for the video audience;
 (C) the availability of universal service with a broad range of news,
 sports, and entertainment programming (both local and national); and
 (D) the extent to which interlocking relationships among participants in
 the video marketplace may affect the nature, quality, or competitiveness
 of such participants in the video marketplace.
 (d) PROCEEDING WITH RESPECT TO AREAS RECEIVING POOR OVER-THE-AIR SIGNALS- The
 Federal Communications Commission shall initiate an inquiry and rulemaking
 to examine the feasibility of providing access to network and independent
 broadcasting station signals to persons who subscribe to direct broadcast
 satellite service and are unable to receive such signals (of grade B quality)
 over the air from a local licensee, or from a cable system. In undertaking
 such rulemaking, the Commission shall take into consideration pertinent
 economic and technological factors, including the following:
 (1) the extent to which individuals in rural, underserved areas are unable
 to receive broadcast television transmission; and
 (2) potential ways in which operators of satellite-delivered programming
 services or the manufacturers or distributors of receiving equipment might
 enhance the ability of such persons to receive and readily access additional
 video distribution, including without limitation, an electronic switching
 capability as a minimum feature on satellite television receiving equipment.
 (e) Study of Low-Power Television-
 (1) STUDY REQUIRED- Within 12 months after enactment of this Act, the Federal
 Communications Commission shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report
 on whether, and under what conditions, low power television stations (as
 defined in section 74.701(f) of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations,
 or any successor regulations thereto) which provide local origination
 programming should be entitled to carriage on cable systems whose service
 area encompasses the service area to which a low power television station
 is licensed.
 (2) PUBLIC COMMENT; FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION- In preparing its report,
 the Commission shall provide an opportunity for public comment and take
 into account--
 (A) whether and how many low power television stations provide local
 program services which serve the public interest, convenience and necessity;
 (B) the status of low power television as a secondary service;
 (C) the impact of carriage of low power television stations on the
 availability of channels for future communications needs;
 (D) the burden on cable systems of carriage of low power television stations,
 the propriety of imposing such a burden, and any technical considerations
 relating to providing carriage limited only to the low power television
 station's community of license; and
 (E) the extent of the burden presently imposed upon low power television
 stations as a result of charges for carriage imposed on stations by cable
 systems.
SEC. 18. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Except where otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act and
 the amendments made thereby shall take effect 60 days after the enactment
 of this Act.