HR 5800 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5800
To amend title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 to increase the penalties
for violating the fair housing provisions of the Act, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 5, 1990
Mr. SENSENBRENNER (for himself, Mr. STARK, Mr. BLILEY, Mr. MADIGAN, Mr. GILMAN,
Mr. BEREUTER, and Mr. FROST) introduced the following bill; which was referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 to increase the penalties
for violating the fair housing provisions of the Act, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Amendments Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. PENALTIES FOR ACTS OF VIOLENCE OR INTIMIDATION.
 Section 901 of the Act entitled `An Act to prescribe penalties for certain
 acts of violence or intimidation, and for other purposes', approved April
 11, 1968 (known as the `Civil Rights Act of 1968'; Public Law 90-284;
 42 U.S.C. 3631) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 901. PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
 `(a) UNLAWFUL ACTS- It shall be unlawful to use force or threat of force,
 whether or not acting under color of law, to willfully injure, intimidate,
 or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with--
 `(1) any person because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
 status, or national origin of the person and because the person is or has
 been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
 negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
 dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization,
 or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
 `(2) any person because the person is, or has been, or in order to intimidate
 the person or any other person or any class of persons from--
 `(A) participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
 religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
 activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in paragraph
 (1) of this section; or
 `(B) affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection
 so to participate; or
 `(3) any citizen because the citizen is, or has been, or in order to
 discourage the citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
 encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
 of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
 in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described
 in paragraph (1), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
 opposing any denial of the opportunity so to participate.
 `(b) PENALTIES- Whoever commits an act described in subsection (a)--
 `(1) shall be fined not more than $100,000, or imprisoned not more than
 1 year, or both;
 `(2) that results in bodily injury shall be fined not more than $250,000,
 or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both;
 `(3) that results in death shall be subject to imprisonment for any term
 of years or for life; and
 `(4) that results in property damage exceeding the sum of $100, or uses
 or attempts to use fire in committing the act, or uses or carries a
 firearm while committing the act, shall be fined not more than $250,000,
 or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) FAMILIAL STATUS- The term `familial status' has the meaning given
 the term in section 802.
 `(2) FIREARM- The term `firearm' has the meaning given the term in section
 921(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code.
 `(3) HANDICAP- The term `handicap' has the meaning given the term in
 section 802.
 `(4) BODILY INJURY- The term `bodily injury' has the meaning given the
 term in section 1515(a)(5) of title 18, United States Code.'.