S 1400 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1400
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for a uniform product liability
law, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 25 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. KASTEN (for himself, Mr. INOUYE, Mr. DANFORTH, Mr. ROCKEFELLER, Mr. MCCAIN,
Mr. EXON, Mr. PRESSLER, Mr. RIEGLE, Mr. GORTON, Mr. SANFORD, Mr. BURNS,
Mr. LOTT, Mrs. KASSEBAUM, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr. COATS, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. HELMS,
Mr. BOSCHWITZ, and Mr. BOND) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for a uniform product liability
law, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I
--Page
2
2
7
9
9
TITLE II
9
12
TITLE III
13
13
15
19
21
24
25
TITLE I
SHORT TITLE
 SEC. 101. This Act may be cited as the `Product Liability Reform Act'.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 102. As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `claimant' means any person who brings a civil action pursuant to this
 Act, and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought; if such an
 action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes the
 claimant's decedent, or if it is brought through or on behalf of a minor
 or incompetent, the term includes the claimant's parent or guardian;
 (2) `clear and convincing evidence' is that measure or degree of proof that
 will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction
 as to the truth of the allegations sought to be established; the level of
 proof required to satisfy such standard is more than that required under
 preponderance of the evidence, but less than that required for proof beyond
 a reasonable doubt;
 (3) `collateral benefits' means all benefits and advantages received or
 entitled to be received (regardless of any right any other person has or
 is entitled to assert for recoupment through subrogation, trust agreement,
 lien, or otherwise) by any claimant harmed by a product or by any other
 person as reimbursement of loss because of harm to person or property
 payable or required to be paid to the claimant, under--
 (A) any Federal law or the laws of any State (other than through a claim
 for breach of an obligation or duty); or
 (B) any life, health, or accident insurance or plan, wage or salary
 continuation plan, or disability income or replacement service insurance,
 or any benefit received or to be received as a result of participation in
 any pre-paid medical plan or health maintenance organization;
 (4) `commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce, or transportation (A)
 between a place in a State and any place outside of that State; or (B) which
 affects trade, traffic, commerce, or transportation described in clause (A);
 (5) `commercial loss' means economic injury, whether direct, incidental,
 or consequential, including property damage and damage to the product itself;
 (6) `economic loss' means any pecuniary loss resulting from harm which is
 allowed under State law;
 (7) `exercise of reasonable care' means conduct of a person of ordinary
 prudence and intelligence using the attention, precaution, and judgment that
 society expects of its members for the protection of their own interests
 and the interests of others;
 (8) `harm' means any harm recognized under the law of the State in which
 the civil action is maintained, other than loss or damage caused to a
 product itself, or commercial loss;
 (9) `manufacturer' means (A) any person who is engaged in a business to
 produce, create, make, or construct any product (or component part of a
 product) and who designs or formulates the product (or component part of the
 product) or has engaged another person to design or formulate the product
 (or component part of the product); (B) a product seller with respect to
 all aspects of a product (or component part of a product) which are created
 or affected when, before placing the product in the stream of commerce,
 the product seller produces, creates, makes, or constructs and designs
 or formulates, or has engaged another person to design or formulate, an
 aspect of a product (or component part of a product) made by another; or
 (C) any product seller not described in clause (B) which holds itself out
 as a manufacturer to the user of a product;
 (10) `noneconomic loss' means loss caused by a product other than economic
 loss or commercial loss;
 (11) `person' means an individual, corporation, company, association,
 firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity
 (including any governmental entity);
 (12) `preponderance of the evidence' is that measure or degree of proof
 which, by the weight, credit, and value of the aggregate evidence on either
 side, establishes that it is more probable than not that a fact occurred
 or did not occur;
 (13) `product' means any object, substance, mixture, or raw material
 in a gaseous, liquid, or solid state (A) which is capable of delivery
 itself or as an assembled whole, in a mixed or combined state, or as
 a component part or ingredient; (B) which is produced for introduction
 into trade or commerce; (C) which has intrinsic economic value; and (D)
 which is intended for sale or lease to persons for commercial or personal
 use; the term does not include human tissue, blood and blood products,
 or organs unless specifically recognized as a product pursuant to State law;
 (14) `product seller' means a person who, in the course of a business
 conducted for that purpose, sells, distributes, leases, prepares, blends,
 packages, labels, or otherwise is involved in placing a product in the
 stream of commerce, or who installs, repairs, or maintains the harm-causing
 aspect of a product; the term does not include--
 (A) a seller or lessor of real property;
 (B) a provider of professional services in any case in which the sale or
 use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of the
 transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services; or
 (C) any person who--
 (i) acts in only a financial capacity with respect to the sale of a
 product; and
 (ii) leases a product under a lease arrangement in which the selection,
 possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are controlled by
 a person other than the lessor; and
 (15) `State' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
 Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and any other territory
 or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision thereof.
PREEMPTION
 SEC. 103. (a) This Act governs any civil action brought against a
 manufacturer or product seller, on any theory, for harm caused by a
 product. A civil action brought against a manufacturer or product seller
 for loss or damage to a product itself or for commercial loss is not subject
 to this Act and shall be governed by applicable commercial or contract law.
 (b) This Act supersedes any State law regarding recovery for harm caused
 by a product only to the extent that this Act establishes a rule of law
 applicable to any such recovery. Any issue arising under this Act that
 is not governed by any such rule of law shall be governed by applicable
 State or Federal law.
 (c) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any provision of law;
 (2) supersede any Federal law, except the Federal Employees Compensation
 Act and the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act;
 (3) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States;
 (4) affect the applicability of any provision of chapter 97 of title 28,
 United States Code;
 (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation;
 (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum; or
 (7) supersede any statutory or common law, including an action to abate
 a nuisance, that authorizes a State or person to institute an action for
 civil damages or civil penalties, cleanup costs, injunctions, restitution,
 cost recovery, punitive damages, or any other form of relief resulting
 from contamination or pollution of the environment, or the threat of such
 contamination or pollution.
 (d) As used in this section, `environment' has the meaning given to
 such term in section 101(8) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(8)).
 (e) This Act shall be construed and applied after consideration of
 its legislative history to promote uniformity of law in the various
 jurisdictions.
JURISDICTION OF FEDERAL COURTS
 SEC. 104. The district courts of the United States shall not have
 jurisdiction over any civil action pursuant to this Act, based on section
 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 105. (a) This Act shall take effect on the date of its enactment
 and shall apply to all civil actions pursuant to this Act commenced on
 or after such date, including any action in which the harm or the conduct
 which caused the harm occurred before the effective date of this Act.
 (b) If any provision of this Act would shorten the period during which a
 manufacturer or product seller would otherwise be exposed to liability,
 the claimant may, notwithstanding the otherwise time period, bring any
 civil action pursuant to this Act within one year after the effective date
 of this Act.
TITLE II
EXPEDITED PRODUCT LIABILITY SETTLEMENTS
 SEC. 201. (a) Any claimant may bring a civil action for damages against
 a person for harm caused by a product pursuant to applicable State law,
 except to the extent such law is superseded by this title.
 (b) Any claimant may, in addition to any claim for relief made in accordance
 with State law, include in such claimant's complaint an offer of settlement
 for a specific dollar amount.
 (c) The defendant may make an offer of settlement for a specific dollar
 amount within sixty days after service of the claimant's complaint or
 within the time permitted pursuant to State law for a responsive pleading,
 whichever is longer, except that if such pleading includes a motion to
 dismiss in accordance with applicable law, the defendant may tender such
 relief to the claimant within ten days after the court's determination
 regarding such motion.
 (d) In any case in which an offer of settlement is made pursuant to
 subsection (b) or (c) of this section, the court may, upon motion made
 prior to the expiration of the applicable period for response, enter an
 order extending such period. Any such order shall contain a schedule for
 discovery of evidence material to the issue of the appropriate amount of
 relief, and shall not extend such period for more than sixty days. Any
 such motion shall be accompanied by a supporting affidavit of the moving
 party setting forth the reasons why such extension is necessary to promote
 the interests of justice and stating that the information likely to be
 discovered is material, and is not, after reasonable inquiry, otherwise
 available to the moving party.
 (e) If the defendant, as offeree, does not accept the offer of settlement
 made by a claimant in accordance with subsection (b) of this section within
 the time permitted pursuant to State law for a responsive pleading or, if
 such pleading includes a motion to dismiss in accordance with applicable
 law, within thirty days after the court's determination regarding such
 motion, and a verdict is entered in such action equal to or greater than
 the specific dollar amount of such offer of settlement, the court shall
 enter judgment against the defendant and shall include in such judgment an
 amount for the claimant's reasonable attorney's fees and costs. Such fees
 shall be offset against any fees owed by the claimant to the claimant's
 attorney by reason of the verdict.
 (f) If the claimant, as offeree, does not accept the offer of settlement
 made by a defendant in accordance with subsection (c) of this section within
 thirty days after the date on which such offer is made and a verdict is
 entered in such action equal to or less than the specific dollar amount of
 such offer of settlement, the court shall reduce the amount of the verdict
 in such action by an amount equal to the reasonable attorney's fees and
 costs owed by the defendant to the defendant's attorney by reason of the
 verdict, except that the amount of such reduction shall not exceed that
 portion of the verdict which is allocable to noneconomic loss and economic
 loss for which the claimant has received or will receive collateral benefits.
 (g) For purposes of this section, attorney's fees shall be calculated on the
 basis of an hourly rate which should not exceed that which is considered
 acceptable in the community in which the attorney practices, considering
 the attorney's qualifications and experience and the complexity of the case.
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURES
 SEC. 202. (a) In lieu of or in addition to making an offer of settlement
 under section 201 of this title, a claimant or defendant may, within the time
 permitted for the making of such an offer under section 201 of this title,
 offer to proceed pursuant to any voluntary alternative dispute resolution
 procedure established or recognized under the law of the State in which
 the civil action for damages for harm caused by a product is brought or
 under the rules of the court in which such action is maintained.
 (b) If the offeree refuses to proceed pursuant to such alternative
 dispute resolution procedure and the court determines that such refusal
 was unreasonable or not in good faith, the court shall assess reasonable
 attorney's fees and costs against the offeree.
 (c) For the purposes of this section, there shall be created a rebuttable
 presumption that a refusal by an offeree to proceed pursuant to such
 alternative dispute resolution procedure was unreasonable or not in good
 faith, if a verdict is rendered in favor of the offeror.
TITLE III
CIVIL ACTIONS
 SEC. 301. A person seeking to recover for harm caused by a product may
 bring a civil action against the product's manufacturer or product seller
 pursuant to applicable State or Federal law, except to the extent such
 law is superseded by this Act.
UNIFORM STANDARDS OF PRODUCT SELLER LIABILITY
 SEC. 302. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 301 of this title,
 in any civil action for harm caused by a product, a product seller other
 than a manufacturer is liable to a claimant, only if the claimant establishes
 by a preponderance of the evidence that--
 (1)(A) the individual product unit which allegedly caused the harm complained
 of was sold by the defendant; (B) the product seller failed to exercise
 reasonable care with respect to the product; and (C) such failure to
 exercise reasonable care was a proximate cause of the claimant's harm; or
 (2)(A) the product seller made an express warranty, independent of any
 express warranty made by a manufacturer as to the same product; (B) the
 product failed to conform to the warranty; and (C) the failure of the
 product to conform to the warranty caused the claimant's harm.
 (b)(1) In determining whether a product seller is subject to liability under
 subsection (a)(1) of this section, the trier of fact may consider the effect
 of the conduct of the product seller with respect to the construction,
 inspection, or condition of the product, and any failure of the product
 seller to pass on adequate warnings or instructions from the product's
 manufacturer about the dangers and proper use of the product.
 (2) A product seller shall not be liable in a civil action subject to this
 title based upon an alleged failure to provide warnings or instructions
 unless the claimant establishes that, when the product left the possession
 and control of the product seller, the product seller failed--
 (A) to provide to the person to whom the product seller relinquished
 possession and control of the product any pamphlets, booklets, labels,
 inserts, or other written warnings or instructions received while the
 product was in the product seller's possession and control; or
 (B) to make reasonable efforts to provide users with those warnings and
 instructions which it received after the product left its possession
 and control.
 (3) A product seller shall not be liable in a civil action subject to this
 title except for breach of express warranty where there was no reasonable
 opportunity to inspect the product in a manner which would or should, in
 the exercise of reasonable care, have revealed the aspect of the product
 which allegedly caused the claimant's harm.
 (c) A product seller shall be treated as the manufacturer of a product and
 shall be liable for harm to the claimant caused by a product as if it were
 the manufacturer of the product if--
 (1) the manufacturer is not subject to service of process under the laws
 of any State in which the action might have been brought; or
 (2) the court determines that the claimant would be unable to enforce a
 judgment against the manufacturer.
UNIFORM STANDARDS FOR AWARD OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES
 SEC. 303. (a) Punitive damages may, if otherwise permitted by applicable
 law, be awarded in any civil action subject to this title to any claimant
 who establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the harm suffered
 was the result of conduct manifesting a manufacturer's or product seller's
 conscious, flagrant indifference to the safety of those persons who might be
 harmed by a product. A failure to exercise reasonable care in choosing among
 alternative product designs, formulations, instructions, or warnings is not
 of itself such conduct. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section,
 punitive damages may not be awarded in the absence of a compensatory award.
 (b) In any civil action in which the alleged harm to the claimant is death
 and the applicable State law provides, or has been construed to provide,
 for damages only punitive in nature, a defendant may be liable for any such
 damages regardless of whether a claim is asserted under this section. The
 recovery of any such damages shall not bar a claim under this section.
 (c)(1) Punitive damages shall not be awarded pursuant to this section
 against a manufacturer or product seller of a drug (as defined in section
 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1))
 or medical device (as defined under section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(h)) which caused the claimant's harm where--
 (A) such drug or device was subject to pre-market approval by the Food
 and Drug Administration with respect to the safety of the formulation or
 performance of the aspect of such drug or device which caused the claimant's
 harm or the adequacy of the packaging or labeling of such drug or device,
 and such drug was approved by the Food and Drug Administration; or
 (B) the drug is generally recognized as safe and effective pursuant to
 conditions established by the Food and Drug Administration and applicable
 regulations, including packaging and labeling regulations.
The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply in any case in which the
defendant withheld from or misrepresented to the Food and Drug Administration
or any other agency or official of the Federal Government information that
is material and relevant to the performance of such drug or device.
 (2) Punitive damages shall not be awarded pursuant to this section against
 a manufacturer of an aircraft which caused the claimant's harm where--
 (A) such aircraft was subject to pre-market certification by the Federal
 Aviation Administration with respect to the safety of the design or
 performance of the aspect of such aircraft which caused the claimant's harm
 or the adequacy of the warnings regarding the operation or maintenance of
 such aircraft;
 (B) the aircraft was certified by the Federal Aviation Administration
 under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 App. U.S.C. 1301 et seq.); and
 (C) the manufacturer of the aircraft complied, after delivery of the aircraft
 to a user, with Federal Aviation Administration requirements and obligations
 with respect to continuing airworthiness, including the requirement to
 provide maintenance and service information related to airworthiness whether
 or not such information is used by the Federal Aviation Administration in
 the preparation of mandatory maintenance, inspection, or repair directives.
The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply in any case in which
the defendant withheld from or misrepresented to the Federal Aviation
Administration information that is material and relevant to the performance
or the maintenance or operation of such aircraft.
 (d) At the request of the manufacturer or product seller, the trier of fact
 shall consider in a separate proceeding (1) whether punitive damages are
 to be awarded and the amount of such award, or (2) the amount of punitive
 damages following a determination of punitive liability. If a separate
 proceeding is requested, evidence relevant only to the claim of punitive
 damages, as determined by applicable State law, shall be inadmissible in
 any proceeding to determine whether compensatory damages are to be awarded.
 (e) In determining the amount of punitive damages, the trier of fact shall
 consider all relevant evidence, including--
 (1) the financial condition of the manufacturer or product seller;
 (2) the severity of the harm caused by the conduct of the manufacturer or
 product seller;
 (3) the duration of the conduct or any concealment of it by the manufacturer
 or product seller;
 (4) the profitability of the conduct to the manufacturer or product seller;
 (5) the number of products sold by the manufacturer or product seller of
 the kind causing the harm complained of by the claimant;
 (6) awards of punitive or exemplary damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant;
 (7) prospective awards of compensatory damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant;
 (8) any criminal penalties imposed on the manufacturer or product seller
 as a result of the conduct complained of by the claimant; and
 (9) the amount of any civil fines assessed against the defendant as a
 result of the product complained of by the claimant.
UNIFORM TIME LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY
 SEC. 304. (a) Any civil action subject to this title shall be barred
 unless the complaint is filed within two years of the time the claimant
 discovered or, in the exercise of reasonable care, should have discovered
 the harm and its cause, except that any such action of a person under legal
 disability may be filed within two years after the disability ceases. If
 the commencement of such an action is stayed or enjoined, the running of
 the statute of limitations under this section shall be suspended for the
 period of the stay or injunction.
 (b)(1) Any civil action subject to this title shall be barred if a product
 which is a capital good is alleged to have caused harm which is not a
 toxic harm unless the complaint is served and filed within twenty-five
 years after the time of delivery of the product. This subsection shall
 apply only if the court determines that the claimant has received or would
 be eligible to receive compensation under any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law for harm caused by the product.
 (2) A motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or railroad used primarily to
 transport passengers for hire shall not be subject to the provisions of
 this subsection.
 (3) As used in this section, the term--
 (A) `time of delivery' means the time when a product is delivered to
 its first purchaser or lessee who was not involved in the business of
 manufacturing or selling such product or using it as a component part of
 another product to be sold;
 (B) `capital good' means any product, or any component of any such product,
 which is of a character subject to allowance for depreciation under the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and which was--
 (i) used in a trade or business;
 (ii) held for the production of income; or
 (iii) sold or donated to a governmental or private entity for the production
 of goods, for training, for demonstration, or for other similar purposes; and
 (C) `toxic harm' means harm which is functional impairment, illness, or
 death of a human being resulting from exposure to an object, substance,
 mixture, raw material, or physical agent of particular chemical composition.
 (c) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of any person who is
 subject to liability for harm under this Act to seek and obtain contribution
 or indemnity from any other person who is responsible for such harm.
UNIFORM STANDARDS FOR OFFSET OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS
 SEC. 305. (a) In any civil action subject to this title in which damages are
 sought for harm for which the person injured is or would have been entitled
 to receive compensation under any State or Federal workers' compensation
 law, any damages awarded shall be reduced by the sum of the amount paid
 as workers' compensation benefits for such harm and the present value of
 all workers' compensation benefits to which the employee is or would be
 entitled for such harm. The determination of workers' compensation benefits
 by the trier of fact in a civil action subject to this title shall have no
 binding effect on and shall not be used as evidence in any other proceeding.
 (b) In any civil action subject to this title in which damages are sought
 for harm for which the person injured is entitled to receive compensation
 under any State or Federal workers' compensation law, the action shall,
 on application of the claimant made at claimant's sole discretion, be
 stayed until such time as the full amount payable as workers' compensation
 benefits has been finally determined under such workers' compensation law.
 (c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, unless
 the manufacturer or product seller has expressly agreed to indemnify or
 hold an employer harmless for harm to an employee caused by a product,
 neither the employer nor the workers' compensation insurance carrier of
 the employer shall have a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied
 indemnity against the manufacturer or product seller or a lien against
 the claimant's recovery from the manufacturer or product seller if the
 harm is one for which a civil action for harm caused by a product may be
 brought pursuant to this Act.
 (2) Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply if the employer or
 the workers' compensation insurer of the employer establishes, and the
 trier of fact determines, that the claimant's harm was not in any way
 caused by the fault of the claimant's employer or coemployees.
 (d)(1) Except as provided in subsection (e), in any civil action subject to
 this title in which damages are sought for harm for which the person injured
 is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any State or
 Federal workers' compensation law, no third party tortfeasor may maintain
 any action for implied indemnity or contribution against the employer, any
 coemployee, or the exclusive representative of the person who was injured.
 (2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any provision of a
 State or Federal workers' compensation law which prohibits a person who
 is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any such law,
 or any other person whose claim is or would have been derivative from such
 a claim, from recovering for harm caused by a product in any action other
 than a workers' compensation claim against a present or former employer
 or workers' compensation insurer of the employer, any coemployee, or the
 exclusive representative of the person who was injured. Any action other
 than such a workers' compensation claim shall be prohibited, except that
 nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any State or Federal
 workers' compensation law which permits recovery based on a claim of an
 intentional tort by the employer or coemployee, where the claimant's harm
 was caused by such an intentional tort.
 (e) Subsection (d) shall not apply and applicable State law shall control
 if the employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the employer,
 in a civil action subject to this title, asserts or attempts to assert,
 because of subsection (c), a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied
 indemnity against the manufacturer or product seller or a lien against
 the claimant's recovery from the manufacturer or product seller.
SEVERAL LIABILITY FOR NONECONOMIC DAMAGES
 SEC. 306. (a) In any product liability action, the liability of each
 defendant for noneconomic damages shall be several only and shall not be
 joint. Each defendant shall be liable only for the amount of noneconomic
 damages allocated to such defendant in direct proportion to such defendant's
 percentage of responsibility as determined under subsection (b) of this
 section. A separate judgment shall be rendered against such defendant for
 that amount.
 (b) For purposes of this section, the trier of fact shall determine the
 proportion of responsibility of each party for the claimant's harm.
 (c) As used in this section, the term--
 (1) `noneconomic damages' means subjective, nonmonetary losses including,
 but not limited to, pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental suffering,
 emotional distress, loss of society and companionship, loss of consortium,
 injury to reputation and humiliation; the term does not include objectively
 verificable monetary losses including, but not limited to, medical expenses,
 loss of earnings, burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or
 replacement, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, rehabilitation
 and training expenses, loss of employment, or loss of business or employment
 opportunities; and
 (2) `product liability action' includes any action involving a claim,
 third party claim, crossclaim, counterclaim, or contribution claim in a
 civil action in which a manufacturer or product seller is found liable
 for harm caused by a product.
DEFENSES INVOLVING INTOXICATING ALCOHOL OR DRUGS
 SEC. 307. (a) In any civil action subject to this Act in which all defendants
 are manufacturers or product sellers, it shall be a complete defense to
 such action that the claimant was intoxicated or was under the influence of
 intoxicating alcohol or any drug and that as a result of such intoxication or
 the influence of the alcohol or drug the claimant was more than 50 per centum
 responsible for the accident or event which resulted in such claimant's harm.
 (b) In any civil action subject to this Act in which not all defendants
 are manufacturers or product sellers and the trier of fact determines that
 no liability exists against those defendants who are not manufacturers or
 product seller, the court shall enter a judgment notwithstanding the verdict
 in favor of any defendant which is a manufacturer or product seller if it
 is proved that the claimant was intoxicated or was under the influence of
 intoxicating alcohol or any drug and that as a result of such intoxication or
 the influence of the alcohol or drug the claimant was more than 50 per centum
 responsible for the accident or event which resulted in such claimant's harm.
 (c)(1) For purposes of this section, the determination of whether a person
 was intoxicated or was under the influence of intoxicating alcohol or any
 drug shall be made pursuant to applicable State law.
 (2) As used in this section, the term `drug' means any non-over-the-counter
 drug which has not been prescribed by a physician for use by the claimant.