HR 3125 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3125
To amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to increase the penalties for
employers who violate such Act, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 3, 1989
Mr. SCHUMER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to increase the penalties for
employers who violate such Act, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Sweatshops Prevention Act
 of 1989'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act (other than section 7) an amendment or
 repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or
 other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section
 or other provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201
 et seq.).
SEC. 2. VIOLATIONS.
 (a) SECTION 16(b)- Section 16(b) (29 U.S.C. 216(b)) is amended--
 (1) by amending the first sentence to read as follows:
 `(b)(1) Any employer who violates section 6 or 7 of this Act shall be
 liable--
 `(A) in the case of a first violation, to each employee affected (i) in
 the amount of their unpaid minimum wages or unpaid overtime compensation,
 as the case may be, (ii) for liquidated damages in an amount equal to
 the amount described in clause (i), and (iii) for interest on the amount
 described in clause (i) computed, at the time of payment, at the rate of
 interest determined by the Secretary of the Treasury for interest payments
 under section 12 of the Contracts Dispute Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 611), and
 `(B) for a second or subsequent violation, to each employee affected in
 the amount of three times their unpaid minimum wages or unpaid overtime
 compensation, as the case may be.',
 (2) in the third sentence by striking out `An action to recover the
 liability prescribed in either of the preceding sentences' and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following:
 `(2) An action to recover the liability prescribed in paragraph (1)', and
 (3) in the sixth sentence by striking out `unpaid minimum wages, or the
 amount of unpaid overtime compensation, as the case may be, owing to such
 employee under section 6 or section 7 of this Act by an employer liable
 therefor under the provisions of this subsection' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `the liability prescribed in paragraph (1)'.
 (b) SECTION 16(c)- Section 16(c) (29 U.S.C. 216(c)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence by striking out `under subsection (b) of this
 section to such unpaid minimum wages or unpaid overtime compensation and
 an additional equal amount as liquidated damages' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `to the amount prescribed by subsection (b)(1)',
 (2) in the second sentence by striking out `the amount of the unpaid minimum
 wages or overtime compensation and equal amount as liquidated damages'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `the amount prescribed by subsection (b)(1).',
 (3) in the third sentence, (A) by striking out `(b)' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `(b)(2)', (B) by striking out `the first sentence of such
 subsection' and inserting in lieu thereof `subsection (b)(1)', and (C) by
 striking out `unpaid minimum wages or unpaid overtime compensation under
 sections 6 and 7 or liquidated or other damages provided by this subsection'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `the amounts'.
SEC. 3. SEIZURES.
 Section 16 (29 U.S.C. 216) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(f)(1)(A)(i) If an employer engaged in garment manufacturing violates
 section 6, 7, or 12 more than 2 times in a 3-year period, the Secretary
 may seize garments from the premises of the employer in a value not to
 exceed the liability of the employer under subsection (b) or (e) for the
 last such violation.
 `(ii) If garments are produced by homeworkers in violation of section 11(d),
 the Secretary may seize all the garments so produced, except that if the
 employer of the homeworker obtained a certificate to employ homeworkers
 pursuant to section 11(d) and the employer violated the terms of the
 certificate, the Secretary may seize garments so produced in a value not
 to exceed the liability of the employer under this Act.
 `(B) If the Secretary seizes garments under subparagraph (A), the Secretary
 shall notify the owner of such garments of the seizure and shall provide for
 the return of the garments to the owner if the liability of such employer
 for such violation is met.
 `(2) The owner of garments seized under paragraph (1) may have review of
 the authority of the Secretary to make the seizure. Such review shall be
 made in an adminstrative proceeding after opportunity for a hearing in
 accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(3) The Secretary shall issue regulations governing the destruction or
 disposal of garments seized under paragraph (1). Such garments may not be
 disposed of by sale.
 `(4) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `garment manufacturing'
 means the sewing, knitting, cutting, making, processing, repairing,
 finishing, assembling, or otherwise preparing any garment or any article
 of wearing apparel or accessories designed or intended to be worn by an
 individual, including clothing, hats, gloves, handbags, hosiery, ties,
 scarfs, and belts to be sold or resold by any person contracting to have
 such operations performed.'.
SEC. 4. CIVIL PENALTIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The first sentence of section 16(e) (29 U.S.C. 216(e)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(e)(1) Any person--
 `(A) who violates section 12 or any regulation issued under that section
 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each
 such violation,
 `(B) who violates section 6 or 7 two or more times shall be subject to a
 civil penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each such violation, or
 `(C) who violates section 15(a)(5)--
 `(i) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000 for the
 first violation, and
 `(ii) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for
 each violation after the first violation.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL- The second sentence of section 16(e) (29 U.S.C. 216(e))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `In determining the amount of such penalty' and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(2) In determining the amount of the penalty authorized by paragraph
 (1)', and
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) as subparagraphs (A),
 (B), and (C), respectively.
SEC. 5. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 Section 16(a) (29 U.S.C. 216(a)) is amended by striking out `a fine of
 not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for not more than six months' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `a fine in accordance with title 18, United States
 Code, or to imprisonment for at least six months and not more than one year'.
SEC. 6. SETTLEMENTS.
 The first sentence of section 16(c) (29 U.S.C. 216(c) is amended by
 striking out `unpaid minimum wages or the unpaid overtime compensation
 owing to any employee or employees under section 6 or 7 of this Act'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `amount prescribed by subsection (b)(1)
 to any employee or employees'.
SEC. 7. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
 Section 6(a) of the Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947 (29 U.S.C. 255(a)) is
 amended by striking out `two years' each place it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `three years' and by striking out `, except that' and all
 that follows in that section and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon.
SEC. 8. COORDINATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Labor shall establish and encourage closer
 working relationships among Federal and State agencies having responsibility
 for enforcing labor, safety and health, and immigration laws.
 (b) Referrals-
 (1) The Secretary of Labor shall establish a referral system under which
 employees engaged in the enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act of
 1938 and the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 shall--
 (A) exchange information about suspected violators of the Acts and monitor
 the results of referrals to each other, and
 (B) provide basic training to each other's staffs concerning the requirements
 of such Acts.
 (2) The Secretary of Labor shall require employees engaged in the enforcement
 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and the Occupational Safety and
 Health Act of 1970 to establish a referral system with--
 (A) employees of the Immigration and Naturalization Service engaged in
 the enforcement of the Immigration and Nationality Act, and
 (B) employees of Departments of Labor of the States engaged in the
 enforcement of State minimum wage and occupational safety and health laws.
The Service and the State Departments of Labor shall each be encouraged
by the Secretary of Labor to establish information exchanges and, to the
extent practicable, provided training to each other's staffs concerning the
requirements of the Acts enforced by the respective agencies.