HR 3028 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3028
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prescribe nutrition
labeling for foods.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 27, 1989
Mr. WAXMAN (for himself, Mr. MOAKLEY, Mr. GLICKMAN, Mr. COOPER, Mr. SCHEUER,
Mr. WALGREN, Mr. SIKORSKI, Mr. BATES, and Mr. SHARP) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prescribe nutrition
labeling for foods.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Nutrition Labeling and
 Education Act of 1989'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
SEC. 2. NUTRITION LABELING.
 (a) LABELING REQUIREMENT- Section 403 (21 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(q)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), if it is intended
 for human consumption and is offered for sale, unless its label or labeling
 states--
 `(A)(i) the serving size which is an amount customarily consumed and which is
 expressed in a common household measure that is appropriate to the food, or
 `(ii) if the use of the food is not typically expressed in a serving
 size, the other unit of measure which is an amount customarily used as an
 ingredient in the preparation of a food and which is expressed in a common
 household measure that is appropriate to the food,
 `(B) the number of servings or other units of measure per container;
 `(C) the number of calories--
 `(i) per serving size or other unit of measure,
 `(ii) derived from the total fat in each serving size or other unit of
 measure of the food, and
 `(iii) derived from the saturated fat in each serving size or other unit
 of measure of the food, and
 `(D) the amount of total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol,
 sodium, total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein,
 and dietary fiber contained in each serving size or other unit of measure.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that nutrition information in addition
 to the information required by paragraph (1) should be provided for
 food subject to paragraph (1) for purposes of providing consumers with
 information regarding the nutritional value of the food, the Secretary may
 by regulation require that such additional information be provided in the
 label or labeling of such food.
 `(3) A food which is a raw agricultural commodity shall not be subject to
 the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) if the person who offers the
 food for sale to consumers provides to consumers the information required
 by paragraphs (1) and (2) in a manner prescribed by regulation by the
 Secretary. The regulation of the Secretary shall permit the information
 described in subparagraphs (C) and (D) of paragraph (1) to be expressed
 as an average per unit of the same type of raw agricultural commodity.
 `(4) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 `(A) food which is sold for immediate human consumption at the place of
 sale, and
 `(B) food which is processed and prepared in a retail establishment for
 human consumption and is offered for sale to consumers but not for immediate
 consumption in such retail establishment.'.
 (b) Regulations-
 (1) Within 30 days of the date of the enactment of this Act the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall contract with the National Academy of
 Sciences to prepare a report which makes recommendations regarding the
 manner in which the information required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of
 section 403(q) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by
 subsection (a)) should be included in food labels and labeling to convey
 in an effective way nutrition information to the public to enable it to
 readily observe and comprehend the information required to be disclosed
 and to understand the relative significance of the nutrition information
 in the context of a total daily diet.
 (2) The National Academy of Sciences shall prepare the report described in
 paragraph (1) within 6 months of the date of the execution of the contract
 of the Secretary under paragraph (1).
 (3) The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations to implement section
 403(q) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act within 3 months of the
 date of receiving the report of the National Academy of Sciences. Not later
 than 6 months after the date the Secretary issues proposed regulations
 the Secretary shall issue final regulations to implement the requirements
 of such section. Such regulations shall require the required information
 to be conveyed to the public in a manner which enables the public to
 readily observe and comprehend such information and to understand the
 relative significance of such information in the context of a total
 daily diet. Such regulations shall include regulations which establish
 standards, in accordance with paragraph (1)(A) of such section 403(q),
 to define serving size or other unit of measure for food.
SEC. 3. CLAIMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 403 (21 U.S.C. 343) is amended by adding after
 the paragraph added by section 2 the following:
 `(r)(1) If it is a food for which a claim is made which--
 `(A) characterizes the amount of--
 `(i) the calories, total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol,
 sodium, total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein,
 or dietary fiber, or
 `(ii) any item required to be included in the food's label or labeling
 under paragraph (q)(2),
which is contained in the food, or
 `(B) characterizes the relationship of--
 `(i) the calories, total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol,
 sodium, total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein,
 or dietary fiber, or
 `(ii) any item required to be included in the food's label or labeling
 under paragraph (q)(2),
which is contained in the food to a disease or a condition,
unless the claim is made in accordance with paragraph (2).
 `(2)(A) A claim described in paragraph (1)(A) may only be made--
 `(i) if the characterization of amount made in the claim uses terms which
 are defined in regulations of the Secretary, and
 `(ii) if the food for which the claim is made contains, as determined by
 the Secretary--
 `(I) calories, total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol,
 sodium, total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein,
 and dietary fiber, and
 `(II) all items required to be included in the food's label or labeling
 under paragraph (q)(2),
in amounts which reduce dietary risk to persons in the general population.
 `(B) A claim described in paragraph (1)(B) may only be made--
 `(i) in accordance with regulations of the Secretary, and
 `(ii) if the food for which the claim is made contains, as determined by
 the Secretary--
 `(I) calories, total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol,
 sodium, total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein,
 and dietary fiber, and
 `(II) all items required to be included in the food's label or labeling
 under paragraph (q)(2),
in amounts which reduce dietary risk to persons in the general population.
 `(C) In prescribing regulations under subpararaph (B)(i), the Secretary--
 `(i) may only authorize claims for which there is scientific consensus, as
 determined by the Secretary, among experts qualified by scientific training
 and experience to evaluate such claims regarding the relationship between the
 calories, total fat, saturated fat, unsaturated fat, cholesterol, sodium,
 total carbohydrates, complex carbohydrates, sugars, total protein, dietary
 fiber, or the item required to be included in the food's label or labeling
 under paragraph (q)(2) contained in the food and a disease or condition, and
 `(ii) shall require claims to be made in a manner which enables the public
 to comprehend the information provided in the claim and to understand
 the relative significance of such information in the context of a total
 daily diet.'.
SEC. 4. STATE ENFORCEMENT.
 Section 307 (21 U.S.C. 337) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting before the period the following:
 `, except that proceedings for the enforcement, or to restrain violations,
 of section 403(q) or 403(r) may also be brought in the name of a State in
 which the food that is the subject matter of the proceedings is located. If
 a State intends to bring such a proceeding, the State shall notify the
 Secretary at least 30 days before such proceeding is brought', and
 (2) in the last sentence, by striking out `such proceeding' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `any proceeding under this section'.
SEC. 5. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) SECTION 405- Section 405 (21 U.S.C. 345) is amended by adding at the
 end the following: `This section does not apply to the labeling requirements
 of sections 403(q) and 403(r)'.
 (b) DRUGS- Section 201(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) is amended by adding at
 the end the following: `A food which makes a claim described in section
 403(r)(1)(B) in accordance with the requirements of section 403(r)(2)(B)
 is not a drug under clause (B).'.
SEC. 6. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by sections 2, 3, 4, and 5 shall apply with respect
 to food which is produced or processed 18 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act.