HR 2254 IH
101st Congress
1st Session
H. R. 2254
To amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to establish
an Office of Construction, Safety, Health, and Education within OSHA,
to improve inspections, investigations, reporting, and recordkeeping in
the construction industry, to require certain construction contractors
to establish construction safety and health programs and onsite plans and
appoint construction safety specialists, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 4, 1989
Mr. SHAYS (for himself, Mr. GEJDENSON, Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut,
Mrs. KENNELLY, Mr. MORRISON, and Mr. ROWLAND) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Education and Labor
A BILL
To amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to establish
an Office of Construction, Safety, Health, and Education within OSHA,
to improve inspections, investigations, reporting, and recordkeeping in
the construction industry, to require certain construction contractors
to establish construction safety and health programs and onsite plans and
appoint construction safety specialists, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Construction Safety, Health,
 and Education Improvement Act of 1989'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. References to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. Office of Construction, Safety, Health, and Education.
Sec. 5. Inspections, investigations, reporting, and recordkeeping.
Sec. 6. Construction safety and health programs.
Sec. 7. Onsite construction safety and health plans.
Sec. 8. Construction safety specialists.
Sec. 9. Construction Safety and Health Training Academy.
Sec. 10. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
Sec. 11. Penalties.
Sec. 12. Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health.
Sec. 13. Budget contents.
Sec. 14. Effective dates.
SEC. 2. REFERENCES TO THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT OF 1970.
 Except as otherwise specifically provided, whenever in this Act an
 amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of,
 a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made
 to a section or other provision of the Occupational Safety and Health Act
 of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 3 (29 U.S.C. 652) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by inserting after `employees' the following:
 `(including a self-employed contractor in the construction industry)';
 (2) in paragraph (6), by inserting before the period at the end thereof
 the following: `(including a self-employed contractor in the construction
 industry, at such times as the contractor personally performs construction
 work)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(15) The term `Academy' means the Construction Safety and Health Training
 Academy established under section 38.
 `(16) The term `Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health'
 means the Advisory Committee established under section 107(e) of the
 Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 333(e)).
 `(17) The term `construction contractor' means a person (including a prime
 contractor, general contractor, or subcontractor) who enters into a contract
 with a construction owner for the performance of construction work.
 `(18) The term `construction owner' means a person who--
 `(A) owns, leases, or has effective control of--
 `(i) real property, with or without improvements; or
 `(ii) a structure or other improvement on real property; and
 `(B) performs, or intends to perform, construction work on such property
 or improvement.
 `(19) The term `construction safety specialist' means--
 `(A) an individual who is hired and retained, and performs the duties
 required, under section 37; or
 `(B) in any case in which such individual is not appointed pursuant to
 section 34(d), an employee designated by a construction contractor to
 perform such duties.
 `(20) The term `construction work' means work for construction,
 alteration, or repair, or any combination thereof, including painting and
 decorating. Such term shall include such work performed under a contract
 between an employer and an agency of the United States or any State or
 political subdivision of a State.
 `(21) The term `construction worksite' means a site where construction
 work is performed.
 `(22) The term `serious injury' means any injury or illness that results in--
 `(A) the permanent removal of a part of the body;
 `(B) a part of the body being rendered functionally useless; or
 `(C) a substantial reduction of a bodily function or efficiency, on or
 off the job.'.
SEC. 4. OFFICE OF CONSTRUCTION, SAFETY, HEALTH, AND EDUCATION.
 The Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 34. OFFICE OF CONSTRUCTION, SAFETY, HEALTH, AND EDUCATION.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established in the Occupational Safety
 and Health Administration an Office of Construction, Safety, Health, and
 Education (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Office') to ensure
 safe and healthy working conditions in the performance of construction work.
 `(b) DUTIES- The Office shall--
 `(1) carry out the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Secretary
 under this Act that relate to safety and health in the performance of
 construction work, including powers, duties, and responsibilities prescribed
 under subsections (h) through (k) of section 8 and sections 35 through 38;
 `(2) develop mandatory criteria for construction safety and health programs
 established under section 35 and onsite construction safety and health
 plans established under section 36;
 `(3) assume control of a construction site following an accident that
 results in a fatality to--
 `(A) prevent the destruction of any evidence that would assist in the
 investigation of the accident; and
 `(B) oversee rescue operations conducted in response to the accident;
 `(4) assist the Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health in
 the development of training courses and curriculum for certification of
 construction safety specialists and in the training and testing program
 of the Academy;
 `(5) consult with and advise employers, employees, and labor organizations
 as to effective means of preventing occupational injuries and illnesses
 in construction work and ensure equal access to such consultative services;
 `(6) increase awareness of construction site safety through education,
 training, and outreach programs;
 `(7) provide technical experts who can assist construction contractors
 with specific technical inquiries; and
 `(8) carry out such other duties as are assigned to the Office by law.
 `(c) PERSONNEL-
 `(1) DIRECTOR- The Office shall be headed by a Director, appointed by the
 Secretary, who shall be responsible for carrying out the duties of the
 Office prescribed under subsection (b).
 `(2) EMPLOYEES- The Director shall--
 `(A) in accordance with the civil service laws, appoint and fix the
 compensation of such officers and employees as may be necessary to carry
 out this section; and
 `(B) prescribe the powers, duties, and responsibilities of all officers
 and employees engaged in carrying out this section.
 `(3) ADDITIONAL INSPECTORS- Subject to appropriations, the Secretary shall
 employ such additional inspectors as are necessary to carry out the duties
 of the Office prescribed under subsection (b). Such inspectors shall be
 in addition to inspectors employed under this Act on the effective date
 of this section.
 `(4) SMALL BUSINESS LIAISON- The Director shall designate an employee
 of the Office to serve as a small business liaison. The liaison shall be
 responsible for providing assistance for complying with new and existing
 standards established under this Act for the performance of construction
 work (in the form of manuals, videos, and audiotapes and other outreach
 programs) to trade associations and other small businesses.
 `(d) Exemptions-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may issue regulations that provide an
 exemption from the requirements of section 35, 36, or 37, in whole or
 in part, for certain types of construction projects, operations, or
 construction contractors, if the Secretary finds that such a requirement
 is not feasible for such type of project, operation, or contractor and
 will not promote a significant increase in employee safety and health.
 `(2) PROCEDURE- In issuing such regulations, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) condition the exemption on compliance with alternative requirements
 that are feasible for such project, operation, or contractor and are
 capable of promoting employee safety and health;
 `(B) base the exemption on written information submitted to the Secretary;
 `(C) publish notice of the exemption in the Federal Register; and
 `(D) provide an opportunity for public comment and response to such
 submitted information.'.
SEC. 5. INSPECTIONS, INVESTIGATIONS, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING.
 Section 8 (29 U.S.C. 657) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsections:
 `(h)(1) The Secretary shall establish an effective and fair system for
 construction worksite inspections.
 `(2) In establishing such system, the Secretary shall establish construction
 worksite inspection priorities intended to ensure that resources for
 enforcement are concentrated on construction worksites and operations
 having a high potential for fatalities or serious injuries and illnesses.
 `(3) In establishing such priorities, the Secretary shall give due weight
 to the record of the compliance of--
 `(A) an employer with standards established under this Act and the Contract
 Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 et seq.); and
 `(B) a construction owner and an employer with this Act, including compliance
 with recordkeeping and reporting requirements of this Act.
 `(4) The Secretary shall inspect on a priority basis construction projects
 of construction owners and construction worksites of employers having a
 higher than average incident frequency or severity rate of injuries or
 illnesses for the specific type of construction operation involved.
 `(5) The Secretary shall use reports and notices filed under subsections
 (j) and (k) to develop the system of prioritized inspections required
 under this subsection.
 `(6) The inspection priority system required under this subsection shall
 not have the effect of limiting--
 `(A) inspections conducted by the Secretary on the basis of complaints by
 employees or employee representatives or complaints of imminent dangers; or
 `(B) inspections intended as a followup to prior enforcement actions
 or proceedings.
 `(7) No construction owner or employer engaged in construction work
 shall be--
 `(A) excluded by the Secretary from inspections conducted under this
 subsection; or
 `(B) advised directly or indirectly as to the status of the owner or
 employer or placement on the inspection priority system required under
 this subsection.
 `(8) No advance notice of an inspection conducted under this subsection
 shall be provided to any person.
 `(i)(1) Each construction contractor shall maintain accurate records
 concerning accidents and injuries at a construction worksite.
 `(2) The records required under paragraph (1) shall specify--
 `(A) the name, business address, and telephone number of the construction
 owner;
 `(B) the location of the construction worksite;
 `(C) the name, business address, and telephone number of the employer whose
 employee or employees were killed or injured or could have been killed or
 injured by the incident;
 `(D) the name and business address of the project contractor or pertinent
 general contractor at the construction worksite;
 `(E) the date and time of the incident;
 `(F) the type of incident (such as whether the incident involved a fire,
 explosion, or building collapse);
 `(G) the number and nature of fatalities or injuries resulting from the
 incident;
 `(H) the number of persons hospitalized as a result of the incident;
 `(I) the number of persons unaccounted for at the time the report is
 made; and
 `(J) the identity and mailing address of the construction safety specialist
 responsible for investigating the incident.
 `(3) Such information shall be available for any inspection conducted
 under this Act.
 `(4) Any construction contractor who fails to maintain the information
 required by this subsection shall be assessed a civil penalty in an amount
 to be determined by the Secretary.
 `(j)(1) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, an employer shall
 report to the appropriate regional office of the Occupational Safety and
 Health Administration by telephone or telegraph (not later than 24 hours
 after the occurrence of the incident) any incident involving construction
 work that results in--
 `(A) a serious injury;
 `(B) a fatality;
 `(C) a structural failure that leads to the collapse of a place of
 employment; or
 `(D) a potential collapse of a place of employment.
 `(2) The employer shall submit a followup written report to the regional
 office as soon as practicable after a report is made under paragraph (1).
 `(3) Each report required under this subsection shall specify--
 `(A) the name, business address, and telephone number of the construction
 owner of the project;
 `(B) the location of the project;
 `(C) the name, business address, and telephone number of the employer or
 employers whose employee or employees were killed or seriously injured;
 `(D) the date and time of the occurrence;
 `(E) the nature of the occurrence;
 `(F) the number of fatalities and serious injuries;
 `(G) the number of persons hospitalized;
 `(H) the number of persons unaccounted for at the time the report is
 made; and
 `(I) the name, business address, and telephone number of the construction
 safety specialist submitting the report.
 `(4)(A) The Secretary shall conduct an inspection of the construction
 worksite, or the pertinent area of the site, to investigate all reports
 of incidents described in paragraph (1), as well as reports of those
 categories of serious injuries as the Secretary, by regulation, prescribes.
 `(B) The Secretary shall be granted access to the site.
 `(C) The Secretary shall conduct the inspection as soon as practicable,
 but no later than 24 hours, after receipt of a construction safety report
 under paragraph (1), unless the Secretary determines that conditions at
 the site would make an inspection dangerous.
 `(5) The construction contractor shall take appropriate measures (as
 defined in regulations issued by the Secretary) to prevent the destruction
 of any evidence that would assist the Secretary in the investigation of
 the occurrence.
 `(6)(A) As soon as practicable after the investigation, the Secretary
 shall prepare and make public a narrative description of the occurrence.
 `(B) Such description shall include a statement of all of the items referred
 to in paragraph (3) and shall contain appropriate recommendations for the
 prevention of a similar occurrence in the future.
 `(C) A copy of such description shall be provided by the Secretary to the
 construction contractor or the construction safety specialist and shall
 be made available to employees and their representatives.
 `(k)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), prior to the commencement
 of construction work on a construction project, the construction safety
 specialist shall provide to the Secretary notice in writing that provides--
 `(A) a description of the project;
 `(B) the name, principal business address, and telephone number of--
 `(i) the construction owner;
 `(ii) the project construction safety specialist; and
 `(iii) the prime and general contractors.
 `(C) the total number of other employers who the specialist estimates will
 be engaged on the project;
 `(D) the municipal address of the project or its location with respect to
 the nearest public highway;
 `(E) the date construction work will commence and the anticipated duration
 of such work;
 `(F) the estimated total costs of the project for labor and material,
 including labor and material for work performed by subcontractors; and
 `(G) the expected number of employees to be employed on such project at--
 `(i) the commencement of construction work;
 `(ii) the time when the peak number of employees is expected to be
 employed; and
 `(iii) the conclusion of construction work.
 `(2) If it is necessary to perform construction work on a project immediately
 in order to prevent injury to persons, such work may be commenced without
 complying with paragraph (1), except that, in any such case, the notice
 shall be given to the Secretary as soon as practicable after the construction
 work on the project commences.
 `(3)(A) At the completion of a construction project or at intervals of
 1-year duration of a project, whichever occurs earlier, the construction
 safety specialist for the project shall submit to the Secretary a report of
 all fatalities and serious injuries and illnesses suffered by employees,
 and of all structural failures that occurred, on the project. If there
 have been no fatalities or serious injuries or illnesses, or structural
 failures, on the project, the report shall so state.
 `(B) The report shall provide--
 `(i) the name, business address, and telephone number of the construction
 owner, construction safety specialist, and each employer who was engaged
 on the project;
 `(ii) the name of each employer whose employee or employees suffered death,
 serious injury, or illness;
 `(iii) a description of the nature of the work performed by such employer
 on the project;
 `(iv) a description of the nature of the work performed by each employee
 at the time the employee suffered death or serious injury or illness; and
 `(v) the date of each such occurrence.
 `(4) The Secretary shall--
 `(A) issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this subsection;
 and
 `(B) prepare and make available standard forms to be used for compliance
 with the requirements of this subsection.'.
SEC. 6. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 The Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (as amended by section 4 of this Act)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 35. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- Except as provided in section 34(d), a construction
 contractor shall establish a written safety and health program (hereinafter
 in this section referred to as the `program') in accordance with this
 section.
 `(b) Manager-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The program shall provide for the assignment of a
 construction safety specialist or other employee of the contractor who is
 responsible for general management of the program.
 `(2) DUTIES- The responsibilities and authorities of such employee shall
 be specified in writing as part of the safety program.
 `(c) General Safety and Health Training-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The program shall provide for ensuring that all supervisory
 personnel and all employees of the contractor engaged in construction
 work on the project shall receive, or have received within the immediately
 preceding 12-month period, general safety and health training in a manner
 prescribed by the Secretary, with the advice of the Advisory Committee on
 Construction Safety and Health.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION WORKSITE INSTRUCTION- The construction worksite instruction
 required under subsection (g) may be counted toward fulfillment of the
 minimum training requirements prescribed under paragraph (1).
 `(3) DEMONSTRATION OF COMPLIANCE- The Secretary shall establish a procedure
 under which a contractor will be able to demonstrate to the Secretary that
 the employees of the contractor have fulfilled the training requirements
 prescribed under paragraph (1).
 `(4) RECORDKEEPING- The Secretary shall require a contractor to maintain
 current records showing the amount of training and instruction received by
 each employee and supervisor, and the subjects in which such training and
 instruction have been received, pursuant to paragraph (1) and subsection (g).
 `(d) INSPECTIONS- The program shall provide for regular safety inspections
 of the construction worksite by the contractor, and for emergency and
 special inspections as may be appropriate.
 `(e) REPORTING- The program shall provide for the reporting of fatalities,
 serious injuries, and other injuries and illnesses, in accordance with
 the requirements of the this Act and other applicable laws, standards,
 and regulations.
 `(f) EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLANS- The program shall provide for an emergency
 evacuation plan, including the location of first-aid facilities and the
 routes of exiting from areas during emergencies.
 `(g) CONSTRUCTION WORKSITE INSTRUCTION- The program shall provide for the
 instruction of employees in--
 `(1) the recognition and avoidance of unsafe and unhealthy conditions;
 `(2) the standards and regulations applicable to the work activities of
 each employee;
 `(3) use of construction worksite equipment and required personal protective
 equipment; and
 `(4) the handling and use of poisons, caustics, flammable liquids, gases,
 and other toxic or harmful substances.
 `(h) MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS- The program shall provide for--
 `(1) obtaining material safety data sheets from manufacturers, distributors,
 and other suppliers of chemicals and other hazardous materials that the
 contractor shall use on the project; and
 `(2) making available those sheets to their own employees and to employers
 of other employees who may be exposed.
 `(i) COPIES- The program shall provide for making available to all employees
 and employee representatives, prior to the commencement of construction
 work for that contractor, copies of the program.
 `(j) MEETINGS- The program shall provide for regular safety and health
 construction worksite meetings to be conducted with employees to review
 and update the program.
 `(k) NOTICES- The program shall provide for the placement of a notice,
 to be furnished by the Secretary, in a conspicuous place or places where
 notices to employees are customarily posted--
 `(1) informing employees that a program exists on the construction
 worksite; and
 `(2) identifying the name and location of the employee of the contractor who
 is responsible for general management of the program under subsection (b).
 `(l) Evaluations and Analyses-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The program shall provide for a procedure under which
 an employee or employee representative may request the contractor to
 conduct an evaluation of a perceived hazardous condition or an analysis
 of a perceived harmful material or substance on a construction worksite.
 `(2) CONSTRUCTION SAFETY PROFESSIONAL- Hazardous condition evaluations and
 substance analyses shall be conducted for the contractor under paragraph (1)
 by an individual who, by possession of a recognized degree, certificate,
 or professional standing, and who by extensive knowledge, training, and
 experience, has successfully demonstrated the ability of the individual to
 solve or resolve problems relating to worker safety and health involving
 construction work.
 `(3) WRITTEN REPORT- A written report of such an evaluation and analysis
 shall be provided immediately to the construction safety specialist and
 the employee who requested the evaluation or analysis.
 `(4) DENIAL- If the contractor denies a request to conduct an evaluation
 or analysis under paragraph (1), the denial and the specific reasons for
 the denial shall be reduced to writing and provided immediately to the
 construction safety specialist, the employee who requested the evaluation
 or analysis, and any employee representative of the employee.'.
SEC. 7. ONSITE CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH PLANS.
 The Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (as amended by section 6 of this Act)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 36. ONSITE CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- Except as provided in section 34(d), a construction
 contractor shall develop and maintain an onsite project safety and health
 plan for each construction project that--
 `(1) includes a construction process plan that meets the requirements of
 subsection (b);
 `(2) includes a hazard analysis that meets the requirements of subsection
 (c); and
 `(3) meets the other requirements prescribed in subsection (d).
 `(b) CONSTRUCTION PROCESS PLAN- The construction process plan required
 under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) describe the construction process to be used, including specific
 references to critical points and conditions in the process that require
 special attention;
 `(2) identify the means that will be used to ensure the structural stability
 of all buildings, structures, and excavations during the process;
 `(3) contain a list of all inspections and tests required (including a
 schedule for such inspections and tests) and the criteria established for
 continuation of construction based on the inspection and test results; and
 `(4) make appropriate references to the hazard analysis prepared in
 accordance with subsection (c).
 `(c) HAZARD ANALYSIS- The hazard analysis required under subsection
 (a) shall--
 `(1) identify any possibilities for major safety failures of the project
 that could occur throughout the construction process; and
 `(2) provide instructions for the prevention of hazards throughout the
 construction process.
 `(d) OTHER REQUIREMENTS- The plan required under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) protect workers against the hazards anticipated on the project and
 described in the hazard analysis;
 `(2) contain provisions for the construction worksite specific education
 and training of supervisory personnel and employees in the recognition,
 avoidance, and prevention of unsafe and unhealthy conditions;
 `(3) establish construction worksite specific benchmarks and procedures
 for monitoring by the construction safety specialist of compliance with
 such plan by all contractors on the project;
 `(4) provide for the posting of a notice, to be furnished by the Secretary,
 in a conspicuous place or places where notices to employees are customarily
 posted, informing employees that such plan exists for the project, and
 identifying the project construction safety specialist, the means for
 contacting the specialist on the project, and the address and telephone
 number of the principal place of business of the specialist;
 `(5) provide for maintaining on the construction worksite and making
 available to all employers and employees and their representatives, on
 request, a copy of such plan;
 `(6) provide that a construction safety specialist shall, on behalf of
 the contractor, stop work at, or remove affected employees from, an area
 in which danger exists if the specialist believes that an imminent danger
 exists that cannot be eliminated immediately through actions not requiring
 the stoppage of such work or the removal of affected employees; and
 `(7) comply with all other requirements of this Act.
 `(e) APPROVAL- The construction safety specialist shall evidence the
 approval of the plan by affixing the signature of the specialist and the
 certification number on a copy of the plan required under subsection (a) (1).
 `(f) COPY- The construction safety specialist shall provide to each
 employer on the project, prior to commencement of work by the contractor,
 a copy of the plan.
 `(g) Notification of Hazards and Violations-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If the construction safety specialist determines that
 there exists--
 `(A) a condition or work practice that violates any Federal, State, or
 local occupational safety or health law, standard, regulation, or order;
 `(B) a failure to comply with the program established under this section
 or the safety and health program of a contractor; or
 `(C) an occupational safety or health hazard,
the specialist shall notify the responsible contractor or contractors and
direct such contractor or contractors to correct the condition, work practice,
or hazard.
 `(2) WRITING- Such notification shall be reduced to writing by the
 construction safety specialist as soon as practicable.
 `(3) COPIES- A copy of the notification shall be--
 `(A) provided by the construction safety specialist to the responsible
 contractor or contractors; and
 `(B) be made available, on request, to all affected employers, employees,
 and employee representatives on the project and to the Secretary.'.
SEC. 8. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY SPECIALISTS.
 The Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (as amended by section 7 of this Act)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 37. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY SPECIALISTS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- Except as provided in section 34(d), a construction
 contractor shall ensure that a construction safety specialist--
 `(1) is hired and retained to perform the duties prescribed by this Act
 at a construction worksite; and
 `(2) performs such duties.
 `(b) OVERALL RESPONSIBILITY- Notwithstanding subsection (a), the construction
 contractor shall have overall responsibility for the safety of a construction
 worksite with respect to construction safety, rules, and practices.
 `(c) SUBCONTRACTORS AND SUPERVISORS- The construction contractor shall--
 `(1) ensure that each subcontractor and supervisor at a construction
 worksite is informed of the identity and duties of the construction safety
 specialist; and
 `(2) require such subcontractor and supervisor to comply with the policies
 of the construction safety specialist regarding health and safety at the
 construction worksite.
 `(d) Compliance With Onsite Construction Safety and Health Plan-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A construction safety specialist shall ensure compliance at
 the construction worksite with the onsite construction safety and health
 plan required under section 36 and with guidelines established by the
 Secretary and by the Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health.
 `(2) SAFETY REPORT- A construction safety specialist shall maintain a
 detailed safety report with respect to the construction worksite, including
 information concerning unsafe practices, actions, and conditions, and any
 accidents, injuries, or fatalities at such worksite.
 `(3) HAZARDS- If a construction safety specialist discovers a hazard at
 a construction worksite, the construction safety specialist shall--
 `(A) order the construction contractor to eliminate such hazard; and
 `(B) inform the construction contractor, the construction owner of the
 construction worksite, and the Secretary of any imminent dangers at the
 worksite.
 `(e) QUALIFICATIONS- To be considered a construction safety specialist
 under this Act, an individual shall--
 `(1)(A)(i) have obtained written certification of completion of a minimum
 40-hour course of study in construction health and safety, the curriculum of
 which shall be established jointly by the Secretary, the Advisory Committee
 on Construction Safety and Health, and the Office of Construction, Safety,
 Health, and Education established under section 34; and
 `(ii) continue to receive certification for successful completion of a
 refresher course at least once each 3 years;
 `(B) have completed an on-the-job training program conducted by a certified
 construction safety specialist, with such training conducted for no less
 than 18 months and covering each aspect of a project, from the initial
 stages through project completion; or
 `(C) have met satisfactory equivalency education and experience criteria
 established by the Secretary;
 `(2) be capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards or
 conditions at a construction worksite that are unsanitary, hazardous,
 or dangerous to construction workers.
 `(f) RESPONSIBILITIES- On behalf of the construction contractor, the
 construction safety specialist shall--
 `(1) prior to the commencement of construction work on the project,
 prepare or approve an onsite project safety and health program applicable
 to the entire project in accordance with section 36, except that if it
 is not practicable to prepare or approve the entire program prior to the
 commencement of construction work--
 `(A) that part of the program that is feasible to prepare or approve at
 such time shall be prepared or approved; and
 `(B) the program as it relates to the specific major phases of construction
 work to be performed on the subject shall be prepared or approved prior
 to the commencement of each such phase;
 `(2) prior to the commencement of construction work by each contractor
 on the project, review and approve the safety and health program of such
 contractor to ensure its consistency with the onsite project safety and
 health program and compliance with this Act;
 `(3) monitor the implementation by contractors of their safety and health
 programs;
 `(4) ensure compliance by contractors with reporting requirements established
 by this Act;
 `(5) obtain, or require a contractor to obtain, the assistance of an
 individual or organization professionally qualified and duly licensed to
 perform architectural or engineering services if the construction safety
 specialist determines that--
 `(A) such assistance is required for compliance with the onsite safety
 and health program, a safety and health program of the contractor, or this
 Act; or
 `(B) a particular aspect of the work involves such safety hazards, is so
 highly technical, or requires such special expertise for safe construction
 that the contractor could not reasonably be expected to be aware of the
 risks; and
 `(6) perform all other responsibilities assigned to a construction safety
 specialist under this Act.'.
SEC. 9. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH TRAINING ACADEMY.
 The Act (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (as amended by section 8 of this Act)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 38. CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH TRAINING ACADEMY.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established in the Occupational Safety and
 Health Administration a Construction Safety and Health Training Academy
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Academy'), to be headed
 by a Director appointed by the Secretary.
 `(b) FUNCTIONS- The Academy shall be responsible for--
 `(1) the training of--
 `(A) employees of the Office of Construction Safety, Health, and Education
 who conduct inspections of construction worksites; and
 `(B) other persons as the Secretary, with the advice of the Advisory
 Committee on Construction Safety and Health, shall consider appropriate; and
 `(2) the training and certification of construction safety specialists
 who have fulfilled the requirements of a standardized training course and
 testing program developed or approved by the Academy, with the advice of
 the Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health.
 `(c) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS- In carrying out this section, the Academy may
 enter into cooperative educational and training agreements with educational
 institutions, State governments, labor organizations, and construction
 industry employers.
 `(d) EQUAL ACCESS- The Secretary and the Academy shall ensure that employees,
 employee representatives, and employers have equal access to the services
 made available pursuant to this section.'.
SEC. 10. NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH.
 Section 22 (29 U.S.C. 671) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `in the Department of Health, Education and Welfare'
 each place it appears in subsections (a) and (b) and inserting in lieu
 thereof `as an agency of the Public Health Service'; and
 (2) by striking out `Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare' each
 place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Health and
 Human Services'.
SEC. 11. PENALTIES.
 Subsection (e) of section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666(e)) is amended to read as
 follows:
 `(e)(1)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any employer who--
 `(i) willfully violates any standard, rule, or order promulgated pursuant to
 section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to this Act, and thereby
 causes serious injury to any employee; or
 `(ii) under circumstances evincing an extreme indifference to human life,
 recklessly engages in conduct that violates such standard, rule, order,
 or regulation and creates a grave risk of serious injury to any employee,
 and thereby causes serious injury to such employee,
shall, on conviction, be fined in accordance with title 18, United States
Code, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(B) If a conviction under subparagraph (A) is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such employer, such employer shall be fined
 in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more
 than 10 years, or both.
 `(2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any employer who--
 `(i) willfully violates any standard, rule, or order promulgated pursuant to
 section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to this Act, and thereby
 causes the death of any employee; or
 `(ii) under circumstances evincing an extreme indifference to human life,
 recklessly engages in conduct which violates such standard, rule, order,
 or regulation and that creates a grave risk of death to any employee,
 and thereby causes the death of such employee,
shall, on conviction, be fined in accordance with title 18, United States
Code, or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
 `(B) If a conviction under subparagraph (A) is for a violation committed
 after a first conviction of such employer, such employer shall be fined
 in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more
 than 20 years, or both.
 `(3) For purposes of this subsection, an employer acts recklessly with
 respect to a result or circumstance described by this subsection if
 the employer is aware of and consciously disregards a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk that such result will occur or that such circumstance
 exists. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that disregarding it
 constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a reasonable
 person would observe in the situation.'.
SEC. 12. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH.
 Section 107(e) of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40
 U.S.C. 333(e)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(4) The Advisory Committee shall have the authority to schedule meetings
 and set meeting agendas, establish subcommittees, conduct research and
 issue reports, retain experts and consultants, employ secretarial and
 clerical personnel, and purchase office equipment and research material
 as may be necessary to carry out its functions.'.
SEC. 13. BUDGET CONTENTS.
 In the preparation of the budget message required under section 1105 of
 title 31, United States Code, the President shall set forth as separate
 appropriation accounts--
 (1) amounts for appropriation for construction industry safety and health
 activities conducted pursuant to the Occupational Safety and Health Act
 of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) and the Contract Work Hours and Safety
 Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 et seq.); and
 (2) amounts required for appropriation for nonconstruction occupational
 safety and health activities conducted pursuant to the Occupational Safety
 and Health Act of 1970 and the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act.
SEC. 14. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act and the
 amendments made by this Act shall become effective on October 1, 1991.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION SAFETY SPECIALISTS- Section 37 of the Occupational Safety
 and Health Act of 1970 (as added by section 8 of this Act) shall become
 effective on October 1, 1993.