HR 1625 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1625
To amend the Truth in Lending Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act to
prohibit credit card issuers from taking adverse actions against consumers
on the basis of the location of the consumer's residence, to prohibit the
unfair acceleration of outstanding balances on consumer credit card accounts
and limit the extent to which credit card issuers can change the terms of
the account agreement unilaterally, arbitrarily, and without adequate notice
to the consumer, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 22, 1991
Mr. KENNEDY (for himself and Mr. MARKEY) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To amend the Truth in Lending Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act to
prohibit credit card issuers from taking adverse actions against consumers
on the basis of the location of the consumer's residence, to prohibit the
unfair acceleration of outstanding balances on consumer credit card accounts
and limit the extent to which credit card issuers can change the terms of
the account agreement unilaterally, arbitrarily, and without adequate notice
to the consumer, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Regional Antidiscrimination and Credit Card
 Disclosure Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. CONSUMER CREDIT CARDHOLDER PROTECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1631 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 138. CONSUMER CREDIT CARD PROTECTIONS.
 `(a) PROHIBITION ON ACCELERATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of any credit card account under an open end
 consumer credit plan, the creditor may not--
 `(A) unilaterally terminate the account and require the immediate repayment
 of the outstanding balance; or
 `(B) reduce the credit limit applicable to the account below the amount of
 any outstanding balance on the account and require the immediate repayment
 of that portion of the outstanding balance in excess of the new applicable
 credit limit.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR FRAUD, BREACH OF CONTRACT, ETC- Paragraph (1) shall
 not apply with respect to any credit card account referred to in such
 paragraph in the case of--
 `(A) fraud or material misrepresentation on the part of the consumer in
 connection with the account; or
 `(B) failure by the consumer to meet the repayment terms of the agreement
 for any outstanding balance.
 `(b) REGULATION OF CHANGES IN TERMS-
 `(1) PROHIBITION ON UNILATERAL CHANGES IN TERMS WITHOUT ADEQUATE NOTICE-
 No credit card account agreement under an open end consumer credit plan
 may contain a provision which permits a creditor to change unilaterally
 any term required to be disclosed under section 127(a) or any other term
 (other than an insignificant term) before the end of the 60-day period
 beginning on the date the consumer receives actual notice of such change.
 `(2) PROHIBITION ON ARBITRARY CHANGES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No change in any term required to be disclosed under
 section 127(a) with respect to any credit card account under an open end
 consumer credit plan may be made arbitrarily or capriciously by the creditor.
 `(B) REGULATIONS- The Board shall prescribe such regulations as the Board
 determines to be necessary to implement and enforce the requirement of
 subparagraph (A) and prevent evasions of such requirement.
 `(C) CREDIT REVIEW SCORING SYSTEMS- The regulations prescribed by the Board
 under subparagraph (A) prohibiting arbitrary credit determinations shall
 include requirements relating to the methodology used in developing credit
 review scoring systems and the manner in which and the circumstances under
 which such systems may be used in reviewing any consumer credit cardholder's
 credit standing.
 `(3) CERTAIN CHANGES NOT PRECLUDED- Paragraph (1) and (2) shall not apply
 to any of the following changes with respect to any credit card account:
 `(A) A prohibition on additional extensions of credit or a reduction in
 the credit limit applicable to the account during any period in which the
 creditor has reason to believe that the consumer will be unable to comply
 with the repayment requirements of the account due to a material change
 in that consumer's financial circumstances.
 `(B) A prohibition on additional extensions of credit or a reduction in
 the credit limit applicable to the account during any period in which the
 consumer is in default with respect to material obligation of the consumer
 under the agreement.
 `(C) Any change that will benefit the consumer.
 `(3) MATERIAL OBLIGATION- At the time an agreement is entered into by a
 consumer to open a credit card account under an open end consumer credit
 plan, the consumer shall be given a list of the categories of contract
 obligations which are considered by the creditor to be material obligations
 of the consumer under the agreement for purposes of paragraph (2)(B).'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 2 of the Truth
 in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
 137 the following new item:
`138. Consumer credit card protections.'.
SEC. 3. FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD STUDY AND CREDIT RISK ASSESSMENT MODEL.
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall--
 (1) conduct a study of econometric credit review scoring systems in use
 today to determine the extent to which such systems accurately predict
 credit risk; and
 (2) develop a credit risk assessment model for use by creditors under open
 end consumer credit plans which--
 (A) protects the institution from excessive credit risk; and
 (B) protects the availability of adequate credit for consumers under fair
 and objective credit standards.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITION ON ADVERSE CONSUMER CREDIT ACTIONS ON BASIS OF GEOGRAPHIC
LOCATION.
 (a) ADDITION TO LIST OF ACTIVITIES CONSTITUTING UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 701(a) of title VII of the Consumer Credit
 Protection Act (commonly referred to as the `Equal Credit Opportunity Act')
 (15 U.S.C. 1691(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (2);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting `;
 or'; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) on the basis of--
 `(A) the geographic region in which the applicant resides, unless the
 creditor has established a geographically localized credit business; or
 `(B) the location of the residence of the applicant, whether such location
 is determined specifically or is taken into account on the basis of the
 zip code, census tract, or other means for determining the demographic
 characteristics of the neighborhood in which the applicant resides.'.
 (2) GEOGRAPHICALLY LOCALIZED CREDIT BUSINESS- Section 702 of title VII of
 the Consumer Credit Protection Act (commonly referred to as the `Equal
 Credit Opportunity Act') (15 U.S.C. 1691a) is amended by adding at the
 end the following new subsection:
 `(h) GEOGRAPHICALLY LOCALIZED CREDIT BUSINESS DEFINED- The term
 `geographically localized credit business' means any business which, from
 the time such business was first organized and on the basis of a general
 business plan which is strictly adhered to, limits extensions of credit under
 any open end consumer credit plan to applicants and consumers who reside
 within a circumscribed geographic region described in the business plan.'.
 (b) PROHIBITION ON ADVERSE ACTIONS ON BASIS OF LOCATION OF CONSUMER'S
 RESIDENCE- Section 127 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1637) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) CERTAIN FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED UNDER OPEN END CREDIT
 CARD PLANS- No creditor may take any action or impose any condition with
 respect to any credit card account under any open end consumer credit plan,
 or change any term of the agreement for such account (including the amount
 of credit available under such agreement), on the basis of--
 `(1) the geographic region in which the consumer resides, unless the
 creditor has established a geographically localized credit business (as
 defined in section 702(h) of this Act); or
 `(2) the location of the residence of the consumer, whether such location
 is determined specifically or is taken into account on the basis of the
 zip code, census tract, or any other means for determining the demographic
 characteristics of the neighborhood in which the applicant resides.'.