HR 5571 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5571
To create American jobs, deregulate American industry, and reduce taxes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 8, 1992
Mr. EDWARDS of Oklahoma introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means, Rules, the Judiciary, Merchant
Marine and Fisheries, Interior and Insular Affairs, Education and Labor,
Energy and Commerce, Public Works and Transportation, Government Operations,
and House Administration
A BILL
To create American jobs, deregulate American industry, and reduce taxes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `American Job Creation, Deregulation, and
 Tax Reduction Act of 1992'.
TITLE I--AMENDMENTS OF INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986
Subtitle A--Repeal of Taxes on Capital Gains
SEC. 101. EXCLUSION FROM INCOME FOR NET CAPITAL GAIN.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross
 income) is amended by redesignating section 136 as section 137 and by
 inserting after section 135 the following new section:
`SEC. 136. EXCLUSION FOR NET CAPITAL GAIN.
 `Gross income shall not include net capital gain.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 1 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (h).
 (2) Subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking part I.
 (3) Section 12 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4) and by
 redesignating the succeeding paragraphs accordingly.
 (4) Subsection (b) of section 527 of such Code is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) TAX IMPOSED- A tax is hereby imposed for each taxable year on the
 political organization taxable income of every political organization. Such
 tax shall be computed by multiplying the political organization taxable
 income by the highest rate of tax specified in section 11(b).'
 (5) Subsection (a) of section 594 of such Code is amended by striking
 `or section 1201(a)'
 (6) Paragraph (4) of section 691(c) of such Code is amended by striking
 `sections 1(h), 1201, and' and inserting `section'.
 (7) Subsection (a) of section 801 of such Code is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) TAX IMPOSED- A tax is hereby imposed for each taxable year on the life
 insurance company taxable income of every life insurance company. Such tax
 shall consist of a tax computed as provided in section 11 as though the
 life insurance company taxable income were the taxable income referred to
 in section 11.'
 (8) Subsection (c) of section 831 of such Code is amended by striking
 paragraph (1) and by redesignating the succeeding paragraphs accordingly.
 (9) Sections 832(c) and 834 of such Code are each amended by striking
 `sec. 1201' each place it appears and inserting `sec. 1211'.
 (10) Subparagraph (D) of section 852(b)(3) of such Code is amended
 by striking clause (iii) and by redesignating the succeeding clauses
 accordingly.
 (11) Paragraph (3) of section 857(b) of such Code is amended by striking
 subparagraph (A) and by redesignating the succeeding subparagraphs
 accordingly.
 (12) Paragraph (1) of section 882(a) of such Code is amended by striking
 `59A, or 1201(a)' and inserting `or 59A'.
 (13) Paragraph (2) of section 904(b) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of this section, taxable income from sources
 outside the United States shall not include gain from the sale of capital
 assets (or gain which is so treated under section 1231).'
 (14) Subsection (b) of section 1374 of such Code is amended by striking
 paragraph (4).
 (15) Subsection (b) of section 1381 of such Code is amended by striking
 `or 1201'.
 (16) Clause (i) of section 6425(c)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking
 `or 1201(a)'.
 (17) Paragraph (1) of section 6655(g) of such Code is amended by striking
 `or 1201(a)' each place it appears.
 (18) Subparagraph (A) of section 7518(g)(6) of such Code is amended by
 striking the last sentence and inserting the following flush sentence:
`The preceding sentence shall not apply to withdrawals made out of the
capital gain account.'
 (19) The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following
 new items:
`Sec. 136. Exclusion for net capital gain.
`Sec. 137. Cross reference to other Acts.
 (20) The table of parts for subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is
 amended by striking the item relating to part I.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
Subtitle B--Repeal of Estate, Gift, and Inheritance Taxes
SEC. 111. REPEAL OF ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subtitle B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to estate and gift taxes) is hereby repealed.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 estates of decedents dying after, gifts made after, and generation-skipping
 transfers made after, December 31, 1992.
SEC. 112. REPEAL OF INHERITANCE TAXES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 4 of title 4, United States Code, is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`Sec. 114. Prohibition of inheritance taxes.
 `No State or political subdivision thereof may impose any inheritance tax.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such chapter is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`114. Prohibition of inheritance taxes.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 transfers with respect to decedents dying after December 31, 1992.
TITLE II--TRADE RELATIONS WITH AND RESPONSE TO TRADE PRACTICES OF CERTAIN
TRADING PARTNERS
SEC. 201. AMENDMENT TO THE TRADE ACT OF 1974.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2101 et seq.) is amended
 by inserting after title VI the following new title:
`TITLE VII--TRADE RELATIONS WITH AND RESPONSE TO TRADE PRACTICES OF CERTAIN
TRADING PARTNERS
`SEC. 701. ACTIONS BY THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE.
 `(a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- Notwithstanding any other provision of law and
 subject to subsection (d), if the United States Trade Representative
 determines under section 702 that goods and services exported from the
 United States do not receive reciprocal treatment in the markets of a nation
 because of tariffs or other trade barriers, the Trade Representative shall--
 `(1) determine the monetary amount lost by exporters of United States
 goods and services due to such lack of reciprocal treatment; and
 `(2) take action in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) to restrict
 the importation into the United States of goods and services exported by
 such nation to the United States to offset such lost amount.
 `(b) EXPORTS TO BE RESTRICTED- In restricting the importation into the
 United States of goods and services exported by a nation as required by
 subsection (a)(2), the Trade Representative shall--
 `(1) first restrict the importation into the United States by such nation of
 goods or services in the same industry in which goods or services exported by
 the United States have not received reciprocal treatment by such nation; and
 `(2) then, if necessary, restrict the importation into the United States
 by such nation of goods and services in all industries until the monetary
 amount determined pursuant to subsection (a)(1) is offset.
 `(c) METHOD OF RESTRICTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Trade
 Representative shall restrict the importation of goods and services into
 the United States by a nation as required by subsection (a)(1) by--
 `(A) imposing a duty, or increasing an existing duty;
 `(B) imposing a quantitative restriction, or modifying an existing
 quantitative restriction; or
 `(C) any combination of the actions described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 `(2) RESTRICTION IN CASE OF SUBSIDY- In any case in which the Trade
 Representative determines that a nation is subsidizing the exportation of
 goods or services to the United States, the Trade Representative shall
 calculate the dollar amount of the subsidy per exported good or service
 and impose a duty to offset the subsidy amount.
 `(d) DELAY OF SANCTIONS- The Trade Representative shall not take any
 actions as required by subsection (c) until the expiration of the 30-day
 period beginning on the date on which the report required by section 702(2)
 is submitted to the Congress.
`SEC. 702. DETERMINATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE; TIME
FOR ACTIONS TO TAKE EFFECT.
 `Before the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date of the
 enactment of the Fair Trade Act of 1992 and not later than February 1, 1993,
 and February 1 of each succeeding year, the Trade Representative shall--
 `(1) determine, based on the national trade estimates for the preceding
 year made by the Trade Representative as required by section 181(a),
 with respect to each nation engaging in trade with the United States,
 whether such nation is--
 `(A) maintaining open markets for exports of United States goods and
 services;
 `(B) refraining from government subsidization or other unfair trade practices
 with respect to goods and services imported by such nation into the United
 States; and
 `(C) extending reciprocal treatment under its trade laws and practices to
 goods and services exported to such nation from the United States; and
 `(2) submit to the Congress a report on any action the Trade Representative
 is required by section 701 to take against any nation based on the
 determinations made under paragraph (1).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of contents contained in the first
 section of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2101) is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
`TITLE VII--TRADE RELATIONS WITH AND RESPONSE TO TRADE PRACTICES OF CERTAIN
MAJOR TRADING PARTNERS
`Sec. 701. Actions by the United States Trade Representative.
`Sec. 702. Determinations by the United States Trade Representative; time
for actions to take effect.'.
TITLE III--EXTENSION OF BAN ON NEW REGULATIONS; USE OF LINE-ITEM VETO
SEC. 301. EXTENSION OF BAN ON NEW REGULATIONS.
 The provisions of the 90-day moratorium on new unnecessary regulations
 ordered in the President's `Memorandum on Reducing the Burden of Government
 Regulations' dated January 28, 1992, shall apply during the 1-year period
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act as if those provisions
 were enacted in this Act.
SEC. 302. USE OF LINE-ITEM VETO.
 It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) the question of whether the President has line-item veto authority
 remains unanswered, as there is both significant scholarly support for
 such authority and scholarly opposition to such authority; and
 (2) in order to allow the courts to answer this question about the scope
 of Presidential authority, the President should use the line-item veto.
TITLE IV--LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED TO INCLUDE CERTAIN ANALYSES
SEC. 401. CBO JOBS AND OTHER ANALYSES.
 Section 403(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 653(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (6) and (7),
 respectively, and in paragraph (6) (as redesignated) by striking `paragraph
 (1) and (2),' and inserting `the applicable preceding paragraph'; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) an estimate of the job creation or loss which would be incurred in
 carrying out such bill or resolution in the fiscal year in which it is to
 become effective and in each of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal
 year, together with the basis for each such estimate;
 `(4) an estimate of its effect on the Federal deficit in the fiscal year in
 which it is to become effective and in each of the 4 fiscal years following
 such fiscal year, together with the basis for each such estimate;
 `(5) an estimate of its effect on domestic oil and gas production in
 the fiscal year in which it is to become effective and in each of the 4
 fiscal years following such fiscal year, together with the basis for each
 such estimate;'.
SEC. 402. ANALYSIS AND ESTIMATE OF ECONOMIC COSTS AND BENEFITS OF NEW RULES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For each rule proposed by an agency after the date of
 the enactment of this Act for which notice is required to be published in
 the Federal Register under section 553(b) of title 5, United States Code,
 the head of the agency shall--
 (1) prepare an analysis and estimate of the economic costs and economic
 benefits to consumers associated with the implementation of the proposed
 rule; and
 (2) publish that analysis and estimate in the Federal Register with
 the notice.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- In this section, each of the terms `agency' and `rule' has
 the meaning that term has under section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
TITLE V--OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION
Subtitle A--Arctic Coastal Plain Domestic Energy Leasing
SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Arctic Coastal Plain Domestic Energy
 Leasing Act of 1992'.
SEC. 502. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.
 As the basis for the declaration of policy and authorizations set forth
 in subsequent provisions of this subtitle, the Congress finds that--
 (1) the Nation's domestic crude oil production is in substantial decline
 and dependence upon unreliable foreign sources of oil is growing at an
 alarming rate;
 (2) the oil-rich Middle East is a highly volatile, turbulent region of the
 world, upon which the United States cannot continue to grow more dependent
 for its energy resources critical to our industrial and economic might;
 (3) the United States currently spends more than $100,000,000,000 per year
 for foreign energy;
 (4) production from the Prudhoe Bay oil fields on Alaska's North Slope,
 which now constitutes 24 percent of the Nation's total domestic crude oil
 production, has begun to decline;
 (5) in 1980, Congress designated approximately one-half of the eighteen
 million acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska as wilderness and
 directed the Secretary of the Interior to study the oil and gas potential
 and the fish and wildlife resources of the Refuge's one million five
 hundred thousand acre Coastal Plain, which lies east of Prudhoe Bay;
 (6) reports prepared by the Department of the Interior and other Federal,
 State and private studies clearly indicate that the Coastal Plain is the
 most outstanding oil and gas prospect in the United States, onshore or
 offshore, with potential resources in place estimated to be from 4.8 to
 29.4 billion barrels of oil;
 (7) the results of more than twenty years of operations at Prudhoe Bay
 and other North Slope fields are compelling evidence that carefully
 planned and executed oil and gas exploration, development, production,
 and transportation is compatible with the North Slope's fish and wildlife
 resources and the needs of subsistence users of those resources;
 (8) the long lead time--ten or more years--needed for development of a
 new North Slope oil field requires a prompt decision by Congress on the
 future use of available Federal lands in the Coastal Plain; and
 (9) the United States needs to know--one way or the other--whether oil exists
 under the Coastal Plain in commercial quantities to assist in our long-range
 planning and developmental efforts to meet tomorrow's energy needs.
SEC. 503. DECLARATION OF POLICY.
 (a) The Congress declares that--
 (1) it is in the national interest of the United States to permit
 exploration, development, production, and transportation of oil and gas
 resources in the Coastal Plain Study Area of the Arctic National Wildlife
 Refuge, which is--
 (A) located east of Prudhoe Bay and south of the Beaufort Sea, areas
 where intensive oil exploration and development have been conducted in an
 environmentally sound manner, and
 (B) served by an existing crude oil pipeline and tanker transportation
 system; and
 (2) exploration, development, production, and transportation of the Coastal
 Plain's oil and gas resources, which is supported by the State of Alaska,
 the North Slope Borough and other local governments in Alaska, and the
 Inupiat Eskimo people of the North Slope, serve vital interests of the
 Nation, including--
 (A) national security by providing dependable new sources of domestic oil
 production outside of the control and influence of the Organization of
 Petroleum Exporting Countries;
 (B) American consumers by expanding domestic sources of reasonably priced
 gasoline, jet fuel, heating oil, and other crude oil products, and
 (C) the national economy by improving the balance of trade through reductions
 in foreign oil imports, by generating new economic activity and creating
 new jobs, and by reducing the Federal deficit through increased tax and
 royalty revenues.
 (b) The Congress declares that it is the policy of the United States that--
 (1) exploration, development, production, and transportation of the oil
 and gas resources of the Coastal Plain, the Nation's foremost prospect for
 the discovery of new giant and super giant oil fields, should proceed with
 dispatch; and
 (2) such activities should be conducted in a manner consistent with
 the protection of the Coastal Plain's fish and wildlife resources and
 environment and the needs of the area's subsistence users.
SEC. 504. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this subtitle, the term--
 (a) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior; and
 (b) `Coastal Plain' means that portion of the Arctic National Wildlife
 Refuge identified in section 1002(b)(1) of the Alaska National Interest
 Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-487).
SEC. 505. AUTHORIZATION FOR LEASING OF THE COASTAL PLAIN.
 (a) The Congress hereby authorizes and directs the Secretary of the
 Interior through whatever agency of the Department he deems appropriate
 and other appropriate Federal officers and agencies to take such actions
 as are necessary to establish and promptly implement a competitive oil
 and gas leasing program that will assure the expeditious exploration,
 development and production of the oil and gas resources of the Coastal
 Plain Study Area of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
 (b) This authorization includes, incorporates, and supplements the provisions
 of existing Federal law on oil and gas leasing and development on Federal
 lands and grants such new legislative authority as is necessary to enable
 the Secretary to authorize and permit all such activities as are required
 to achieve the expeditious exploration, development and production of the
 oil and gas resources of the Coastal Plain. These activities include all
 activities associated with and required in the exploration, development,
 production and transportation of the oil and gas resources of the Coastal
 Plain, and include, but are not limited to, the authorization and granting of
 rights-of-way, permits, leases, use permits and such other authorizations as
 are necessary to facilitate exploration, development, and production of oil
 and gas resources on lands within the Coastal Plain and their transportation.
 (c) The leasing program required by subsection (a) shall include the
 following elements:
 (1) The first lease sale shall be conducted within twelve months of the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) The Secretary is authorized to grant to the highest responsible qualified
 bidder or bidders by competitive bidding, under regulations promulgated
 in advance, any oil and gas lease on unleased Federal lands within the
 Coastal Plain. Such regulations may provide for the deposit of cash bids in
 an interest-bearing account until the Secretary announces his decision on
 whether to accept the bids, with the interest earned thereon to be paid to
 the Treasury as to bids that are accepted and to the unsuccessful bidders
 as to bids that are rejected. The bidding shall be conducted as determined
 by the Secretary pursuant to bidding systems included in section 205(A)(1)
 (A) through (H) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, as amended,
 of 1978 (43 U.S.C. 1331).
 (3) The size of lease tracts may be up to eleven thousand five hundred
 and twenty acres but not less than two thousand five hundred and sixty
 acres, as determined by the Secretary: Provided, That the Secretary may
 lease tracts of less than two thousand five hundred and sixty acres if
 he determines tracts of smaller size are necessary to promote a more
 competitive leasing program or are necessary in certain locations to
 mitigate reasonably foreseeable impacts on the environment.
 (4) Each lease shall be issued for an initial period of up to ten years
 and shall be extended for so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced
 in paying quantities from the lease or unit area to which the lease
 is committed or as drilling or reworking operations as approved by the
 Secretary are conducted thereon.
 (d) This subtitle shall be considered the primary land management
 authorization for all activities associated with exploration, development,
 and production from the Coastal Plain. No land management review shall be
 required except as specifically authorized and directed by this subtitle.
 (e) Activities undertaken pursuant to this section shall include or provide
 for such conditions, restrictions, and prohibitions as the Secretary deems
 necessary or appropriate to mitigate reasonably foreseeable significant
 adverse effects on fish and wildlife and their habitats pursuant to section
 506 of this subtitle.
 (f) The Secretary is authorized to permit, subject to reasonable rules and
 regulations, on lands within the Coastal Plain all activities described
 in subsection (b) by owners of private lands within and/or adjacent to
 the Coastal Plain and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
 (g) All receipts from sales, rentals, bonuses, and royalties on leases
 issued pursuant to this subtitle shall be deposited into the Treasury and
 allocated in accordance with applicable law.
SEC. 506. PROTECTION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES AND OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL
VALUES.
 (a) Prior to conducting a competitive oil and gas lease sale pursuant
 to section 505, the Secretary shall promulgate such stipulations, rules,
 and regulations as he determines are necessary and appropriate to ensure
 that oil and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation
 activities undertaken in the Coastal Plain are conducted in a manner to
 achieve the reasonable protection of the fish and wildlife resources,
 environment and subsistence uses of the Coastal Plain.
 (b)(1) The `Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska, Coastal Plain Resource
 Assessment' prepared by the Secretary pursuant to section 1002(h) of
 the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (Public Law
 96-487) and the legislative environmental impact statement incorporated
 into the Assessment pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act of
 1969 (Public Law 91-190) shall satisfy all legal requirements under those
 laws with respect to any action taken to develop rules and regulations
 and procedures for a competitive oil and gas leasing program or to conduct
 particular lease sales in the Coastal Plain. No further studies, reports,
 or assessments shall be required before the Secretary or other appropriate
 Federal officials take such action.
 (2) Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to affect the applicability
 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 to phases of oil and gas
 development, production, and transportation subsequent to initial leasing
 and exploration. Consistent with the general authority of the Secretary
 as described in section 505 of this Act, environmental laws of general
 applicability to oil and gas operation and permitting shall continue to
 be applied.
SEC. 507. IMPACT AID.
 The Secretary, after consulting with the Governor of Alaska, is authorized
 and directed to provide such impact aid, planning advice, and other
 appropriate assistance to communities on the North Slope and elsewhere
 in Alaska as is required to ensure the availability of public services
 needed to accommodate oil and gas exploration, development, production,
 and transportation in the Coastal Plain.
Subtitle B--Tax Incentives for Oil and Natural Gas Exploration and Production
PART I--NATIONAL ENERGY SECURITY TAX CREDITS
SEC. 511. CRUDE OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION CREDIT.
 (a) CRUDE OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION CREDIT- Subpart B of part IV of
 subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by adding the following new section:
`SEC. 30. CRUDE OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION CREDIT.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of a taxpayer other than an integrated oil
 company (as defined in section 291(b)(4)), there shall be allowed as a credit
 against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal
 to 15 percent of the taxpayer's qualified investment for the taxable year.
 `(b) QUALIFIED INVESTMENT- For purposes of this section, the term `qualified
 investment' means amounts paid or incurred--
 `(1) for geological and geophysical expenditures incurred for the purpose
 of ascertaining the existence, location, extent, or quality of any crude
 oil or natural gas deposit, including core testing and drilling test wells,
 `(2) for the purpose of drilling and equipping crude oil and natural gas
 wells (including pollution control equipment used in connection with such
 wells), or
 `(3) for the purpose of performing secondary or tertiary recovery techniques,
 on properties located in the United States or in a possession of the United
 States as defined in section 638 (relating to Continental Shelf areas),
 but only to the extent that the expenditure is not a qualifying cost under
 section 30A.
 `(c) Limitation Based on Amount of Tax-
 `(1) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any
 taxable year shall not exceed--
 `(A) the sum of--
 `(i) the taxpayer's minimum tax liability under section 55(a) for such
 taxable year, plus
 `(ii) the taxpayer's regular tax liability for such taxable year (as
 defined in section 26(b)), over
 `(B) the sum of the credits allowable against the taxpayer's regular tax
 liability under subparts A and D of this part and sections 27, 28, and 29.
 `(2) Carryback and carryforward of unused credit-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a)
 for any taxable year exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1) for such
 taxable year (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as the `unused
 credit year'), such excess shall be--
 `(i) an oil and gas production credit carryback to each of the 10 taxable
 years proceding the unused credit year, and
 `(ii) an oil and gas production credit carryforward to each of the 15
 taxable years following the unused credit year, and shall be added to
 the amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for such years. If
 any portion of such excess is a carryback to a taxable year beginning on
 or before the date of the enactment of this section, this section shall
 be deemed to have been in effect for such taxable year for purposes of
 allowing such carryback as a credit under this section. The entire amount
 of the unused credit shall be carried to the earliest of the 25 taxable
 years to which such credit may be carried, and then to each of the other
 24 taxable years to the extent that, because of the limitation contained
 in paragraph (1), such unused credit may not be added for a prior taxable
 year to which such unused credit may be carried.
 `(B) LIMITATIONS- The amount of the unused credit which may be taken into
 account under subparagraph (A) for any succeeding taxable year shall not
 exceed the amount by which the limitation provided by paragraph (1) for
 such taxable year exceeds the sum of--
 `(i) the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year, and
 `(ii) the amounts which, by reason of this paragraph, are added to the
 amount allowable for such taxable year and which are attributable to
 taxable years preceding the unused credit year.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The last sentence of section 38(c)(1) of such
 Code is amended by striking `subparts A and B' each place it appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `subpart A and sections 27 and 28'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart B of part IV
 of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 30. Crude oil and natural gas exploration credit.'
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 expenditures paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act in
 taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 512. MARGINAL PRODUCTION CREDIT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding the following new section:
`SEC. 30A. MARGINAL PRODUCTION CREDIT.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT- There shall be allowed as a credit against the
 tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year to the producer of eligible
 crude oil an amount equal to 15 percent of the qualified cost of each barrel
 of such oil (or fractional part thereof) produced during the taxable year.
 `(b) QUALIFIED COST- For purposes of this section, the term `qualified cost'
 means, with respect to each barrel of eligible crude oil, the sum of--
 `(1) such barrel's pro rata share of the lease operating expenses (other
 than business overhead expenses) paid or incurred by the producer of such
 barrel during the taxable year in which such barrel was produced, plus
 `(2) the amount of severance tax paid or incurred by such producer with
 respect to such barrel.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) ELIGIBLE CRUDE OIL- The term `eligible crude oil' means domestic
 crude oil which is--
 `(A) from a stripper well property,
 `(B) heavy oil, or
 `(C) harsh environment oil.
 `(2) Other definitions-
 `(A) CRUDE OIL- The term `crude oil' has the meaning given to such term
 by the June 1979 energy regulations.
 `(B) BARREL- The term `barrel' means 42 United States gallons.
 `(C) DOMESTIC- The term `domestic' when used with respect to crude oil,
 means crude oil produced from a property located in the United States or
 a possession of the United States.
 `(D) UNITED STATES- The term `United States' has the meaning given to such
 term by paragraph (1) of section 638 (relating to Continental Shelf areas).
 `(E) POSSESSION OF THE UNITED STATES- The term `possession of the United
 States' has the meaning given to such term by paragraph (2) of section 638.
 `(F) STRIPPER WELL PROPERTY- The term `stripper well property' means any
 property that produced less than ten barrels per day during any consecutive
 12-month period beginning after December 31, 1972.
 `(G) PROPERTY- The term `property' means property as defined in section 614.
 `(H) HEAVY OIL- The term `heavy oil' means all crude oil which is produced
 from a property if crude oil produced and sold from such property during--
 `(i) the last month before July 1979 in which crude oil was produced and
 sold from such property, or
 `(ii) the taxable year had a weighted average gravity of 20 degrees API
 or less (corrected to 60 degrees Fahrenheit).
 `(I) HARSH ENVIRONMENT OIL- The term `harsh environment oil' means oil
 produced from a property located north of the 49th parallel or under at
 least 400 feet of water.
 `(J) SEVERANCE TAX- The term `severance tax' means a tax imposed by a State
 or political subdivision thereof with respect to the extraction of crude oil.
 `(K) ENERGY REGULATIONS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `energy regulations' means regulations prescribed
 under section 4(a) of the Energy Petroleum Allocation Act of 1973 (15
 U.S.C. 753(a)).
 `(ii) JUNE 1979 ENERGY REGULATIONS- The June 1979 energy regulations shall
 be the terms of the energy regulations as such terms existed on June 1, 1979.
 `(iii) OCTOBER 1979 ENERGY REGULATIONS- The October 1979 Energy Regulations
 shall be the terms of the energy regulations as such terms existed on
 October 30, 1979.
 `(iv) CONTINUED APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS AFTER DECONTROL- Energy
 regulations shall be treated as continuing in effect without regard to
 decontrol of oil prices or any other termination of the application of
 such regulations.
 `(d) SPECIAL RULE FOR OFFSHORE WELLS- In the case of eligible crude oil
 produced from a property located under at least 400 feet (but less than
 1,200 feet) of water, the percentage determined under the following table
 shall be substituted for `20 percent' in subsection (a):
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `If distance (in feet) of the property under water is--
 At least But less than The
 percentage is--
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 400 600 5
 percent
 600 900 10
 percent
 900 1,200 15
 percent
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(e) LIMITATION BASED ON AMOUNT OF TAX-
 `(1) LIABILITY FOR TAX- The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any
 taxable year shall not exceed--
 `(A) the sum of--
 `(i) the taxpayer's minimum tax liability under section 55(a) for such
 taxable year, plus
 `(ii) the taxpayer's regular tax liability for such taxable year (as
 defined in section 26(b)), over
 `(B) the sum of the credits allowable against the taxpayer's regular tax
 liability under subparts A and D of this part and sections 27, 28, 29,
 and 30.
 `(2) Carryback and carryforward of unused credit-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a)
 for any taxable year exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1) for such
 taxable year (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as the `unused
 credit year'), such excess shall be--
 `(i) an oil and gas production credit carryback to each of the 10 taxable
 years preceding the unused credit year, and
 `(ii) an oil and gas production credit carryforward to each of the 15
 taxable years following the unused credit year,
and shall be added to the amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a)
for such years. If any portion of such excess is a carryback to a taxable
year beginning on or before the date of the enactment of this section,
this section shall be deemed to have been in effect for such taxable year
for purposes of allowing such carryback as a credit under this section. The
entire amount of the unused credit shall be carried to the earliest of the
25 taxable years to which such credit may be carried, and then to each of
the other 24 taxable years to the extent that, because of the limitation
contained in paragraph (1), such unused credit may not be added for a prior
taxable year to which such unused credit may be carried.
 `(B) LIMITATIONS- The amount of the unused credit which may be taken into
 account under subparagraph (A) for any succeeding taxable year shall not
 exceed the amount by which the limitation provided by paragraph (1) for
 such taxable year exceeds the sum of--
 `(i) the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year, and
 `(ii) the amounts which, by reason of this paragraph, are added to the
 amount allowable for such taxable year and which are attributable to
 taxable years preceding the unused credit year.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subpart B of part IV
 of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 30A. Marginal Production Credit.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 expenditures paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act in
 taxable years ending after such date.
PART II--ADDITIONAL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION INCENTIVES
SEC. 521. INTANGIBLE DRILLING COSTS INCLUDE GEOLOGICAL, GEOPHYSICAL, AND
SURFACE CASING COSTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (c) of section 263 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to intangible drilling and development costs in the case
 of oil and gas wells and geothermal wells) is amended by inserting before the
 last sentence the following new sentence: `In the case of oil and gas wells,
 the tax treatment under this subsection which applies to the taxpayer's
 intangible drilling and development costs shall also apply to surface
 casing costs and to geological and geophysical costs for the purposes of
 ascertaining the existence, location, extent or quality of any deposit of
 oil or gas within the United States (within the meaning of section 638).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 costs paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 522. REPEAL OF TAXABLE INCOME LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 613(A)(d)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 amended by striking `65 percent' and inserting in lieu thereof `100 percent'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 523. INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 DEFINITION OF TAR SANDS.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Subsection (c) of section 29 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) TAR SANDS- The term `tar sands' means any consolidated or unconsolidated
 rock (other than coal, oil shale, or gilsonite) which--
 `(A) contains a hydrocarbonaceous material which has a gas-free viscosity
 measured at reservoir temperature greater than 10,000 centipoise, or
 `(B) contains a hydrocarbonaceous material that is extracted from the
 mined or quarried rock.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
PART III--AMENDMENTS TO THE ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX
SEC. 531. REMOVAL OF PERCENTAGE DEPLETION AND INTANGIBLE DRILLING COSTS FROM
THE ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX.
 (a) ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX- Sections 56(g)(3)(D)(i), 56(g)(3)(F), 57(a)(1),
 57(a)(2), and 57(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are hereby repealed.
 (b) CORPORATE PREFERENCE ITEMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 291(b) of such Code is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount allowable as a deduction for any taxable year
 under section 616(a) or 617(a) (determined without regard to this section)
 shall be reduced by 30 percent.'
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 291(b) of such Code are each amended
 by striking out `263(c), 616(a),' and inserting in lieu thereof `616(a)'.
 (B) Section 291(b) of such Code is amended by striking out paragraph (4)
 and by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4).
 (C) Section 59(e)(2) of such Code is amended by striking out subparagraph (C)
 and by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D).
 (D) Section 263(c) of such Code is amended by striking out the last sentence.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act.
PART IV--MISCELLANEOUS TAX AND ADMINISTRATIVE AMENDMENTS
SEC. 541. REPEAL OF REVENUE RULING 77-176.
 (a) With respect to mineral sharing arrangements, the application of
 chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be determined--
 (1) without regard to Revenue Ruling 77-176 (and without regard to any
 other regulation, ruling, or decision reaching the same result as, or a
 result similar to, the result set forth in such Revenue Ruling); and
 (2) with full regard to the rules in effect before Revenue Ruling 77-176.
TITLE VI--REPEAL OF CERTAIN LAWS
SEC. 601. REPEAL OF DAVIS-BACON ACT.
 The Act of March 3, 1931 (40 U.S.C. 276a et seq.) (known as the Davis-Bacon
 Act) is hereby repealed.
SEC. 602. REPEAL OF AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT OF 1990.
 The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336; 42
 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) (and the amendments made by such Act) are hereby
 repealed; and the laws of the United States shall be applied as if such Act
 (and amendments) had never been enacted.
TITLE VII--OTHER PROVISIONS
SEC. 701. REPEAL OF SOCIAL SECURITY EARNINGS LIMIT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsections (b), (c)(1), (d), (f), (h), (j), and (k)
 of section 203 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 403) are repealed.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 203 of such Act (as amended by subsection
 (a)) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by redesignating such subsection as subsection
 (b), and--
 (A) by striking `NONCOVERED WORK OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES OR' in the
 heading;
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) as paragraphs (1),
 (2), and (3), respectively;
 (C) by striking `For purposes of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `For purposes of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)'; and
 (D) by striking the last sentence;
 (2) in subsection (e), by redesignating such subsection as subsection (c),
 and by striking `subsections (c) and (d)' and inserting `subsection (b)';
 (3) in subsection (g), by redesignating such subsection as subsection
 (d), and by striking `subsection (c)' each place it appears and inserting
 `subsection (b)';
 (4) in subsection (i), by redesignating such subsection as subsection
 (e), and by striking `subsection (b), (c), (g), or (h)' and inserting
 `subsection (b) or (d)'; and
 (5) in subsection (l), by redesignating such subsection as subsection (f),
 and by striking `subsection (g) or (h)(1)(A)' and inserting `subsection (d)'.
 (c) PROVISIONS RELATING TO BENEFITS TERMINATED UPON DEPORTATION- Section
 202(n)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(n)(1)) is amended by striking `Sections
 203 (b), (c), and (d)' and inserting `Section 203(b)'.
 (d) PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXEMPTIONS FROM REDUCTIONS BASED ON EARLY
 RETIREMENT-
 (1) Section 202(q)(5)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(q)(5)(B)) is amended
 by striking `section 203(c)(2)' and inserting `section 203(b)(1)'.
 (2) Section 202(q)(7)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(q)(7)(A)) is amended
 by striking `deductions under section 203(b), 203(c)(1), 203(d)(1), or
 222(b)' and inserting `deductions on account of work under section 203 or
 deductions under section 222(b)'.
 (e) PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXEMPTIONS FROM REDUCTIONS BASED ON DISREGARD
 OF CERTAIN ENTITLEMENTS TO CHILD'S INSURANCE BENEFITS-
 (1) Section 202(s)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(s)(1)) is amended by
 striking `paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of section 203(c)' and inserting
 `paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of section 203(b)'.
 (2) Section 202(s)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(s)(3)) is amended by
 striking `The last sentence of subsection (c) of section 203, subsection
 (f)(1)(C) of section 203, and subsections' and inserting `Subsections'.
 (f) PROVISIONS RELATING TO SUSPENSION OF ALIENS' BENEFITS- Section 202(t)(7)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(t)(7)) is amended by striking `Subsections (b),
 (c), and (d)' and inserting `Subsection (b)'.
 (g) PROVISIONS RELATING TO BENEFITS INCREASED ON ACCOUNT OF DELAYED
 RETIREMENT- Section 202(w)(2)(B)(ii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 402(w)(2)(B)(ii))
 is amended by striking `or 203(c)'.
 (h) PROVISIONS RELATING TO REDUCTIONS IN BENEFITS BASED ON MAXIMUM BENEFITS-
 Section 203(a)(3)(B)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 403(a)(3)(B)(iii)) is
 amended by striking `and subsections (b), (c), and (d)' and inserting
 `and subsection (b)'.
 (i) PROVISIONS RELATING TO PENALTIES FOR MISREPRESENTATIONS CONCERNING
 EARNINGS FOR PERIODS SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS ON ACCOUNT OF WORK- Section
 208(a)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 408(a)(3)) is amended by striking `under
 section 203(f) of this title for purposes of deductions from benefits'
 and inserting `under section 203 for purposes of deductions from benefits
 on account of work'.
 (j) PROVISIONS TAKING INTO ACCOUNT EARNINGS IN DETERMINING BENEFIT
 COMPUTATION YEARS- Clause (I) in the next to last sentence of section
 215(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 415(b)(2)(A)) is amended by striking
 `no earnings as described in section 203(f)(5) in such year' and inserting
 `no wages, and no net earnings from self-employment (in excess of net loss
 from self-employment), in such year'.
 (k) PROVISIONS RELATING TO ROUNDING OF BENEFITS- Section 215(g) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 415(g)) is amended by striking `and any deduction under
 section 203(b)'.
 (l) PROVISIONS RELATING TO EARNINGS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT IN DETERMINING
 SUBSTANTIAL GAINFUL ACTIVITY OF BLIND INDIVIDUALS- The second sentence
 of section 223(d)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 423(d)(4)) is amended by
 striking `the exempt amount under section 203(f)(8) which is applicable
 to individuals described in subparagraph (D) thereof' and inserting the
 following: `an amount equal to the exempt amount which would have been
 applicable under section 203(f)(8), to individuals described in subparagraph
 (D) thereof, if the Social Security Earnings Test Elimination Act of 1991
 had not been enacted'.
 (m) PROVISIONS DEFINING INCOME FOR PURPOSES OF SSI- Section 1612(a) of
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1382a(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `as determined under section 203(f)(5)(C)' in paragraph
 (1)(A) and inserting `as defined in the last two sentences of this
 subsection'; and
 (2) by adding at the end (after and below paragraph (2)(F)) the following
 new sentences:
`For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the term `wages' means wages as defined in
section 209, but computed without regard to the limitations as to amounts of
remuneration specified in subsections (a), (g)(2), (g)(3), (h)(2), and (j)
of such section. In making the computation under the preceding sentence,
(A) services which do not constitute employment as defined in section
210, performed within the United States by an individual as an employee or
performed outside the United States in the active military or naval services
of the United States, shall be deemed to be employment as so defined if the
remuneration for such services is not includible in computing the individual's
net earnings or net loss from self-employment for purposes of title II, and
(B) the term `wages' shall be deemed not to include (i) the amount of any
payment made to, or on behalf of, an employee or any of his or her dependents
(including any amount paid by an employer for insurance or annuities, or into
a fund, to provide for any such payment) on account of retirement, or (ii)
any payment or series of payments by an employer to an employee or any of his
or her dependents upon or after the termination of the employee's employment
relationship because of retirement after attaining an age specified in a
plan referred to in section 209(m)(2) or in a pension plan of the employer.'.
 (n) REPEAL OF DEDUCTIONS ON ACCOUNT OF WORK UNDER THE RAILROAD RETIREMENT
 PROGRAM- Section 2 of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231a)
 is amended by striking subsections (f) and (g)(2).
 (o) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments and repeals made by this section shall
 be effective with respect to taxable years ending on and after the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 702. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PRIVATIZATION AND DEREGULATION.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The President shall establish an advisory committee
 which shall be known as the `Committee on Privatization and Deregulation'
 (in this section referred to as the `Committee').
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The Committee shall examine activities conducted by Federal
 agencies, to--
 (1) determine the economic costs and economic benefits of each of those
 activities;
 (2) determine for each of those activities whether the economic benefits
 of the activity exceeds the economic costs of the activity; and
 (3) determine and recommend which of those activities could be plausibly
 and more economically conducted by the private sector.
 (c) REPORT- The Committee shall submit a report to the Congress and the
 President describing its determinations and recommendations under this
 section.
SEC. 703. UNION EMPLOYEES ALLOWED TO WITHHOLD DUES FOR POLITICAL PURPOSES.
 (a) CONTRIBUTIONS TO ALL POLITICAL COMMITTEES INCLUDED- Paragraph
 (2) of section 316(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441b(b)(2)) is amended by inserting `political committee,' after
 `campaign committee,'.
 (b) APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS TO LABOR ORGANIZATIONS- Section 316(b)
 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(8)(A) Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (2) shall not apply
 to a labor organization unless the organization meets the requirements of
 subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D).
 `(B) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if the labor
 organization provides, at least once annually, to all employees within
 the labor organization's bargaining unit or units (and to new employees
 within 30 days after commencement of their employment) written notification
 presented in a manner to inform any such employee--
 `(i) that an employee cannot be obligated to pay, through union dues or
 any other mandatory payment to a labor organization, for the political
 activities of the labor organization, including, but not limited to,
 the maintenance and operation of, or solicitation of contributions to,
 a political committee, political communications to members, and voter
 registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns;
 `(ii) that no employee may be required actually to join any labor
 organization, but if a collective bargaining agreement covering an employee
 purports to require membership or payment of dues or other fees to a labor
 organization as a condition of employment, the employee may elect instead
 to pay an agency fee to the labor organization;
 `(iii) that the amount of the agency fee shall be limited to the employee's
 pro rata share of the cost of the labor organization's exclusive
 representation services to the employee's collective bargaining unit,
 including collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance
 adjustment;
 `(iv) that an employee who elects to be a full member of the labor
 organization and pay membership dues is entitled to a reduction of those
 dues by the employee's pro rata share of the total spending by the labor
 organization for political activities;
 `(v) that the cost of the labor organization's exclusive representation
 services, and the amount of spending by such organization for political
 activities, shall be computed on the basis of such cost and spending for
 the immediately preceding fiscal year of such organization; and
 `(vi) of the amount of the labor organization's full membership dues,
 initiation fees, and assessments for the current year; the amount of the
 reduced membership dues, subtracting the employee's pro rata share of the
 organization's spending for political activities, for the current year;
 and the amount of the agency fee for the current year.
 `(C) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if the labor
 organization provides all represented employees an annual examination
 by an independent certified public accountant of financial statements
 supplied by such organization which attests that the expenditures which
 the union claimed it made for certain expenses were actually made for
 those expenses. Such examination shall be conducted in accordance with
 generally accepted auditing standards.
 `(D) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if the labor
 organization--
 `(i) maintains procedures to promptly determine the costs that may properly
 be charged to agency fee payors as costs of exclusive representation,
 and explains such procedures in the written notification required under
 subparagraph (B); and
 `(ii) if any person challenges the costs which may be properly charged as
 costs of exclusive representation--
 `(I) provides a mutually selected impartial decisionmaker to hear and decide
 such challenge pursuant to rules of discovery and evidence and subject to de
 novo review by the National Labor Relations Board or an applicable court; and
 `(II) places in escrow amounts reasonably in dispute pending the outcome
 of the challenge.
 `(E)(i) A labor organization that does not satisfy the requirements of
 subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) shall finance any expenditures specified
 in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (2) only with funds legally
 collected under this Act for its separate segregated fund.
 `(ii) For purposes of this paragraph, subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) shall
 apply only with respect to communications expressly advocating the election
 or defeat of any clearly identified candidate for elective public office.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 contributions and expenditures made after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.