S 1446 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1446
To provide for an equitable and universal national health care program
administered by the States, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 11 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. KERREY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide for an equitable and universal national health care program
administered by the States, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Health USA Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and program goals.
Sec. 3. General definitions.
TITLE I--UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
Sec. 101. Universal eligibility.
Sec. 102. Enrollment in approved plans.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
Sec. 201. Covered health care services.
Sec. 202. Covered long-term care services.
Sec. 203. Provider standards.
Sec. 204. State approval of plans.
TITLE III--FINANCING
SUBTITLE A--BUDGET PROCESS
Sec. 301. National program budget.
Sec. 302. State program budgets.
Sec. 303. Payments to States.
SUBTITLE B--PAYMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS, PROVIDERS, AND CARE MANAGERS
Sec. 311. Payments to approved plans.
Sec. 312. Payments to providers under approved plans.
Sec. 313. Payments to institutional providers.
Sec. 314. Payments for practitioner services.
Sec. 315. Payments to care managers.
SUBTITLE C--SOURCES OF REVENUES
Sec. 331. Federal sources of revenues.
Sec. 332. State sources of revenues.
Sec. 333. Cost-sharing.
Sec. 334. National Health Care Trust Fund.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 401. National Health Care Commission.
Sec. 402. State programs.
Sec. 403. State Commissions on Quality.
Sec. 404. Resource Enhancement Fund.
TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA.
Sec. 501. Effective date.
Sec. 502. Repeals.
Sec. 503. Transition.
Sec. 504. Relation to ERISA.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PROGRAM GOALS.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) health care spending in the United States has grown at a rate that
 substantially exceeds the rise in the Nation's gross national product
 (GNP), and more specifically that--
 (A) between 1965 and 1989, national health spending doubled, increasing
 from 5.9 to 11.6 percent of the GNP;
 (B) national spending on health care has been increasing at a greater
 rate than the general cost-of-living index and the growth in the GNP for
 a number of years;
 (C) in 1989, spending on health care was $604,000,000,000, an amount which
 exceeded the proportion of the GNP spent on health care by every other
 industrialized nation;
 (D) the Nation's high relative expenditure on health care diminishes
 American incomes, productivity, and competitiveness in global trade;
 (E) administrative, marketing, and liability costs are among those components
 of health care costs that have grown the fastest; and
 (F) cost-shifting, the rising cost of insurance premiums, and declining
 coverage are leaving more Americans without access or without adequate
 access to important health services;
 (2) a growing number of Americans are uninsured or inadequately insured
 to meet their health care needs, and more specifically that--
 (A) all Americans have a right to at least a basic level of health care
 services that are continuously available and determined to be cost-effective;
 (B) at least 33,000,000 Americans currently lack access to basic health
 services at any point in time; and
 (C) it is estimated that during any 2-year period, approximately 25 percent
 of the non-elderly population of this Nation has neither health insurance
 nor public health care coverage for some period of time, and that an
 additional 13 percent of all Americans are underinsured for health care; and
 (3) the growing costs of health care, coupled with declining access to
 services, represent a growing national problem, and more specifically that--
 (A) despite growing expenditures on health care, health status indicators
 in the United States lag well behind those of other industrialized nations;
 (B) studies indicate that persons who are uninsured or underinsured are
 less likely to receive adequate health care services;
 (C) studies also find that insufficient access to health care services
 has a negative impact on health status and also increases health care
 expenditures in the longer term;
 (D) the Nation's current system of financing health care is complex,
 confusing and frustrating to many Americans, including physicians and
 other providers of health care; and
 (E) national expenditures on health care cannot continue to expand
 faster than inflation and the rate of national economic growth without
 endangering the country's domestic standard of living and international
 economic competitiveness.
 (b) PROGRAM GOALS- It is the policy of the Congress that the financing of
 the health care system of this Nation should reflect the following goals:
 (1) The financing system should contain adequate measures to control
 health care costs and expenditures with emphasis placed on the provision
 of appropriate and effective services.
 (2) Administration of health care financing and methods of paying for
 health care services should be simplified and made more efficient.
 (3) Access to an adequate level of effective and efficient health care
 services, including long-term care services, should be provided to all
 United States citizens and permanent residents to promote the health of
 the American people.
 (4) To facilitate equitable access and meet cost control objectives,
 coverage should be provided in 1 universal health care financing program.
 (5) To ensure universal and uninterrupted coverage of the population and
 to free employers from the administrative burden of providing coverage,
 health care coverage should be separated from employment.
 (6) The population and professional providers should have the freedom of
 choice among a range of health care plans.
 (7) To meet the broad health care needs of the population, it is necessary
 to establish an adequate system of financing comprehensive health care
 services that emphasizes the delivery of quality preventive, diagnostic,
 treatment, rehabilitative, and long-term care services.
 (8) To improve the balance within the delivery system, greater emphasis
 should be given to primary and preventive care services.
 (9) To further assure adequate access to health care services, the system
 should provide incentives for physicians and other health care professionals
 to locate and practice in rural and other medically underserved areas.
 (10) To ensure that coverage is universal and that costs are equitably
 distributed, the financial burden for the program should be shared
 progressively, based on ability to pay.
 (11) Revenues, from specifically dedicated and general taxes, should be
 sufficient to fund the Federal share of the program, including adequate
 reserves.
 (12) The incidence and cost of professional liability, as they affect
 access to health care services and health care costs, should be addressed.
 (13) Flexibility and responsiveness should be encouraged among State
 programs and local providers of health care services to provide quality,
 effective, and adequate care that recognizes local variations in medical
 needs and preferences.
 (14) States should be encouraged to be innovative in the organization of
 health care services.
SEC. 3. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `approved plan' means a public or private health services plan
 (whether offered by the State, an insurer, health maintenance organization,
 or other entity) which offers covered health care services or covered
 long-term care services, or both, approved under a State program under
 section 204.
 (2) The term `Commission' means the National Health Care Commission
 established in section 401.
 (3) The term `covered health care services' means those health care services
 specified in section 201.
 (4) The term `covered long-term care services' means those long-term care
 services specified in section 202.
 (5) The term `State program' means a State health care program approved
 under section 402.
 (6) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
 of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa,
 and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (7) The term `Trust Fund' means the National Health Care Trust Fund
 established in section 334.
 (b) OTHER DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided, the definitions
 contained in section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 shall apply in this Act.
TITLE I--UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
SEC. 101. UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each individual who is a resident of the United States
 and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (c)) is eligible for covered health care services
 and covered long-term care services under the State program in the State
 in which the individual maintains a primary residence.
 (b) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN NONIMMIGRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Commission may make eligible for covered health care
 services and covered long-term care services such classes of aliens admitted
 to the United States as nonimmigrants as the Commission may provide.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1),
 the Commission shall consider reciprocity in health care and long-term
 care services offered to United States citizens who are nonimmigrants to
 other foreign states, and such other factors as the Commission determines
 to be appropriate.
 (c) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `lawful resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
 residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United
 States under color of law, including an alien with lawful temporary resident
 status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).
SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT IN APPROVED PLANS.
 (a) ENROLLMENT PROCESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall specify an understandable and
 readily available process for the enrollment in approved plans of eligible
 individuals residing in the State. Such enrollments may occur by mail,
 at offices of the State program and other locations, or by other methods
 approved by the State program.
 (2) OPEN-ENROLLMENT PERIODS- Each State program shall establish at least 1
 open-enrollment period each calendar year for the enrollment of eligible
 individuals in any approved plan serving the residential area of such
 individuals to the extent such plan has the capacity to provide services.
 (3) DISENROLLMENT PROCEDURES- Each State program shall provide an individual
 an opportunity to change an approved plan--
 (A) during any open-enrollment period,
 (B) if such individual is eligible for covered long-term care services and
 such individual's present approved plan does not provide coverage for such
 services, or
 (C) as a resolution of a grievance filed by such individual under procedures
 established under section 402(b)(7).
 (4) DEFAULT ENROLLMENT- In the case of an eligible individual who otherwise
 is not enrolled in an approved plan under any State program, such individual
 shall be covered by the State-operated approved plan in the State in which
 such individual maintains a primary residence. The State shall provide a
 process for enrollment of the individual at the time and place in which
 the individual first is provided (after the effective date of benefits
 under this Act) covered health care services or covered long-term care
 services in the State-operated approved plan.
 (5) ISSUANCE OF HEALTH SERVICES CARD- Upon enrollment in an approved plan,
 each eligible individual shall be issued a health services card that
 indicates the approved plan in which the individual is enrolled.
 (b) TREATMENT OF MARRIED INDIVIDUALS- A State may not require married
 individuals to enroll in the same approved plan.
 (c) TREATMENT OF MINOR DEPENDENTS- In the case of an unmarried individual
 under 18 years of age, enrollment in an approved plan shall be effected, in
 a manner specified under each State program in accordance with guidelines
 of the Commission, by a parent or guardian of the child. Except in such
 cases as the Commission may provide, such enrollment shall be in the
 approved plan in which the enrolling parent or guardian is enrolled.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
SEC. 201. COVERED HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The covered health care services provided under this Act
 by each approved plan are as follows:
 (1) HOSPITAL CARE- Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, including
 24-hour a day emergency services.
 (2) PHYSICIAN SERVICES AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL MEDICAL SERVICES- Physician
 services and professional services of other health care professionals who
 are authorized to provide health care services under State law.
 (3) TESTS- Diagnostic and screening tests and procedures.
 (4) PRESCRIPTION DRUGS- Prescription drugs incidental to physician services
 and other professional medical services.
 (5) PREVENTIVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES- As defined by the Commission:
 (A) Basic immunizations.
 (B) Pre-natal and post-natal care (including home visitation services).
 (C) Well-baby care (for infants under 1 year of age).
 (D) Well-child care (including periodic physical examinations, hearing
 and vision screening, and developmental screening and examinations) for
 individuals under 18 years of age.
 (E) Periodic screening mammography, Pap smears, and colorectal examinations
 and examinations for prostate cancer (according to guidelines adopted by
 the Commission on recommendations by the National Advisory Board established
 in section 401(j)).
 (F) Family planning services.
 (G) Health education and promotion services designed to prevent or minimize
 the effect of illness, disease, or medical condition.
 (H) Such other health care services as are found to be effective in
 preventing or minimizing the effect of illness, disease, or medical
 condition.
 (6) MENTAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES- Diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, and
 crisis intervention for a mental illness, subject to an annual limitation
 of 45 inpatient days and 25 outpatient visits.
 (7) DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT PROGRAMS- Drug and alcohol abuse
 treatment services provided under a treatment program approved by the
 State and through provider organizations that meet State qualification
 standards, subject to an annual limitation of 45 inpatient days and 25
 outpatient visits.
 (8) HOSPICE CARE- Hospice care for individuals certified to be terminally
 ill, including care-management services, provided by a hospice program
 approved by the State.
 (9) POST-HOSPITAL SKILLED NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- Post-hospital skilled
 nursing services and home health care services.
 (10) OTHER MEDICAL AND HEALTH CARE SERVICES- Other medical and health care
 services specified by the Commission, including the following:
 (A) Services and supplies incidental to the provision of physician services.
 (B) Hospital services incidental to physician services rendered to
 outpatients.
 (C) Experimental treatments, as reviewed by the appropriate technical
 advisory committee (established in section 401(j)(8)(A)) and authorized
 by the Commission or a State program.
 (D) Outpatient physical therapy services, outpatient speech pathology
 services, and outpatient occupational therapy services.
 (E) Health care clinic services, including rural health care clinic services.
 (F) Home dialysis supplies and equipment.
 (G) Diagnostic x-ray tests, diagnostic laboratory tests, and other
 diagnostic tests.
 (H) Radiation (and related) therapy.
 (I) Durable medical equipment used in the patient's home.
 (J) Ambulance service, to the extent provided in regulation.
 (K) Prosthetic devices which replace all or part of an internal body organ
 (including lens after cataract surgery), including replacements of such
 devices.
 (L) Leg, arm, back, and neck braces, and artificial legs, arms, and eyes,
 including necessary replacements.
 (M) Hearing aids, upon a determination of a certified audiologist or
 physician that a hearing problem exists and is caused by a condition that
 can be corrected by use of a hearing aid.
 (b) Limitations on Amount, Duration, and Scope-
 (1) NO LIMITS IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section and section
 333, an approved plan may not limit the amount, duration, or scope of
 covered health care services.
 (2) LIMITATIONS DETERMINED BY COMMISSION- The Commission may limit, and may
 allow State programs to limit, the duration or scope of specific covered
 health care services if--
 (A) such limitations are in accord with the prevailing medical practice
 guidelines,
 (B) such limitations are necessary to allocate expenditures in a manner
 that will optimize improvements in the health and well being of the
 population, and
 (C) adequate provisions are made to allow reasonable exceptions to such
 limitations.
 (3) LIMITATIONS ON SERVICES PROVIDED OUTSIDE THE STATE- Covered health
 care services shall not include items and services not provided within
 the State of the individual's residence, except for--
 (A) emergency hospital care or physician services available in any other
 State or country while the individual is temporarily visiting such State
 or country,
 (B) any item or service available from a provider in a neighboring State if--
 (i) the provider is closer to the individual's residence than a provider
 in the State of the individual's residence, or
 (ii) such State and the State of the individual's residence have established
 a reciprocal provision of care relationship, and
 (C) emergency hospital care or physician services available in Canada or
 Mexico if the hospital or physician is closer to the individual's residence
 than a hospital or physician in the United States.
 (4) COSMETIC SURGERY EXCLUDED- Covered health care services shall not
 include cosmetic surgery, unless--
 (A) required to correct a congenital anomaly,
 (B) required to restore or correct a part of the body which has been
 altered as a result of accidental injury, disease, or surgery, or
 (C) determined to be medically necessary by the State program.
 (c) ADDITIONAL SERVICES- Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 limiting the health care services that an approved plan may provide.
 (d) NO DUPLICATE PRIVATE INSURANCE- Private insurance for health care
 services may be sold in a State only for services not covered under the
 State program of such State.
 (e) STATE-FINANCING OF SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES- There is no Federal financing
 available under this Act for health care services other than covered health
 care services.
SEC. 202. COVERED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The covered long-term care services provided under this
 Act by each approved plan (either as separate coverage or as part of the
 coverage for covered health care services) are institutional services,
 noninstitutional services, and respite care services for the health, social,
 and personal needs of individuals with limited self-care capabilities in
 order to promote the maximum functional independence of such individuals.
 (b) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- For purposes of subsection (a), institutional
 services are items and services provided to an individual while residing
 in a nursing facility meeting the minimum requirements established by the
 Commission and approved for operation by the State program. Such services
 are as follows:
 (1) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 (2) Bed and board in connection with the furnishing of supervised residential
 services.
 (3) Physical, occupational, or speech therapy.
 (4) Medical social services.
 (5) Drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment as are ordinarily
 furnished for the care and treatment of inpatients.
 (6) Other services necessary for the health of patients and generally
 provided by chronic nursing facilities.
 (c) NONINSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- For purposes of subsection (a),
 noninstitutional services are home and community-based care services
 provided to an individual to enable the individual to remain in such
 individual's place of residence within the community. Such services shall
 include the following:
 (1) Homemaker services, including meals.
 (2) Home health aide services.
 (3) Heavy chores.
 (4) Adult day health care, social day care or psychiatric day care.
 (5) Home mobility aids and minor adaptions to the home that promote
 independence (railings, ramps, special toilets).
 (6) Medical social work services.
 (7) Community mental health services, therapy services, and nursing services.
 (8) Physical, occupational or rehabilitative services to preserve and
 restore functional capability or prevent further deterioration.
 (9) Transportation services to and from health and social services.
 (10) Nutrition and dietary counseling provided by or under the supervision
 of a qualified dietitian.
 (11) Other services as determined by the Commission and authorized by the
 care manager.
 (d) RESPITE CARE SERVICES- For purposes of subsection (a), respite care
 services are institutional or noninstitutional services to provide temporary
 relief to an individual's primary caregiver who is a relative or friend
 of such individual. Such services may not exceed 30 days or 720 hours per
 calendar year and are as follows:
 (1) Companion, day care, and homemaker services.
 (2) Training for informal caregivers.
 (e) DETERMINATION OF NEED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Individual needs shall be determined by care managers
 through standardized assessments of the individual's abilities for self-care,
 including--
 (A) medical examinations necessary to determine the level of medical care
 (if any) that is required, and
 (B) environmental and psychosocial evaluations to determine the physical
 and mental abilities of the individual.
Such assessments shall be conducted pursuant to criteria established by
the Commission (subject to modification by the State with approval by the
Commission).
 (2) TYPE OF SERVICES- The assessment described in paragraph (1) shall
 include a determination by the care manager whether institutional services,
 noninstitutional services, or respite care services are required. Such
 determination shall be based on the following:
 (A) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- The individual's inability to perform at
 least 3 ADLs (of which 2 must be described in clauses (iii), (iv), or (v)
 of paragraph (4)(A)) or a similar level of disability due to cognitive
 impairment.
 (B) NONINSTITUTIONAL SERVICES- The individual's inability to perform at least
 3 ADLs or 3 IADLs (without substantial assistance from another individual)
 or similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment.
 (C) RESPITE CARE SERVICES- The degree to which the individual, on a daily
 basis, is dependent on a primary caregiver who is living with or assisting
 the individual without monetary compensation and is providing assistance to
 the individual in at least 3 ADLs or IADLs or a similar level of disability
 due to cognitive impairment.
 (3) PLAN OF CARE- The care manager shall develop a plan of care for an
 individual in consultation with the individual, family members, or other
 informal caregivers, and based on the assessment described in paragraph
 (1). The individual shall be eligible for only those covered long-term
 services included in the plan of care.
 (4) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) ADLS- The term `ADLs' means activities of daily living, including
 such basic self-maintenance activities as (i) bathing, (ii) dressing,
 (iii) toileting, (iv) eating, (v) transferring from bed to chair, (vi)
 exiting outside, and (vii) walking.
 (B) IADLS- The term `IADLs' means instrumental activities of daily living,
 including such activities as (i) cooking, (ii) cleaning, (iii) shopping,
 (iv) taking medications, (v) doing laundry, (vi) making telephone calls,
 and (vii) managing money.
 (f) CARE MANAGEMENT- Covered long-term care services shall include
 coordination by the care manager of such services with the provision of
 covered health care services to enable an individual to remain safely in
 the least restrictive setting.
 (g) REASSESSMENT- Reassessment of the individual's needs shall be conducted
 by a care manager at appropriate intervals, but not less than annually in the
 case of an individual receiving institutional services and semiannually in
 the case of individual receiving noninstitutional or respite care services.
 (h) LEAST RESTRICTIVE SETTING- In providing covered long-term care services
 under an approved plan, a State program shall encourage and reimburse
 noninstitutional long-term care where appropriate, as determined by the
 assessment process, to allow individuals needing long-term care to remain
 safely in their homes to the maximum extent possible.
 (i) ADDITIONAL SERVICES- Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 limiting the long-term care services that an approved plan may provide.
 (j) NO DUPLICATE PRIVATE INSURANCE- Private insurance for long-term care
 services may be sold in a State only for services not covered under the
 State program of such State.
 (k) STATE-FINANCING OF SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES- There is no Federal financing
 available under this Act for long-term care services other than covered
 long-term care services.
SEC. 203. PROVIDER STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall prescribe rules similar to the rules
 provided in section 1866 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 with respect to conditions of participation for health care providers in
 State programs.
 (b) ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS FOR PROVISIONS OF CERTAIN SERVICES- In the case
 of high-risk, high-cost, elective, or over-utilized items or services,
 specified by the Commission, for which payment may otherwise be made under
 this Act, the Commission, or State program, may restrict coverage of such
 items or services to a provider--
 (1) that is certified by an appropriate specialty board in the relevant
 medical specialty, or
 (2) that is adequately equipped and staffed (in accordance with regulations
 of the Commission) to furnish the items or services, or
 (3) that is both.
 (c) CARE MANAGEMENT SERVICES- The Commission shall prescribe standards
 for care managers providing services with respect to covered long-term
 care services. Such standards shall be sufficiently flexible--
 (1) to allow State programs to provide care management services or to
 contract with private nonprofit organizations or agencies to provide
 such services.
 (2) to insure that such managers are independent of approved plans or
 other care providers.
 (3) to allow individuals such as nurses, social workers, or other medical
 or social welfare professionals to be care managers, and
 (4) to allow State programs to provide care managers with the responsibility
 for monitoring the adequacy and quality of care provided.
SEC. 204. STATE APPROVAL OF PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide for the review and approval
 or disapproval of health services plans as approved plans in the State
 for purposes of this Act.
 (b) REQUIREMENTS- A State may not approve a health services plan as an
 approved plan under its State program unless the State finds that the plan--
 (1) provides services at least equal to covered health care services or
 covered long-term care services, or both, for the capitation payment
 determined by the State program under section 311 and any copayments
 allowed under section 333,
 (2) provides for services of an acceptable quality (as determined by the
 State program),
 (3) provides for enrollment of eligible individuals in a manner consistent
 with section 102,
 (4) does not discriminate in its enrollment and provision of benefits
 on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, sex, marital status, type of
 occupation, disability or health condition, or other impermissible basis
 (as specified by the Commission),
 (5) provides for simplified procedural requirements,
 (6) provides for an approved orientation for new enrollees,
 (7) provides for establishment of budgets and payments for services in a
 manner consistent with this Act,
 (8) provides for payment of services rendered to enrollees of such plan by
 providers in another State or country as described in section 201(b)(3),
 at reimbursement rates established by such State or country,
 (9) provides for economic operation and administration of the State program,
 (10) provides for information and data systems as specified by the Commission
 and State program,
 (11) provides for accountability, including an advisory committee of
 enrollees in such plan who have adequate access to information and data
 (including financial records) of such plan,
 (12) establishes a responsive grievance procedure for the receipt and
 resolution of grievances concerning the enrollment of individuals and
 delivery of services under this Act, and
 (13) meets such other requirements as the Commission may specify to insure
 against fraud and abuse under this Act.
 (c) STATE-OPERATED APPROVED PLAN-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall establish at least 1 approved
 plan operated by the State program, that will meet the requirements of
 subsection (b), provide payment for experimental treatments as described
 in section 312(e)(3), and be available to any eligible resident of the
 State not enrolled in another approved plan.
 (2) COST CONTAINMENT MEASURES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Each State-operated approved plan shall control costs
 in a manner that does not impede appropriate use of covered health care
 services and covered long-term care services and does not intrude on
 clinical decision making by health care providers who follow accepted
 standards of practice. The cost containment measures shall include--
 (i) negotiated fee schedules,
 (ii) negotiated expenditure targets or caps, and
 (iii) certain specialty services directed to certain types of providers.
 (B) ALTERNATIVE MEASURES- If the cost containment measures described in
 subparagraph (A) are inadequate, the State-operated approved plan may
 institute any or all of the following measures:
 (i) Cost-sharing for services (subject to the requirements of section 333).
 (ii) Controls on utilization ordered by providers, including concurrent
 utilization review, pre-procedure certification, and other methods as
 necessary.
 (3) WAIVER- The State program may apply to the Commission for a waiver to
 contract with a private approved plan to fulfill the State's responsibilities
 for administration of the State-operated approved plan. Any contractor
 and contractual arrangement must fulfill the following criteria:
 (A) The contractor must provide--
 (i) payment for individuals enrolled in the plan,
 (ii) payment for individuals not enrolled in any other approved plan, and
 (iii) payment for experimental treatments for persons enrolled in any plan
 as described in section 312(e)(3).
 (B) The State program and the contractor must demonstrate that the
 alternative arrangements would--
 (i) be administratively as efficient as a State-operated approved plan, and
 (ii) provide access to quality health services at least equal to a
 State-operated approved plan.
 (d) LIMITED PLANS- Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), a State program may
 contract with and approve a health services plan which provides limited
 services (including either covered health care services or covered long-term
 care services) as part of a coordinated provision of full services in
 order to assure quality or convenience to a local population.
 (e) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL- If a State determines that a health services
 plan that has been previously approved no longer meets the requirements
 of an approved plan, the State shall withdraw approval of the plan and
 shall provide a procedure whereby individuals enrolled in the plan may be
 enrolled in other approved plans.
TITLE III--FINANCING
Subtitle A--Budget Process
SEC. 301. NATIONAL PROGRAM BUDGET.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall recommend to the Congress an annual
 fiscal year budget of expenditures which estimates the total expenditures
 to be made in such fiscal year by States and the Federal Government for
 covered health care services, covered long-term care services, and care
 management services under this Act (including administrative costs).
 (b) NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- At least 5 months before the beginning of the first fiscal
 year of the program under this Act, the Commission shall compute the national
 average per capita cost for each of the services described in subsection
 (a) using data from the national health accounts of the Office of National
 Cost Estimates of the Office of the Actuary of the Health Care Financing
 Administration, and other available data.
 (2) ADJUSTMENTS FOR RISK GROUPS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall develop an adjustment factor to the
 national average per capita costs computed under paragraph (1) for each
 risk group (as designated under subparagraph (B)) to reflect the national
 average per capita costs for that risk group.
 (B) RISK GROUPS- The Commission shall designate a series of risk groups,
 determined by age, sex, and other factors that represent distinct patterns
 of health care services and long-term care services utilization and costs.
 (3) STATE ADJUSTMENTS TO NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS- The Commission
 shall develop for each State a factor to adjust the national average per
 capita costs for each risk group to reflect--
 (A) average labor and nonlabor costs that are necessary to produce the
 services described in subsection (a),
 (B) any special social, environmental, or other condition affecting health
 status or the need for health care services or long-term care services,
 (C) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly
 the proportion of the population residing in rural or medically underserved
 areas, and
 (D) any other factor.
 (c) STATE TOTAL EXPENDITURES- The Commission shall compute for each State
 total projected expenditures for each of the services described in subsection
 (a) by multiplying the national average per capita costs of each risk group
 designated in subsection (b)(2)(B) by the State adjustment factors described
 in subsection (b)(3) by the number of persons in the State estimated by
 the Bureau of the Census to be resident members of each risk group.
 (d) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS- The Commission shall recommend to the Congress the
 appropriate Federal contribution for each State. The Federal contribution
 shall be determined by subtracting the State share from 100 percent of
 the expenditures for such State (as described under subsection (c)), but
 in no event shall such Federal contribution be less than 82 percent nor
 more than 92 percent of such expenditures. The Federal contribution for
 all States shall equal 87 percent of the aggregate of such expenditures
 for all States. In determining each State share, the Commission shall
 recommend to the Congress a formula that considers a State's per capita
 income or other relevant economic indicators.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT CALCULATIONS- For each subsequent fiscal year, the Commission
 shall recompute under subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) at least 5 months
 before the beginning of such fiscal year. In making such a recomputation,
 the Commission shall take into account--
 (1) changes in medical technology, research evidence concerning the
 efficacy and safety of health care services and long-term care services,
 needs for health personnel, and professional practice, after reviewing
 recommendations of the National Advisory Board, and
 (2) changes in the services described in subsection (a).
SEC. 302. STATE PROGRAM BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall establish an annual fiscal year
 State program budget which provides for--
 (1) the expenditures to be made under the State program in such fiscal
 year for covered health care services, covered long-term care services, and
 care management services under this Act (including prevention expenditures,
 capital costs, and administrative costs), and
 (2) the revenues to meet such expenditures.
 (b) COORDINATION- Each State program budget shall be coordinated, in
 a manner specified by the Commission, with the national program budget
 established under section 301(a).
 (c) STATE SHARE- Each State program shall cover the State share of
 program costs through the use of tax revenues and copayments allowed under
 section 333.
 (d) ANNUAL PUBLICATION- The State shall provide for the publication annually
 of the most recent State program budget established under this section.
SEC. 303. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State with an approved State program under section
 402 of this Act is entitled to receive, from amounts in the Trust Fund,
 an amount equal to the product of (1) the average number of residents
 of the State, and (2) the annual Federal share of the average per capita
 costs for such State (computed under section 301).
 (b) USE OF CARE FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All revenues (including State revenues) provided to finance
 a State program under this Act shall be deposited into a Care Fund for
 the State. Payments to approved plans and care managers shall be made from
 such Fund.
 (2) SPECIAL ACCOUNTS- Each State shall establish within its Care Fund special
 accounts, the amount of revenues deposited in each to be determined by the
 State program under the State program budget. The various special accounts
 shall include the following:
 (A) PREVENTION ACCOUNT- A Prevention Account shall be used for
 community-based disease prevention, health promotion, farm and occupational
 health and safety, or other programs and will be targeted to populations
 with particular health care needs. Programs should fund innovative,
 community-based programs and services that reduce or eliminate illness
 and disability or provide outreach to underserved populations, rather
 than funding medical or clinical services that are the responsibility of
 approved plans.
 (B) CAPITAL ACCOUNT- A Capital Account shall be used in designated local
 areas according to a formula based on (i) population size and geographic
 dispersion, (ii) population mix identified by factors used to establish
 risk-adjusted capitation payments, (iii) capital needs to ensure adequate
 access to general and specialty services and technologies and to ensure
 medical effectiveness, and (iv) other factors as determined by the State
 program. Funds in a Capital Account may also be used to support the
 development of approved plans by nonprofit and public agencies. Capital
 obligations in effect at the inception of the State program may be approved
 for assistance by the State program. The State program shall determine
 the procedures by which the capital funds will be distributed to local
 institutions and organizations. Each State is encouraged to make local
 planning processes involving health care providers and consumers a central
 part of the capital allocation procedures. Reimbursements to providers
 for covered health care services and covered long-term care services shall
 not include capital assistance.
 (C) EDUCATION AND RESEARCH ACCOUNT- An Education and Research Account
 shall be used to encourage and fund research and teaching activities
 in patient care settings. The State program shall designate funds to be
 allocated to major and minor teaching hospitals and other facilities for
 excess operating and capital costs associated with teaching and research
 activities. Each State is encouraged to use such funds to meet national,
 regional, and local health care needs, particularly training of health
 professionals to meet manpower needs.
Subtitle B--Payments to Approved Plans, Providers, and Care Managers
SEC. 311. PAYMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS.
 (a) COMPUTATION OF ADJUSTED AVERAGE PER CAPITA COST- Based on a methodology
 established by the Commission, each State program shall compute an adjusted
 average per capita cost for covered health care services and covered
 long-term care services under the program in the State for different
 classes of individuals. Such adjusted average per capita cost shall reflect
 the average per capita level of expenditures that the State estimates
 (based on actual experience or actuarial equivalent, with appropriate
 adjustments to assure actuarial equivalence) is required to provide for
 expenditures in the State for services (and related administrative costs)
 under the State program. Such adjusted average per capita cost shall be
 computed for individuals based on age, sex, regional cost differences,
 local areas with disproportionate low-income populations, and such other
 factors as will assure actuarial equivalence and otherwise provide for
 equitable distribution of funds to approved plans. The State program shall
 negotiate adjustment factors with the relevant health services associations
 and the approved plans in the State.
 (b) PAYMENT TO PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide for payment to approved
 plans, for individuals enrolled under this Act, on a monthly basis in
 an amount equal to the adjusted average per capita cost computed under
 subsection (a) with respect to such individuals. The program may provide for
 retroactive adjustment in such payments to take into account any difference
 between the actual number (or composition) of individuals enrolled under
 the plan and the number of such individuals estimated to be so enrolled
 in determining the amount of the advance payment.
 (2) STATE-OPERATED APPROVED PLANS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In determining the number of individuals estimated to be
 enrolled in the State-operated approved plan for purposes of paragraph
 (1), the State program shall include all individuals who maintain a primary
 residence in such State and have not enrolled in another approved plan in
 the State.
 (B) ACCOUNTING OF PAYMENTS- The State-operated approved plan shall maintain
 separate accounting of payments received on behalf of State residents not
 enrolled in any other approved plan and for experimental treatments.
 (C) UNUSED PAYMENTS- Any payments made to the State-operated approved
 plan for State residents not enrolled in any other approved plan or for
 experimental treatments, that are not used for these purposes, are to be
 returned to the State program at the end of the plan year.
SEC. 312. PAYMENTS TO PROVIDERS UNDER APPROVED PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide for the payment of
 providers by approved plans in a manner consistent with this subtitle.
 (b) MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT- Each provider of services or other practitioner
 that receives funding under this Act agrees to accept the payment amount
 recognized under the State program for services covered under the program
 as payment in full for such services and may not impose any charges for
 such services other than those permitted with respect to such services
 under section 333.
 (c) CONTINUUM OF CARE- The Commission, in order to avoid fragmented care,
 shall develop financial incentives, in the payment methods provided under
 this subtitle, to promote a continuum of care.
 (d) DIRECT PAYMENT FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONALS- A State program shall require
 approved plans that pay for most health care services on a fee-for-service
 basis to provide for direct payment to physicians and other health care
 professionals who are authorized to provide health care services under
 State law.
 (e) PAYMENTS BY STATE-OPERATED APPROVED PLANS- A State-operated approved
 plan shall pay providers--
 (1) for the care of all individuals enrolled in such plan,
 (2) for all eligible individuals in such State who do not enroll in any
 other approved plan, and
 (3) for the costs of approved experimental treatments for all individuals
 who meet the criteria of treatment protocols, regardless of the approved
 plan in which such individuals are enrolled.
SEC. 313. PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONAL PROVIDERS.
 (a) DIRECT PAYMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), payment for
 institutional care, including hospital services and nursing facility
 services, shall be made directly to each institution by each State program,
 or its State-operated plan, under an annual prospective budget negotiated
 with each institution and consistent with the State program budget under
 section 302.
 (2) EXCEPTION FOR INSTITUTIONS OWNED BY APPROVED PLANS- In the case of
 institutional care provided by an institution owned by an approved plan,
 payment for such care shall be made to the plan.
 (b) PAYMENTS- Payments shall be made periodically, based on the annual
 operating budget, or per diem or per admission, based on annual operating
 budget targets. Per admission or per diem costs which exceed such budget
 targets shall be reimbursed at marginal costs.
 (c) PLAN CHARGES- Each approved plan shall be charged the full or partial
 costs for institutional care of plan enrollees based on the number of
 admissions or hospital days, multiplied by the average cost per admission
 or hospital day.
 (d) WAIVERS- The Commission may waive the requirement of subsection (a)
 in the case of a State, but only if the State demonstrates that the payment
 methodology used will not result in expenditures exceeding those provided
 under the State program budget.
SEC. 314. PAYMENTS FOR PRACTITIONER SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, payment for
 services by physicians and other individual health care personnel shall
 be based on payment schedules established by each State program. Such
 schedules--
 (1) shall be established after negotiations with organizations representing
 physicians and such personnel,
 (2) shall be based on a national relative value scale, developed by the
 Commission taking into account the relative value scale developed under
 section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as in effect
 on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 (3) shall be in amounts consistent with the State program budget adopted
 under section 302 and with the expenditure targets defined by the State
 program for groupings of physicians and other individual health care
 personnel defined by specialization and geographic area (as determined by
 the State program),
 (4) shall be multiplied by a factor to make total expenditures for services
 of physicians and other individual health care personnel consistent with
 expenditure targets determined in paragraph (3) for approved plans that
 pay such personnel based upon such schedules, and
 (5) shall base future fee increases for each target group of physicians
 and individual health care personnel to the extent expenditures for such
 group are kept within the target for such group.
 (b) PRACTICE PROFILES- Each State program shall develop and provide
 individual practice profiles for physicians and other individual health care
 personnel, as well as comparison profiles for the average of the physicians
 or such personnel in each expenditure target group. Such profiles shall
 also be provided to each negotiating organization representing physicians
 and such personnel to help each organization aid its members in keeping
 expenditures in line with such targets.
 (c) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT MECHANISMS- Approved plans that pay physicians and
 other individual health care personnel by capitation methods, annual salary,
 or hourly payments are exempt from the fee schedules and expenditure targets
 adopted under subsection (a), as long as the amount of payments under such
 methodologies do not exceed, in the aggregate, the amount of payments that
 would otherwise be made under the methodology described in subsection (a).
 (d) PAYMENTS BY STATE-OPERATED PLANS- At least one State-operated plan
 in each State shall pay for services by physicians and other individual
 health care personnel under the methodology described in subsection (a).
SEC. 315. PAYMENTS TO CARE MANAGERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Payment for care managers shall be made directly by each
 State program pursuant to payment schedules under an annual prospective
 budgeting system established by the State consistent with the State program
 budget established under section 302.
 (b) PAYMENT SCHEDULES- The payment schedules may be based on negotiations
 between the State program and care management agencies, capitation, or
 other methods.
 (c) MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT- Each care manager that receives funding under
 this Act agrees to accept the payment amount recognized under the State
 program for services covered under the program as payment in full for such
 services and may not impose any charges for such services.
Subtitle C--Sources of Revenues
SEC. 331. FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) PAYROLL TAXES-
 (1) TAX ON EMPLOYEES- Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees) is amended by redesignating
 subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e) and by inserting after
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) HEALTH USA INSURANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding
 subsections, there is hereby imposed on the income of every individual
 a tax equal to 1 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a))
 received by such individual after December 31, 1992, with respect to
 employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).
 `(2) EMPLOYER'S ELECTION TO PAY EMPLOYEES' TAX- During any period in which
 there is in effect an election by an employer to pay the tax otherwise
 imposed under paragraph (1), wages received by or paid to an individual
 as an employee of such employer shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
 such paragraph.'.
 (2) TAX ON EMPLOYERS- Section 3111 of such Code (relating to rate of tax
 on employers) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection
 (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) HEALTH USA INSURANCE- In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding
 subsections, there is hereby imposed on every employer an excise tax, with
 respect to having individuals in such employer's employ, equal to 4 percent
 (5 percent, if an election is in effect as described in section 3101(c)(2))
 of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid by such employer in
 excess of $30,000 during each calendar year beginning after December 31,
 1992, with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).'.
 (3) TAX ON SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 1401 of such Code (relating to rate of tax on
 self-employment income for hospital insurance) is amended by redesignating
 subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b)
 the following new subsection:
 `(c) HEALTH USA INSURANCE- In addition to the taxes imposed by the
 preceding subsections, there shall be imposed for each taxable year, on
 the self-employment income of every individual, a tax equal to 5 percent
 of the amount of the self-employment income for such taxable year.'.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (2) of section 1402(b) of such Code
 (defining self-employment income) is amended by inserting `($30,000 with
 respect to the tax imposed under section 1401(c))' after `$400'.
 (4) RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAXES- Sections 3201(a), 3211(a), and 3221(a) of such
 Code (relating to tier 1 taxes) are each amended by striking `subsections (a)
 and (b)' each place it appears and inserting `subsections (a), (b), and (c)'.
 (5) ELIMINATION OF LIMIT ON WAGES OR SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME SUBJECT TO
 HEALTH USA INSURANCE TAX-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Subsection (x) of section 3121 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to applicable contribution base) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) HEALTH USA INSURANCE- For purposes of the taxes imposed by sections
 3101(c) and 3111(c), the applicable contribution base for any calendar
 year is equal to the remuneration for employment paid to an individual
 for such calendar year.'.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (i) Subsection (k) of section 1402 of such Code (relating to applicable
 contribution base) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(3) HEALTH USA INSURANCE- For purposes of the tax imposed by section
 1401(c), the applicable contribution base for any calendar year is equal to
 the individual's net earnings from self-employment for such calendar year.'.
 (ii) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code (relating to tier
 1 taxes) is amended--
 (I) by striking `subclause (II)' in subclause (I) and inserting `subclauses
 (II) and (III)', and
 (II) by adding at the end thereof the following new subclause:
 `(III) HEALTH USA INSURANCE- For purposes of applying so much of the rate
 applicable under section 3201(a) or 3221(a) (as the case may be) as does
 not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(c), and for purposes
 of applying so much of the rate of tax applicable under section 3211(a)(1)
 as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 1401(c), the term
 `applicable base' means for any calendar year the applicable contribution
 base determined under section 3121(x)(3) or 1401(k)(3) (as the case may be)
 for such calendar year.'.
 (iii) Subsection (c) of section 6413 of such Code (relating to special
 refunds) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) SEPARATE APPLICATION FOR HEALTH USA INSURANCE TAXES- In applying this
 subsection with respect to--
 `(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(c) (or any amount equivalent to such
 tax), and
 `(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201 as is determined at a rate
 not greater than the rate in effect under section 3101(c),
the applicable contribution base determined under section 3121(x)(3) for
any calendar year shall be substituted for `contribution and benefit base
(as determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act)' each place
it appears.'.
 (iv) Sections 1401(b), 1402(k)(2), 3101(b), 3111(b), 3121(x)(2),
 3231(e)(2)(B)(i)(II), and 6413(c)(3) of such Code are each amended by
 striking `hospital' each place it appears in the headings thereof and
 inserting `health care'.
 (5) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid after December 31, 1992, and with respect
 to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning
 after such date.
 (b) TOP MARGINAL INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX RATE INCREASED TO 33 PERCENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The tables in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of
 section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed)
 are each amended by striking `31%' and inserting `33%' each place it appears.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
 (c) INDIVIDUAL TAX ON UNEARNED INCOME AND EMPLOYERS' MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT
 FOR RETIREES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to normal taxes and surtaxes) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--HEALTH CARE TAXES
`Sec. 59B. Individual health care tax.
`Sec. 59C. Employers health care tax.
`SEC. 59B. INDIVIDUAL HEALTH CARE TAX.
 `In the case of an individual, there is hereby imposed (in addition to
 any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to 2 percent of the
 portion of the adjusted gross income for the taxable year which is not
 attributable to earned income (as defined in section 911(d)(2)).
`SEC. 59C. EMPLOYERS HEALTH CARE TAX.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of an employer, there is imposed (in addition
 to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to 50 percent of
 the actuarially equivalent aggregate amount which would have been paid or
 incurred by the employer (or predecessor employer) during the taxable year
 for individual or family coverage of retired employees with respect to whom
 such employer had a contactual obligation on December 31, 1992, under group
 health plans (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)) in existence on such date.
 `(b) TERMINATION- This section shall not apply in any taxable year beginning
 after December 31, 2012.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of parts of subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII. Health care taxes.'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
 (d) OASDI TAXABLE WAGE BASE INCREASED- Section 230(c) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 430(c)) is amended by striking `beginning)--'
 and all that follows through `that subsection' and inserting `beginning)
 in 1993 shall be $125,000. For purposes of determining under subsection
 (b) of this section the `contribution and benefit base' with respect to
 remuneration paid (and taxable years beginning in 1994 and subsequent years,
 the dollar amount specified in clause (2) of the preceding sentence shall
 be considered to have resulted from the application of such subsection
 (b) of this section and to be the amount determined under that subsection.'.
 (e) INCREASE IN PERCENTAGE OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS SUBJECT TO TAX-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsections (a) and (b) of section 86 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to social security and tier 1 railroad
 retirement benefits) are each amended by striking `one-half' each place
 it appears and inserting `85 percent'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
 (f) TAX ON CORPORATE INCOME-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (b) of section 11 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to tax imposed on corporations) is amended by striking
 `34 percent' each place it appears and inserting `44 percent'.
 (2) Conforming amendments-
 (A) Section 852(b)(3)(D)(iii) of such Code is amended by striking `66
 percent' and inserting `56 percent'.
 (B) Section 1201(a) of such Code is amended by striking `34 percent'
 each place it appears and inserting `44 percent'.
 (C) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e) of such Code are each amended
 by striking `34 percent' and inserting `44 percent'.
 (D) Section 7518(g)(6)(A) of such Code and section 607(h)(6)(A) of the
 Merchant Marine Act, 1936 are each amended by striking `34 percent' and
 inserting `44 percent'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
 (g) INCREASE IN TAX ON CIGARETTES-
 (1) RATE OF TAX- Subsection (b) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (A) by striking `$12 per thousand ($10 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (1) and inserting `$30.50 per thousand';
 and
 (B) by striking `$25.20 per thousand ($21 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (2) and inserting `$64.05 per thousand'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply
 with respect to articles removed after December 31, 1992.
 (3) Floor stocks-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States which are removed before January 1, 1993, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (i) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $18.50 per thousand;
 (ii) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $38.85 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on January 1, 1993,
 to which any tax imposed by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for
 such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on February 15, 1993, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on January 1, 1993.
 (C) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `cigarette' shall
 have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section 5702 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (D) EXCEPTION FOR RETAIL STOCKS- The taxes imposed by subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to cigarettes in retail stocks held on January 1, 1993,
 at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
 (E) FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (19
 U.S.C. 81a et seq.) or any other provision of law--
 (i) cigarettes--
 (I) on which taxes imposed by Federal law are determined, or customs duties
 are liquidated, by a customs officer pursuant to a request made under the
 first proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a))
 before January 1, 1993, and
 (II) which are entered into the customs territory of the United States on
 or after January 1, 1993, from a foreign trade zone, and
 (ii) cigarettes which--
 (I) are placed under the supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the
 provisions of the second proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18,
 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a)) before January 1, 1993, and
 (II) are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or
 after January 1, 1993, from a foreign trade zone,
shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) and such cigarettes
shall, for purposes of subparagraph (A), be treated as being held on January
1, 1993, for sale.
 (h) INCREASE IN TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 5001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to rate of tax on distilled spirits) is amended by striking
 `$13.50' each place it appears in paragraphs (1) and (3) and inserting
 `$50.00'.
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 5010 of such Code (relating to credit
 for wine and flavors content) is amended by striking `$13.50' each place
 it appears in paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) and inserting `$50.00'.
 (3) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On any item subject to tax under section 5001 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is removed before January 1, 1993,
 and held after such date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed
 a tax equal to $36.50.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding an item to which any tax imposed
 by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed on any item by subparagraph (A)
 shall be treated as a tax imposed under section 5001 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be due and payable on February 13, 1993,
 in the same manner as the tax imposed under such section is payable with
 respect to such items removed on January 1, 1993.
 (C) EXCEPTION FOR RETAILERS- To the extent provided in regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate, the tax
 imposed by subparagraph (A) shall not apply to items in retail stocks held
 after December 31, 1992, on the premises of a retail establishment where
 alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises only.
 (D) TREATMENT OF ITEMS IN FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act
 of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a), or any other provision
 of law, any item which is located in a foreign trade zone on January 1,
 1993, shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) and shall
 be treated for purposes of this paragraph as held on such date for sale if--
 (i) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or customs duties
 liquidated, with respect to such item before such date pursuant to a
 request made under the first proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
 (ii) such item is held on such date under the supervision of a customs
 officer pursuant to the second proviso of such section 3(a).
Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury or the
Secretary's delegate, provisions similar to sections 5062 and 5064 of such Code
shall apply to any item with respect to which tax is imposed by subparagraph
(A) by reason of this subparagraph.
 (E) OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE- All provisions of law, including penalties,
 applicable with respect to the excise taxes imposed under section 5001 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall, insofar as applicable and not
 inconsistent with the provisions of this paragraph, apply in respect of
 the taxes imposed by subparagraph (A).
 (4) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 items removed after December 31, 1992.
 (i) INCREASE IN OTHER EXCISE TAXES- The Commission shall recommend to the
 Congress not later than January 1, 1993, increases in other excise taxes
 under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 resulting in additional annual
 revenues of $5,000,000,000.
SEC. 332. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for establishing a financing
 program for the implementation of the State program in the State. Such
 financing program may include--
 (1) funds used to finance the State share of medicaid under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act as in effect on the date described in section 502
 of this Act,
 (2) 75 percent of State and local funding for public hospitals and other
 indigent care programs, and
 (3) State funding from general revenues, earmarked taxes, payroll taxes,
 sales taxes, and such other measures consistent with this Act as the State
 may provide.
 (b) START-UP FUNDS- In order to assist each State in the development and
 implementation of the State program, each State is entitled to receive
 from the Trust Fund an amount equal to--
 (1) $10,000,000, plus
 (2) $1 for each individual of the State population in excess of 7,000,000.
 (c) ON-GOING ENTITLEMENT- Each State with a State program approved by
 the Commission is entitled to funding from the Commission in the amounts
 provided under section 303.
SEC. 333. COST-SHARING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, a State program may
 not permit approved plans to impose cost-sharing for services under this Act.
 (b) COST-SHARING FOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND NONINSTITUTIONAL LONG-TERM
 CARE SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) ANNUAL DEDUCTIBLE- A State program shall require an annual deductible
 with respect to covered health care services and noninstitutional services
 described in section 202(c) (including noninstitutional respite care
 services) equal to--
 (i) $100 for each individual, and
 (ii) $300 for a family consisting of more than 2 individuals.
 (B) COPAYMENTS FOR PHYSICIAN VISITS- A State program shall require a
 copayment of $5 be charged and collected at the first physician visit for
 an illness.
 (C) GENERAL COPAYMENTS- A State program shall require copayments with
 respect to expenses incurred in a calendar year for services described
 in this paragraph at a rate not to exceed 20 percent, or its equivalent
 (including any $5 charge described in subparagraph (B)).
 (2) OVERALL LIMIT ON COST-SHARING- Cost-sharing described in paragraph
 (1) with respect to expenses incurred in any calendar year for services
 described in such paragraph may not exceed--
 (A) $1,000 for a family consisting of 1 individual,
 (B) $1,500 for a family consisting of 2 individuals, or
 (C) $2,000 for a family consisting of more than 2 individuals.
 (3) SERVICES EXCLUDED FROM COST-SHARING- No cost-sharing may be imposed
 with respect to--
 (A) preventive services described in section 201(a)(5),
 (B) inpatient care, and
 (C) other services as specified by the Commission.
 (4) ACCESS FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- The Commission shall establish
 rules and procedures to ensure that services described in paragraph (1)
 are available and affordable to low-income individuals. To the extent
 possible, such rules and procedures shall not be based on means testing
 or stigmatizing indicators.
 (c) LIMIT ON COST-SHARING FOR INSTITUTIONAL LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), cost-sharing with
 respect to expenses incurred in any month for institutional services
 described in section 202(b)(1) may not exceed an amount equal to 80 percent
 of the individual's benefits under title II of the Social Security Act
 for such month.
 (2) THREE-MONTH EXCLUSION- No individual shall be liable for payment of
 any amount for the first 3 months of such institutional services during
 any period of continuous institutional care exceeding 3 months.
 (d) PAYMENT AMOUNT IS PAYMENT IN FULL- No individual shall be liable for
 payment of any amount for covered health care services or covered long-term
 care services furnished under this Act except as permitted in this section.
SEC. 334. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
 (a) TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of
 the United States a trust fund to be known as the `National Health Care
 Trust Fund'. The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as
 may be made and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to,
 such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (2) TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS EQUIVALENT TO CERTAIN TAXES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to 100 percent of the taxes imposed under sections 59B, 59C,
 1401(b), 1401(c), 3101(b), 3101(c), 3111(b), and 3111(c) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (B) ADDITIONAL REVENUES- There are appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to the additional revenues received in the Treasury as the
 result of the amendments made by subsections (a)(4), (b), (d), (e), (f),
 (g), (h), and (i) of section 331 of this Act.
 (C) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) shall be transferred from time to time (not less frequently
 than monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund,
 such amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary
 of the Treasury of the taxes, specified in such subparagraphs, paid to
 or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be made in
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in
 excess of or were less than the taxes specified in such subparagraphs.
 (3) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- All amounts, not otherwise obligated, that remain
 in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplemental
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund on the first day of the fiscal year described
 in section 501 shall be transferred to the Trust Fund.
 (4) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (b)
 through (i) of section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any
 reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Administrator
 of the Health Care Financing Administration shall be deemed a reference
 to the Commission.
 (5) APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL SUMS- There are hereby authorized to be
 appropriated to the Trust Fund such additional sums as may be required
 to make expenditures referred to in subsection (b), including amounts
 appropriated with respect to title XIX of the Social Security Act, section
 1079 of title 10, United States Code (CHAMPUS), and chapter 89 of title 5,
 United States Code, as in effect on the day before the effective date of
 section 502 of this Act.
 (b) Expenditures-
 (1) TO STATES- Payments in each calendar year to each State from the Trust
 Fund as determined under section 303 are hereby authorized and appropriated.
 (2) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- There are hereby authorized and appropriated
 such sums as are necessary for the administrative expenses of the Commission
 for each fiscal year, not to exceed 0.2 percent of the total payments made
 to the States for such fiscal year as determined under section 303.
 (c) TRUST FUND OFF-BUDGET- The receipts and disbursements of the Trust
 Fund and the taxes described in subsection (a)(2) shall not be included
 in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted
 by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be exempt from
 any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net
 lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 401. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE COMMISSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established within the Department of Health
 and Human Services a National Health Care Commission.
 (b) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS- The Commission shall be composed of--
 (1) 8 individuals approved by the President, with the advice and consent
 of the Senate, and
 (2) the Surgeon General of the United States.
Such individuals shall serve for a term of 5 years, except that the terms
of individuals initially appointed shall be (as specified by the President)
for such fewer number of years as will provide for the expiration of terms
on a staggered basis.
 (c) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The President shall fill any vacancy in the membership of
 the Commission in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy
 shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties
 of the Commission.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The President may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Commission for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (d) PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT- The Commission shall select a President
 and a Vice President from among the members of the Commission.
 (e) COMPENSATION- Members of the Commission, with the exception of the
 Surgeon General of the United States, shall be compensated at a level
 comparable to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance with
 section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) STAFF- The Commission shall employ such staff as the Commission may
 determine necessary.
 (g) APPLICABILITY OF CIVIL SERVICE PROVISIONS- The staff of the Commission
 may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States
 Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and be compensated
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter
 53 of title 5 relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates,
 except that no individual may receive pay less than 120 percent of the
 minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule or more
 than the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 (h) DUTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Commission is responsible for the overall administration
 of this Act, as well as the development of specific guidelines to permit
 States to carry out this Act.
 (2) INNOVATION- The Commission shall encourage the States to develop and
 experiment with innovative ways to improve the efficiency, effectiveness,
 and quality of State programs, including the development of models that
 promote the integration of covered health care services and covered
 long-term care services.
 (3) MINIMUM STANDARDS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall establish, evaluate, and update
 national minimum standards to assure the quality of services provided
 under this Act and to monitor efforts by State programs to assure the
 quality of such services.
 (B) NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS- The national minimum standards under
 subparagraph (A) shall be established for institutional providers
 of services, physicians and other individual health care personnel,
 and organized delivery programs. Such standards shall include elements
 relating to--
 (i) adequacy and quality of facilities,
 (ii) training and competence of personnel,
 (iii) comprehensiveness of service,
 (iv) continuity of service,
 (v) patient satisfaction (including waiting time and access to services), and
 (vi) performance standards (including organization, facilities, and
 structure of services, and outcome in palliation, improvement of health,
 stabilization, cure, or rehabilitation).
 (C) EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION- The Commission shall provide for an exchange,
 at least annually, among State Commissions on Quality of information
 respecting quality assurance and cost containment.
 (4) UNIFORM REPORTING- The Commission shall establish uniform reporting
 requirements to ensure an adequate national data base regarding health
 personnel, services and finances of State programs, approved plans,
 and providers.
 (5) TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT, EFFECTIVENESS RESEARCH, AND PRACTICE GUIDELINES-
 The Commission shall, in close consultation with the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services, make recommendations (to be included in the report
 required by subsection (i)) related to--
 (A) technological development and clinical treatment effectiveness;
 (B) outcomes of drugs, devices, and clinical procedures;
 (C) possible inclusion of new drugs and technological procedures as
 covered health care services and discontinuance of payment for inefficient
 procedures; and
 (D) development and adoption of medical guidelines, including the improvement
 of outcomes in rural or other medically underserved areas.
 (6) SERVICES TO MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In making programmatic recommendations (to be included
 in the report required by subsection (i)), the Commission shall consider
 national and regional needs for health professionals and health services,
 including special consideration of areas of medically underserved populations
 and the relative numbers of medical, nursing, and other specialists and
 health professionals providing services in such areas. Such recommendations
 should include economic, educational, or other incentives, such as bonuses,
 tax credits, scholarships, and loan repayment programs, to attract health
 personnel to such areas. The Commission will consider the role of and
 support of the programs of the Health Resources and Services Administration,
 including the National Health Service Corps program and other programs
 focusing on increasing the supply of health manpower, in its recommendations.
 (B) REGIONAL AND STATE EFFORTS ENCOURAGED- The Commission shall strongly
 encourage the further development of--
 (i) college, university, or other State-based programs to train health
 professionals for work in rural or medically underserved areas of a State
 or region, such as the Rural Health Education Network (RHEN) program at
 the University of Nebraska's Medical Center and Nebraska State Offices of
 Rural Health, and
 (ii) State and local grants and scholarships to encourage health care
 providers to work in medically underserved areas.
 (C) ADDITIONAL APPROACHES- The Commission shall also recommend methods to
 support research, demonstrations, and other innovative experiments with
 approaches to providing health services in medically underserved areas
 and improving the delivery and outcomes of care provided in rural or other
 medically underserved areas.
 (7) ORGANIZED APPROACHES TO DELIVERY OF SERVICES- The Commission shall
 sponsor efforts to encourage State programs to develop and expand organized
 approaches to the delivery of health care services, especially those
 that emphasize primary and preventive care and outreach to underserved
 groups. Such approaches may include fee-for-service health care plans,
 health maintenance organizations, local health departments, community
 health care centers, hospital-based and community-oriented team health
 care services, and neighborhood-hospital-home health care plans.
 (8) MALPRACTICE AND LIABILITY REFORM- The Commission shall recommend
 options (to be included in the report required by subsection (i)) for
 providing incentives or grants to States to establish alternative dispute
 resolution systems. Such recommendations may include no-fault, fault-based,
 or binding arbitration systems and may provide for funds for State-level
 demonstration programs for these types of systems. The Commission shall
 also make recommendations pertaining to various tort reforms including
 limitations on recovery of noneconomic damages, reducing awards by the
 amount of compensation from collateral sources, and limiting attorneys'
 contingency fees.
 (i) Report-
 (1) INITIAL REPORT- Not later than January 1, 1992, the Commission
 shall report to the Congress regarding the implementation of the program
 established under this Act, including any recommendations for further
 implementing legislation. Such recommendations shall include proposals for--
 (A) the treatment or enrollment of veterans and families of veterans under
 the program,
 (B) the coordination of the military medical system with the program,
 (C) the transition from coverage by existing Federal health care programs
 for Federal employees and other specific segments of the population to
 coverage by the program established under this Act, and
 (D) the use of existing Federal health care facilities.
 (2) ANNUAL REPORTS- Beginning January 1, 1993, the Commission shall
 annually report to Congress on the status of expenditures under this Act,
 long-range plans and goals for the organization and delivery of personal
 health services, progress in quality assurance, differences in the health
 status of the populations of the different States, necessary changes in
 the education of health personnel, and opportunities for improvements
 under this Act.
 (j) NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The Commission shall provide for appointment of a National
 Advisory Board to advise the Commission on its activities.
 (2) MEMBERSHIP- Such Advisory Board shall consist of 15 members who
 are representatives of employers, unions, health care providers, health
 care insurers, consumer organizations, State programs, and public health
 professionals, as well as the general public. Such members shall serve
 for terms of 3 years, except that, in the initial appointment, 5 members
 shall be each appointed for terms of 1-year, 2-years, and 3-years.
 (3) VACANCIES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall fill any vacancy in the membership
 of the Board in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy
 shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties
 of the Board.
 (B) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (C) REAPPOINTMENT- The Commission may reappoint an appointed member of
 the Board for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (4) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Board shall select a Chairperson
 and a Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Board.
 (5) COMPENSATION- All members of the Board and the committees established
 under paragraph (8) shall be reimbursed by the Commission for travel and
 per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses during the performance of duties
 of the Board in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 (6) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act shall not apply to the Board.
 (7) DUTIES- Such Advisory Board shall sponsor site visits and studies that
 are concerned with issues of access to health care services, utilization
 of health care services, consumer participation and satisfaction in the
 provision of health care services, education of health personnel, medical
 practice, medical technology, quality of approved plans, and malpractice
 liability.
 (8) COMMITTEES- The Board shall create such committees (composed of
 Commission members and others as appointed by the Chairperson) as necessary
 to enable the Board to meet its responsibilities and functions, including
 the following standing committees:
 (A) TECHNICAL COMMITTEE- A technical committee to evaluate medical
 technologies, education of health personnel, and medical practice and
 make recommendations to the Board regarding technology, education, medical
 practice, and other related issues.
 (B) QUALITY OF CARE PLAN COMMITTEE- A quality of care plan committee to
 assess the performance and quality standards for care plans in the States
 and the enforcement of those standards.
 (C) MALPRACTICE AND LIABILITY COMMITTEE- A malpractice and liability
 committee to assess and make recommendations on issues relating to
 professional liability and the resolution of malpractice claims.
SEC. 402. STATE PROGRAMS.
 (a) Submission of Programs-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State shall submit to the Commission the State program
 in the State.
 (2) REGIONAL PROGRAMS- Any State may join with neighboring States to submit
 to the Commission a regional program in lieu of a State program.
 (b) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PROGRAMS- The Commission shall review programs
 submitted under subsection (a) and determine whether such programs meet
 the requirements for approval. The Commission shall not approve such a
 program unless it finds that the program provides, consistent with the
 provisions of this Act, for--
 (1) adequate financing of covered health care services and covered long-term
 care services under the program through a Care Fund, including the annual
 submission of the State program budget to the Commission,
 (2) freedom of choice of eligible individuals in the selection among
 approved plans,
 (3) a system by which the State program shall provide all eligible
 individuals with standardized information about all approved plans in
 their areas to facilitate the enrollment process;
 (4) effective cost containment measures and payment methodologies consistent
 with title III,
 (5) a process for retroactively adjusting hospital payments to more closely
 reflect costs of operation during a calendar year,
 (6) adequate administration, including the designation of a single State
 agency responsible for administration of the program and the establishment
 of a public advisory board (with board representation of interested parties),
 (7) a system of uniform and simplified reporting requirements by approved
 plans;
 (8) responsive quality assurance mechanisms (including the establishment
 of a State Commission on Quality),
 (9) organization of a State procedure to determine capital needs and
 recommend allocation of capital to localities and institutions,
 (10) an organized grievance procedure available to consumers through which
 complaints about the organization and administration of approved plans
 and services covered by the State program may be filed, heard, and resolved,
 (11) a process for developing the State's annual health budget, cost
 containment measures, payment practices, quality assurance mechanisms,
 grievance procedures, and other relevant aspects of the State program,
 which process shall include regular and adequate opportunities in diverse
 geographical settings for the citizens of the State (or region) to have
 their opinions solicited and heard by the Commission, and
 (12) the development of models that promote the integration of covered
 health care services and covered long-term care services.
Programs under paragraph (9) shall provide for appropriate plans to refinance
institutional debt.
 (c) OPERATIONAL STATUS- A State program in a State shall not be considered
 operational unless it is approved under subsection (b).
 (d) FAILURE OF APPROVAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If the Commission finds that a State program submitted under
 subsection (a) does not meet the requirements for approval under subsection
 (b) or that a State program, previously approved, no longer meets such
 requirements, the Commission shall provide notice to the State of such
 failure and that unless corrective action is taken within a period of 90
 days the sanctions described in paragraph (2) may be applied, effective
 90 days after the end of such 90-day period.
 (2) SANCTIONS- The sanctions described in this paragraph are--
 (A) censure,
 (B) reductions in the amounts otherwise payable by the Federal Government
 under this Act to the State, but in no event shall such amount be reduced
 by more than 10 percent, and
 (C) placing the State program in receivership under the jurisdiction of
 the Commission.
For purposes of subparagraph (B), no reduction shall result in the contraction
of primary or essential care services.
SEC. 403. STATE COMMISSIONS ON QUALITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide for an appointment of a
 State Commission on Quality to implement national minimum standards in each
 State. Members of such a Commission shall be appointed to serve for fixed
 (and staggered) terms and in a manner as to provide for representation of
 the viewpoints of relevant health professions, health institutions and
 programs, and the general public (including representation of various
 population groups in the public).
 (b) MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS- Each State Commission on Quality may, with the
 consent of the Commission, provide for the application of modified national
 minimum standards due to special conditions or opportunities in the State.
SEC. 404. RESOURCE ENHANCEMENT FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established a Resource Enhancement Fund,
 to be administered by the Commission.
 (b) PURPOSE- The Fund shall be used by the Commission to augment the
 capability of any medically under-developed area to provide services
 under this Act, such as through the development of health clinics, and
 to strengthen such area's abilities to provide local services.
 (c) FUNDING- There are authorized to be appropriated for the Fund for
 fiscal year 1994, $1,000,000,000, and, for each fiscal year thereafter,
 amounts not exceeding 1 percent of the total payments made to the States
 under this Act in that fiscal year.
 (d) GRANTS- The Commission shall provide, upon application, for making
 amounts available in the Fund to States and localities.
TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA
SEC. 501. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The program established under this Act shall first apply to health care
 services and long-term care services furnished during the third fiscal
 year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 502. REPEALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act and chapter
 89 of title 5, United States Code, are repealed.
 (b) REPEAL OF CHAMPUS PROVISIONS-
 (1) AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER 55 OF TITLE 10- Sections 1079 through 1083,
 1086, and 1097 through 1100 of title 10, United States Code, are repealed.
 (2) TABLE OF SECTIONS- The table of sections at the beginning of chapter
 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out the items
 relating to the sections referred to in paragraph (1).
 (3) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code,
 is amended as follows:
 (A) DEFINITION- Section 1072 is amended by striking out paragraph (4).
 (B) REIMBURSEMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS- Section 1104(b)
 is amended--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking out `from CHAMPUS funds'; and
 (ii) by striking out `from funds' and all that follows and inserting in
 lieu thereof `for medical care provided by the Department of Veterans
 Affairs pursuant to such agreement.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The repeals and amendments made by this section shall
 take effect on the first day of the fiscal year described in section 501.
SEC. 503. TRANSITION.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for each of 3 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act such sums as may be necessary to provide for financial assistance
 to States in the planning and development of State programs.
 (b) REGULATIONS- The Commission shall issue such regulations as are necessary
 to provide for a transition to the national health care program established
 under this Act from the programs repealed under section 502.
SEC. 504. RELATION TO ERISA.
 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act are superseded
 to the extent inconsistent with the requirements of this Act.