HR 3907 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3907
To require each State to adopt by 1994 a plan for ensuring the provision of
health insurance to all residents of the State, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 25, 1991
Mr. OBEY (for himself, Mr. SWIFT, and Mr. KOLTER) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce
and Ways and Means
A BILL
To require each State to adopt by 1994 a plan for ensuring the provision of
health insurance to all residents of the State, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Universal Health Insurance Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. ADOPTION OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS BY STATES; DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL
HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) ADOPTION OF PLAN- Not later than July 1, 1993, each State shall submit
 to the Secretary of Health and Human Services a description of a State
 health insurance and cost control plan designed to be administered by the
 State and containing the provisions described in section 3, together with
 such other provisions as the Secretary may consider appropriate, and shall
 have such plan in place and operating not later than January 1, 1994.
 (b) PAYMENTS TO STATES-
 (1) PLANNING GRANTS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants to States for planning
 and developing the State health insurance plans described in subsection (a).
 (B) ALLOTMENT OF FUNDS- Each State submitting an application to the
 Secretary for a grant under subparagraph (A) shall be entitled to receive
 a grant of $500,000.
 (C) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for grants under this paragraph not more than $25,000,000.
 (2) GRANTS FOR OPERATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make
 grants to eligible States in amounts determined as follows:
 (i) 50 percent of such funds shall be made available for payments in amounts
 determined in accordance with the representative revenue system established
 by the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, to assist those
 States in the operation of the plans developed under subsection (a).
 (ii) 25 percent of such funds shall be made available for payments in
 amounts determined on the basis of the percentage of the payments made to
 all States under section 1903(a) of the Social Security Act for quarters
 in 1991 attributable to payments made to the State under such section for
 such quarters.
 (iii) 25 percent of such funds shall be made available for payments in
 amounts determined on the basis of the percentage of individuals 75 years
 of age or older in all States who reside in the State.
 (B) ELIGIBILITY- A State is eligible to receive payments under subparagraph
 (A) if its State health insurance plan is approved by the Secretary pursuant
 to subsection (c)(1).
 (3) USE OF PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICAID TO CARRY OUT PLANS- Section 1903 of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new subsection:
 `(w) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the amount
 of payment made to a State under this section for quarters beginning
 January 1, 1994, shall be equal to the amount of the payment made to
 the State under this section for the quarter ending December 31, 1993,
 increased by an amount considered appropriate by the Secretary to take
 into account increases in the costs of items and services provided under
 the State plan under this title and the State's approved health insurance
 plan under section 2 of the Universal Health Coverage Act of 1991.'.
 (c) REVIEW OF PLANS BY SECRETARY-
 (1) EVALUATION AND APPROVAL- The Secretary shall evaluate the State plans
 developed and implemented under subsection (a) and, not later than January 1,
 1994, shall approve those plans that efficiently and effectively provide
 quality health care to State residents in a cost-effective manner, and
 shall periodically review such plans during 1995 and 1996 to ensure that
 such plans continue to meet the requirements of this Act.
 (2) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than January 1, 1997, the Secretary
 shall submit a report to Congress consisting of--
 (A) the Secretary's determination as to which State plans most efficiently
 and effectively provide quality health care to State residents in a
 cost-effective manner and should be adopted in whole or in part by other
 States; and
 (B) the Secretary's determination as to whether the experience gained has
 demonstrated that the administration of universal health coverage should
 be moved to the Federal Government or remain at the State level.
 (d) ADDITIONAL PAYMENT FOR STATES IMPLEMENTING SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEM-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For years after 1992, the Secretary shall provide an
 additional payment to at least 2 States that have implemented a single-payer
 system for all health care services provided to all individuals in the State.
 (2) AMOUNT OF PAYMENT- The amount of the additional payment made for a
 year under paragraph (1) shall be equal to 5 percent of the amount paid
 to the State during the year under subsection (b)(2).
SEC. 3. REQUIRED PROVISIONS OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall have maximum flexibility in developing
 and implementing its health insurance plan under section 2 and may operate
 a fully publicly funded and administered plan or may require employers to
 provide coverage or pay for others to provide coverage, except that the
 plan shall include at least the following provisions:
 (1) In the case of a State that elects to operate a plan under which
 employers provide coverage or pay for others to provide coverage--
 (A) a requirement that each employer in the State that employs 50 or
 more persons--
 (i) shall enroll its employees and members of their immediate families
 in a health benefit plan that meets, at a minimum, the requirements of
 subsection (b), or
 (ii) shall make a contribution to enable its employees and members of
 their immediate families to enroll in such a plan; and
 (B) the creation and implementation of mechanisms (including insurance
 pools) designed to reduce the costs of providing health insurance coverage
 for self-employed individuals, unemployed individuals, and individuals
 employed by businesses with fewer than 50 employees.
 (2) The establishment of a health benefit plan--
 (A) under which--
 (i) low-income individuals in the State,
 (ii) individuals in the State who, regardless of income, are unable to
 obtain health insurance because of preexisting health conditions, and
 (iii) other individuals in the State who are otherwise unable to obtain
 health insurance, including those unable to obtain such insurance through
 employment, or those who are not eligible to be provided health benefits
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or the State plan for medical
 assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act,
are provided health insurance coverage for a premium that is determined by
taking into account the individuals' incomes (subject to paragraph (3)); and
 (B) that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
 (3) The creation of mechanisms designed to limit an individual's costs
 of coverage under health insurance plans offered under the State plan,
 including--
 (A) in the case of an individual whose income does not exceed 100 percent of
 the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget,
 and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved,
 payment by the State of any premiums, deductibles, copayment, and coinsurance
 which may be assessed against an individual participating in such plans; and
 (B) in the case of other individuals, other appropriate limitations on
 the amount of such premiums, deductibles, copayment, and coinsurance.
 (4) A requirement that the State plan for medical assistance under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act meet the national minimum standards established
 by the Secretary pursuant to section 6 of this Act.
 (5) The creation of mechanisms designed to assure, monitor, and maintain
 the provision of high quality health care to individuals in the State.
 (6) The creation of mechanisms designed to control the costs of providing
 high quality health care to individuals in the State under the State plan.
 (7) Any requirements or provisions necessary to ensure that the State is
 in compliance with the managed care standards described in subsection (c).
 (b) PLAN REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1)
 and (2) of subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, coverage for the
 following care and services:
 (A) Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for
 a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations described in
 subparagraph (E)(i).
 (B) Inpatient and outpatient physician services, except that psychotherapy
 or counseling for a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations
 described in subparagraph (E)(ii).
 (C) Diagnostic and screening tests.
 (D) Prenatal care and well-baby care provided to children who are 1 year
 of age or younger.
 (E)(i) Inpatient hospital care for a mental disorder for not less than 45
 days per year.
 (ii) Outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder for
 not less than 20 visits per year.
 (F) Long-term care services, including nursing home and home health care.
 (G) Prescription drugs.
 (H) Early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and testing services.
 (I) Immunizations.
 (2) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as requiring a health
 benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) to
 provide coverage for--
 (A) care and services that are not medically necessary, or
 (B) experimental services and procedures.
 (3) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- Except as provided in
 paragraph (2), a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (2)
 of subsection (a) shall place no limits on the amount, scope, or duration
 of benefits described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) of paragraph (1).
 (4) MENTAL HEALTH CARE- (A) With respect to inpatient hospital care
 described in paragraph (1)(E)(i), such care shall include reimbursement
 for professional care provided to the individual while receiving such
 inpatient care. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to modify
 hospital practices with regard to scope of practice, admitting privileges,
 or billing arrangements.
 (B) The Secretary shall establish standards that providers of services
 described in paragraph (1)(E)(ii) must meet to be eligible for payment under
 a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a).
 (5) PROHIBITION OF PREEXISTING CONDITION PROVISIONS- A health benefit plan
 described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) may not exclude or
 otherwise limit any individual from coverage under the plan on the basis
 that the individual has (or at any time has had) any disease, disorder,
 or condition.
 (6) PERMITTING PROPORTIONAL CONTRIBUTION BY PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- (A)
 A health benefit plan described in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) may
 require a part-time employee to pay a proportional premium based on the
 number of hours worked by the employee, in accordance with regulations
 promulgated by the Secretary.
 (B) In this paragraph, the term `part-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis less
 than 50 hours of service per week for that employer.
 (7) MULTI-STATE INSURANCE MECHANISMS- Nothing in this subsection shall
 prohibit a State from establishing or participating in a joint or multistate
 mechanism with one or more other States to establish health insurance
 plans that cover residents of more than one State.
 (8) COINSURANCE, DEDUCTIBLES, ETC- Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit
 a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a)
 from imposing deductibles, coinsurance, or other forms of cost-sharing on
 any individual enrolled in the plan (subject to such restrictions as the
 Secretary may impose).
 (c) MANAGED CARE STANDARDS-
 (1) PROHIBITIONS- No requirement of any State insurance, health care,
 or any other law or regulations shall--
 (A) prohibit a managed care plan from freely selecting the health care
 providers, or the type of health care providers in a locale, as participating
 providers for any health benefit plan in the State;
 (B) limit the ability of a managed care entity to negotiate, enter
 into contracts or establish alternative rates or forms for payment for
 participating providers for health benefit plans in the State, or to require
 or provided incentives that promote the use of participating providers;
 (C) prohibit or limit a managed care plan from including incentives for
 enrollees to use the services of participating providers;
 (D) prohibit or limit a managed care plan from limiting coverage of services
 to those provided by a participating provider;
 (E) prohibit or limit the negotiation of rates and forms of payments
 for providers under a managed care plan, unless the amount of payments
 with respect to a block of services or providers is established under a
 Statewide system applicable to all non-Federal payers with respect to such
 services or providers;
 (F) prohibit or limit a managed care plan from limiting the number of
 participating providers for a health benefit plan; or
 (G) prohibit or limit a managed care plan from requiring that services
 be provided (or authorized) by a primary care physician selected by the
 enrollee from a list of available participating providers.
 (2) AVAILABILITY OF MANAGED CARE OPTION- If a carrier in the State
 (other than a health maintenance organization or reinsurance carrier)
 offers health benefit plans to employers that are not small employers,
 in a community where a managed care plan exists, the carrier must make
 available to small employers in the community a health benefit plan that
 is such a managed care plan.
 (d) REQUIRING PAYMENT FOR OPERATING COSTS OF INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICE
 UNDER MEDICARE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ALTERNATE STATE PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1886(c)(1) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395ww(c)(1)) is amended by striking `The Secretary' and all that
 follows through `may be made' and inserting the following: `In accordance
 with the succeeding paragraphs of this subsection, the Secretary shall
 provide that payment with respect to services provided by a hospital in
 a State shall be made'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with
 respect to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1993.
SEC. 4. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Not earlier than December 31, 1991, the Secretary shall
 establish a demonstration program under which the Secretary shall make
 grants to 10 eligible States to cover the Federal share of the costs to
 such a State of implementing not more than 1 feature of the State's health
 insurance plan under section 2 during a period determined by the Secretary.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY- A State shall be eligible to receive a grant under
 subsection (a) if it submits to the Secretary, at such time and in such
 form as the Secretary may require by rule, an application containing--
 (1) assurances that the State has adopted, and assumed responsibility for
 enforcing, the State health insurance plan under section 2; and
 (2) such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require
 by rule.
 (c) CRITERIA- In determining those States that are to receive grants under
 this section, the Secretary shall give preference to States that will
 use the grant to finance a feature of the State health insurance plan
 that is designed to provide health care to a category of individuals
 experiencing difficulty in obtaining reasonably priced quality care,
 including individuals living in rural areas, non-institutionalized elderly
 and disabled individuals, and the homeless, or to States that will use the
 grant to finance the establishment and operation of a mechanism designed
 to control the costs of providing high quality health care to individuals
 in the State under the State health insurance plan.
 (d) FEDERAL SHARE- The Federal share referred to in subsection (a) may
 not exceed 50 percent.
SEC. 5. STATE ADOPTION OF PLAN REQUIRED TO RECEIVE MEDICAID PAYMENTS;
COORDINATION OF APPROVED STATE PLANS WITH MEDICAID.
 (a) REQUIRING ADOPTION OF PLAN TO RECEIVE MEDICAID PAYMENTS- Section 1903
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b), as amended by section 2(b)(3),
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(x)(1) In order to receive payments under this title for any quarter
 beginning on or after January 1, 1994, a State must certify to the Secretary
 that it has adopted, and assumed responsibility for enforcing, an approved
 State health insurance plan under section 2 of the Universal Health Coverage
 Act of 1991, or has otherwise adopted, and assumed responsibility for
 enforcing laws, rules, or regulations which ensure the provision of health
 insurance coverage to all residents of the State as effectively as such plan.
 `(2)(A) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a State for
 any quarter--
 `(i) that follows the quarter during which the State meets the requirements
 of this subsection; or
 `(ii) with respect to which the Secretary determines that the State is
 unable to comply with the relevant requirements of this subsection--
 `(I) for good cause (but such a waiver may not be for a period in excess
 of 4 quarters), or
 `(II) due to circumstances beyond the control of such State.
 `(B) For purposes of determining deadlines imposed under this subsection,
 any time period during which a State was found under subparagraph (A)(ii)(II)
 to be unable to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not
 be taken into account, and the Secretary shall modify all such deadlines
 with respect to such State accordingly.'.
 (b) COORDINATION OF APPROVED STATE PLANS WITH MEDICAID-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) CLARIFICATION OF NONDUPLICATION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE- Title XIX of
 such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`NONDUPLICATION OF BENEFITS WITH APPROVED STATE HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
 `SEC. 1931. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State
 is not required under its plan under section 1901(a) to provide medical
 assistance for items and services for which payment is made under an
 approved State health insurance plan under section 2 of the Universal
 Health Coverage Act of 1991.'.
 (B) CLARIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF THIRD-PARTY PAYER RULES TO APPROVED STATE
 HEALTH PLANS- Section 1902(a)(25)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(25)(A))
 is amended by inserting `and approved State health insurance plans under
 section 2 of the Universal Health Coverage Act of 1991' after `health
 insurance'.
 (2) CONTINUATION OF MEDICAID BENEFITS NOT COVERED UNDER APPROVED STATE
 PLANS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed as--
 (A) changing the eligibility of individuals for medical assistance under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act; or
 (B) subject to the amendments made by paragraph (1), changing the amount,
 duration, or scope of medical assistance required (or permitted) to be
 provided under such title.
SEC. 6. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STATE MEDICAID PLANS.
 Not later than December 31, 1993, the Secretary shall develop and submit
 to Congress such recommendations for uniform eligibility and coverage
 requirements with respect to title XIX of the Social Security Act as the
 Secretary considers appropriate, except that such requirements shall,
 at a minimum, include the requirements for health benefit plans developed
 under section 3(b) of this Act.
SEC. 7. REQUIRING SELF-INSURANCE PLANS TO COMPLY WITH PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29
 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any State law to the extent such law
 conforms to or reflects the provisions of the State health insurance plan
 developed and implemented by the State under section 2 of the Universal
 Health Coverage Act of 1991.'.
SEC. 8. DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-EMPLOYED INCREASED AND
MADE PERMANENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of
 self-employed individuals) is amended by striking `25 percent' and inserting
 `the applicable percentage'.
 (b) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- Paragraph (6) of section 162(l) of such Code
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 `In the case of taxable
--
years beginning in
--The applicable
calendar year:
--percentage is:
 1992 or 1993
--25
 1994 or 1995
--50
 1996 or thereafter
--100.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
SEC. 9. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) the term `employee' means, with respect to an employer, an individual
 who normally performs on a monthly basis 17 1/2 hours of service per week
 for that employer;
 (2) the term `employer' means, with respect to a calendar year, an employer
 that normally employs 25 or more employees on a typical business day during
 the calendar year, including a State or political subdivision thereof;
 (3) the term `health benefit plan' means an employee welfare benefit plan
 (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)) that provides medical care to participants or
 beneficiaries directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise; and
 (4) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.