HR 1993 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1993
To amend the provisions of the Solid Waste Disposal Act regarding the
regulation of storage tanks containing hazardous substances.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 13, 1989
Mr. WALGREN (for himself, Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN, and Mr. MURPHY) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the provisions of the Solid Waste Disposal Act regarding the
regulation of storage tanks containing hazardous substances.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Tank Spill Prevention Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO SUBTITLE I OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO FEDERAL REGULATORY PROGRAM- Subtitle I of the Solid Waste
 Disposal Act is amended by adding the following new part at the end thereof:
`PART 2--Above-Ground Storage Tanks
`SEC. 9101. STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- The Administrator, after consultation with organizations
 representing industry, organizations representing local governments, and
 other appropriate organizations, and after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, shall promulgate such regulations applicable to above-ground storage
 tanks, as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment. The
 regulations shall be promulgated within 12 months after the enactment of the
 Tank Spill Prevention Act of 1988 and shall include requirements regarding
 design, construction, materials, installation, testing, fabrication,
 placarding, siting, financial responsibility, inspection, maintenance,
 tank modification, and release detection, prevention and correction. The
 regulations may exempt releases of small quantities of regulated substances
 which the Administrator determines by rule will not present a substantial
 danger to human health and the environment. The regulations shall also
 require the owners and operators of above-ground storage tanks to adopt spill
 and leak prevention plans which conform to section 9103 and to construct and
 maintain spill and leak prevention systems in compliance with section 9102.
 `(b) EFFECTIVE DATE- Regulations under this part shall be effective with
 respect to each above-ground storage tank which commences operation after
 the promulgation of the regulations. In the case of each above-ground
 storage tank which commenced operations on or before the promulgation of
 such regulations, the Administrator shall issue regulations to set a time
 table for bringing tanks into compliance including regulations for testing
 and modifying tanks currently in service.
`SEC. 9102. SPILL AND LEAK PREVENTION SYSTEMS.
 `Spill and leak prevention systems required under regulations under section
 9101 shall meet each of the following requirements--
 `(1) The system shall be capable of catching and holding 110 percent of
 the full capacity of the tank and shall include a secondary containment
 system for the entire contents of the tank. The system shall prevent any
 release of regulated substances beyond the boundaries of the property of
 the tank owner or operator, as defined in the spill prevention plan. (In
 the case of spill and leak prevention systems jointly developed and owned
 by more than one owner or operator, the system shall prevent any release of
 regulated substances beyond the boundaries of the property of all of such
 owners or operators.) The system shall also restrain drainage and prevent
 contamination of adjacent subsurface soil, surface water, or groundwater.
 `(2) Within 2 years after the promulgation of final regulations under this
 section, the system shall be reviewed by a qualified registered professional
 engineer not permanently employed by the owner or operator of the tank
 and such engineer shall have certified that the system is fail-safe
 engineered and reflects good engineering practices. Such certification
 shall be provided to the Administrator (or to the State in the case of a
 State carrying out an approved program under this part). Thereafter, each
 tank and system shall be reviewed by the owner or operator not less than
 once every 3 years. The owner or operator shall provide a certification of
 the review of the tank and systems to the Administrator (or to the State
 in the case of a State carrying out an approved program under this part).
`SEC. 9103. SPILL AND LEAK PREVENTION PLAN.
 `The owner and operator of each above-ground storage tank shall develop
 and implement a spill and leak prevention plan for the tank or group of
 tanks. The plan shall meet each of the following requirements:
 `(1) The plan shall be designed specifically for each facility taking full
 account of the flow patterns possible from each tank.
 `(2) The plan shall assure that adequate equipment and personnel are on site
 or otherwise available to control and cleanup any release of a regulated
 substance and shall assure adequate training of response personnel,
 including contractors.
 `(3) The plan shall include procedures to control and cleanup any release
 of a regulated substance.
 `(4) The plan shall include testing of the tank, including foundations,
 supports and leak detection systems before beginning operations and
 periodically as prescribed in regulations promulgated by the Administrator.
 `(5) The plan (or any substantial modification of the plan) shall be
 certified by a qualified registered professional engineer not permanently
 employed by the owner or operator of the tank and such engineer shall have
 certified that the plan reflects good engineering practices.
 `(6) The plan shall be updated periodically as new spill control and
 clean-up technology is developed.
 `(7) The plan shall include prompt notification procedures to the National
 Response Center and the nearest local government.
 `(8) The plan shall require assurances of an adequate spill prevention and
 leak detection system and certification of inspections to local governments.
 `(9) The plan shall require the maintenance of records of inspections and
 testing of the spill and leak prevention and detection system.
`SEC. 9104. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO RELEASES FROM ABOVE-GROUND
TANKS.
 `The regulations promulgated pursuant to this part shall include, each of
 the following requirements for all above-ground storage tanks--
 `(1) Requirements for maintaining records of the spill or leak detection
 system and the certifications required for the system and of any tank
 testing.
 `(2) Requirements for reporting releases to the National Response Center
 and for maintaining, and making available to all governmental authorities,
 complete records of such releases and corrective action.
 `(3) Requirements for taking corrective action in response to a release
 from an above-ground storage tank.
 `(4) Requirements prohibiting the use or operation of a tank after a release
 from that tank unless the Administrator (or the State in the case of an
 approved State program) determines that such prohibition is not necessary
 to protect human health and the environment or that adequate corrective
 action has been taken.
`SEC. 9105. EPA RESPONSE.
 `(a) CORRECTIVE ACTION BY OWNER OR OPERATOR- The Administrator is authorized
 to require the owner or operator of an above-ground storage tank to
 undertake corrective action with respect to any release of a regulated
 substance from the tank when the Administrator (or the State) determines
 that such corrective action will be done properly and promptly by the
 owner or operator of the tank from which the release occurs. The costs of
 any such corrective action shall be recoverable by the Administrator in
 accordance with section 9111. The Administrator shall, upon notification
 of a release, make a determination about the feasibility of and safety of
 continued operations at the facility and may prohibit operations in some
 part or all of the facility until the Administrator (or the State in the
 case of an approved State program) has determined that adequate corrective
 action has been taken.
 `(b) CORRECTIVE ACTION BY ADMINISTRATOR- The Administrator is authorized
 to take appropriate and necessary action to contain, correct, clean up,
 and otherwise mitigate any release or immediate consequences of a release
 and to undertake any other corrective action with respect to any release
 of a regulated substance into the environment from an above-ground storage
 tank if such action is necessary, in the judgment of the Administrator
 (or the State), to protect human health and the environment and if the
 owner or operator fails to take such action in a timely and proper fashion
 pursuant to subsection (a). The Administrator shall use funds available
 in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Fund for payment of costs incurred
 for corrective action under this subsection.
 `(c) CORRECTIVE ACTION INCLUDED- The corrective action under this
 subsection shall be such as may be necessary to protect human health and
 the environment, including the costs of removal of the regulated substance,
 consistent with the National Contingency Plan and the providing alternative
 water supplies and water treatment needed to provide water during and
 after a release.
`SEC. 9106. TANK MODIFICATIONS.
 `The regulations under this part shall require the owner or operator of
 each above-ground storage tank to amend the spill and leak prevention
 and detection plan and system whenever there is a major modification
 in the design, construction, operation or maintenance of the tank which
 materially affects the potential for the tank to release substances. The
 regulations shall prohibit the use or operation of the tank until the owner
 or operator has notified the Administrator (or the State in the case of
 a State exercising primary enforcement responsibility) that the amended
 plan and system have been certified by a qualified registered professional
 engineer not permanently employed by the owner or operator as reflecting
 good engineering practices.
`SEC. 9107. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- Financial responsibility required by this section
 may be established in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
 Administrator. The regulations shall permit financial responsibility to be
 established by any means deemed appropriate by the Administrator, including,
 but not limited to the following: insurance, guarantee, surety bond, letter
 of credit, qualification as a self-insurer. In promulgating requirements
 under this subsection, the Administrator is authorized to specify policy
 or other contractual terms, conditions, or defenses which are necessary or
 are unacceptable in establishing such evidence of financial responsibility
 in order to effectuate the purposes of this subtitle or any other method
 satisfactory to the Administrator.
 `(b) CLAIMS AGAINST GUARANTOR- In any case where the tank owner or operator
 is in bankruptcy, reorganization, or arrangement pursuant to the Federal
 Bankruptcy Code or where with reasonable diligence jurisdiction in any State
 court of the Federal Courts cannot be obtained over an owner or operator
 likely to be solvent at the time of judgment, any claim arising from conduct
 for which evidence of financial responsibility must be provided under this
 subsection may be asserted directly against the guarantor providing such
 evidence of financial responsibility. In the case of any action pursuant
 to this paragraph such guarantor shall be entitled to invoke all rights
 and defenses which would have been available to the owner or operator if
 any action had been brought against the owner or operator by the claimant
 and which would have been available to the guarantor if an action had been
 brought against the guarantor by the owner or operator.
 `(c) LIMIT OF GUARANTOR LIABILITY- The total liability of any guarantor
 shall be limited to the aggregate amount which the guarantor has provided
 as evidence of financial responsibility to the owner or operator under
 this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit any
 other State or Federal statutory, contractual or common law liability
 of a guarantor to its owner or operator including, but not limited to,
 the liability of such guarantor for bad faith either in negotiating or
 in failing to negotiate the settlement of any claim. Nothing in this
 subsection shall be construed to diminish the liability of any person
 under section 107 or 111 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 or other applicable law.
 `(d) DEFINITION- For the purpose of this subsection, the term `guarantor'
 means any person, other than the owner or operator, who provides evidence
 of financial responsibility for an owner or operator under this subsection.
 `(e) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LIMITS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF COVERAGE- The Administrator, in promulgating financial
 responsibility regulations under this section, may establish an amount
 of coverage for particular classes or categories of above-ground storage
 tanks which shall satisfy such regulations.
 `(2) FACTORS- In establishing classes and categories for purposes of this
 paragraph, the Administrator may consider the following factors:
 `(A) The size, type, location, storage, handling capacity and contents of
 above-ground storage tanks in the class or category.
 `(B) The likelihood of release and the potential extent of damage from
 any release from tanks in the class or category.
 `(C) The economic impact of the limits on the owners and operators of each
 such class or category in relation to the impact of a potential release
 on the affected community and affected natural resources.
 `(D) The availability of adequate financial responsibility.
 `(E) Such other factors as the Administrator deems pertinent.
`SEC. 9108. STATE PROGRAMS.
 `(a) ELEMENTS OF STATE PROGRAM- Any State may submit for review and approval
 by the Administrator a State program to enforce the requirements of this
 part in such State. A State program may be approved by the Administrator
 under this section if the State demonstrates that the program includes
 each of the following:
 `(1) Provision for regulations and enforcement procedures at least equivalent
 to the regulations and enforcement procedures used by the Administrator
 to administer and enforce the requirements of this part.
 `(2) Designation of an agency with authority to enforce the requirements
 of this part.
 `(3) Sufficient funding.
 `(4) Provisions for reporting the Administrator all information requested
 by the Administrator regarding tank safety and spill and leak prevention
 plans and systems.
 `(5) Periodic inspection of tanks and spill and leak prevention systems
 and plans.
 `(b) EPA APPROVAL--Within 180 days of the date of receipt of a proposed
 State program, the Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, make a determination whether the State's program complies
 with the provisions of this section. If the Administrator determines that
 a State program complies with the provisions of this section, he shall
 approve the State program in lieu of the Federal program and the State
 shall have primary enforcement responsibility with respect to requirements
 of its program.
 `(c) WITHDRAWAL OF AUTHORIZATION- The Administrator shall monitor
 State programs approved under this part to determine compliance with the
 requirements of this part. The monitoring shall include periodic inspection
 of above-ground storage tanks and related facilities and spill and leak
 prevention plans and systems. Whenever the Administrator determines, after
 public hearing, that a State is not administering and enforcing a program
 authorized under this part in accordance with the provisions of this part,
 he shall so notify the State. If appropriate action is not taken within
 a reasonable time, not to exceed 120 days after such notification, the
 Administrator shall withdraw approval of such program and reestablish the
 Federal program pursuant to this part.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL AUTHORITIES WITH RESPECT TO STATE PROGRAMS- The Administrator
 shall provide technical assistance to States, local governments, and to the
 owners and operators of above-ground storage tanks to assist in compliance
 with this part. The Administrator shall periodically inspect tanks and spill
 and leak prevention systems and plans. The Administrator shall also monitor
 all corrective action taken with respect to releases from above-ground
 storage tanks or assure that adequate monitoring is carried out by the State
 (in the case of a State with primary enforcement responsibility).
`SEC. 9109. TANK SPILL ENFORCEMENT FUND.
 `(a) USER FEES- The Administrator shall establish and collect a fee on
 all above-ground storage tanks. The fee shall be based on the volume
 of regulated substances in the tank and shall be sufficient to cover
 the administrative costs incurred by the Administrator and the State in
 carrying out the provisions of this part.
 `(b) FUND- The Administrator shall establish a Tank Spill Enforcement
 Fund to be funded by fees under subsection (a). Amounts credited to the
 fund are authorized to be appropriated to make grants to the States under
 subsection (c) to administer the provisions of this part in States with
 primary enforcement responsibility .
 `(c) GRANTS- The Administrator may make grants to States from amounts
 credited to the Tank Spill Enforcement Fund. The grants shall be allocated
 among such States based upon the ratio of the number of gallons of regulated
 substances in above-ground storage tanks in each State to the number of
 gallons of regulated substances in above-ground storage tanks in all States
 exercising primary enforcement responsibility.
`SEC. 9110. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) COMPLIANCE-
 (1) EPA ORDERS AND CIVIL ACTIONS- Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 whenever, on the basis of any information, the Administrator determines that
 any person is in violation of any requirement of this part, the Administrator
 may issue an order requiring compliance within a reasonable specified time
 period or the Administrator may commence a civil action in the United States
 district court in which the violation occurred for appropriate relief,
 including a temporary or permanent injunction. The Administrator may also
 issue an order prohibiting the use or operation of all or any portion of
 the facility where a tank is located after a release from the tank until
 the Administrator (or the State in the case of an approved State program)
 determines that such prohibition is not necessary to protect human health
 and the environment or that adequate corrective action has been taken.
 `(2) NOTICE TO STATE- In the case of a violation of any requirement of this
 part where such violation occurs in a State with a program approved under
 this part, the Administrator shall give notice to the State in which such
 violation has occurred prior to issuing an order or commencing a civil
 action under this section.
 `(3) PENALTY- If a violator fails to comply with an order under this
 subsection within the time specified in the order, he shall be liable
 for a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued
 noncompliance.
 `(b) PROCEDURE- Any order issued under this section shall become final
 unless, no later than 30 days after the order is served, the person or
 persons named therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the
 Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any
 proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers,
 books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 `(c) CONTENTS OF ORDER- Any order issued under this section shall state with
 reasonable specificity the nature of the violation, specify a reasonable
 time for compliance, and assess a penalty, if any, which the Administrator
 determines is reasonable taking into account the seriousness of the violation
 and any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
 `(d) CIVIL PENALTIES-
 (1) LIMITATION- Any person who knowingly fails to provide any information
 required under this part or submits false information pursuant to this
 part shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each
 tank for which such information is not given or for which false information
 is submitted.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS OF STANDARDS- Any owner or operator of an above-ground
 storage tank who fails to comply with any requirement or standard promulgated
 by the Administrator under this part or with any requirement or standard
 of a State program approved pursuant to this part shall be subject to a
 civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each tank for each day of violation.
 `(e) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any owner or operator of an above-ground storage
 tank who knowingly fails to comply with any requirement or standard
 promulgated by the Administrator under this part or with any requirement
 or standard of a State program approved pursuant to this part shall, upon
 conviction, be imprisoned for not more than 5 years or fined in accordance
 with title 18 of the United States Code, or both, if such failure results
 in the release of any regulated substance.
`SEC. 9111. LIABILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) COSTS AND DAMAGES- Whenever costs have been incurred by the
 Administrator, for undertaking corrective action under this part, the
 owner or operator of such tank shall be liable to the Administrator for
 such costs. Any person may also recover from the owner or operator damages
 that arise out of or directly result from the release of any regulated
 substance from an above-ground storage tank. The liability under this
 paragraph shall be construed to be the standard of liability which obtains
 under section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 `(2) COVERED COSTS AND DAMAGES-
 `(A) COSTS- The costs referred to in paragraph (1) are removal costs
 consistent with the national contingency plan, which shall be recoverable
 by any claimant. Such costs include alternative water supplies and water
 treatment.
 `(B) DAMAGES- The damages referred to in paragraph (1) are the following:
 `(i) NATURAL RESOURCES- Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury,
 destruction, or loss, which shall be recoverable by either a United States
 trustee or a State trustee.
 `(ii) REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY- Damages for injury to, or economic losses
 resulting from destruction of, real or personal property, which shall be
 recoverable by a claimant who owns or leases such property.
 `(iii) SUBSISTENCE USE- Damages for loss of subsistence use of natural
 resources, which shall be recoverable by any claimant who so uses natural
 resources which have been injured, destroyed, or lost.
 `(iv) REVENUES- Damages equal to the loss of taxes, royalties, rents,
 or net profits shares, for a period not to exceed one year, due to the
 injury, destruction, or loss of real property, personal property, or
 natural resources, which shall be recoverable by the Government of the
 United States, a State, or political subdivision thereof.
 `(v) PROFITS AND EARNING CAPACITY- Damages equal to the loss of profits
 or impairment of earning capacity due to the injury, destruction, or loss
 of real property, personal property, or natural resources, which shall
 be recoverable by any claimant who derives at least 25 percent of his or
 her earnings from the activities which utilize such property or natural
 resources, or, if such activities are seasonal in nature, 25 percent of
 his or her earnings during the applicable season.
 `(3) EXCLUDED RELEASES- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any release
 permitted by a permit issued under Federal, State, or local law.
 `(4) LIABILITY OF THIRD PARTIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In any case where the owner or operator of the tank
 can establish that release and the removal costs and damages resulting
 were caused solely by an act or omission of one or more third parties in
 accordance with subsection (b)(1)(B) (or solely by such an act or omission
 in combination with an act of God or an act of war), such third party or
 parties shall be liable under this section.
 `(B) LIMITATION APPLIED-
 `(i) OWNER OR OPERATOR- If such third party or parties are the owner or
 operator of a facility which caused the incident, the liability of such
 third party or parties shall be subject to the limits provided in subsection
 (c), as applied with respect to such facility.
 `(ii) OTHER CASES- In any other case, the liability of such third party or
 parties shall not exceed the limitation which would have been applicable
 to the owner or operator from which the discharge actually occurred if
 such responsible party were liable.
 `(b) DEFENSES TO LIABILITY-
 `(1) COMPLETE DEFENSES- Except when the owner or operator has failed or
 refused to report the incident where required by law and knows or has
 reason to know of the incident, there is no liability under subsection
 (a) if he establishes that the incident--
 `(A) resulted from an act of God, an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
 or insurrection; or
 `(B) was solely caused by an act or omission of one or more persons
 other than--
 `(i) the owner or operator; or
 `(ii) an employee or agent of the owner or operator or a person under
 contract with the owner or operator.
 `(2) DEFENSES AS TO PARTICULAR CLAIMANTS- There is no liability under
 subsection (a)--
 `(A) as to a particular claimant, where the incident is caused, in whole or
 in part, by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of that claimant; or
 `(B) as to a particular claimant, to the extent that the incident is caused
 by the negligence of that claimant.
 `(3) CERTIFICATION- No certification provided under this part by a qualified
 registered professional engineer or by any other person shall be treated as
 relieving the owner or operator of a tank or any other person of liability
 under this section.
 `(c) LIMITS ON LIABILITY-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- The Administrator is authorized to establish a limit on
 the total of the liability of a tank owner or operator under subsection
 (a) and any removal costs incurred by, or on behalf of, the responsible
 party with respect to each incident.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) PROXIMATE CAUSE- Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the incident was
 proximately caused by--
 `(i) willful misconduct or gross negligence within the privity or knowledge
 of the tank owner or operator; or
 `(ii) a violation, within the privity or knowledge of the responsible party,
 of applicable Federal safety, construction, or operating regulations.
 `(B) FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY- Paragraph (1) shall not
 apply if the tank owner or operator fails or refuses--
 `(i) to report the incident where required by law and the responsible
 party knows or has reason to know of the incident; or
 `(ii) to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested by
 a responsible official in connection with removal activities.
 `(3) ADJUSTING LIMITS OF LIABILITY- The Administrator is authorized
 to establish by regulation, with respect to any class or category of
 facility, a maximum limit of liability taking into account the size,
 storage capacity, proximity to sensitive areas, type of contents handled,
 history of releases, and other factors relevant to risks posed by the
 class or category of facility.
 `(d) LIABILITY FOR INTEREST-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- The owner or operator or his guarantor shall be liable
 to the claimant for interest on the amount paid in satisfaction of a claim
 under this section for the period described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) PERIOD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the period for
 which interest shall be paid under paragraph (1) is the period beginning
 on the date on which the claim is presented to the responsible party, or
 guarantor, and ending on the date on which the claimant is paid, inclusive.
 `(B) EXCLUSION OF PERIOD DUE TO OFFER BY GUARANTOR- If the guarantor offers
 to the claimant an amount equal to or greater than that finally paid in
 satisfaction of the claim, the period described in subparagraph (A) shall
 not include the period beginning on the date such offer is made and ending
 on the date such offer is accepted. If such offer is made within 60 days
 after the date upon which the claim is presented, the period described in
 subparagraph (A) shall not include any period before such offer is accepted.
 `(C) CALCULATION OF INTEREST- The interest paid under this subsection
 shall be calculated at the average of the highest rate for commercial and
 finance company paper of maturities of 180 days or less obtaining on each
 of the days included within the period for which interest must be paid to
 the claimant, as published in the Federal Reserve bulletin.
 `(D) INTEREST NOT SUBJECT TO LIABILITY LIMITS- Interest under this paragraph
 shall be in addition to damages for which claims may be asserted and shall
 be paid without regard to any limitation of liability under subsection
 (c)(1) of this section. The payment of interest under this subsection
 by a guarantor shall be subject to the limited on the liability of the
 guarantor established under this part.
 `(e) NATURAL RESOURCES-
 `(1) LIABILITY- In the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources under this section, liability shall be--
 `(A) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States,
 `(B) to any State for natural resources within the State or belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to such State, and
 `(C) a local government for natural resources belonging to, managed by,
 controlled by, or appertaining to such local government.
 `(2) DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The President, or the authorized representative of any
 State or of a local government, shall act on behalf of the public as
 trustee of such natural resources to recover for such damages.
 `(B) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The President shall designate the Federal officials
 who shall act on behalf of the public as trustees for natural resources
 under this Act.
 `(C) STATE TRUSTEES- The Governor of each State shall designate State and
 local officials who may act on behalf of the public as trustee for natural
 resources under this Act and shall notify the President of such designations.
 `(3) FUNCTIONS OF TRUSTEES-
 `(A) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The officials designated under paragraph (2)(B)--
 `(i) shall assess damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural
 resources for purposes of this Act for the natural resources under their
 trusteeship; and
 `(ii) may, upon request of and reimbursement from a State and at the
 Federal officials' discretion, assess damages for the natural resources
 under the State's trusteeship; and
 `(iii) shall develop and adopt a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 or replacement or acquisition of the equivalent of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 `(B) STATE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under paragraph (2)(C)--
 `(i) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 `(ii) shall develop and adopt a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 or replacement or acquisition of the equivalent of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 `(C) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD- Plans shall be developed and adopted
 under subparagraphs (A)(iii) and (B)(ii) only after adequate public notice
 and opportunity for hearing and consideration of all public comment.
 `(4) MEASURE OF DAMAGES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The measure of damages in any action under this section
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources shall not be
 limited to the sums which can be used to restore or replace such resources.
 `(B) DETERMINE COSTS WITH RESPECT TO PLANS- Costs shall be determined under
 subparagraph (A) with respect to plans adopted under paragraph (3)(A) and
 (B).
 `(C) NO DOUBLE RECOVERY- There shall be no double recovery under this Act
 for natural resource damages, including the costs of damage assessment
 or restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition for the same
 incident and natural resource.
 `(5) REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION- Any determination or assessment of damages to
 natural resources for the purposes of this Act made by a Federal, State,
 or local trustee in accordance with the regulations promulgated under
 section 301 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 shall have the force and effect of a rebuttable
 presumption on behalf of the trustees in any administrative or judicial
 proceeding under this Act.
 `(6) USE OF RECOVERED SUMS- Sums recovered by the United States Government
 or a State as trustee under this subsection shall be retained by the
 trustee, for use only to restore, replace, or acquire the equivalent of
 such natural resources.
 `(f) RECOVERY OF REMOVAL COSTS AND DAMAGES BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The owner or operator of a tank may assert a claim for
 removal costs and damages under subsection (a) only if he can show that--
 `(A) he is entitled to a defense to liability under subsection (b), or
 `(B) he is entitled to a limitation of liability under subsection (c).
 `(2) EXTENT OF RECOVERY- An owner or operator who is entitled to a limitation
 of liability, may assert a claim under paragraph (1) of subsection (a)
 only to the extent that the sum of the removal costs and damages incurred
 by the owner or operator party plus the amounts paid by the owner or
 operator or by the guarantor on behalf of the responsible party for claims
 asserted under subsection (a) exceeds the amount to which the total of the
 liability under subsection (a) and removal costs and damages incurred by,
 or on behalf of, the owner or operator is limited under subsection (c).
 `(g) CONTRIBUTION- A person may bring an action for contribution against
 any other person who is liable or potentially liable under this section.
 `(h) INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No indemnification, hold harmless, or similar agreement
 or conveyance shall be effective to transfer the liability imposed under
 this section from any person who may be liable under this section to any
 other person. Nothing in this subsection shall bar any agreement to insure,
 hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such agreement for any liability
 under this section.
 `(2) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION- Nothing in this Act, including
 the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall bar a cause of
 action that a party subject to liability under this section, or a guarantor,
 has or would have, by reason of subrogation or otherwise against any person.
 `(i) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS FOR CLAIMS-
 `(1) REMOVAL COSTS- No claim may be presented under this section for
 recovery of removal costs unless the claim is presented within 3 years
 after the date of completion of all removal action.
 `(2) DAMAGES- No claim may be presented under this section for recovery
 of damages unless the claim is presented within 3 years after the date
 on which the loss and its connection with the release in question were
 reasonably discoverable with the exercise of due care.
`SEC. 9112. STATE AUTHORITY.
 `Nothing in this part shall preclude or deny any right of any State
 or political subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce any regulation,
 requirement, or standard of performance respecting above-ground storage
 tanks that is more stringent than a regulation, requirement, or standard of
 performance in effect under this part or to impose any additional liability
 with respect to the release of regulated substances within such State or
 political subdivision.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 is amended by striking out `this subtitle' in each place it appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `this part'.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents contained in section 1001 of
 the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by striking the word `Underground'
 in the heading for subtitle I, inserting `Part 1--Underground Tanks'
 immediately after the item relating to section 9001, and by adding the
 following at the end of the items relating to section 9010:
`PART 2--Above-Ground Tanks
`Sec. 9101. Standards and regulations.
`Sec. 9102. Spill and leak prevention systems.
`Sec. 9103. Spill plan.
`Sec. 9104. Additional requirements relating to above-ground storage tanks.
`Sec. 9105. EPA response.
`Sec. 9106. Tank modifications.
`Sec. 9107. Financial responsibility.
`Sec. 9108. State programs.
`Sec. 9109. Tank spill enforcement fund.
`Sec. 9110. Federal enforcement.
`Sec. 9111. Liability.
`Sec. 9112. State authority.'.
 (d) DEFINITIONS- Section 9001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Strike out the words `an underground' in each place where they appear
 in paragraphs (3) and (5) and substitute `a'.
 (2) Strike out `underground' in paragraphs (3), (4) and (7).
 (3) Add the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `(9) The term `above-ground storage tank' means any one or combination of
 stationary tanks (including pipes connected thereto and processing lines)
 which is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances, and
 which is not an underground storage tank. Such term does not include any--
 `(A) agricultural farm or residential tank of 4,200 gallons or less,
 `(B) tank of 4,200 gallons or less capacity,
 `(C) tank used for storing heating oil for consumptive use on the premises
 where stored,
 `(D) septic tank,
 `(E) pipeline facility (including gathering lines) regulated under--
 `(i) the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49 U.S.C. App. 1671,
 et seq.),
 `(ii) the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2001,
 et seq.), or
 `(iii) which is an intrastate pipeline facility regulated under State
 laws comparable to the provisions of law referred to in clause (i) or (ii)
 of this subparagraph,
 `(F) surface impoundment, pit, pond, or lagoon,
 `(G) storm water or waste water collection system,
 `(H) flow-through process tank, or
 `(I) liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or
 gas production and gathering operations.
The term `above-ground storage tank' shall not include any pipes connected
to any tank which is described in subparagraphs (A) through (H).'.