S 1215 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1215
To require the Federal Communications Commission to reinstate restrictions
on advertising during children's television, to enforce the obligation of
broadcasters to meet the educational and informational needs of the child
audience, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 21 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. WIRTH (for himself, Mr. METZENBAUM, and Mr. LAUTENBERG) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To require the Federal Communications Commission to reinstate restrictions
on advertising during children's television, to enforce the obligation of
broadcasters to meet the educational and informational needs of the child
audience, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Children's Television Education
 Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that--
 (1) there are serious shortcomings in our Nation's educational system,
 which have been documented by a number of expert commissions, and which
 will profoundly affect both the opportunities available to our Nation's
 children, and the ability of the United States to compete effectively in
 an international economy;
 (2) by the time the average student graduates from high school, that child
 has spent more time watching television than in the classroom;
 (3) it has been clearly demonstrated that television can assist children
 in learning important information, skills, values, and behavior, while
 entertaining them and exciting their curiosity to learn about the world
 around them;
 (4) the potential of commercial television programming for making a major
 positive impact in improving the education of children has been largely
 unrealized;
 (5) as public trustees, commercial television broadcasters have a legal
 obligation to serve children, regardless of the contribution that may be
 made by public television, cable television, video cassettes, or other
 new or traditional communications media;
 (6) commercial television has generally failed to meet its obligation to
 provide educational and informational programming to children as part of
 its requirement to serve the public interest; and
 (7) the Federal Communications Commission has declined to take effective
 steps to increase educational and informational programming designed for
 children on commercial television and has instead rendered broadcasters'
 obligations to serve children vague and unenforceable.
LIMITATION OF COMMERCIAL MATTER AND REQUIREMENT OF PUBLIC NOTICE
 SEC. 3. (a)(1) Subject to any modification adopted by the Federal
 Communications Commission under subsection (c), a broadcast television
 licensee shall limit the duration of commercial matter in children's
 television programming, on and after January 1, 1990, to not more than
 9.5 minutes per hour on weekends and not more than 12 minutes per hour
 on weekdays.
 (2) On and after January 1, 1990, a broadcast television licensee shall
 provide public notice to assist interested individuals in identifying
 programs specifically designed to serve the educational and informational
 needs of children.
 (b)(1) The Commission shall, within 180 days after the date of enactment into
 law of this Act, adopt rules to enforce the requirements of subsection (a).
 (2) The rules adopted under this subsection shall require, among other
 things, a broadcast television licensee to publicly identify programs
 specifically designed to serve the educational and informational needs of
 both preschool and school-aged children. The public notice shall be provided
 in advance of the date a program is broadcast and also immediately prior
 to the beginning of each such program to assist parents and others who
 supervise children in identifying programs of educational or informational
 value for children.
 (c) After January 1, 1993, the Commission shall have the authority to (1)
 review and evaluate the requirements prescribed in subsection (a), and
 (2) after notice and public comment and a demonstration of the need for a
 modification of such requirements, modify such requirements in accordance
 with the public interest.
 (d) For the purposes of this Act, the term `commercial matter' means all
 matter broadcast by a broadcast television licensee for which any money,
 service, or other valuable consideration is directly or indirectly paid, or
 promised to or charged or accepted by the station so broadcasting, from any
 person, regardless of whether such matter is entirely commercial in content.
 (e) In any complaint brought to enforce this section, where the broadcast
 matter was obtained by a broadcast television licensee through a barter
 arrangement, the licensee shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
 terms of such barter arrangement provide fair compensation to the supplier
 of the broadcast matter.
CONSIDERATION OF CHILDREN'S TELEVISION SERVICE IN BROADCAST LICENSE RENEWAL
 SEC. 4. The Federal Communications Commission shall consider, among the
 elements in its review of an application for renewal of a television
 broadcast license--
 (1) whether the licensee complied with the requirements prescribed under
 section 3 of this Act; and
 (2) whether the licensee has provided programming specifically designed
 to serve the educational and informational needs of both preschool and
 school-aged children.