S 1311 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1311
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide a 15 percent maximum
rate on capital gains for sales or exchanges after the date of enactment
of this Act and before 1991, to provide indexing of the bases of capital
assets sold or exchanged after 1990, to provide a 20 percent maximum rate
on capital gains from small business stock, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 13 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. ARMSTRONG (for himself, Mr. SYMMS, and Mr. BOSCHWITZ) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide a 15 percent maximum
rate on capital gains for sales or exchanges after the date of enactment
of this Act and before 1991, to provide indexing of the bases of capital
assets sold or exchanged after 1990, to provide a 20 percent maximum rate
on capital gains from small business stock, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. 15 PERCENT MAXIMUM RATE ON CAPITAL GAINS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended
 by inserting after section 1201 the following new section:
`SEC. 1202. DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL GAINS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- If for any taxable year a taxpayer other than a corporation
 has any applicable net capital gain, there shall be allowed as a deduction
 from gross income an amount equal to 46.4 percent of the amount of such
 net capital gain.
 `(b) SPECIAL RULE FOR ESTATES AND TRUSTS- In the case of an estate or
 trust, the deduction shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any)
 of the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets
 which, under sections 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in
 gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income
 beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.
 `(c) APPLICABLE NET CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable net capital gain' means the lesser of--
 `(A) the net capital gain for the taxable year, or
 `(B) the net capital gain taking into account only gain or loss--
 `(i) from the sale or exchange of an indexed asset (within the meaning of
 section 1022(b)), and
 `(ii) properly taken into account only for the portion of the taxable year
 which occurs during the period beginning on the day after the date of the
 enactment of this section and ending on December 31, 1990.'.
 (b) MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE OF 15 PERCENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (j) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) SPECIAL RULES FOR APPLICABLE NET CAPITAL GAIN- If for any taxable
 year a taxpayer has any applicable net capital gain--
 `(A) this subsection shall apply, and
 `(B) subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall be applied as if it read
 as follows:
 `(B) a tax equal to the sum of--
 `(i) 28 percent of the amount of taxable income in excess of the amount
 determined under subparagraph (A), reduced by the amount of the applicable
 net capital gain, plus
 `(ii) 15 percent of the amount of the applicable net capital gain.'
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `applicable net capital gain'
has the meaning given such term by section 1202(c).'.
 (2) PHASEOUT OF 15-PERCENT RATE AND PERSONAL EXEMPTION NOT TO APPLY TO
 CAPITAL GAINS- Subparagraph (A) of section 1(g)(1) of such Code (relating to
 phaseout of 15-percent rate and personal exemption) is amended by inserting
 `, reduced by the amount of the applicable net capital gain (within the
 meaning of section 1202(c))' after `taxable income'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 62(a) of such Code (defining adjusted gross income) is amended
 by adding after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 `(13) LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAINS- The deduction allowed by section 1202.'.
 (2) Section 163(d)(4) of such Code (defining net investment income) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) NET CAPITAL GAINS EXCLUDED FROM GROSS INCOME- The net gain described
 in subparagraph (B)(ii) shall be reduced by the amount excluded from gross
 income under section 1202.'.
 (3) Section 170(e)(1) of such Code (relating to certain contributions
 of ordinary income and capital gain property) is amended by striking out
 `long-term capital gain' the second place it appears and inserting `long-term
 capital gain (reduced by the deduction allowed under section 1202)'.
 (4) Section 172(d)(2) of such Code (relating to modifications with respect
 to net operating loss deduction) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAINS AND LOSSES OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS- In
 the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation--
 `(A) the amount deductible on account of losses from sales or exchanges
 of capital assets shall not exceed the amount includible on account of
 gains from sales or exchanges of capital assets; and
 `(B) the deduction for long-term capital gains provided by section 1202
 shall not be allowed.'.
 (5) Subparagraph (B) of section 172(d)(4) of such Code is amended by
 inserting `, (2)(B),' after `paragraphs (1)'.
 (6)(A) Section 221 of such Code (relating to cross reference) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 221. CROSS REFERENCES.
 `(1) For deduction for long-term capital gains in the case of a taxpayer
 other than a corporation, see section 1202.
 `(2) For deductions in respect of a decedent, see section 691.'.
 (B) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by striking out `reference' in the item relating to
 section 221 and inserting `references'.
 (7) Paragraph (4) of section 642(c) of such Code (relating to adjustments
 for credits and deductions) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) ADJUSTMENTS- To the extent that the amount otherwise allowable as a
 deduction under this subsection consists of gain from the sale or exchange
 of capital assets held for more than 1 year, proper adjustment shall be
 made for any deduction allowable to the estate or trust under section 1202
 (relating to deduction for excess of capital gains over capital losses). In
 the case of a trust, the deduction allowed by this subsection shall be
 subject to section 681 (relating to unrelated business income).'.
 (8) Paragraph (3) of section 643(a) of such Code (relating to distribution
 of net income) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 sentence: `The deduction under section 1202 (relating to deduction for
 excess capital gains over capital losses) shall not be taken into account.'.
 (9) Paragraph (4) of section 691(c) of such Code (relating to deduction
 for estate tax) is amended by striking out `For purposes of sections 1(j),
 1201, and 1211' and inserting `For purposes of sections 1(j), 1201, 1202,
 and 1211'.
 (10) The second sentence of paragraph (2) of section 871(a) of such Code
 (relating to capital gains of aliens present in the United States 183 days
 or more) is amended by inserting `such gains and losses shall be determined
 without regard to section 1202 (relating to deduction for capital gains)
 and' after `except that'.
 (11) Section 1402(i)(1) of such Code (relating to special rules for options
 and commodities dealers) is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In determining the net earnings from self-employment of
 any options dealer or commodities dealer--
 `(A) notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(A), there shall not be excluded any
 gain or loss (in the normal course of the taxpayer's activity of dealing in
 or trading section 1256 contracts) from section 1256 contracts or property
 related to such contracts, and
 `(B) the deduction provided by section 1202 shall not apply.'.
 (12) The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1201,
 the following new item:
`Sec. 1202. Deduction for capital gains.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to--
 (1) taxable years beginning on or before and ending after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, and
 (2) taxable years beginning on or after such date and before January 1, 1991.
SEC. 2. INDEXING OF BASES OF CAPITAL ASSETS SOLD OR EXCHANGED AFTER 1990.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application)
 is amended by inserting after section 1021 the following new section:
`SEC. 1022. INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE-
 `(1) INDEXED BASIS SUBSTITUTED FOR ADJUSTED BASIS- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), if an indexed asset which has been held for more than
 1 year is sold or otherwise disposed of, the indexed basis of the asset
 shall be substituted for its adjusted basis for purposes of this title.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR DEPRECIATION, ETC- The deduction for depreciation,
 depletion, and amortization shall be determined without regard to the
 application of paragraph (1) to the taxpayer or any other person.
 `(b) INDEXED ASSET-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset'
 means--
 `(A) stock in a corporation, or
 `(B) tangible property (or any interest therein) which is a capital asset
 or property used in a trade or business (as defined in section 1231(b)).
 `(2) CERTAIN PROPERTY EXCLUDED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `indexed asset' does not include--
 `(A) CREDITOR'S INTEREST- Any interest in property which is in the nature
 of a creditor's interest.
 `(B) OPTIONS- Any option or other right to acquire an interest in property.
 `(C) NET LEASE PROPERTY- In the case of a lessor, net lease property
 (within the meaning of subsection (h)(1)).
 `(D) CERTAIN PREFERRED STOCK- Stock which is fixed and preferred as to
 dividends and does not participate in corporate growth to any significant
 extent.
 `(E) STOCK IN CERTAIN CORPORATIONS- Stock in--
 `(i) an S corporation (within the meaning of section 1361),
 `(ii) a personal holding company (as defined in section 542), and
 `(iii) a foreign corporation.
 `(3) EXCEPTION FOR STOCK IN FOREIGN CORPORATION WHICH IS REGULARLY TRADED
 ON NATIONAL OR REGIONAL EXCHANGE- Clause (iii) of paragraph (2)(E) shall
 not apply to stock in a foreign corporation the stock of which is listed on
 the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, or any domestic
 regional exchange for which quotations are published on a regular basis
 other than--
 `(A) stock of a foreign investment company (within the meaning of section
 1246(b)), and
 `(B) stock in a foreign corporation held by a United States person who
 meets the requirements of section 1248(a)(2).
 `(c) INDEXED BASIS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) INDEXED BASIS- The indexed basis for any asset is--
 `(A) the adjusted basis of the asset, multiplied by
 `(B) the applicable inflation ratio.
 `(2) APPLICABLE INFLATION RATIO- The applicable inflation ratio for any
 asset is the percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(A) the gross national product deflator for the calendar quarter in which
 the disposition takes place, by
 `(B) the gross national product deflator for the calendar quarter in which
 the asset was acquired by the taxpayer (or, if later, the calendar quarter
 ending December 31, 1986).
The applicable inflation ratio shall not be taken into account unless it
is greater than 1. The applicable inflation ratio for any asset shall be
rounded to the nearest one-tenth of 1 percent.
 `(3) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT DEFLATOR- The gross national product deflator
 for any calendar quarter is the implicit price deflator for the gross
 national product for such quarter (as shown in the first revision thereof).
 `(4) SECRETARY TO PUBLISH TABLES- The Secretary shall publish tables
 specifying the applicable inflation ratios for each calendar quarter.
 `(d) SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) TREATMENT AS SEPARATE ASSET- In the case of any asset, the following
 shall be treated as a separate asset:
 `(A) a substantial improvement to property,
 `(B) in the case of stock of a corporation, a substantial contribution to
 capital, and
 `(C) any other portion of an asset to the extent that separate treatment
 of such portion is appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(2) ASSETS WHICH ARE NOT INDEXED ASSETS THROUGHOUT HOLDING PERIOD-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The applicable inflation ratio shall be appropriately
 reduced for calendar months at any time during which the asset was not an
 indexed asset.
 `(B) CERTAIN SHORT SALES- For purposes of applying subparagraph (A), an
 asset shall be treated as not an indexed asset for any short sale period
 during which the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse sells short property
 substantially identical to the asset. For purposes of the preceding sentence,
 the short sale period begins on the day after the substantially identical
 property is sold and ends on the closing date for the sale.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN DISTRIBUTIONS- A distribution with respect to stock
 in a corporation which is not a dividend shall be treated as a disposition.
 `(4) SECTION CANNOT INCREASE ORDINARY LOSS- To the extent that (but for
 this paragraph) this section would create or increase a net ordinary loss
 to which section 1231(a)(2) applies or an ordinary loss to which any other
 provision of this title applies, such provision shall not apply. The taxpayer
 shall be treated as having a long-term capital loss in an amount equal to
 the amount of the ordinary loss to which the preceding sentence applies.
 `(5) ACQUISITION DATE WHERE THERE HAS BEEN PRIOR APPLICATION OF SUBSECTION
 (a)(1) WITH RESPECT TO THE TAXPAYER- If there has been a prior application
 of subsection (a)(1) to an asset while such asset was held by the taxpayer,
 the date of acquisition of such asset by the taxpayer shall be treated as
 not earlier than the date of the most recent such prior application.
 `(6) COLLAPSIBLE CORPORATIONS- The application of section 341(a) (relating to
 collapsible corporations) shall be determined without regard to this section.
 `(e) CERTAIN CONDUIT ENTITIES-
 `(1) REGULATED INVESTMENT COMPANIES; REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS; COMMON
 TRUST FUNDS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Stock in a qualified investment entity shall be an indexed
 asset for any calendar month in the same ratio as the fair market value of
 the assets held by such entity at the close of such month which are indexed
 assets bears to the fair market value of all assets of such entity at the
 close of such month.
 `(B) RATIO OF 90 PERCENT OR MORE- If the ratio for any calendar month
 determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 90
 percent or more, such ratio for such month shall be 100 percent.
 `(C) RATIO OF 10 PERCENT OR LESS- If the ratio for any calendar month
 determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 10
 percent or less, such ratio for such month shall be zero.
 `(D) VALUATION OF ASSETS IN CASE OF REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS- Nothing
 in this paragraph shall require a real estate investment trust to value
 its assets more frequently than once each 36 months (except where such
 trust ceases to exist). The ratio under subparagraph (A) for any calendar
 month for which there is no valuation shall be the trustee's good faith
 judgment as to such valuation.
 `(E) QUALIFIED INVESTMENT ENTITY- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `qualified investment entity' means--
 `(i) a regulated investment company (within the meaning of section 851),
 `(ii) a real estate investment trust (within the meaning of section 856), and
 `(iii) a common trust fund (within the meaning of section 584).
 `(2) PARTNERSHIPS- In the case of a partnership, the adjustment made
 under subsection (a) at the partnership level shall be passed through to
 the partners.
 `(3) S CORPORATIONS- In the case of an S corporation, the adjustment
 under subsection (a) at the corporate level shall be passed through to
 the shareholders.
 `(f) DISPOSITIONS BETWEEN RELATED PERSONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- This section shall not apply to any sale or other
 disposition of property between related persons except to the extent that the
 basis of such property in the hands of the transferee is a substituted basis.
 `(2) RELATED PERSONS DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `related persons' means--
 `(A) persons bearing a relationship set forth in section 267(b), and
 `(B) persons treated as single employer under subsection (b), (c), (m),
 or (n) of section 414.
 `(g) TRANSFERS TO INCREASE INDEXING ADJUSTMENT OR DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCE-
 If any person transfers cash, debt, or any other property to another person
 and the principal purpose of such transfer is--
 `(1) to secure or increase an adjustment under subsection (a), or
 `(2) to increase (by reason of an adjustment under subsection (a)) a
 deduction for depreciation, depletion, or amortization,
the Secretary may disallow part or all of such adjustment or increase.
 `(h) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) NET LEASE PROPERTY DEFINED- The term `net lease property' means leased
 real property where--
 `(A) the term of the lease (taking into account options to renew) was 50
 percent or more of the useful life of the property, and
 `(B) for the period of the lease, the sum of the deductions with respect to
 such property which are allowable to the lessor solely by reason of section
 162 (other than rents and reimbursed amounts with respect to such property)
 is 15 percent or less of the rental income produced by such property.
 `(2) STOCK INCLUDES INTEREST IN COMMON TRUST FUND- The term `stock in a
 corporation' includes any interest in a common trust fund (as defined in
 section 584(a)).
 `(i) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for part II of subchapter
 O of such chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 1021 the following new item:
`Sec. 1022. Indexing of certain assets for purposes of determining gain.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply
 to dispositions after December 31, 1990, in taxable years ending after
 such date.
SEC. 3. CAPITAL GAINS EXCLUSION FOR CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESS STOCK.
 (a) TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS- Section 1202 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986, as added by section 1, is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 1202. DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL GAINS ON SMALL BUSINESS STOCK HELD MORE
THAN 4 YEARS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- If for any taxable year a taxpayer other than a
 corporation has a qualified small business net capital gain, there shall
 be allowed as a deduction from gross income an amount equal to 28.5 percent
 of such qualified small business net capital gain.
 `(b) QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS NET CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of this
 section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified small business net capital gain'
 means the lesser of--
 `(A) the net capital gain for the taxable year, or
 `(B) the net capital gain for the taxable year determined by taking into
 account only gain or loss from qualified small business stock with a
 holding period of at least 4 years at the time of the disposition.
 `(2) Qualified small business stock-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified small business stock' means stock
 which--
 `(i) is issued by a qualified small business after the date of the enactment
 of this section,
 `(ii) is first acquired (whether directly or through an underwriter)
 by the taxpayer, and
 `(iii) is not issued in redemption of (or otherwise exchanged for) stock
 not issued during the period described in clause (i).
 `(B) QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS- For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified small business' means a corporation the
 paid-up capital of which immediately after the date of issuance described
 in subparagraph (A) is $100,000,000 or less.
 `(ii) ACTIVE TRADE OR BUSINESS REQUIREMENT- A corporation shall not be
 treated as a qualified small business unless such corporation--
 `(I) was engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business during the
 5-year period ending on the date of issuance described in subparagraph (A)
 (or if shorter, its period of existence), and
 `(II) is so engaged immediately after such date.
 `(iii) EXCEPTION FOR PERSONAL SERVICE CORPORATIONS- The term `qualified
 small business' shall not include a personal service corporation (within
 the meaning of section 269A(b)(1)).
 `(3) TRANSITION RULE- In the case of a taxable year beginning before January
 1, 1991, and ending on or after such date, qualified small business net
 capital gain shall be determined by taking into account gain or loss which
 is properly taken into account only for the portion of the taxable year
 after December 31, 1990.
 `(c) ESTATES AND TRUSTS- In the case of an estate or trust, the deduction
 under subsection (a) shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any)
 of the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets
 which, under section 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in
 gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income
 beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.'.
 (b) CORPORATIONS- Section 1201 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 amended by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c) and by inserting
 after subsection (a) the following new subsection:
 `(b) DEDUCTION FOR SMALL BUSINESS NET CAPITAL GAIN-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If for any taxable year a corporation has a qualified
 small business net capital gain--
 `(A) there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross income an amount
 equal to 41 percent of such qualified small business net capital gain, and
 `(B) paragraph (2) of subsection (a) shall be applied as if it read
 as follows:
 `(2) a tax equal to the sum of--
 `(A) 20 percent of the qualified small business net capital gain, plus
 `(B) 34 percent of the net capital gain, reduced by the amount taken into
 account under subparagraph (A).
 `(2) QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS NET CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of this
 subsection, the term `qualified small business net capital gain' has the
 meaning given such term by section 1202(b)(1).'.
 (c) MAXIMUM 20 PERCENT RATE- (1) Section 1(j) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3)
 and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 `(2) Special rule where taxpayer has qualified small business net capital
 gain-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If a taxpayer has qualified small business net capital
 gain for any taxable year, then the tax imposed by this section shall not
 exceed the lesser of--
 `(i) the amount determined under paragraph (1), or
 `(ii) the sum of--
 `(I) the amount determined under paragraph (1) without taking into account
 qualified small business net capital gain for purposes of subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) thereof, plus
 `(II) 20 percent of the qualified small business net capital gain.
 `(B) QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS NET CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of this
 paragraph, the term `qualified small business net capital gain' has the
 meaning given such term by section 1202(b).'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Subparagraph (B) of section 1(j)(3) of such Code,
 as redesignated by paragraph (1), is amended by inserting `paragraph (2)
 applies for such taxable year or if' after `if'.
 (d) TREATMENT AS PREFERENCE ITEM FOR MINIMUM TAX- Section 57(a) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items of tax preference under
 the alternative minimum tax) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraph:
 `(8) CAPITAL GAINS ON SALE OF CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESS STOCK- An amount equal
 to the deduction for the taxable year determined under section 1201(b)
 or 1202.'.
 (e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 170(e)(1) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by inserting `(or, in the case of qualified small business stock under
 section 1202(b)(2), 75 percent of)' before `the amount of gain', and
 (B) by striking `(reduced by the deduction allowed under section 1202)'.
 (2) Paragraph (4) of section 642(c) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(4) ADJUSTMENTS- To the extent that the amount otherwise allowable as a
 deduction under this subsection consists of gain from the sale or exchange of
 small business stock held for more than 4 years, proper adjustment shall be
 made for any deduction allowable to the estate or trust under section 1202.'.
 (3) The last sentence of paragraph (3) of section 643(a) of such Code is
 amended to read as follows: `The deduction under section 1202 shall not
 be taken into account.'.
 (4) Clause (iii) of section 852(b)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by
 striking out `66 percent' and inserting `the rate differential portion
 (within the meaning of section 904(b)(3)(E))'.
 (5) Section 904(b)(3)(E) of such Code is amended by striking out `1201(a)'
 in clause (iii)(II) thereof and inserting `1201 (a) or (b)'.
 (6) Section 1445(e)(1) of such Code is amended by striking out `34 percent
 (or, to the extent provided in regulations, 28 percent)' and inserting
 `34 percent (or, to the extent provided in regulations, the alternative
 tax rate determined under section 904(b)(3)(E)(iii))'.
 (7) The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of such
 Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 1202 and inserting:
`Sec. 1202. Deduction for capital gains on small business stock held for
more than 4 years.'.
 (8)(A) The heading for section 1201 of such Code is amended by inserting `;
 DEDUCTION FOR GAIN ON QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS STOCK' after `CORPORATIONS'.
 (B) The item relating to section 1201 in the table of sections for part
 I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting `;
 deduction for gain on qualified small business stock' after `corporations'.
 (f) Effective Date-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made
 by this section shall apply to sales or exchanges after December 31, 1990,
 of stock issued after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) CORPORATIONS- The amendments made by subsection (b) and paragraphs
 (4), (5), (6), and (8) of subsection (e) shall apply to sales or exchanges
 after the date of the enactment of this Act of stock issued after such date.