Calendar No. 99
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 596
[Report No. 102-67]
A BILL
To provide that Federal facilities meet Federal and State environmental laws
and requirements and to clarify that such facilities must comply with such
environmental laws and requirements.
May 30, 1991
Reported without amendment
S 596 RS
Calendar No. 99
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 596
[Report No. 102-67]
To provide that Federal facilities meet Federal and State environmental laws
and requirements and to clarify that such facilities must comply with such
environmental laws and requirements.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 7 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. MITCHELL (for himself, Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. BAUCUS, Mr. BURDICK, Mr. REID,
Mr. HARKIN, Mr. PELL, Mr. LEVIN, Mr. SARBANES, Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. SPECTER,
Mr. DECONCINI, Mr. BRYAN, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. BUMPERS, Mr. COHEN, Ms. MIKULSKI,
Mr. WIRTH, Mr. WELLSTONE, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. METZENBAUM, Mr. KERRY,
Mr. SANFORD, Mr. KERREY, Mr. HATFIELD, Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. DURENBERGER,
Mr. LEAHY, Mr. PACKWOOD, Mr. RIEGLE, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. BRADLEY, and Mr. BROWN)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Environment and Public Works
May 30, 1991
Reported, under the authority of the order of the Senate of May 17 (legislative
day, April 25), 1991, by Mr. BURDICK, without amendment
A BILL
To provide that Federal facilities meet Federal and State environmental laws
and requirements and to clarify that such facilities must comply with such
environmental laws and requirements.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Federal Facility Compliance Act
 of 1991'.
FACILITY ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS
 SEC. 2. (a) Each department, agency, and instrumentality of the United
 States shall perform an assessment of the releases of hazardous substances
 (including hazardous constituents thereof) from each solid waste management
 unit at each hazardous substance treatment, storage, or disposal facilty
 owned or operated by the department, agency, or instrumentality after
 November 19, 1980. Such assessments shall be completed within twelve months
 after the enactment of this section and shall indicate whether such facility
 and department, agency, or instrumentality is in compliance with applicable
 requirements of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Comprehensive Emergency
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean
 Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Toxic Subtances Control
 Act. Such assessments shall be provided to the Environmental Protection
 Agency and to the State in which the facility is located.
 (b) FACILITY INSPECTIONS- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency shall undertake a thorough inspection annually of each facility
 owned or operated by a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United
 States that is subject to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Comprehensive
 Emergency Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, the Clean Air Act,
 the Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Toxic Substances
 Control Act to enforce compliance with these Acts. Each annual inspection
 shall include an analysis of comprehensive groundwater monitoring. The
 records of such inspections shall be available to the public in the
 same manner as provided in section 3007(b) of the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act. The department, agency, or instrumentality owning or operating each
 such facility shall reimburse the Environmental Protection Agency for the
 costs of the inspection of the facility.
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS TO FEDERAL FACILITIES
 Sec. 3. (a) IN GENERAL- Section 6001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6961) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a) IN GENERAL- ' after `6001.';
 (2) in the first sentence, by inserting `and management' before `in the
 same manner';
 (3) by inserting after the first sentence the following: `The Federal, State,
 interstate, and local substantive and procedural requirements referred
 to in this subsection include, but are not limited to, all administrative
 orders and all civil and administrative penalties and fines.'; and
 (4) by inserting after the second sentence the following: `For purposes
 of enforcing any such substantive or procedural requirement (including,
 but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order, or civil
 or administrative penalty or fine) against any such department, agency,
 or instrumentality, the United States hereby expressly waives any immunity
 otherwise applicable to the United States. No agent, employee, or officer
 of the United States shall be personally liable for any civil penalty
 under any Federal or State solid or hazardous waste law with respect to
 any act or omission within the scope of his official duties. An agent,
 employee, or officer of the United States shall be subject to any criminal
 sanction (including, but not limited to, any fine or imprisonment) under
 any Federal or State solid or hazardous waste law, but no department,
 agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial
 branch of the Federal Government shall be subject to any such sanction.'.
Federal agencies are authorized, at the discretion of the Secretary of the
head of the Federal department or agency concerned, to:
 (1) in State criminal proceedings, represent or expend funds to represent
 an employee in a case in which he or she is sued, subpoenaed or charged in
 his or her individual capacity, when the actions for which representation
 is requested reasonably appear to have been performed within the scope of
 the employee's employment and providing representation would otherwise be
 in the interest of the United States;
 (2) in Federal criminal proceedings, reimburse an employee for reasonable
 defense costs, if no indictment is brought, for actions performed within
 the scope of the employee's employment.
 (b) ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS- Such section is further amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection--
 `(b) ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS- (1) The Administrator may commence
 an administrative enforcement action against any department, agency, or
 instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the
 Federal Government pursuant to the enforcement authorities contained in
 this act. The Administrator shall initiate an administrative enforcement
 action against such a department, agency, or instrumentality in the same
 manner and under the same circumstances as an action would be initiated
 against another person. Any voluntary resolution or settlement of such an
 action shall be set forth in a consent order.
 `(2) No administrative order issued to such a department, agency, or
 instrumentality shall become final until such department, agency, or
 instrumentality has had the opportunity to confer with the Administrator.'.
DEFINITION
 SEC. 4. (a) PERSON- Section 1004(15) is amended by adding the following
 before the period: `and shall include each department, agency, and
 instrumentality of the United States.'.