S 1462 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1462
To create a Federal nuclear facility environmental response fund, to create
an Office of Environmental Management and Remedial Action, to require the
Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency to cooperate with affected States and Indian tribes, to provide for
research and development to address environmental problems at Federal nuclear
facilities, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. ADAMS (for himself, Mr. WIRTH, Mr. REID, Mr. METZENBAUM, Mr. FOWLER,
Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. SANFORD, Mr. BRYAN, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. GORE, Mr. LIEBERMAN,
Mr. DASCHLE, and Mr. HATFIELD) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To create a Federal nuclear facility environmental response fund, to create
an Office of Environmental Management and Remedial Action, to require the
Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency to cooperate with affected States and Indian tribes, to provide for
research and development to address environmental problems at Federal nuclear
facilities, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Federal Nuclear Facilities Environmental
 Response Act'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act are the following:
 (1) To provide an adequate, assured long-term source of funding for
 environmental restoration, decontamination, decommissioning, and long-term
 management of Federal nuclear facilities and sites.
 (2) To provide for the compliance of Federal nuclear facilities and sites
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Energy with applicable Federal
 environmental laws.
 (3) To restore the environment affected by releases of hazardous and
 nuclear materials from Federal nuclear facilities within 30 years.
 (4) To characterize, stabilize, retrieve, and dispose of high-level
 radioactive waste and transuranic waste currently stored at Federal
 nuclear facilities.
 (5) To provide for the timely decontamination, decommissioning, and
 long-term management and monitoring of Federal nuclear facilities and sites.
 (6) To provide for cooperation and consultation between the Federal
 Government and States and Indian tribes affected by environmental
 compliance and restoration activities at Federal nuclear facilities and
 sites, including transportation of radioactive and hazardous materials
 resulting from those activities.
 (7) To provide research and development necessary for the environmental
 restoration, decommissioning, and long-term management of Federal nuclear
 facilities and sites.
SEC. 3. ENFORCEMENT OF FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL LAW.
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify or restrict the obligation
 of the Administrator (or a State to which regulatory authority has been
 delegated under Federal environmental law) to enforce, or the obligation
 of the Secretary to comply with, Federal environmental law.
SEC. 4. NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION.
 Nothing in this Act shall authorize the release or disclosure of classified
 national security information to any person, including the Administrator
 and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, except as provided by other law.
SEC. 5. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.
 (2) The term `affected State or Indian tribe' means a State or Indian
 tribe that--
 (A) has within its borders or contiguous to one of its borders a Federal
 nuclear facility or site;
 (B) has within its boundaries or contiguous to one of its boundaries a
 major river, waterway, or underground aquifer that is within or contiguous
 to such a facility or site; or
 (C) in the case of an Indian tribe, possesses treaty rights to lands or
 surface or subsurface waters that lie within or are contiguous to such a
 facility or site.
 (3) The term `affected transportation corridor State or Indian tribe' means
 a State or Indian tribe within whose State or reservation boundaries is a
 transportation corridor used for radioactive or hazardous wastes resulting
 from the activities authorized by this Act.
 (4) The terms `byproduct material', `source material', and `special nuclear
 material' have the meanings given such terms by subsections e, z, and aa
 of section 11 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2014).
 (5) The term `Director' means the Director of the Office of Environmental
 Management and Remedial Action of the Department of Energy established by
 section 205.
 (6) The term `environmental restoration' means--
 (A) the removal of hazardous and radioactive materials to background levels
 or to applicable Federal or State standards, both on-site and off-site,
 that have been released into the environment, including air, surface and
 subsurface water, and land; and
 (B) the decontamination of facilities.
 (7) The term `Federal environmental law' includes--
 (A) the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.);
 (B) the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.);
 (C) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
 Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) (in this Act referred to as `CERCLA');
 (D) the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.);
 (E) the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33
 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.);
 (F) the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300f et seq.);
 (G) the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.); and
 (H) the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.).
 (8)(A) The term `Federal nuclear facility' means--
 (i) a production facility or a utilization facility, as defined by
 subsections v and cc, respectively, of section 11 of the Atomic Energy
 Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2014);
 (ii) a facility for the storage or disposal of hazardous or radioactive
 materials that is owned by the Department of Energy, including soil
 discharge facilities; and
 (iii) any other facility or site subject to the Atomic Energy Act of
 1954 which is subject to the control of, or under the jurisdiction of,
 the Secretary of Energy.
 (B) Such term does not include--
 (i) a naval nuclear propulsion program facility within the jurisdiction
 of the Department of Energy as pursuant to section 309 of the Department
 of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7158); or
 (ii) a facility developed pursuant to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982
 (42 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.).
 (9) The term `Fund' means the Federal Nuclear Facilities Environment
 Response Fund established by section 101.
 (10) The term `hazardous material' means material that is regulated and
 controlled as a hazardous substance under CERCLA (42 U.S.C. 9601(14)) or
 as a hazardous waste under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6903(5)).
 (11) The term `high-level radioactive waste' has the meaning given
 that term in section 2(12) of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (42
 U.S.C. 10101(12)).
 (12) The term `Indian tribe' means an Indian tribe, band, nation, or
 other organized group or community of Indians, including a Native village
 described in section 3(c) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43
 U.S.C. 1602(c)), which is recognized as eligible for the services provided to
 Indians by the Secretary of the Interior because of their status as Indians.
 (13) The term `penalties' means fines, fees, monetary judgments, and
 monetary damages resulting from regulatory enforcement or litigation
 stemming from Federal environmental laws or this Act.
 (14) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy.
 (15) The term `transuranic waste' means material contaminated with
 elements that--
 (A) have an atomic number greater than 92, including neptunium, plutonium,
 americium, and curium; and
 (B) are in concentrations greater than 10 nanocuries per gram, or in such
 other concentrations as the Nuclear Regulatory Commission may prescribe
 to protect the public health and safety.
TITLE I--FEDERAL NUCLEAR FACILITY ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE FUND
SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND- (1) There is established in the Treasury
 of the United States a separate fund to be known as the `Federal Nuclear
 Facilities Environmental Response Fund'.
 (2) The Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be--
 (A) appropriated and transferred to the Fund as provided in subsections
 (b) and (c);
 (B) transferred to the Fund as provided in subsection (d); and
 (C) credited to the Fund as provided in subsection (e)(2)(C).
 (b) INTERIM FUNDING- (1) There are appropriated and transferred to the
 Fund, out of funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, amounts
 determined by the Secretary of the Treasury to be equivalent to any amount
 appropriated pursuant to paragraph (2).
 (2) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for appropriation
 into the Fund under paragraph (1), in lieu of any funds that prior to the
 date of enactment of this Act may have been authorized to be appropriated
 to the Secretary for defense waste management environmental restoration and
 compliance activities such as those authorized by this Act, $2,500,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991, $3,700,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and for each
 fiscal year thereafter such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
 (3) Any unobligated balances appropriated prior to the date of enactment
 of this Act for defense waste management and environmental restoration
 and compliance activities such as those authorized by this Act shall be
 transferred to the Fund not later than 30 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act.
 (c) TRANSFER OF PENALTIES- (1) There are appropriated and transferred
 to the Fund, out of funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
 amounts determined by the Secretary of the Treasury to be equivalent to the
 amounts received in the Treasury attributable to collections of penalties
 and other amounts as described in paragraph (2).
 (2) The amounts appropriated by paragraph (1) are amounts equivalent to the
 following penalties and other amounts assessed against the Department of
 Energy or any contractor of the Department of Energy operating a Federal
 nuclear facility, for actions resulting from the operation of a Federal
 nuclear facility or site containing such facility:
 (A) Amounts recovered on behalf of the Superfund under CERCLA (42 U.S.C. 9601
 et seq.).
 (B) Penalties assessed under title I of CERCLA.
 (C) Punitive damages collected under section 107(c)(3) of CERCLA.
 (D) Penalties assessed under section 3008 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6928).
 (E) Penalties assessed under section 16 of the Toxic Substances Control Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2615).
 (F) Penalties assessed under section 1414 of the Safe Drinking Water Act
 (42 U.S.C. 300g-3).
 (G) Penalties assessed under section 113 of the Clean Air Act (42
 U.S.C. 7413).
 (H) Moneys recovered or collected under section 311(b)(6)(B) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321).
 (I) Penalties assessed under section 309 of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1319).
 (3) The amounts appropriated by paragraph (1) shall be transferred annually
 from the general fund of the Treasury to the Fund.
 (4)(A) A penalty or other amount described in paragraph (2) that is assessed
 against the Department of Energy shall be paid out of the operating
 budget of the Department of Energy for the activity that resulted in
 the assessment and not out of any other account of the Federal budget
 (including an account under section 1304 of title 31, United States Code).
 (B)(i) A penalty or other amount described in paragraph (2) that is
 assessed against a contractor of the Department of Energy shall be paid
 by the contractor and not by the Department of Energy.
 (ii) In order to effect payment of a penalty or other amount by a contractor
 the Secretary of Energy may deduct an appropriate amount from an award
 fee owed to the contractor and pay the penalty or other amount on behalf
 of the contractor.
 (iii) A provision in a contract between the Secretary of Energy and a
 contractor that purports to indemnify a contractor, hold a contractor
 harmless, or otherwise protect a contractor against liability for action
 by the contractor that results in assessment of a penalty or other amount
 described in paragraph (2)--
 (I) is void as against public policy;
 (II) shall not be performed or complied with by the Secretary of Energy; and
 (III) shall not be enforceable by the contractor.
 (d) TRANSFERS FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Secretary of the Treasury shall
 transfer quarterly into the Fund amounts described in section 102(d).
 (e) MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND- (1) The Secretary of the Treasury shall report
 to the Congress each fiscal year ending on or after September 30, 1990,
 on the financial condition and results of the operation of the Fund during
 the preceding fiscal year and on its expected condition and operations
 during the coming fiscal year.
 (2)(A) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the
 Fund as is not required to meet current withdrawals in interest-bearing
 obligations of the United States acquired--
 (i) on original issue at the issue price, or
 (ii) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
 (B) Obligations acquired for the Fund may be sold by the Secretary of the
 Treasury at the market price.
 (C) Interest on and proceeds of the sale or redemption of obligations held
 for the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
 (f) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND- (1) Amounts in the Fund shall be available
 to the Secretary and the Administrator, as provided in appropriation Acts,
 for purposes of making expenditures to carry out activities described in
 section 102(a) and for no other purpose.
 (2) Amounts in the Fund shall remain available until expended.
 (g) SEPARATE BUDGET ACCOUNT- The Secretary shall establish a budget account
 for the Fund, under the Director of the Office of Environmental Management
 and Remedial Action, which shall be included as a separate budget account
 in the budget submitted each fiscal year by the President in accordance
 with chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code.
 (h) NOTIFICATION OF INSUFFICIENT FUNDS- If at any time the funds available
 in the Fund are insufficient to enable the Secretary and the Administrator
 to discharge their responsibilities under this Act, the Secretary shall
 issue a determination of insufficiency to the Secretary of the Treasury
 and report such determination to the Congress, identifying the amount of
 additional funds needed to carry out the obligations of the Secretary and
 the Administrator under this Act.
SEC. 102. ALLOCATION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
 (a) BUDGET PLAN FOR ACTIVITIES- (1) The Secretary, with the consultation
 and concurrence of the Secretary of the Treasury and the Administrator,
 and after consultation with affected States and Indian tribes and affected
 transportation corridor States and Indian tribes, shall prepare a budget
 plan for the timely completion of the following:
 (A) Characterization, stabilization, retrieval, treatment, packaging,
 and transport of high-level radioactive and transuranic wastes generated
 or stored at Federal nuclear facilities in compliance with Federal
 environmental law.
 (B) Disposal of transuranic wastes.
 (C) Disposal of high-level wastes generated by the Department of Energy
 as determined pursuant to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (42
 U.S.C. 10101).
 (D) Remedial investigations and surveys and response actions under CERCLA
 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) and corrective actions under subsections (u)
 and (v) of section 3004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6924)
 at Federal nuclear facilities.
 (E) Decommissioning, decontamination, long-term monitoring and long-term
 care of Federal nuclear facilities.
 (F) Grants to affected States and Indian tribes and affected transportation
 corridor States and Indian tribes.
 (G) Research and development under the program established by title III.
 (H) Evaluation and mitigation of releases of radioactive and hazardous
 materials to off-site areas affecting property and populations adjacent
 to Federal nuclear facilities.
 (I) Activities to bring Federal nuclear facilities into compliance with
 Federal environmental law.
 (J) Activities of the Office of Environmental Management and Remedial
 Action pursuant to this Act relating to Federal nuclear facilities.
 (2) The budget plan required by paragraph (1) shall be based on the
 site-specific surveys and plans required by subtitle A of title II.
 (3) The budget plan required by paragraph (1) shall be prepared in
 preliminary form not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of
 this Act, and thereafter the Secretary shall submit the plan to Congress
 annually at the same time as the budget of the Department of Energy is
 submitted in accordance with chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code.
 (b) ALLOCATION OF COSTS- (1) Not later than 1 year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate by rule, pursuant to
 section 553 of title 5, United States Code, a methodology for allocating
 costs, proportionately among the entities listed in paragraph (3), based on--
 (A) total program costs identified in budgets prepared pursuant to subsection
 (a);
 (B) annual funding requirements of the Secretary necessary to comply with
 Federal environmental law and this Act; and
 (C) other authorized costs of carrying out the requirements of this Act
 as they relate to Federal nuclear facilities and sites containing such
 facilities, including the provision of grants pursuant to title II.
 (2) The proportionate share of costs specified pursuant to paragraph (1)
 shall be based on the site-specific costs for Federal nuclear facilities
 and sites of environmental restoration, compliance, decommissioning, and
 long-term surveillance to be incurred by the Department of Energy. These
 costs shall be allocated on a proportionate basis to each entity identified
 in paragraph (3) based on--
 (A) the degree to which each activity and facility of the Department of
 Energy has resulted in such costs being incurred in providing specific
 services or use of specific facilities or sites to Department of Energy
 programs and to private and government entities other than the Department
 of Energy; and
 (B) the degree to which the entities identified in paragraph (3) participated
 in, utilized, or contracted for services from such activity or facility
 and the level of usage by each such entity of services or usage provided by
 the Department of Energy to the entity (such as uranium enrichment services).
 (3) The entities among which costs shall be allocated are the following:
 (A) The Department of Energy, with costs allocated proportionately among
 budget accounts for atomic energy defense activities, the civilian nuclear
 energy program, energy research and uranium enrichment and radioisotope
 programs, and such other programs of the Department of Energy as the
 Secretary determines to be appropriate to recover costs related to such
 programs.
 (B) Other departments and agencies of the Federal Government that obtain
 nuclear-related services from the Department of Energy or use nuclear
 facilities or sites under the jurisdiction of the Secretary, including
 waste management, naval reactor decommissioning and disposal, and uranium
 enrichment services.
 (C) Commercial and other non-Federal entities that purchase nuclear-related
 services of the Department of Energy or are the beneficiary of
 nuclear-related activities of the Department of Energy, including--
 (i) uranium enrichment services;
 (ii) uranium mill tailings reclamation and long-term management;
 (iii) low-level and transuranic radioactive waste management, disposal,
 and long-term management;
 (iv) isotope production and distribution; and
 (v) the basic research user facilities program and other research activities.
 (4) With public notice and comment, the Secretary shall annually review
 the methodology established pursuant to paragraph (1) to assure adequate
 funding and equitable apportionment of costs.
 (c) REIMBURSEMENT BY FEDERAL AGENCIES- (1)(A) Each fiscal year the
 Secretary shall notify each Federal department and agency described in
 subsection (b)(3) (A) and (B) of its proportionate share of the costs of
 the activities described in subsection (a)(1) for the following fiscal
 year and an estimate for future years.
 (B) The head of each department and agency notified of its proportionate
 share of costs pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall reflect its proportionate
 share of costs in the budget of such department or agency for such fiscal
 year submitted in accordance with chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code.
 (C) Each department and agency (other than the Department of Energy)
 shall reimburse the Secretary of Energy for its proportionate share of
 costs for such fiscal year from amounts appropriated to the department or
 agency for such share of costs for such fiscal year.
 (2) Under regulations issued pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United
 States Code, the Secretary shall assess and collect from each commercial
 and other non-Federal entity described in subsection (b)(3)(C) a user fee
 for purposes of recovering such entity's proportionate share of the costs
 of the activities described in subsection (a)(1).
 (d) TRANSFERS TO FUND- The Secretary shall transfer quarterly into the Fund--
 (1) amounts reimbursed to the Secretary under subsection (c)(1);
 (2) amounts equivalent to the fees collected under subsection (c)(2);
 (3) amounts allocated to the Department of Energy by the Secretary under
 subsection (a) as the Department of Energy's proportionate share of costs;
 (4) amounts received by the Secretary for costs associated with the disposal
 of low-level radioactive waste that is the responsibility of the Federal
 Government under section 3(b) of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act
 (42 U.S.C. 2021c);
 (5) amounts received by the Secretary for the costs of long-term monitoring
 and maintenance of commercial low-level waste disposal facilities transferred
 to the Secretary pursuant to section 151(b) of the Nuclear Waste Policy
 Act of 1982 (42 U.S.C. 10171(b)); and
 (6) amounts received by the Secretary for costs associated with the long-term
 monitoring and maintenance of uranium mill tailings and lands transferred
 to the Secretary pursuant to section 104(f) of the Uranium Mill Tailings
 Radiation Control Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 7914(f)).
TITLE II--ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND REMEDIAL ACTION
Subtitle A--Plans for Compliance with Federal Environmental Law
SEC. 201. ENVIRONMENTAL BASELINE SURVEYS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- As soon as practicable, but not later than 1 year after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of the
 Department of Energy responsible for environmental protection shall conduct
 and complete an environmental baseline survey of each site containing a
 Federal nuclear facility.
 (b) CONTENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL BASELINE SURVEYS- An environmental baseline
 survey shall--
 (1) identify all Federal nuclear facilities on the site;
 (2) inventory existing quantities and concentrations of hazardous material
 in storage and disposal facilities on the site;
 (3) identify the level of compliance of the site with Federal environmental
 law;
 (4) inventory all previous and current releases into the environment of
 hazardous or radioactive materials at or from the site;
 (5) identify off-site properties, aquifers, bodies of water, and populations
 that have been contaminated by or exposed to hazardous or radioactive
 materials released from the site;
 (6) identify and describe site management activities currently being
 conducted to correct or mitigate such releases or contamination;
 (7) describe the status of efforts to characterize, treat, stabilize, and
 dispose of high-level radioactive waste and transuranic waste at the site;
 (8) specify the quality control and assurance programs and confidence
 levels applicable to the data contained in the survey; and
 (9) include such other information as the Assistant Secretary considers
 appropriate.
 (c) USE OF PRIOR DATA- In the preparation of an environmental baseline survey
 under subsection (a), the Secretary may use preexisting environmental data
 and studies if--
 (1) the quality control and assurance procedures utilized in the collection
 and analysis of such data or studies were adequate;
 (2) the data and studies remain valid despite the passage of time or
 changes in circumstances; and
 (3) the Secretary makes a specific finding to that effect.
 (d) PERIODIC REVISION- An environmental baseline survey shall be revised
 at appropriate intervals, but not less often than every 5 years.
 (e) AVAILABILITY- An environmental baseline survey shall be provided to
 the Administrator and to the affected States and Indian tribes and shall
 be made available to any other person on request.
SEC. 202. COMPLIANCE PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 6 months after completion of a site-specific
 environmental baseline survey under section 201, the Secretary, in
 consultation with the Administrator and affected States and Indian tribes,
 shall develop a compliance plan to bring each such site or facility
 into timely and full compliance with Federal environmental law and State
 environmental law.
 (b) CONTENT OF COMPLIANCE PLAN- A compliance plan shall specify--
 (1) required actions that the Secretary will take in order to bring the
 site into compliance with Federal environmental law, including a full
 description of and schedule for completing such actions;
 (2) a description of compliance activities, including enforcement activities,
 being taken by the Administrator or a State at the site, including a full
 description of and schedule for completing any corrective actions that
 the Administrator or the State has required;
 (3) determination of the costs of such compliance activities, including
 total and estimated annual costs;
 (4) a program for quality control and assurance;
 (5) a program of environmental inspection and monitoring to confirm
 compliance; and
 (6) such other items as the Secretary considers appropriate.
 (c) PERIODIC REVISION- A compliance plan shall be revised at appropriate
 intervals, but not less often than every 5 years unless, after public notice
 and comment and with the concurrence of the Administrator and affected States
 and Indian tribes, the Secretary determines that revision is unnecessary.
SEC. 203. SITE MANAGEMENT PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator and
 affected States and Indian tribes, shall prepare a site management plan
 for each Federal nuclear facility and site.
 (b) CONTENT OF SITE MANAGEMENT PLANS- A site management plan shall--
 (1) prescribe management and corrective actions for the characterization,
 stabilization, retrieval, treatment, and disposal of high-level radioactive
 wastes and transuranic wastes at the site;
 (2) provide for timely decontamination and decommissioning of the facility
 and site;
 (3) provide for long-term management of the facility and site, both
 before and after decontamination and decommissioning, including long-term
 maintenance and monitoring of the facility and site;
 (4) include plans, work procedures and schedules, institutional arrangements,
 and budget outlay schedules for carrying out the activities described in
 paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) at the site;
 (5) describe the health and environmental protection impacts and goals
 of carrying out those activities at the site and applicable regulatory
 standards;
 (6) provide estimates of radiation exposures and risk to occupational workers
 involved in carrying out those activities at the site and to the public;
 (7) establish priorities for implementation of the plan;
 (8) describe quality control and assurance programs and procedures;
 (9) describe environmental monitoring measures; and
 (10) address such other matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.
 (c) PERIODIC REVISION- A site management plan shall be revised at appropriate
 intervals, but not less often than every 5 years unless, after public notice
 and comment and with the concurrence of the Administrator and affected States
 and Indian tribes, the Secretary determines that revision is unnecessary.
SEC. 204. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO COMPLIANCE PLANS AND SITE MANAGEMENT PLANS.
 (a) IMPLEMENTATION OF PLANS- The Secretary shall implement the compliance
 plans required by section 202 and site management plans required by section
 203 with the concurrence of the affected States and Indian tribes and
 the Administrator.
 (b) AGREEMENTS- (1) An agreement that--
 (A) is among the Administrator, the Secretary, and a State to which the
 Administrator has delegated regulatory authority under Federal environmental
 law; and
 (B) provides for the implementation of Federal environmental law or
 management or treatment of radioactive wastes or facilities at a Federal
 nuclear facility,
may be deemed to satisfy, in whole or in part, the requirements of sections
202 and 203 if the agreement meets the requirements of paragraph (2).
 (2) The requirements that an agreement must meet for purposes of paragraph
 (1) are the following:
 (A) The agreement is substantially consistent with the requirements of
 sections 202 and 203.
 (B) The parties to the agreement concur that the agreement satisfies
 those requirements.
 (3) Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary, after public notice and comment and with the concurrence of
 the Administrator and affected States and Indian tribes, shall complete
 a review of all site-specific agreements for the application of Federal
 environmental law to, management of, or environmental restoration of
 Federal nuclear facilities entered into before the date of enactment of
 this Act and shall determine the extent to which such agreements may be
 deemed to satisfy the requirements of section 202 or 203.
 (c) PUBLIC NOTICE AND COMMENT- (1) Prior to the initiation of an action
 required by section 202 or 203, the Secretary shall publish a notice of
 intention to initiate such action and shall solicit public comment on the
 scope and content of each survey or plan.
 (2) At least 45 days before adoption of a survey or plan required by
 section 202 or 203, the Secretary shall provide public notice of such
 proposed plan, make a copy of the survey or plan available to the public,
 and solicit comments on the proposed survey or plan.
Subtitle B--Office of Environmental Management and Remedial Action
SEC. 211. ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is established in the Department of Energy an Office of
 Environmental Management and Remedial Action (in this subtitle referred to as
 the `Office') to consolidate the waste management, remedial, environmental,
 and decommissioning programs related to Federal nuclear facilities within
 the Department and improve the efficiency, cost-effectiveness, budgeting,
 and accountability of those programs.
 (b) DIRECTOR- The Office shall be headed by a Director who shall be
 appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
 Senate, and who shall be compensated at the rate payable for level IV of
 the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
 (c) FUNCTIONS- The Director shall be responsible for carrying out the
 functions of the Secretary under this Act and, notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, shall also be responsible for the Department of Energy's
 remedial action and waste technology programs, other than those assigned
 to the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management by section 304 of
 the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (42 U.S.C. 10224) including each of
 the following:
 (1) The Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action Program required by the
 Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 7091 et
 seq.) and land and byproduct material transferred to the United States
 under section 83(b) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1982 (42 U.S.C. 2113(b)).
 (2) Low-level radioactive waste and land to which the Secretary has assumed
 title and of which the Secretary has assumed custody under section 151(b)
 of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (42 U.S.C. 10171(b)).
 (3) Residual radioactive materials and lands that are transferred to the
 United States under section 104(f) of the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation
 Control Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 7914(f)).
 (4) Facilities for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste that is
 the responsibility of the Federal Government under section 3(b) of the
 Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 2021c(b)).
 (5) The West Valley demonstration project carried out under the West Valley
 Demonstration Project Act (42 U.S.C. 2021a note).
 (6) The Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program.
 (7) The Surplus Facilities Management Program.
 (8) The Shippingport Station Decommissioning Project.
 (d) ANNUAL REPORT- (1) Not later than January 15 of each year, the
 Director shall submit to Congress a report on the environmental compliance,
 management, and remedial activities of the Office.
 (2) The report required by paragraph (1) shall include--
 (A) a status report on the actions that need to be taken at each site
 containing a Federal nuclear facility in order to bring the site into
 compliance with Federal environmental law;
 (B) a status report on management and remedial activities;
 (C) a status report on research and development activities;
 (D) a determination of the amount of funds necessary to carry out the
 actions at the sites, including an outlay schedule for each site for the
 next 5 fiscal years; and
 (E) such other items as the Director considers appropriate.
Subtitle C--Notification and Participation of Affected States and Indian Tribes
SEC. 221. OBLIGATIONS OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In the execution of the activities necessary to bring
 Federal nuclear facilities into compliance with Federal environmental
 law and in the execution of any other actions for the decommissioning,
 decontamination, long-term care, and monitoring of Federal nuclear
 facilities, and transportation related thereto, and in fulfillment of
 the requirements of this Act, the Secretary and the Administrator shall
 consult with, and ensure the participation of--
 (1) affected States and Indian tribes; and
 (2) with regard to related transportation activities, affected transportation
 corridor States and Indian tribes.
 (b) NOTIFICATION- (1) Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (A) notify affected States and Indian tribes of the existence of Federal
 nuclear facilities within their territories; and
 (B) inform them of the procedures that the Secretary and the Administrator
 will use in carrying out this title.
 (2) Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary shall--
 (A) notify affected transportation corridor States and Indian tribes of
 the existence of a transportation corridor within their territories to be
 utilized for activities required by this Act; and
 (B) inform them of the procedures that the Secretary and the Administrator
 will use in carrying out this title.
 (3) If, after making the notifications required by paragraphs (1) and
 (2), the Secretary or the Administrator determines that additional Federal
 nuclear facilities or transportation corridors are located within any State
 or within the jurisdiction of any Indian tribe, the Secretary shall notify
 such affected State or Indian tribe or affected transportation corridor
 State or Indian tribe not later than 30 days after the determination is made.
 (4) The notification provided pursuant to this subsection is for the purpose
 of general information only and shall not be deemed to constitute notice
 under any other law or for any other purpose.
 (c) REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION- Upon written request by the Governor of an
 affected State or by the governing body of an affected Indian tribe for
 information pertinent to a Federal nuclear facility or transportation
 corridor, the Secretary shall provide a written response to such request
 no later than 30 days after receipt of the request.
SEC. 222. GRANTS TO AFFECTED STATES AND TRIBES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants from the Fund to an affected
 State or Indian tribe notified under section 221 for the following purposes:
 (1) To negotiate agreements with the Federal Government pertaining to
 remedial environmental and compliance activities at Federal nuclear
 facilities.
 (2) To independently monitor, test, and evaluate Federal nuclear facilities
 and sites for the purpose of determining the extent of environmental
 contamination at such facilities and sites and the extent of compliance
 with Federal environmental law at such facilities and sites.
 (3) To evaluate the existing and potential public health and safety,
 economic, and environmental impacts of environmental releases.
 (4) To educate the public regarding compliance with this title and the
 activities of the respective Federal, State, and tribal authorities in
 carrying out this title.
 (5) To request information about, or comment upon, recommendations, surveys,
 and reports required of the Secretary and Administrator under this Act.
 (6) To evaluate the effect on public health and safety of, and the
 economic and environmental impacts of, the transportation of hazardous and
 radioactive wastes resulting from remedial, corrective, decontamination,
 and other activities conducted pursuant to this Act.
 (b) GRANTS TO STATES WITH DELEGATED REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The Secretary,
 with the consultation and concurrence of the Administrator, shall make
 grants from the Fund to an affected State to which the Administrator has
 delegated regulatory under Federal environmental law for execution of that
 authority with respect to Federal nuclear facilities located in the State.
SEC. 223. GRANTS TO AFFECTED TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR STATES AND INDIAN TRIBES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants from the Fund to an affected
 transportation corridor State or Indian tribe notified under section 221
 for the following purposes:
 (1) To negotiate agreements with the Federal Government pertaining to
 transportation activities of the Secretary related to the environmental
 management and restoration of Federal nuclear facilities and sites.
 (2) To evaluate the existing and potential public health and safety,
 economic, and environmental impacts and risks associated with such
 transportation.
 (3) To support emergency response planning related to such transportation.
 (4) To educate the public regarding the activities of the Secretary
 pursuant to this Act, in general, and regarding the transportation of
 nuclear materials in particular.
 (5) To request information about or comment upon the activities of the
 Secretary pursuant to this Act.
TITLE III--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION AND
MANAGEMENT OF FEDERAL NUCLEAR FACILITIES
SEC. 301. COORDINATION AGREEMENT.
 (a) AGREEMENT- Not more than 180 days after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Administrator and the Secretary shall enter into a
 coordination agreement for the purpose of coordinating research and
 developing technologies for--
 (1) the application of, and compliance with, Federal environmental law at
 Federal nuclear facilities and sites;
 (2) the decontamination and decommissioning of Federal nuclear facilities;
 and
 (3) the characterization, retrieval, treatment, and stabilization of
 hazardous and nuclear materials at Federal nuclear facilities and sites.
 (b) CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT- The coordination agreement required by subsection
 (b) shall provide for--
 (1) utilization and allocation of research facilities and resources of the
 Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy, including
 activities authorized by section 311 of CERCLA (42 U.S.C. 9660);
 (2) creation of a coordinating committee comprised of officials of the
 Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy;
 (3) establishment of independent external scientific and peer review
 procedures;
 (4) establishment of procedures for transfer of technology and field
 application of research and demonstrations consistent with section 303; and
 (5) establishment of procedures for the preparation of budgets for such
 activities consistent with section 302.
 (c) SITE-SPECIFIC AGREEMENTS- In carrying out this section, the Administrator
 and the Secretary may enter into site-specific coordination agreements in
 addition to the coordination agreement required by subsection (a).
SEC. 302. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FUNDING.
 (a) BUDGET REQUEST- (1) The Secretary and the Administrator shall each
 submit annually a Federal nuclear facilities environmental research
 and development budget, prepared pursuant to section 301(b)(5), to the
 Office of Management and Budget, as a separate part of the budgets of the
 Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency, respectively,
 in accordance with section 1105 of title 31, United States Code.
 (2) A budget submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall reflect the annual
 required research and development expenditures of the Secretary and the
 Administrator and state estimates for the succeeding 3 fiscal years as
 determined under the coordination agreement entered into under section 301.
 (b) USE OF THE FUND- The Secretary and the Administrator shall make
 expenditures from the Fund for the purpose of conducting the research
 and development program jointly established by this title, including any
 site-specific agreements.
SEC. 303. TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In carrying out the research and development program
 established under this title, the Administrator and the Secretary shall,
 to the extent practicable, disseminate to the public such information and
 transfer such technologies as are developed.
 (b) COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS- The Secretary and the Administrator shall
 jointly designate or establish a program to transfer such information and
 technologies as are susceptible of commercial application. The administrative
 cost of such a program shall be paid from the Fund.
SEC. 304. CONTRACTS AND RESEARCH GRANTS.
 (a) AUTHORITY- (1) In carrying out this title, the Secretary and the
 Administrator may enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with,
 and make grants to, the persons and entities described in subsection (b).
 (2) Expenditures to support activities under this section may be made from
 the Fund.
 (b) ELIGIBLE ENTITIES- The persons who may enter into contracts and
 cooperative agreements with, and receive grants from, the Secretary and
 the Administrator under subsection (a) are--
 (1) public entities;
 (2) nonprofit private entities described in section 501(c)(3) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 exempt from taxation under section 501(a)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 (3) other individuals or entities; and
 (4) agencies, departments, and instrumentalities of the United States.