B37 [Update] 2-1-89
S 305 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 305
To modernize and reform the regulation of financial services, to strengthen
the enforcement authority of depository institution regulating agencies,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 31 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. DIXON (for himself, Mr. GARN, Mr. GRAHAM, and Mr. WIRTH) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To modernize and reform the regulation of financial services, to strengthen
the enforcement authority of depository institution regulating agencies,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Proxmire Financial
 Modernization Act of 1989'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
TITLE I--SECURITIES AFFILIATES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
Sec. 101. Amendments to the Banking Act of 1933.
Sec. 102. Authorization for bank holding companies to acquire securities
affiliates.
Sec. 103. Definition of securities affiliate.
Sec. 104. Ninety-one day rule for securities affiliate applications.
Sec. 105. Effect on State laws prohibiting the affiliation of banks and
securities companies.
Sec. 106. Amendment to the Federal Reserve Act.
Sec. 107. Securities affiliations of FDIC-insured banks.
Sec. 108. Authorization for national banks to underwrite municipal revenue
bonds, sponsor unit investment trusts, and distribute investment company
securities.
Sec. 109. Amendments to the International Banking Act of 1978.
Sec. 110. Diversified financial holding companies.
Sec. 111. Study on harmonizing the regulation of banking and securities
organizations.
Sec. 112. Study of the national payments system.
Sec. 113. Congressional vote on whether to permit securities affiliates to
underwrite equity securities.
TITLE II--EXPEDITED PROCEDURES
Sec. 201. Expedited procedures for forming a bank holding company.
Sec. 202. Exemption of certain bank holding company formations from
registration under the Securities Act of 1933.
Sec. 203. Expedited procedures for bank holding companies to seek approval
to engage in nonbanking activities.
Sec. 204. Reduction of post-approval waiting period for bank holding company
acquisitions.
Sec. 205. Reduction of post-approval waiting period for bank mergers.
Sec. 206. Bankers' banks.
TITLE III--BROKERS AND DEALERS
Sec. 301. Definition of broker.
Sec. 302. Definition of dealer.
Sec. 303. Power to exempt from the definitions of broker and dealer.
Sec. 304. Requirement that banks falling within the definitions of broker
or dealer place their securities activities in a separate corporate entity.
Sec. 305. Effective date.
TITLE IV--BANK INVESTMENT COMPANY ACTIVITIES
Sec. 401. Custody of investment company assets by affiliated banks.
Sec. 402. Affiliated transactions.
Sec. 403. Borrowing from an affiliated bank.
Sec. 404. Independent directors.
Sec. 405. Additional SEC disclosure authority.
Sec. 406. Definition of broker.
Sec. 407. Definition of dealer.
Sec. 408. Removal of the exclusion from the definition of investment adviser
for banks that advise investment companies.
Sec. 409. Definition of broker.
Sec. 410. Definition of dealer.
Sec. 411. Notification and consultation.
Sec. 412. Publicity.
Sec. 413. Effective date.
TITLE V--STRENGTHENED ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
Sec. 501. Short title.
Part A--Regulation of Banks
Sec. 511. Amendments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Sec. 512. Penalty for violation of `Change in Bank Control Act'.
Sec. 513. Reports.
Part B--Regulation of Savings and Loan Associations
Sec. 521. Definition of institution-related party.
Sec. 522. Cease and desist orders.
Sec. 523. Service corporations.
Sec. 524. Temporary orders.
Sec. 525. Removal and suspension.
Sec. 526. Retention of jurisdiction.
Sec. 527. Penalties.
Sec. 528. Civil penalty.
Sec. 529. Definitions.
Sec. 530. Reports of condition.
Sec. 531. Technical amendments.
Sec. 532. Penalty for failure to report.
Sec. 533. Repealer.
Part C--Credit Unions
Sec. 541. Amendments to section 206.
Sec. 542. Amendments to section 205.
TITLE VI--TRUTH IN SAVINGS AND INVESTMENTS
Sec. 601. Short title.
Sec. 602. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 603. Definitions.
Sec. 604. Disclosure of yields and terms of accounts.
Sec. 605. Account schedule.
Sec. 606. Disclosure requirements for certain accounts.
Sec. 607. Distribution of schedules.
Sec. 608. Payment of interest.
Sec. 609. Regulations.
Sec. 610. Administrative enforcement.
Sec. 611. Civil liability.
Sec. 612. Credit unions.
Sec. 613. Review of disclosure requirements for open-end management investment
companies.
Sec. 614. Effect on State law.
TITLE VII--INSURANCE ACTIVITIES
Sec. 701. Short title.
Sec. 702. Amendments to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 relating to
insurance activities.
Sec. 703. Amendments to the National Bank Act.
Sec. 704. Effective date.
TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 801. Study of hostile acquisitions of United States banks.
Sec. 802. Limitations on grandfathered nonbank banks owned by bank holding
companies.
Sec. 803. Joint marketing restrictions.
Sec. 804. Industrial banks.
Sec. 805. Status of certain registered investment company.
Sec. 806. Amendment to the Federal Power Act.
Sec. 807. Expedited funds availability.
Sec. 808. Payroll tax filing service organizations.
Sec. 809. Effectuating the principle of national treatment for banks.
Sec. 810. Effectuating the principle of national treatment for brokers
and dealers.
Sec. 811. Study of merger of commerce and banking.
Sec. 812. Increased penalties under the Bank Holding Company Act.
Sec. 813. Financial consumers associations.
TITLE I--SECURITIES AFFILIATES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
SEC. 101. AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING ACT OF 1933.
 Section 20 (12 U.S.C. 377) and section 32 (12 U.S.C. 78) of the Banking
 Act of 1933 are repealed.
SEC. 102. AUTHORIZATION FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANIES TO ACQUIRE SECURITIES
AFFILIATES.
 Section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(15)(A) SECURITIES AFFILIATES- Shares of a securities affiliate which may,
 in accordance with this paragraph, do one or more of the following:
 `(i) Engage in underwriting, distributing, or dealing in securities of
 any type.
 `(ii) Engage in securities brokerage, private placement, investment advisory,
 or other securities activities permitted for brokers or dealers registered
 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or for investment advisers
 registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.
 `(iii) Engage in, or acquire the shares of a company engaged in, any
 activity that is not described in clause (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph,
 if another provision of this section permits a bank holding company or
 subsidiary thereof to engage in that activity or acquire those shares, and--
 `(I) the Board permits the bank holding company to engage in that activity
 or acquire those shares through the securities affiliate, or
 `(II) that provision permits the bank holding company or a subsidiary
 thereof to engage in that activity or acquire those shares without the
 Board's approval.
 `(B) APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS-
 `(i) Except as provided in subparagraph (D)(ii) of this paragraph, a bank
 holding company shall not directly or indirectly acquire or retain shares
 of a securities affiliate under this paragraph without complying with
 this subparagraph.
 `(ii) The following provisions shall apply during the 4 years following
 the date of enactment of the Proxmire Financial Modernization Act of 1989:
 `(I) A bank holding company shall not acquire or retain shares of a
 securities affiliate pursuant to this paragraph without the Board's prior
 approval.
 `(II) In acting on an application under this paragraph, the Board shall
 apply the criteria specified in this subparagraph, in subparagraphs (C)
 and (D)(i) of this paragraph, and in paragraph (8)(B)(iv) of this subsection.
 `(III) The Board shall not approve an application under this paragraph
 unless the Board is satisfied that the bank holding company possesses
 the managerial resources to conduct the securities activities safely and
 soundly. In making that determination, the Board shall take into account the
 experience of management and its record of successfully managing the bank
 holding company or enterprises engaged in activities that are the same as or
 similar to those authorized for securities affiliates under this paragraph.
 `(iii) Beginning 4 years after the date of enactment of the Proxmire
 Financial Modernization Act of 1989, a bank holding company seeking to
 acquire or retain shares pursuant to this paragraph shall comply with
 paragraph (8)(B) of this subsection. In making a determination under that
 paragraph, the Board shall apply the criteria specified in clause (iv)
 of that paragraph and in subparagraphs (C) and (D)(i) of this paragraph.
 `(C) CONCENTRATION OF RESOURCES-
 `(i) The Board shall disapprove any acquisition pursuant to this paragraph
 that would result in the affiliation of--
 `(I) a bank holding company or bank that has, or had on average during
 any of the 8 calendar quarters preceding the date of the application,
 total assets of more than $30,000,000,000, with
 `(II) an investment banking organization that has, or had on average during
 any of the 8 calendar quarters preceding the date of the application,
 total assets of more than $15,000,000,000.
 `(ii) The dollar limitations in clause (i) of this subparagraph shall
 be adjusted annually after December 31, 1989, by the annual percentage
 increase in the Consumer Price Index as described in paragraph (8)(C)
 of this subsection.
 `(D) INVESTMENT IN A SECURITIES AFFILIATE-
 `(i) A bank holding company shall not acquire control of a securities
 affiliate pursuant to this paragraph if the acquisition would reduce the
 bank holding company's capital below the minimum level established by the
 Board for bank holding companies.
 `(ii) A bank holding company that has acquired control of a securities
 affiliate pursuant to this paragraph shall not directly or indirectly
 make any additional equity investment in the securities affiliate unless
 it gives the Board prior written notice of the proposed investment and--
 `(I) the Board issues a written statement of its intent not to disapprove
 the notice; or
 `(II) the Board does not disapprove the notice within 30 days after the
 notice is filed.
 `(iii) The Board may disapprove a notice filed under clause (ii) if the
 Board finds that the investment would reduce the bank holding company's
 capital below the minimum level established by the Board or would otherwise
 be unsafe or unsound or inconsistent with the bank holding company's
 obligation to serve as a source of strength to its subsidiary banks.
 `(E) CAPITAL STANDARDS- (i) In determining whether a bank holding company
 complies with the capital requirements or guidelines established by the
 Board for bank holding companies--
 `(I) the bank holding company's capital and total assets shall each be
 reduced by an amount equal to the amount of the bank holding company's
 equity investment in any securities affiliate, and by an amount equal to
 the amount of any extensions of credit by the bank holding company to any
 securities affiliate that are considered capital for purposes of any capital
 requirement imposed on the securities affiliate pursuant to section 15(c)(3)
 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o(c)(3)),
 `(II) the assets and liabilities of the securities affiliate shall not be
 consolidated with those of the bank holding company, and
 `(III) the bank holding company's total assets and total liabilities shall
 each be reduced by an amount equal to the amount of the bank holding
 company's extensions of credit to any securities affiliate, excluding
 extensions of credit described in subclause (I).
 `(ii) Clause (i) of this subparagraph does not apply to the extent that
 the Board determines by order that an item described in that clause relates
 to activities that are not described in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph
 (A) of this paragraph.
 `(F) LIMITATIONS ON SECURITIES AFFILIATES AND THEIR AFFILIATES-
 `(i) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a securities affiliate
 shall, directly or indirectly--
 `(I) extend credit in any manner to the securities affiliate or a subsidiary
 thereof,
 `(II) purchase for its own account financial assets of the securities
 affiliate or a subsidiary thereof,
 `(III) issue a guarantee, acceptance, or letter of credit, including an
 endorsement or a standby letter of credit, for the benefit of the securities
 affiliate or a subsidiary thereof, or
 `(IV) extend credit in any manner to any investment company advised by or
 the shares of which are distributed by the securities affiliate.
 `(ii) Clause (i)(I) of this subparagraph does not apply to any extension
 of credit by a bank or insured institution made to acquire or sell any
 securities of the United States or its agencies or securities on which
 the principal and interest are fully guaranteed by the United States or
 its agencies if--
 `(I) the extension of credit is to be repaid on the same calendar day,
 `(II) the extension of credit is incidental to the clearing of transactions
 in those securities through that bank or insured institution, and
 `(III) both the principal of and the interest on the extension of credit
 are fully secured by securities of the United States or its agencies or
 securities on which the principal and interest are fully guaranteed by
 the United States or its agencies.
 `(iii) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a securities affiliate
 shall directly or indirectly extend credit, or issue or enter into a standby
 letter of credit, asset purchase agreement, indemnity, guarantee, insurance,
 or other facility, for the purpose of enhancing the marketability of a
 securities issue underwritten or distributed by the securities affiliate.
 `(iv) No bank holding company or subsidiary thereof (other than a securities
 affiliate) shall knowingly extend or arrange for the extension of credit,
 directly or indirectly, secured by or for the purpose of purchasing any
 security while, or for 30 days after, that security is the subject of a
 distribution in which a securities affiliate of that bank holding company
 participates as an underwriter or a member of a selling group.
 `(v) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a securities affiliate
 shall, directly or indirectly, extend credit to an issuer of securities
 underwritten by the securities affiliate for the purpose of paying
 the principal of those securities or interest or dividends on those
 securities. Nothing in this clause prohibits an extension of credit for a
 documented purpose (other than paying principal, interest, or dividends)
 if the timing, maturity, and other terms of the credit, taken as a whole,
 are substantially different from those of the underwritten securities.
 `(vi)(I) No officer or director of a securities affiliate shall serve at
 the same time as an officer or director of any affiliated bank or insured
 institution.
 `(II) Notwithstanding subclause (I) of this clause, an officer or director of
 a securities affiliate may serve at the same time as an officer or director
 of an affiliated bank or insured institution if the securities affiliate
 and the affiliated bank or insured institution are subsidiaries of a bank
 holding company that has total banking assets of not more than $500,000,000.
 `(III) The dollar limitation in subclause (II) of this clause shall be
 adjusted annually after December 31, 1989, by the annual percentage increase
 in the Consumer Price Index as described in paragraph (8)(C) of this section.
 `(IV) The Board may, by order or by regulation, grant exemptions from
 subclause (I) of this clause. In determining whether to grant such
 exemptions, the Board shall consider the size of the bank holding companies,
 banks, and securities affiliates involved, any burdens that may be imposed
 by subclause (I), the safety and soundness of the banks and securities
 affiliates, and other appropriate factors, including unfair competition
 in securities activities or the improper exchange of nonpublic customer
 information.
 `(vii) Pursuant to regulations issued by the Securities and Exchange
 Commission, a securities affiliate shall prominently disclose in writing
 to each of its customers--
 `(I) that the securities affiliate is not a bank or insured institution
 and is separate from any affiliated bank or insured institution; and
 `(II) that securities sold, offered, or recommended by the securities
 affiliate are not deposits, are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, are
 not guaranteed by an affiliated bank or insured institution, and are not
 otherwise an obligation of such a bank or insured institution.
 `(viii) No bank, insured institution, or subsidiary thereof shall express
 an opinion on the value of, or the advisability of purchasing or selling,
 securities underwritten, distributed, or dealt in by an affiliated securities
 affiliate unless the bank, insured institution, or subsidiary discloses to
 the customer that the securities affiliate is underwriting, distributing,
 or dealing in the securities.
 `(ix) No bank, insured institution, or subsidiary thereof shall disclose
 to an affiliated securities affiliate, nor shall a securities affiliate
 disclose to an affiliated bank, insured institution, or subsidiary
 thereof, any nonpublic customer information (including an evaluation of
 the creditworthiness of an issuer or other customer of that bank, insured
 institution, subsidiary, or securities affiliate) without the consent of
 that customer.
 `(x) A securities affiliate shall not underwrite or distribute securities
 secured by or representing an interest in mortgages or other obligations
 originated by an affiliated bank, insured institution, or subsidiary
 thereof unless those securities--
 `(I) are rated by an unaffiliated, nationally recognized statistical
 rating organization;
 `(II) are issued or guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
 the Federal National Mortgage Association, or the Government National
 Mortgage Association; or
 `(III) represent interests in securities described in subclause (II)
 of this clause;
 `(xi) Each appropriate Federal banking agency and the Securities and
 Exchange Commission shall establish a program for--
 `(I) enforcing compliance with this paragraph by banks or insured
 institutions or securities affiliates under its supervision; and
 `(II) responding to any complaints from customers about inappropriate
 cross-marketing of securities products or inadequate disclosure.
 `(xii) Nothing in this paragraph limits--
 `(I) any authority of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the Securities and Exchange Commission; or
 `(II) any disclosure or registration requirements under the securities
 laws, as defined in section 21(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
 (15 U.S.C. 78u(g)).
 `(G) SECURITIES AFFILIATES APPROVED UNDER PARAGRAPH (8)-
 `(i) Effective after the expiration of 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this paragraph, no bank holding company may engage in, or retain the
 shares of any company engaged in, activities of the type described in
 subparagraph (A)(i) of this paragraph on the basis of the Board's approval
 of an application under paragraph (8) of this subsection--
 `(I) unless the bank holding company obtains the Board's approval to retain
 the shares of that company pursuant to this paragraph; or
 `(II) except to the extent that those activities are specifically
 authorized by statute for a national bank and involve securities that are
 expressly described in that statute, or that a regulation promulgated by
 the Comptroller of the Currency pursuant to that statute before November
 18, 1987, expressly describes as being authorized for a national bank to
 underwrite or deal in.
 `(ii) The Board shall, after the date of enactment of this paragraph,
 disapprove any notice by a bank holding company under paragraph (8) of
 this subsection to engage in, or acquire the shares of a company engaged
 in, any activity that is described in subparagraph (A)(i), except to the
 extent that the activity is described in clause (i)(II) of this subparagraph.
 `(H) ACTIVITIES PERMITTED FOR BANK AFFILIATES- A bank holding company that
 acquires control of a securities affiliate under this paragraph shall not,
 after one year from the date of that acquisition, permit a bank or insured
 institution that it controls or any subsidiary thereof to engage, directly
 or indirectly, in the United States--
 `(i) in activities described in subparagraph (A)(i) (except to the extent
 that those activities are described in subparagraph (G)(i)(II)); or
 `(ii) in underwriting or distributing securities backed by or representing
 an interest in mortgages or other obligations originated or purchased by
 the bank or its affiliates.
 `(I) Compliance with risk-based capital standards-
 `(i) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, a securities
 affiliate shall not commence any of the following activities unless each
 of its affiliated banks is in compliance with any applicable risk-based
 capital standards issued by the appropriate Federal banking agency:
 `(I) underwriting, distributing, or dealing in unsecured corporate debt
 securities that at the time of issuance have a maturity of one year or
 more; or
 `(II) underwriting, distributing, or dealing in equity securities other
 than those issued by an investment company registered under the Investment
 Company Act of 1940.
 `(ii) A bank is in compliance with the capital standards described in clause
 (i) if that bank is in compliance with a schedule for achieving compliance
 with those standards prescribed by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(J) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this paragraph--
 `(i) a branch or agency of a foreign bank or a commercial lending
 company controlled by a foreign bank (as the terms `agency', `branch',
 `commercial lending company', and `foreign bank' are defined in section
 1 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101)), shall be
 considered a bank;
 `(ii) each shareholder of or participant in a company that controls a bank
 described in section 5169(b)(1) of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27(b)(1))
 or in a similar statute of any State, and each subsidiary of such a
 shareholder or participant, shall be treated as if it were a subsidiary
 of that company;
 `(iii) the term `appropriate Federal banking agency' means the agencies
 referred to in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1813(q)) with respect to banks referred to in that section and
 the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (acting directly or through the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation) with respect to insured institutions;
 `(iv) the terms `deal in' and `dealing in' do not include purchasing or
 selling securities for the account of another person; and
 `(v) the term `securities' does not include insurance and the term
 `securities activities' does not include insurance activities.
 `(K) PHASE-IN OF OR SEPARATE CONGRESSIONAL VOTE ON CERTAIN SECURITIES
 ACTIVITIES- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, a securities
 affiliate shall not--
 `(i) engage before 180 days after the date of enactment of the Proxmire
 Financial Modernization Act of 1989, in underwriting, distributing, or
 dealing in securities issued by an investment company registered under
 the Investment Company Act of 1940; or
 `(ii) engage in underwriting, distributing, or dealing in equity securities,
 other than those issued by an investment company registered under the
 Investment Company Act of 1940, except as authorized pursuant to a joint
 resolution pursuant to section 113 of the Proxmire Financial Modernization
 Act of 1989.'.
SEC. 103. DEFINITION OF SECURITIES AFFILIATE.
 Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(n) SECURITIES AFFILIATE- The term `securities affiliate' means any
 company that--
 `(1) is engaged in the United States pursuant to section 4(c)(15)(A)
 of this Act in one or more of the activities described in that section; and
 `(2) is registered as a broker or dealer under the Securities Exchange
 Act of 1934.'.
SEC. 104. NINETY-ONE DAY RULE FOR SECURITIES AFFILIATE APPLICATIONS.
 (a) NINETY-ONE DAY RULE- Section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act
 of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)) is amended by striking out `paragraph (8)'
 in the penultimate sentence and inserting in lieu thereof `paragraph (15)'.
 (b) SUNSET PROVISION- The penultimate sentence of section 4(c) of the
 Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (as amended by this Act) is repealed,
 effective 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 105. EFFECT ON STATE LAWS PROHIBITING THE AFFILIATION OF BANKS AND
SECURITIES COMPANIES.
 Section 7 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1846) is
 amended by inserting before the final period the following: `, except that
 no State may prohibit the affiliation of a bank or bank holding company
 with a securities affiliate solely because the securities affiliate is
 engaged in activities described in clause (i) or (ii) of section 4(c)(15)(A)
 of this Act.'.
SEC. 106. AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT.
 Section 23B(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c-1(b)(1)(B))
 is amended by inserting `and for 30 days thereafter' after `during the
 existence of any underwriting or selling syndicate'.
SEC. 107. SECURITIES AFFILIATIONS OF FDIC-INSURED BANKS.
 (a) SECURITIES AFFILIATIONS- Section 18(j)(3) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(j)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) SECURITIES AFFILIATIONS-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in section 4(c)(15) of the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956, an insured bank shall not be an affiliate of
 any company that directly or indirectly acts in the United States as an
 underwriter or dealer of any security, other than a security that a national
 bank is specifically authorized by statute to underwrite or deal in and--
 `(i) that is expressly described in that statute; or
 `(ii) that a regulation promulgated by the Comptroller of the Currency
 pursuant to that statute before November 18, 1987, expressly describes as
 being authorized for a national bank to underwrite or deal in.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS- This paragraph does not apply to--
 `(i) an insured bank that is described in subparagraph (D), (F), (H),
 or (I) of section 2(c)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1841(c)(2)); or
 `(ii) a foreign bank, as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(7)), solely because it has an insured
 branch in the United States.
 `(C) GRANDFATHER PROVISION- This paragraph does not prohibit--
 `(i) the continuation of an affiliation that existed on March 5, 1987; or
 `(ii) any affiliation by an insured bank that has an affiliation that would
 be prohibited if it were not covered by clause (i) of this subparagraph.
 `(D) TRANSITION RULE- An affiliation that becomes unlawful as a result of the
 enactment of the Proxmire Financial Modernization Act of 1989 may continue
 until the expiration of one year following the date of enactment of such Act.
 `(E) ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED DIRECTLY BY INSURED BANK- Nothing in this
 paragraph restricts an activity that is conducted directly by an insured
 bank and is subject to section 21 of the Banking Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 378).
 `(F) DEFINITIONS- As used in this paragraph--
 `(i) The term `affiliate' has the meaning given to that term in section 2(k)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(k)).
 `(ii) The term `company' has the meaning given to that term in section 2(b)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(b)).
 `(iii) The term `dealer' has the meaning given to that term in section
 3(a)(5) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(5)).
 `(iv)(I) Except as provided in subclause (II) of this clause or except in
 the case of a contract of insurance, the term `security' has the meaning
 given to that term in section 3(a)(10) of the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(10)).
 `(II) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may by regulation
 exempt from the definition of `security' a banking product that has been
 traditionally and customarily originated or handled by national banks
 (such as loan participations, mortgage notes, and certificates of deposit)
 if the exemption is consistent with the purposes of this paragraph and of
 section 4(c)(15) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.
 `(v) The term `underwriter' has the meaning given to that term in section
 2(11) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77b(11)).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Clause (i) of section 408(m)(1)(A) of the
 National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a(m)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting
 after `clause (iii) of this subparagraph,' the following: `and in section
 18(j)(3) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 18(j)(4)(A) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(j)(4)(A)) is amended by striking `or any provision of
 section 20 of the Banking Act of 1933' and inserting `or any provision of
 paragraph (3) or (6) of this subsection'.
 (d) LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES INVOLVING MUNICIPAL REVENUE BONDS-
 Section 18(j) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(j))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES INVOLVING CERTAIN MUNICIPAL
 SECURITIES-
 `(A) UNDERWRITING OR DISTRIBUTION BY AFFILIATE OF INSURED BANK- No affiliate
 of an insured bank shall underwrite or distribute securities described
 in subparagraph (C) of this paragraph unless that insured bank, as well
 as any affiliated insured institution (as defined in section 408(a)(1)
 of the National Housing Act), complies with section 4(c)(15)(F)(iii)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 in the same manner and to the
 same extent as if the insured bank were a bank and the affiliate were a
 securities affiliate for purposes of section 4(c)(15)(F)(iii).
 `(B) UNDERWRITING OR DISTRIBUTION BY INSURED BANK- An insured bank that
 underwrites or distributes securities described in subparagraph (C) of
 this paragraph shall not take any action with respect to those securities
 that would violate subparagraph (A) of this paragraph if those securities
 were underwritten or distributed by an affiliate of the insured bank.
 `(C) CERTAIN MUNICIPAL SECURITIES DESCRIBED- Securities are described in
 this subparagraph for purposes of this paragraph if--
 `(i) a national bank could underwrite those securities only pursuant to
 the sentence of paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes
 (12 U.S.C. 24) that refers to an obligation issued by or on behalf of or
 guaranteed by a State, territory, or possession of the United States,
 or any political subdivision thereof, the District of Columbia, or any
 agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing; and
 `(ii) no State, territory, or possession of the United States, political
 subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia pledges its full faith and
 credit for payment of the entire principal of and interest on the securities.
 `(D) DEFINITION OF `AFFILIATE'- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `affiliate' has the meaning given to that term in section 2(k) of the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(k)).'.
SEC. 108. AUTHORIZATION FOR NATIONAL BANKS TO UNDERWRITE MUNICIPAL REVENUE
BONDS, SPONSOR UNIT INVESTMENT TRUSTS, AND DISTRIBUTE INVESTMENT COMPANY
SECURITIES.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION- Paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes
 (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `The limitations and restrictions contained in this paragraph as to dealing
 in, underwriting, and purchasing for its own account, securities shall not
 apply to an obligation issued by or on behalf of or guaranteed by a State,
 territory, or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision
 thereof, the District of Columbia, or any agency or instrumentality of any
 of the foregoing. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such limitations
 and restrictions shall apply to a private activity bond (as defined in
 section 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) unless--
 `(1) a State, territory, or possession of the United States or political
 subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, pledges its full faith and
 credit for payment of the entire principal of and interest on such bond; or
 `(2) the interest on such bond is excluded from gross income under
 section 103(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and the issuer,
 or the governmental unit on behalf of which such bond was issued, is the
 sole owner, for Federal income tax purposes, of the facility to be financed
 from the proceeds of such bond.
For purposes of the foregoing sentence, any bond described in section
1312(c)(2) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to which section 141(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 does not apply (by reason of section 1311,
1312, or 1313 of that Act), shall not be treated as a private activity bond.
 `If the association is not an affiliate of a securities affiliate (as the
 terms `affiliate' and `securities affiliate' are defined in section 2 of
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841)), the limitations and
 restrictions contained in this paragraph as to dealing in, underwriting,
 and purchasing for its own account, securities shall not apply to--
 `(1) the securities of unit investment trusts (as defined in section 4(2)
 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-4(2)) holding only
 securities that the association is specifically authorized by statute to
 underwrite and that are expressly described in that authorizing statute, or
 expressly described as being authorized for a national bank to underwrite
 in a regulation promulgated before November 18, 1987, by the Comptroller
 of the Currency pursuant to that authorizing statute, and
 `(2) the distribution of securities issued by investment companies (as
 defined in section 3 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3))
 that are not sponsored, managed, or controlled by the association or any
 affiliate of the association.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The sixth sentence of paragraph Seventh of section
 5136 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended
 by striking out `or general obligations of any State or of any political
 subdivision thereof,'.
SEC. 109. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BANKING ACT OF 1978.
 (a) RESTRICTIONS ON UNITED STATES BANKING ACTIVITIES OF LARGE FOREIGN
 BANKS THAT ACQUIRE LARGE INVESTMENT BANKING ORGANIZATIONS WITH UNITED
 STATES OFFICES- Section 8 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3106) is amended by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (g)
 and by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) No foreign bank or foreign company described in paragraph (2)
 of this subsection shall--
 `(A) acquire or retain control of a bank,
 `(B) establish or maintain a branch or agency in a State, or
 `(C) acquire or retain control of a commercial lending company organized
 under State law.
 `(2) A foreign bank or foreign company controlling a foreign bank is
 described in this paragraph for purposes of paragraph (1) if--
 `(A) the foreign bank or foreign company became an affiliate of an investment
 banking organization (as that term is used in section 4(c)(15)(C)(i)(II)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956) after the date of enactment of
 the Proxmire Financial Modernization Act of 1989;
 `(B) section 4(c)(15)(C) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 would
 have required the Board to disapprove the transaction that resulted in
 the affiliation if the foreign bank or foreign company had been a bank
 holding company at the time of the transaction;
 `(C) the affiliation has not been terminated; and
 `(D) the investment banking organization maintains an office or subsidiary
 in a State.'.
 (b) RESTRICTIONS ON UNITED STATES INVESTMENT BANKING ACTIVITIES OF LARGE
 FOREIGN INVESTMENT BANKING ORGANIZATIONS THAT ACQUIRE LARGE BANK HOLDING
 COMPANIES OR BANKS- Section 8 of the International Banking Act of 1978
 (12 U.S.C. 3106) is amended by inserting after subsection (e) (as added
 by subsection (a)) the following:
 `(f)(1) No foreign investment banking organization (including any of its
 subsidiaries or affiliates) described in paragraph (2) shall acquire or
 retain control of a securities affiliate.
 `(2) A foreign investment banking organization (including any of its
 subsidiaries or affiliates) is described in this paragraph for the purposes
 of paragraph (1) if--
 `(A) the foreign investment banking organization became an affiliate of a
 bank holding company or bank after the date of enactment of the Proxmire
 Financial Modernization Act of 1989;
 `(B) section 4(c)(15)(C) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 would
 have required the Board to disapprove the transaction that resulted in
 the affiliation if the foreign investment banking organization had been
 required to file an application or notice under section 4(c)(15); and
 `(C) the affiliation has not been terminated.'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 1(b)(13) of the International Banking Act
 of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(13)) is amended by inserting `affiliate,' after
 `(13) the terms' and by inserting `securities affiliate' after `control,'.
SEC. 110. DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) DEFINITION- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1841)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(o) DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANY- For purposes of this Act,
 the term `diversified financial holding company' means a company that
 directly or indirectly controls any bank and that is described in each of
 the following paragraphs:
 `(1) ENGAGES ONLY IN FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES- The company engages only in
 activities that are--
 `(A) permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of this Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1843); or
 `(B) permissible under section 4(i)(4).
 `(2) 80-PERCENT TEST- On average during the preceding calendar year,
 the company devoted 80 percent or more of its consolidated assets to
 activities that are permissible under paragraph (8), (13), (14), or (15)
 of section 4(c) of this Act, excluding--
 `(A) activities conducted by any entity described in subparagraph (A) or
 (B) of paragraph (3) of this subsection; and
 `(B) insurance activities that are permissible under section 4(c)(13) but
 not permissible under section 4(j), to the extent that those activities
 exceed 10 percent of the company's consolidated assets.
 `(3) LIMIT ON FDIC-INSURED BANKS, FSLIC- INSURED INSTITUTIONS, AND
 SUBSIDIARIES THEREOF AS PERCENTAGE OF ASSETS- On average during the
 preceding calendar year, 20 percent or less of the company's consolidated
 assets consisted of the following entities in aggregate:
 `(A) insured banks (as defined in section 3(h) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(h)) and any subsidiaries thereof; and
 `(B) insured institutions and any subsidiaries thereof.
 `(4) GLOBAL LIMIT ON DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES AS
 PERCENTAGE OF ASSETS- On average during the preceding calendar year,
 40 percent or less of the company's consolidated assets consisted of the
 following entities in aggregate:
 `(A) insured banks and uninsured banks (as defined in section 3(h) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(h)) and any subsidiaries
 thereof;
 `(B) insured institutions and any subsidiaries thereof, and uninsured
 institutions (as defined in section 408(a)(1)(B) of the National Housing
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a(a)(1)(B)) and any subsidiaries thereof;
 `(C) foreign banks (as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(7)) and any subsidiaries thereof; and
 `(D) other depository institutions, whether or not in the United States,
 and any subsidiaries thereof.
 `(5) ELECTION- The company has filed with the Board a written notice of
 its intent to be treated as a diversified financial holding company.'.
 (b) IN GENERAL- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1843)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i) Diversified Financial Holding Companies-
 `(1) STATUS- A diversified financial holding company shall not be considered
 a bank holding company.
 `(2) APPLICABLE LAW- Except as provided in paragraph (4) or (6) of this
 subsection, a diversified financial holding company shall be subject to any
 provision of the United States Code relating to bank holding companies in
 the same manner and to the same extent as if it were a bank holding company.
 `(3) Intermediate holding companies-
 `(A) A subsidiary of a diversified financial holding company is not a bank
 holding company because it controls a bank.
 `(B) If a subsidiary of a diversified financial holding company controls
 a bank, that subsidiary shall be subject to any provision of the United
 States Code relating to bank holding companies in the same manner and to the
 same extent as if it were a bank holding company, except to the extent that
 the diversified financial holding company is not subject to that provision.
 `(4) AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE TO ENGAGE IN NONCONFORMING FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES-
 Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a diversified financial
 holding company may engage in, or acquire or retain direct or indirect
 ownership or control of shares of any company engaged in, any activity
 described in paragraph (5) of this subsection (other than an activity
 described in subsection (c)(15)(A)(i) of this section) in which the
 diversified financial holding company was lawfully engaged in the United
 States, directly or through a subsidiary, as of February 1, 1989.
 `(5) DEFINITION OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES- The following activities are
 described in this paragraph for purposes of paragraph (4) of this subsection:
 `(A) insurance underwriting activities;
 `(B) insurance agency activities;
 `(C) real estate brokerage activities;
 `(D) real estate investment and development activities;
 `(E) travel agency activities; and
 `(F) any other activities that the Board has determined to be financial.
 `(6) Exemption from examination and capital requirements-
 `(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, a diversified
 financial holding company, and any subsidiary (other than a bank) of that
 bank holding company, shall not be subject to inspection or examination
 or to reporting or capital requirements established by the Board under
 this Act or the International Lending Supervision Act of 1983.
 `(B) The Board may examine or require reports of any company that has filed
 a notice under section 2(o)(5) of this Act, and any nonbank subsidiary
 thereof, in order to--
 `(i) determine whether that company is a diversified financial holding
 company;
 `(ii) assure compliance by that company or nonbank subsidiary with the
 provisions of this Act, the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970
 (12 U.S.C. 1972), and sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act
 (12 U.S.C. 371c, 371c-1); or
 `(iii) assure that the safety and soundness of that company's subsidiary
 banks are not threatened by the activities or condition of that company
 or its nonbank subsidiaries whenever the Board determines that emergency
 conditions exist requiring such assurance.
 `(7) RESTRICTIONS ON JOINT MARKETING- No subsidiary bank of a diversified
 financial holding company shall--
 `(A) offer or market products or services of an affiliate that are not
 permissible for bank holding companies to provide under subsection (c)(8)
 or (c)(15) of this section, or
 `(B) permit its products or services to be offered or marketed in connection
 with products or services of an affiliate that are not permissible for
 bank holding companies to provide under subsection (c)(8) or (c)(15).
 `(8) RESTRICTIONS ON LENDING TO AFFILIATES ENGAGED IN NONCONFORMING
 ACTIVITIES- If a company engages in any activity pursuant to paragraph (4)
 of this subsection, subsection (c)(15)(F)(i) of this section shall apply
 with respect to that company in the same manner and to the same extent as
 if the company were a securities affiliate.
 `(9) Divestiture of subsidiary banks-
 `(A) If a company that has filed a notice under section 2(o)(5) of this Act
 fails to maintain the capital of each of its subsidiary banks at or above
 the level established for that bank by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency, the Board shall notify the company of the capital deficiency and
 provide the company 30 days in which to restore the capital of the bank
 to the level required by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(B) If the Board determines that the company is unable to restore the
 capital of its subsidiary bank to the required level, the Board may issue
 an order requiring the company to terminate its ownership or control of
 the bank within 180 days of the date of the order.'.
SEC. 111. STUDY ON HARMONIZING THE REGULATION OF BANKING AND SECURITIES
ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) FINDING- The Congress hereby finds that authorization for banks to be
 affiliated with securities firms pursuant to section 102 of this Act and
 the provision of banking-type services by firms affiliated with securities
 firms calls for steps to be taken toward the promotion of regulatory equity
 between such firms. Among the most important tasks necessary to achieve
 this goal are the development and harmonization of capital adequacy and
 financial condition reporting requirements applicable to such firms. To
 that end, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (hereinafter
 referred to as the `Board'), the Securities and Exchange Commission, the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Comptroller of the Currency, and
 the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shall review and coordinate their
 respective rules applicable to capital adequacy, reporting requirements,
 and transactions with affiliates on an ongoing basis in order to move in
 an orderly fashion toward greater compatibility and consistency.
 (b) STUDY- The agencies referred to in subsection (a) shall study the issues
 set forth below and prepare a joint report to the Congress within one year
 of the enactment of this Act setting forth the results of their study and
 any recommendations they may have for implementing their conclusions. The
 issues to be studied are--
 (1) the advisability and effect of requiring the consolidated application
 of prudential standards and reports of financial condition on companies
 controlling banks or securities firms;
 (2) the appropriate techniques, to the extent necessary, for supervision
 of financial interrelationships of banks and securities firms with their
 affiliates;
 (3) the direction of efforts to achieve international harmony and convergence
 of capital adequacy and financial condition reporting standards for banks,
 securities firms, and companies controlling banks and securities firms;
 (4) the effect of the conduct of financial activities across national
 borders on the provision of securities services within the United States
 and on the supervision of such services within the United States;
 (5) the advisability of establishing a permanent international framework for
 developing and implementing global policies to better harmonize financial
 market regulation, including capital adequacy standards; registration
 and reporting standards for banks and securities firms (including
 associated activities in futures markets), and companies controlling
 banks and securities firms; direct trading, clearing, and funds transfer
 mechanisms; routine exchange of information to facilitate international
 market surveillance of capital positions, trading activity, intercompany
 transfers, and potential abusive practices; exchange of information to
 facilitate the investigation of individual enforcement cases; dealing with
 international market emergencies; and approval of new products and services;
 (6) the nature and techniques used in the supervision of banks, securities
 firms, and companies controlling banks and securities firms; and
 (7) the impact of financial services competition from firms that are
 neither banks nor securities firms.
 (c) CONSULTATION- With due regard for the existing agreement and
 understandings between bank supervisors on an international level regarding
 capital adequacy of banks, the agencies referred to in subsection (a)
 on an ongoing basis shall--
 (1) each review their respective rules applicable to capital adequacy and
 reporting of financial condition;
 (2) develop proposed revisions to those rules that would move toward the
 harmonization of such rules;
 (3) provide such proposed revisions to the other for comment and discussion;
 and
 (4) discuss in detail, in the report required by subsection (d), any
 proposed revisions on which the agencies disagree.
 (d) REPORTING- No later than September 30 of each year, the agencies
 referred to in subsection (a) shall submit a joint annual report to
 Congress covering their progress toward the goals set forth in subsection
 (a) and recommending amendments to law, if any, that they believe would
 be necessary or advisable in order to attain those goals.
SEC. 112. STUDY OF THE NATIONAL PAYMENTS SYSTEM.
 (a) FINDING- It is the finding of Congress that the continued smooth and
 efficient functioning of the large-dollar payments system of the United
 States, including systems that provide for the delivery of securities
 against payment, is essential to the growth and stability of the economy
 of the United States and other nations and that the recent growth in the
 volume of payments due to new technology and changes in the financial
 services industry suggest that consideration of the mechanism by which
 large-dollar payments in the United States are made is necessary.
 (b) STUDY- The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is hereby
 directed to study and prepare a report on the steps necessary to ensure
 the integrity and reliability of large-dollar payments systems in the
 United States, including the current status of the mechanism by which
 large-dollar payments are made in the United States and the steps that
 appear necessary or advisable to strengthen the reliability and safety and
 soundness of that mechanism over time. Such report shall be presented to
 Congress within one year of the passage of this Act.
 (c) CONSULTATION- The Board is directed to consult with the providers of
 large-dollar payment services, the users of such services, the vendors of
 equipment used in the provisions of such services, and the regulators of
 all of the above in conducting the study.
SEC. 113. CONGRESSIONAL VOTE ON WHETHER TO PERMIT SECURITIES AFFILIATES TO
UNDERWRITE EQUITY SECURITIES.
 (a) DEFINITION AND SUBMISSION OF JOINT RESOLUTION-
 (1) JOINT RESOLUTION DEFINED- For purposes of this section, a joint
 resolution means a joint resolution introduced pursuant to the procedures
 described in this section--
 (A) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows:
`That section 4(c)(15)(K) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 is
repealed.';
 (B) which does not have a preamble; and
 (C) the title of which is `Joint Resolution pursuant to the Proxmire
 Financial Modernization Act of 1989'.
 (2) SUBMISSION TO THE CONGRESS- On the first day of the first session
 of the 102d Congress, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit the
 joint resolution to the Congress, together with a specific legislative
 recommendation on whether or not securities affiliates should be permitted
 to underwrite, distribute, and deal in equity securities. The recommendation
 shall be prepared by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with
 the Comptroller General of the United States, the Securities and Exchange
 Commission, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Comptroller of the Currency, and shall
 be limited solely to the issue of whether the powers prohibited under section
 4(c)(15)(K)(ii) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 shall be authorized.
 (b) PROCEDURE FOR HANDLING JOINT RESOLUTION-
 (1) Within 30 days of the date of submission by the Secretary of the
 Treasury, such joint resolution as defined in subsection (a) of this section
 shall be introduced (by request) in the House by the Speaker of the House
 for himself and the minority leader of the House or by Members of the House
 designated by the Speaker and the minority leader, and shall be introduced
 (by request) by the majority leader of the Senate for himself and the
 minority leader of the Senate or by Members of the Senate designated by
 the majority leader and the minority leader.
 (2) Such joint resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall
 be referred to the appropriate Committee or Committees, and such joint
 resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
 (3) If any Committee of either House to which the joint resolution has been
 referred has not reported the joint resolution at the end of 30 days after
 its referral, the Committee shall be discharged from further consideration
 of the joint resolution or of any other joint resolution introduced with
 respect to the same matter.
 (4) Not later than 90 calendar days after the first day of session of the
 102d Congress, it shall be in order to move to proceed to the consideration
 of such joint resolution.
 (5)(A) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the
 consideration of such joint resolution shall be highly privileged and not
 debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it
 be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed
 to or disagreed to.
 (B) Debate in the House of Representatives on such joint resolution shall
 be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be divided equally between
 those favoring and those opposing the joint resolution. A motion to further
 limit debate shall not be debatable. No amendment to, or motion to recommit,
 the joint resolution shall be in order. It shall not be in order to move
 to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (C) Motions to postpone made in the House of Representatives with respect
 to the consideration of such joint resolution and motions to proceed to
 the consideration of other business shall be decided without debate.
 (D) All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application
 of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to
 such joint resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (E) Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding
 provisions of this paragraph, consideration of such joint resolution
 in the House of Representatives shall be governed by the Rules of the
 House of Representatives applicable to other joint resolutions in similar
 circumstances.
 (6)(A) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of such
 joint resolution shall be privileged. An amendment to the motion shall
 not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote
 by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (B) Debate in the Senate on such joint resolution and on all debatable
 motions and appeals in connection therewith shall be limited to not
 more than 20 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by,
 the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
 (C) Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection
 with such joint resolution shall be limited to not more than one hour, to
 be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager
 of such joint resolution, except that in the event the manager of the joint
 resolution is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition
 shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee. Such leaders,
 or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of
 such joint resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the
 consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
 (D) A motion in the Senate to further limit debate on a resolution, debatable
 motion, or appeal is not debatable. No amendment to, or motion to recommit,
 the joint resolution is in order in the Senate.
 (7) In the case of a joint resolution described in subsection (a), if
 prior to the passage by one House of a joint resolution of that House,
 that House received the joint resolution with respect to the same matter
 from the other House, then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if the joint resolution
 had been received from the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the joint resolution of the
 other House.
 (8) The vote on passage of the joint resolution in each House shall occur
 on or before April 1, 1991.
 TITLEII--EXPEDITED PROCEDURES
SEC. 201. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR FORMING A BANK HOLDING COMPANY.
 Section 3(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `or (B)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(B)',
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end of the second sentence
 the following: `; or (C) with 30 days prior notification to the Board,
 the acquisition by a company of control of a bank in a reorganization
 in which a person or group of persons exchange their shares of the bank
 for shares of a newly formed bank holding company and receive, after the
 reorganization, substantially the same proportional share interest in the
 holding company as they held in the bank except for changes in shareholders'
 interests resulting from the exercise of dissenting shareholders' rights
 under State or Federal law if, immediately following the acquisition,
 the bank holding company meets the capital and other financial standards
 prescribed by the Board by regulation for such a bank holding company and
 the holding company does not engage in any activities other than those
 of banking or managing and controlling banks. In promulgating regulations
 pursuant to this subsection, the Board shall not require more capital for the
 subsidiary bank immediately following the reorganization than is required for
 a similarly sized bank that is not a subsidiary of a bank holding company'.
SEC. 202. EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN HOLDING COMPANY FORMATIONS FROM REGISTRATION
UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933.
 Section 4 of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77d) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(7) transactions involving offers or sales of equity securities, in
 connection with the acquisition of a bank by a company under section 3(a) of
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(a)), if the acquisition
 occurs solely as part of a reorganization in which a person or group of
 persons exchange their shares of a bank for shares of a newly formed bank
 holding company and receive, after that reorganization, substantially the
 same proportional share interests in the bank holding company as they held
 in the bank, except for changes in shareholders' interests resulting from
 the exercise of dissenting shareholders' rights under State or Federal law.'.
SEC. 203. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANIES TO SEEK APPROVAL
TO ENGAGE IN NONBANKING ACTIVITIES.
 Paragraph (8) of section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraphs (C), (D), and
 (E) as subclauses (I) and (II), respectively;
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (G), and any cross references
 thereto as clauses (i) through (vii), respectively; and
 (3) by striking out all that precedes `purposes of this subsection it is
 not' and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(8)(A) ACTIVITIES CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING- In accordance with the
 limitations and requirements contained in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of this
 paragraph, shares of any company whose activities the Board has determined
 (by order or regulation) to be so closely related to banking or managing
 or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto, after taking into
 account technological or other innovations in the provision of banking or
 banking-related services.
 `(B) NOTICE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(i) No bank holding company shall engage in any activity or acquire the
 shares of a company pursuant to this paragraph, either de novo or by an
 acquisition in whole or in part of a going concern, unless the Board has
 been given 60 days prior written notice of that proposal and, within that
 period, the Board has not issued an order--
 `(I) disapproving the proposal, or
 `(II) extending the time period in accordance with clause (iii) below.
 `(ii)(I) An acquisition may be made prior to the expiration of the
 disapproval period if the Board issues a written statement of its intent
 not to disapprove the proposal.
 `(II) The Board shall publish in the Federal Register notice of receipt of
 a notice under this paragraph involving insurance and provide a reasonable
 period for public comment. The Board shall issue an order involving any
 such notice.
 `(III) No notice under this paragraph is required for a bank holding
 company to establish de novo an office to engage in any activity previously
 authorized for that bank holding company under this paragraph or to change
 the location of an office engaged in that activity.
 `(iii) The notice submitted to the Board shall contain such information
 as the Board shall prescribe by regulation or by specific request in
 connection with a particular notice, except that the Board may require
 only such information as may be relevant to the nature and scope of
 the proposed activity and to the Board's evaluation of the notice under
 the criteria specified in clause (iv). If the Board requires additional
 relevant information beyond that provided in the notice, the Board may by
 order extend the time period provided in clause (i) of this subparagraph
 until it has received that information, and the activity that is the
 subject of the notice may be commenced within 60 days of the date of that
 receipt unless the Board issues a disapproval order as provided in clause
 (i). Such an extension order is reviewable under section 9 of this Act.
 `(iv) In determining whether to disapprove a notice under this paragraph,
 the Board shall consider whether the performance of the activity described
 in the notice by a bank holding company or subsidiary thereof can reasonably
 be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience,
 increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible
 adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or
 unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. In
 orders and regulations under this paragraph, the Board may differentiate
 between activities commenced de novo and activities commenced by the
 acquisition, in whole or in part, of a going concern.
 `(v) The Board shall by order set forth the reasons for any disapproval
 or determination not to disapprove a notice under this paragraph.
 `(C) INSURANCE ACTIVITIES NOT CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING- For'.
SEC. 204. REDUCTION OF POST-APPROVAL WAITING PERIOD FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANY
ACQUISITIONS.
 Section 11(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1849(b)(1)) is amended by adding before the period at the end of
 the fourth sentence thereof the following: `or if no adverse comment has
 been received regarding section 4(c)(8)(C) or section 4(j) of this Act,
 such shorter period of time as may be prescribed by the Board with the
 concurrence of the Attorney General, but in no event less than 5 days'.
SEC. 205. REDUCTION OF POST-APPROVAL WAITING PERIOD FOR BANK MERGERS.
 Section 18(c)(6) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(c)(6))
 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the last sentence
 thereof the following: `or such shorter period of time as may be prescribed
 by the agency with the concurrence of the Attorney General, but in no
 event less than 5 days'.
SEC. 206. BANKERS' BANKS.
 (a) BANKERS' BANKS AND BANK HOLDING COMPANIES-
 (1) Paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12
 U.S.C. 24) is amended by inserting `or their holding companies' after
 `is owned exclusively (except to the extent directors qualifying shares
 are required by law) by depository institutions'.
 (2) Section 5169 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27) is amended by
 inserting--
 (A) `, directly or through a holding company,' after `which is owned', and
 (B) `or their holding companies' after `other depository institutions'
 each place it appears in paragraph (b)(1).
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT ON BANKERS' BANKS AND DEPOSIT INSURANCE- Section
 3(e) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(e)) is
 amended by striking `bank described in the last sentence of section 2(c)'
 and inserting `a bankers' bank as described in section 5169 of the Revised
 Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27)'.
 (c) LIMIT ON LOANS SECURED BY SECURITIES- Section 11(m) of the Federal
 Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 248(m)) is amended by striking `10 per centum'
 in each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `15 percent'.
TITLE III--BROKERS AND DEALERS
SEC. 301. DEFINITION OF BROKER.
 Section 3(a)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(4))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) `Broker'-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `broker' means any person engaged in the business
 of effecting transactions in securities for the account of others.
 `(B) EXCLUSION OF BANKS- Such term does not include a bank unless the
 bank publicly solicits such business or is compensated for such business
 by the payment of commissions or similar remuneration based on effecting
 transactions in securities (excluding fees calculated as a percentage of
 assets under management) in excess of the bank's incremental costs directly
 attributable to effecting such transactions (hereinafter referred to as
 `incentive compensation').
 `(C) BANK ACTIVITIES- A bank shall not be deemed to be a `broker' because
 it engages in one or more of the following activities:
 `(i) Enters into a contractual or other arrangement with a broker or dealer
 registered under this title pursuant to which the broker or dealer will
 offer brokerage services on or off the premises of the bank if--
 `(I) such broker or dealer is clearly identified as the person performing
 the brokerage services;
 `(II) bank employees perform only clerical or ministerial functions
 in connection with brokerage transactions unless such employees are
 qualified as registered representatives pursuant to the requirements of
 a self-regulatory organization;
 `(III) bank employees do not receive incentive compensation for any brokerage
 activities unless such employees are qualified as registered representatives
 pursuant to the requirements of a self-regulatory organization; and
 `(IV) such services are provided by the broker or dealer on a basis in
 which all customers are fully disclosed.
 `(ii) Engages in trust activities (including effecting transactions in the
 course of such trust activities) permissible for national banks under the
 first section of the Act of September 28, 1962 (12 U.S.C. 92a), or for
 State banks under relevant State trust statutes or law unless the bank--
 `(I) publicly solicits brokerage business other than by advertising, in
 conjunction with advertising its other trust activities, that it effects
 transactions in securities, and
 `(II) receives incentive compensation.
This clause does not apply to securities safekeeping, self-directed individual
retirement accounts, or managed agency or other functionally equivalent
accounts of a bank.
 `(iii) Effects transactions in exempted securities, other than municipal
 securities, or in commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, or commercial
 bills.
 `(iv) Effects transactions in municipal securities and does not have a
 securities affiliate as provided in section 4(c)(15) of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956.
 `(v) Effects transactions as part of any bonus, profit-sharing, pension,
 retirement, thrift, savings, incentive, stock purchase, stock ownership,
 stock appreciation, stock option, dividend reinvestment, or similar plan
 for employees or shareholders of an issuer or its subsidiaries.
 `(vi) Effects transactions as part of a program for the investment or
 reinvestment of bank deposit funds into any no-load open-end investment
 company registered pursuant to the Investment Company Act of 1940 that
 attempts to maintain a constant net asset value per share and has an
 investment policy calling for investment of at least 80 percent of its
 assets in debt securities maturing in 13 months or less.
 `(vii) Effects transactions for the account of any affiliate of the bank,
 as the term `affiliate' is defined in section 2 of the Banking Act of
 1933 (12 U.S.C. 221a), treating all banks as member banks for purposes of
 such definition.
 `(viii) Effects sales (I) as part of a primary offering of securities by
 an issuer, not involving a public offering, pursuant to sections 3(b),
 4(2), or 4(6) of the Securities Act of 1933 and the rules and regulations
 thereunder, and (II) exclusively to: a bank as defined in section 3(a)(2)
 of the Securities Act of 1933 whether acting in its individual or fiduciary
 capacity; an insurance company as defined in section 2(13) of the Securities
 Act of 1933; an investment company registered under the Investment Company
 Act of 1940 or a business development company as defined in section 2(a)(48)
 of that Act; a Small Business Investment Company licensed by the Small
 Business Administration; an insured institution, as defined in section 401
 of the National Housing Act; an employee benefit plan within the meaning
 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, if the
 investment decision is made by a plan fiduciary, as defined in section
 3(21) of such Act, that is a bank as defined in section 3(a)(2) of the
 Securities Act of 1933, an insurance company as defined in section 2(17)
 of the Investment Company Act of 1940, or an investment adviser registered
 under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or if the employee benefit
 plan has total assets in excess of $5,000,000; an employee benefit plan
 as defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
 1974, established and maintained by a State, its political subdivisions,
 or any agency or instrumentality of a State or its political subdivisions
 exclusively for the benefit of its employees or their beneficiaries
 that is governed by fiduciary principles comparable to those contained
 in such Act, if (i) the plan has total assets in excess of $25,000,000,
 and (ii) investment decisions for the plan are made by a plan fiduciary,
 as defined in section 3(21) of such Act, that is a bank, as defined in
 section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, an insurance company as
 defined in section 2(17) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, or an
 investment adviser registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940;
 a corporation with total assets in excess of $50,000,000 and net worth
 in excess of $5,000,000, as reflected on financial statements prepared in
 accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; an organization
 described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code with total
 assets in excess of $5,000,000; a foreign bank, broker, dealer, insurance
 company, or government or government agency; or a natural person with a net
 worth exceeding $5,000,000. The dollar limitations in this clause shall
 be adjusted annually after December 31, 1989, by the annual percentage
 increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical
 Workers published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 `(ix) Effects fewer than 1,000 transactions per year in securities other than
 transactions referenced in clauses (i) through (viii) of this subparagraph,
 if the bank does not have a subsidiary or affiliate registered as a broker
 or dealer under section 15 of this title.'.
SEC. 302. DEFINITION OF DEALER.
 Section 3(a)(5) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(5))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) `Dealer'-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `dealer' means any person engaged in the business
 of buying and selling securities for his own account through a broker
 or otherwise.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS- Such term does not include--
 `(i) any person insofar as that person buys or sells securities for his
 own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not
 as a part of a regular business; or
 `(ii) any bank insofar as the bank (I) buys and sells commercial paper,
 bankers' acceptances, or commercial bills, or exempted securities other
 than municipal securities; (II) buys and sells municipal securities and
 does not have a securities affiliate as provided in section 4(c)(15) of
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956; (III) engages in trust or fiduciary
 activities (including buying and selling securities for investment purposes
 in the course of such trust or fiduciary activities); or (IV) engages in
 the issuance or sale through a grantor trust or otherwise of securities
 backed by or representing an interest in obligations (other than securities
 of which the bank is not the issuer) originated or purchased by the bank,
 its affiliates, or its subsidiaries.'.
SEC. 303. POWER TO EXEMPT FROM THE DEFINITIONS OF BROKER AND DEALER.
 Section 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(e) The Commission, by rule, regulation, or order, upon its own motion or
 upon application, may conditionally or unconditionally exempt any person
 or class of persons from the definitions of `broker' or `dealer', if the
 Commission finds that such exemption is consistent with the public interest,
 the protection of investors, or the purposes of this title.'.
SEC. 304. REQUIREMENT THAT BANKS FALLING WITHIN THE DEFINITIONS OF BROKER
OR DEALER PLACE THEIR SECURITIES ACTIVITIES IN A SEPARATE CORPORATE ENTITY.
 Section 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) It shall be unlawful for any broker or dealer that is either a
 person other than a natural person or a natural person not associated with
 a broker or dealer that is a person other than a natural person (other than
 such a broker or dealer whose business is exclusively intrastate and who
 does not make use of any facility of a national securities exchange) to make
 use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce to
 effect any transactions in, or to induce or attempt to induce the purchase
 or sale of, any security (other than an exempted security or commercial
 paper, bankers' acceptances, or commercial bills) unless such broker or
 dealer is registered in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.
 `(2) It shall be unlawful for any bank to act as a broker or dealer, except
 in the course of an exclusively intrastate business. This section shall not
 preclude a subsidiary of a bank or an affiliate of a bank holding company,
 other than a bank, as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act
 of 1956, that is registered in accordance with subsection (b) of this section
 from acting as a broker or dealer to any extent otherwise permissible by law.
 `(3) The Commission, by rule or order, as it deems consistent with the
 public interest and the protection of investors, may conditionally or
 unconditionally exempt from paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection any
 broker or dealer or class of brokers or dealers specified in such rule
 or order.'.
SEC. 305. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This title shall take effect upon the expiration of 270 days after the
 date of its enactment.
TITLE IV--BANK INVESTMENT COMPANY ACTIVITIES
SEC. 401. CUSTODY OF INVESTMENT COMPANY ASSETS BY AFFILIATED BANKS.
 (a) MANAGEMENT COMPANIES- Section 17(f) of the Investment Company Act of 1940
 (15 U.S.C. 80a-17(f)) is amended by striking `trusts' the first place it
 appears and inserting in lieu thereof `trusts, but, where any such bank or an
 affiliated person thereof is an affiliated person, promoter, or sponsor of,
 or principal underwriter for, such registered company, only in accordance
 with such rules and regulations or orders as the Commission may from time
 to time prescribe for the protection of investors, after consulting in
 writing with the appropriate Federal banking agency as defined in section
 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q))'.
 (b) UNIT INVESTMENT TRUSTS- Section 26(a)(1) of the Investment Company
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-26(a)(1)) is amended by inserting after `bank'
 the following: `not affiliated with such underwriter or depositor, or
 where such bank is so affiliated, only in accordance with such rules and
 regulations or orders as the Commission may from time to time prescribe for
 the protection of investors after consulting in writing with the appropriate
 Federal banking agency as defined in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q))'.
SEC. 402. AFFILIATED TRANSACTIONS.
 Section 10(f) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-10(f))
 is amended by--
 (1) inserting `(A)' immediately before `a principal underwriter'; and
 (2) inserting `, or (B) the proceeds of which will be used to retire an
 indebtedness owed to a bank where the bank or an affiliated person thereof
 is an affiliated person, promoter, or sponsor of, or principal underwriter
 for, such registered company' after `for the issuer'.
SEC. 403. BORROWING FROM AN AFFILIATED BANK.
 Section 18(f) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-18(f))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 it shall be unlawful for any registered open-end company to borrow from
 any bank if such bank or any affiliated person thereof is an affiliated
 person, promoter, or sponsor of, or principal underwriter for, such company,
 except that the Commission may, by rules and regulations or order, permit
 such borrowing which the Commission finds to be in the public interest
 and consistent with the protection of investors.'.
SEC. 404. INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS.
 (a) INTERESTED PERSON- Section 2(a)(19)(A)(v) of the Investment Company Act
 of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(19)(A)(v)) is amended by striking out `1934 or
 any affiliated person of such a broker or dealer, and' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `1934 or any person that, at any time during the preceding 6 months,
 has acted as custodian or transfer agent or has executed any portfolio
 transactions for, engaged in any principal transactions with, or loaned
 money to, the investment company, or any other investment company having
 the same investment adviser, principal underwriter, sponsor, or promoter,
 or any affiliated person of such a broker, dealer, or person, and'.
 (b) AFFILIATION OF DIRECTORS- Section 10(c) of the Investment Company
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-10(c)) is amended by striking `bank, except'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `bank and its subsidiaries or any one bank
 holding company and its affiliates and subsidiaries, as those terms are
 defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, except'.
 (c) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall become effective
 after one year following the date of enactment of this title.
SEC. 405. ADDITIONAL SEC DISCLOSURE AUTHORITY.
 Section 35(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-35(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 35. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, in issuing or selling
 any security of which a registered investment company is the issuer,
 to represent or imply in any manner whatsoever that such security or
 company has been guaranteed, sponsored, recommended, or approved by the
 United States or any agency or officer thereof or has been insured by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan
 Insurance Corporation or is guaranteed by or is otherwise an obligation
 of any bank or insured institution. If a bank holding company, bank,
 or separately identifiable division or department of a bank, or any
 affiliate or subsidiary thereof, is an investment adviser, organizer,
 sponsor, promoter, principal underwriter or an affiliated person of a
 registered investment company, or a bank or an affiliated person of a
 bank is offering or selling securities of a registered investment company,
 or the name of an investment company is that of, or similar to that of, a
 bank, pursuant to regulations adopted by the Commission, after consultation
 in writing with the appropriate Federal banking agencies, as defined in
 section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)),
 any person in issuing or selling securities of such investment company
 may be required to disclose prominently that the investment company and
 any security issued by it is not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, is
 not guaranteed by an affiliated bank or insured institution, and is not
 otherwise an obligation of such a bank or insured institution.'.
SEC. 406. DEFINITION OF BROKER.
 Section 2(a)(6) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(6))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) `Broker' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include any person solely by reason of the fact that
 such person is an underwriter for one or more investment companies.'.
SEC. 407. DEFINITION OF DEALER.
 Section 2(a)(11) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(11)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(11) `Dealer' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include an insurance company or investment company.'.
SEC. 408. REMOVAL OF THE EXCLUSION FROM THE DEFINITION OF INVESTMENT ADVISER
FOR BANKS THAT ADVISE INVESTMENT COMPANIES.
 Section 202(a)(11) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(11)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `investment company' and inserting `investment company,
 except that the term `investment adviser' includes any bank or bank holding
 company to the extent that such bank or bank holding company acts as an
 investment adviser to a registered investment company unless the bank
 performs such services through a separately identifiable department or
 division of the bank, in which case the department or division and not
 the bank itself shall be deemed to be the `investment adviser'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: `For purposes of this
 paragraph, a separately identifiable department or division of a bank
 shall mean a unit that--
 `(A) is under the direct supervision of an officer or officers designated
 by the board of directors of the bank as responsible for the day-to-day
 conduct of the bank's investment adviser activities for one or more
 investment companies, including the supervision of all bank employees
 engaged in the performance of such activities; and
 `(B) there are separately maintained in or extractable from such unit's
 own facilities or the facilities of the bank, all of the records relating
 to such investment adviser activities and such records are so maintained
 or otherwise accessible as to permit independent examination thereof and
 enforcement of the Act and rules and regulations thereunder.'.
SEC. 409. DEFINITION OF BROKER.
 Section 202(a)(3) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) `Broker' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act
 of 1934.'.
SEC. 410. DEFINITION OF DEALER.
 Section 202(a)(7) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(7)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(7) `Dealer' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include an insurance company or investment company.'.
SEC. 411. NOTIFICATION AND CONSULTATION.
 The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.) is amended
 by inserting after section 210 the following new section:
`NOTIFICATION AND CONSULTATION
 `SEC. 210A. (a) IN GENERAL- The Commission, prior to the examination of,
 the entry of an order of investigation of, or the commencement of any
 disciplinary or law enforcement proceedings against, any bank holding
 company, bank, or department or division of a bank that is a registered
 investment adviser shall give notice to the appropriate Federal banking
 agency, as defined in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), of the identity of such bank holding company, bank,
 or department or division and the nature of such proposed action and shall
 consult in writing with such appropriate Federal banking agency concerning
 any such proposed action, unless the protection of investors requires
 immediate action by the Commission and prior notice or consultation is not
 practical under the circumstances, in which case notice shall be given and
 the appropriate Federal banking agency shall be notified and consulted as
 promptly as possible thereafter.
 `(b) EXAMINATION RESULTS- The Commission and the appropriate Federal banking
 agency shall exchange the results of any examination of any bank holding
 company, bank, or department or division of a bank that is a registered
 investment adviser.
 `(c) EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITY- Nothing herein shall limit in any respect
 the authority of the appropriate Federal banking agency with respect
 to such bank holding company, bank, or department or division under any
 provision of law.'.
SEC. 412. PUBLICITY.
 Section 210(b) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding the following paragraphs after paragraph (2):
 `(3) in the case of any State or Federal Government official or agency
 or any self-regulatory organization, as defined in section 3(a)(26) of
 the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, for law enforcement or regulatory
 purposes; or
 `(4) in the case of any foreign government official or agency for law
 enforcement or regulatory purposes.'.
SEC. 413. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This title shall take effect upon the expiration of 270 days after the
 date of its enactment.
TITLE V--STRENGTHENED ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Enforcement Powers Improvement Act of 1989'.
Part A--Regulation of Banks
SEC. 511. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 8- Section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1818) is amended--
 (1) by striking the following phrases:
 (A) `director, officer, employee, agent, or other person participating in
 the conduct of the affairs of such bank';
 (B) `director, officer or other person'; and
 (C) `director, officer, employee, agent or other person';
each place they appear and inserting `institution-related party';
 (2) at the end of paragraph (1) of subsection (b), by striking the period
 and inserting: `including, without limitation, reimbursement, restitution,
 indemnification, rescission, the disposal of loans or assets, guarantees
 against loss, or other action the appropriate Federal banking agency
 deems appropriate. Such order may place limitations on the activities
 or functions of the bank or any institution-related party necessary to
 correct the conditions resulting from any such violation or practice.';
 (3) after the first sentence of paragraph (1) of subsection (c), by
 inserting the following sentence: `Such order may place limitations on
 the activities or functions of the bank or any institution-related party.';
 (4) at the end of subsection (c), by adding the following new paragraph:
 `(3) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that an insured bank's books
 and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the appropriate Federal
 banking agency is unable with reasonable effort to determine the financial
 condition of that bank or the details or purpose of any transaction or
 transactions that may have a substantial effect on the financial condition
 of that bank, the agency may issue a temporary order requiring cessation of
 any activities the agency deems appropriate until completion of proceedings
 conducted under paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of this section. Such
 order shall become effective upon service, and unless set aside, limited,
 or suspended by a court in proceedings authorized by paragraph (2) of this
 subsection, shall remain effective and enforceable pending completion of the
 administrative proceeding initiated under such notice or until the agency
 determines by examination or otherwise that the bank's books and records
 are accurate and capable of reflecting the financial condition of the bank.';
 (5) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (2) and amending paragraph
 (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) Whenever the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that--
 `(A) any institution-related party, directly or indirectly, has violated
 any law, rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist order which has become
 final, or has engaged or participated in any unsafe or unsound practice in
 connection with any insured bank or business institution, or has committed
 or engaged in any act, omission, or practice which constitutes a breach
 of his fiduciary duty;
 `(B) such insured bank or business institution has suffered or will probably
 suffer substantial financial loss or other damage, or the interests of
 its depositors have been or could be seriously prejudiced by reason of
 such violation, practice, or breach, or the institution-related party has
 received financial gain by reason of such violation, practice, or breach; and
 `(C) such violation, practice, or breach involves personal dishonesty
 on the part of such institution-related party or demonstrates willful or
 continuing disregard for the safety or soundness of such insured bank or
 business institution,
the agency may serve upon such institution-related party a written notice of
its intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit his further
participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured
bank.';
 (6) in subsection (e), by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as
 paragraphs (2) through (5), respectively, and by amending paragraph (3),
 as redesignated, to read as follows:
 `(3) In respect to any institution-related party referred to in paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection, the appropriate Federal banking agency may,
 if it deems it necessary for the protection of the bank or the interests
 of its depositors, by written order to such effect served upon such party,
 suspend him from office or prohibit him from further participation in
 any manner in the conduct of the affairs of the bank. Such suspension
 or prohibition shall become effective upon service of such order on the
 institution-related party and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings
 authorized by subsection (f) of this section, shall remain in effect
 pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the
 notice served under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection and until such
 time as the agency shall dismiss the charges specified in such notice,
 or, if an order of removal or prohibition is issued against such party,
 until the effective date of any such order. Copies of any order issued
 pursuant to this paragraph shall also be served upon any bank where the
 party involved is presently associated.';
 (7) after paragraph (5) of subsection (e), as redesignated, by inserting
 the following new paragraph:
 `(6) Any person who is subject to a removal, suspension, or prohibition
 order pursuant to this subsection or subsection (g) shall also be removed,
 suspended, or prohibited from participation in the conduct of the affairs
 of--
 `(A) any insured institution,
 `(B) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company,
 `(C) any organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 `(D) any savings and loan holding company (as those terms are defined in
 the National Housing Act), and
 `(E) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971,
unless the party involved has received the prior written approval of the
appropriate Federal regulatory agency to continue such affiliation or to
continue participating in the affairs of such institution.';
 (8) in subsection (f), by striking `(e)(4)' in subsection (f) and inserting
 `(e)(3)', and by striking `(e)(1), (e)(2), or (e)(3)' and inserting `(e)(1)
 or (e)(2)';
 (9) in subsection (i), by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as paragraphs
 (2) and (3), respectively, and by inserting after `(i)' the following
 new paragraph:
 `(1) The jurisdiction and authority of the appropriate Federal banking
 agency to proceed under this section against any institution-related
 party shall not be affected by the resignation, termination of employment,
 or other separation of such person from an insured bank.';
 (10) in the first sentence of subsection (i)(3)(i), as redesignated, by
 inserting after `this section' the following: `or any condition imposed in
 writing by the agency in connection with the granting of any application
 or other request by the bank';
 (11) by amending subsection (j) to read as follows:
 `(j) PENALTY- Any person against whom there is outstanding and effective
 any order served upon such person under paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection
 (e) or under subsection (g) who, directly or indirectly, without the prior
 written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory agency--
 `(1) participates in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured
 institution, any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956), any
 organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the Federal
 Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and loan
 holding company (as those terms are defined in the National Housing Act),
 or any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, from which
 he has been suspended, removed, or prohibited, or solicits or procures,
 or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes or attempts to vote any
 proxies, consents, or authorization in respect to any voting rights in
 such institution; or
 `(2) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any manner in the conduct
 of the affairs of any insured institution, any bank holding company or
 subsidiary thereof or any other institution described in paragraph (1)
 of this subsection;
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. Any order
issued under subsection (e) of this section may prohibit any act that would
violate this subsection.';
 (12) by amending subsection (k) to read as follows:
 `(k) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) The term `appropriate Federal regulatory agency' means--
 `(A) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as provided in subsection
 (q) of section 3 (12 U.S.C. 1813);
 `(B) the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, acting either in its own name or
 as operating head of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,
 in the case of a depository institution whose accounts are insured by the
 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the subsidiary of such
 an institution, a Federal savings bank or a subsidiary of such a savings
 bank, a savings and loan holding company, or a subsidiary of a savings
 and loan holding company;
 `(C) the National Credit Union Administration Board in the case of a
 depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National Credit
 Union Share Insurance Fund; and
 `(D) the Farm Credit Administration in the case of an institution chartered
 under the Farm Credit Act of 1971.
 `(2) The terms `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and `order
 which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other order issued
 by the appropriate Federal banking agency (i) with the consent of the bank
 or the institution-related party concerned; (ii) with respect to which no
 petition for review of the action of the agency has been filed and perfected
 in a court of appeals as specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (h) of
 this section; (iii) with respect to which the action of the court in which
 such a petition is so filed is not subject to further review by the Supreme
 Court of the United States in proceedings provided for in that paragraph;
 or (iv) under paragraph (1) or (3) of subsection (g) of this section.
 `(3) The term `institution-related party' means a director, officer,
 employee, agent, or other person participating in the conduct of the
 affairs of an insured bank or a subsidiary of an insured bank, or any
 person who has filed or is required to file a change-in-control notice
 with the appropriate Federal banking agency under section 7(j).
 `(4) The term `insured institution' means an insured bank or a depository
 institution whose accounts are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan
 Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund.
 `(5) The term `violation' includes without limitation any action (alone or
 with another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating
 in, counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.'; and
 (13) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(t) EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITY- The authority granted to the Federal banking
 agencies under this section shall be in addition to, and not restricted by,
 any other authority provided by Federal or State law.'.
 (b) INCREASED PENALTY FOR PARTICIPATION BY CONVICTED INDIVIDUAL- Section
 19 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829) is amended to
 read as follows:
`PENALTY FOR PARTICIPATION
 `SEC. 19. Except with the written consent of the Corporation, no person who
 has been convicted, or who is hereafter convicted of any criminal offense
 involving dishonesty or a breach of trust shall serve as the director,
 officer, or employee of an insured bank or shall participate in the conduct
 of the affairs of such bank. For each knowing violation of this section,
 the bank or the individual involved shall each be subject to a penalty of
 not more than $1,000 for each day such prohibition is violated, which the
 Corporation may recover for its use.'.
SEC. 512. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF `CHANGE IN BANK CONTROL ACT'.
 Section 7(j)(16) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(j)(16))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(16)(A) Any person who violates any provision of this subsection,
 or any regulation or order issued by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency pursuant thereto, shall forfeit and pay a civil money penalty of
 not more than $10,000 per day for each day during which such violation
 continues. The agency having authority to impose a civil money penalty
 may, in its discretion, compromise, modify, or remit any civil money
 penalty which is subject to imposition or has been imposed under such
 authority. The penalty may be assessed and collected by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency by written notice. As used in this paragraph, the
 term `violates' includes without any limitation any action (alone or with
 another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating in,
 counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.
 `(B) In determining the amount of the penalty the appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall take into account the appropriateness of the penalty
 with respect to the size of financial resources and good faith of the person
 charged, the gravity of the violation, the history of previous violations,
 and such other matters as justice may require.
 `(C) The person assessed shall be afforded an opportunity for agency
 hearing upon request made within 10 days after receipt of the notice
 of assessment. In such hearing all issues shall be determined on the
 record pursuant to section 554 of title 5, United States Code. The agency
 determination shall be made by final order which may be reviewed only as
 provided in subparagraph (D). If no hearing is requested as herein provided,
 the assessment shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
 `(D) Any bank or person against whom an order imposing a civil money penalty
 has been entered after agency hearing under this section may obtain review
 by the United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the home
 office of the insured bank is located, or the United States Court of Appeals
 for the District of Columbia Circuit, by filing a notice of appeal in such
 court within 20 days from the date of such order and simultaneously sending
 a copy of such notice by registered or certified mail to the appropriate
 Federal banking agency. The agency shall promptly certify and file in
 such court the record upon which the penalty was imposed, as provided in
 section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. The findings of the agency
 shall be set aside if found to be unsupported by substantial evidence as
 provided by section 706(2)(E) of title 5, United States Code.
 `(E) If any person fails to pay an assessment after it has become a final
 and unappealable order, or after the court of appeals has entered final
 judgment in favor of the agency, the agency shall refer the matter to the
 Attorney General, who shall recover the amount assessed by action in the
 appropriate United States district court. In such action, the validity
 and appropriateness of the final order imposing the penalty shall not be
 subject to review.
 `(F) All penalties collected under authority of this section shall be paid
 into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.'.
SEC. 513. REPORTS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO THE BANK PROTECTION ACT OF 1968- Section 3 of the Bank
 Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1882) is amended by striking in the first
 sentence of subsection (b) the phrase `and shall require the submission
 of periodic reports with respect to the installation, maintenance, and
 operation of security devices and procedures'.
 (b) REPORTS OF CONDITION; FORM; CONTENT; DATE OF MAKING PUBLICATION;
 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO MAKE REPORTS; PENALTIES FOR FALSE OR MISLEADING
 REPORTS- Section 5211 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 161) is amended--
 (1) by striking, in the fifth sentence of subsection (a), `within ten
 days after the receipt of a request thereof from him;' and inserting
 `within the period of time specified by him;';
 (2) by striking `; penalties' in the heading of subsection (c); and
 (3) by striking the last sentence of subsection (c).
 (c) NATIONAL BANKS- Section 5213 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 164)
 is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting `Every association
 which fails to make, obtain, transmit or publish any report or information
 required by the Comptroller under section 5211 of the Revised Statutes (12
 U.S.C. 161) or which submits any false or misleading report or information
 shall be subject to a penalty of $1,000 for each day during which such
 failure continues or such false or misleading information is not corrected.'.
 (d) STATE NONMEMBER BANKS- Section 7(a)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(a)(1)) is amended by striking the last sentence and
 inserting `Every such bank which fails to make or publish any such report
 within the period of time specified by the Corporation or which submits or
 publishes any false or misleading report or information shall be subject to
 a penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day during which such failure
 continues or such false or misleading information is not corrected. Such
 penalty shall be recoverable by the Corporation for its use, and may be
 collected by the Corporation by suit or otherwise.'.
 (e) FEDERAL RESERVE MEMBERS- Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12
 U.S.C. 324) is amended by striking the fourth sentence and inserting
 `Every bank which fails to make such reports within the period of time
 specified by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or which
 submits or publishes any false or misleading report or information shall
 be subject to a penalty of $1,000 for each day during which such failure
 continues or such false or misleading information is not corrected; such
 penalty to be assessed and collected in the same manner as prescribed by
 section 8(i)(3) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 (f) BANK HOLDING COMPANIES- Section 8(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company
 Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1847(b)(1)) is amended by inserting after the word
 `thereto' in the first sentence `or any company which fails to make such
 reports as are required by this chapter or any regulation or order issued
 pursuant thereto within the period of time specified by the Board or which
 submits or publishes any false or misleading report or information,'.
Part B--Regulation of Savings and Loan Associations
SEC. 521. DEFINITION OF INSTITUTION-RELATED PARTY.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407 of the National Housing Act (12
 U.S.C. 1730) is amended--
 (1) by striking the following phrases:
 (A) `director, officer, employee, agent or other person participating in
 the conduct of the affairs of such institution';
 (B) `director or officer';
 (C) `director, officer, employee, agent, or other person';
 (D) `directors, officers, employees, agents, and other persons participating
 in the conduct of the affairs of such institution';
 (E) `director, or other person';
 (F) `director or officer of an insured institution, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such institution';
 (G) `director or officer or other person';
 (H) `director or officer thereof or other person participating in the
 conduct of its affairs'; and
 (I) `director or officer or other person participating in the conduct of
 its affairs', and
 (2) by inserting in lieu of each such phrase the phrase `institution-related
 party'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(f)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the following phrases:
 (A) `director, officer, employee, agent or other person participating in
 the conduct of the affairs of such association';
 (B) `director or officer';
 (C) `director, officer, employee, agent, or other person';
 (D) `its directors, officers, employees, agents, and other persons
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such association';
 (E) `director, officer, or other person';
 (F) `director or officer of an association, or other person participating
 in the conduct of the affairs of such association'; and
 (G) `director or officer or other person',
each place that such phrases appear, and
 (2) by inserting in lieu of each such phrase the phrase `association-related
 party'.
SEC. 522. CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(e)(1) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(e)(1)) is amended by striking the period at the end of
 paragraph (1) and inserting `, including, without limitation, reimbursement,
 restitution, indemnification, rescission, the disposal of loans or
 assets, guarantees against loss, or other action the Corporation deems
 appropriate. Such order may place limitations on the activities or functions
 of the institution or any institution-related party necessary to correct
 the conditions resulting from any such violation or practice. The authority
 granted to the Corporation under this section shall be in addition to,
 and not restricted by, any other authority provided by Federal or State law'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d)(2)(A) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2)(A)) is amended by striking the
 period at the end of paragraph (2)(A) and inserting `, including, without
 limitation, reimbursement, restitution, indemnification, rescission, the
 disposal of loans or assets, guarantees against loss, or other action the
 Board deems appropriate. Such order may place limitations on the activities
 or functions of the association or any association-related party necessary
 to correct the conditions resulting from any such violation or practice. The
 authority granted to the Board under this subsection shall be in addition to,
 and not restricted by, any other authority provided by Federal or State law'.
SEC. 523. SERVICE CORPORATIONS.
 Section 407(e)(3) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730(e)(3))
 and section 5(d)(2)(C) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (12
 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2)(C)) both are amended by striking the phrase `affiliate
 service corporation' and inserting the phrase `service corporation or any
 subsidiary of a service corporation, whether wholly or partly owned,'.
SEC. 524. TEMPORARY ORDERS.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(f) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(f)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by striking the phrase `or
 any institution any of the accounts of which are insured' and inserting
 the phrase `with respect to the served institution';
 (2) after the first sentence of paragraph (1) of subsection (f), by inserting
 the following sentence: `Such order may place limitations on the activities
 or functions of the institution or any institution-related party.';
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 `(3) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that an institution's books
 and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the Corporation is unable
 with reasonable efforts to determine the financial condition of that
 institution or the details or purpose of any transaction or transactions
 that may have a substantial effect on the financial condition of that
 institution, the Corporation may issue a temporary order requiring cessation
 of any activities the Corporation deems appropriate until completion of
 proceedings conducted under subsection (e) of this section. Such order
 shall become effective upon service, and unless set aside, limited, or
 suspended by a court in proceedings authorized by paragraph (2) of this
 subsection, shall remain effective and enforceable pending completion of
 the administrative proceeding initiated under such notice or until the
 Corporation determines by examination or otherwise that the institution's
 books and records are accurate and capable of reflecting the financial
 condition of the institution.'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d)(3) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting the following sentence after the first sentence of
 subparagraph (A) of subsection (d)(3): `Such order may place limitations on
 the activities or functions of the association or any association-related
 party.'.
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D).
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following:
 `(C) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that an association's books
 and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the Board is unable with
 reasonable effort to determine the financial condition of that association
 or the details or purpose of any transaction or transactions that may have
 a substantial effect on the financial condition of that association, the
 Board may issue a temporary order requiring cessation of any activities
 the Board deems appropriate until completion of proceedings conducted
 under subsection (d)(2) of this section. Such order shall become effective
 upon service, and unless set aside, limited, or suspended by a court in
 proceedings authorized by paragraph (B) of this subsection, shall remain
 effective and enforceable pending completion of the administrative proceeding
 initiated under such notice or until the Board determines by examination
 or otherwise that the association's books and records are accurate and
 capable of reflecting the financial condition of the association.'.
SEC. 525. REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(g) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(g)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (2) and amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) Whenever, in the opinion of the Corporation--
 `(A) any institution-related party, directly or indirectly, has committed
 any violation of law, rule, or regulation, or of a cease-and-desist order,
 which has become final, or has engaged or participated in any unsafe
 or unsound practice in connection with any insured institution or other
 business institution, or has committed or engaged in any act, omission or
 practice which constitutes a breach of its fiduciary duty;
 `(B) such insured institution or other business institution has suffered
 or will probably suffer substantial financial loss or other damage or
 that the interests of savings account holders have been or could be
 seriously prejudiced by reason of such violation, practice, or breach or
 the institution-related party has received financial gain by reason of
 such violation, practice, or breach; and
 `(C) such violation, practice, or breach involves personal dishonesty
 on the part of the institution- related party or demonstrates willful or
 continuing disregard for the safety or soundness of the insured institution
 or other business institution,
the Corporation may serve on such institution-related party a written notice
of its intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit the party's
further participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any
insured institution.';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (5) as paragraphs (2) through
 (4) respectively, and by amending paragraph (3) of subsection (g) (as so
 redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(3) In respect to any institution-related party or any other person referred
 to in paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection, the Corporation may if it
 deems it necessary for the protection of the institution or the interests of
 its savings account holders or of the Corporation, by written order to such
 effect served upon such party, suspend that party from office or prohibit
 that party from further participation in any manner in the conduct of the
 affairs of the institution. Such suspension or prohibition shall become
 effective upon service of such order upon the institution-related party
 and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings authorized by paragraph (6)
 of this subsection, shall remain in effect pending the completion of the
 administrative proceeding pursuant to the notice served under paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection and until such time as the Corporation shall
 dismiss the charges specified in such notice, or, if an order of removal
 or prohibition is issued against such party, until the effective date
 of any such order. Copies of any order issued pursuant to this paragraph
 shall also be served upon the institution with which the party involved
 is presently associated.'; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (4) of subsection (g) (as so redesignated)
 the following:
 `(5) Any person who, pursuant to this subsection or subsection (h),
 is removed, suspended, or prohibited from participation in the conduct
 of the affairs of an insured institution or a service corporation or a
 subsidiary of a service corporation of an insured institution, whether
 wholly or partly owned, shall also be removed, suspended, or prohibited
 from participation in the conduct of the affairs of--
 `(A) any insured bank (as that term is defined in the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act),
 `(B) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956),
 `(C) any organization organized and operated under section 25 of the
 Federal Reserve Act,
 `(D) any insured institution,
 `(E) any service corporation or subsidiary of a service corporation of an
 insured institution, whether wholly or partly owned,
 `(F) any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and
 loan holding company,
 `(G) any depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National
 Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, and
 `(H) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971,
without the prior written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory
agency, as that term is defined in the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, to
continue participation in the affairs of such institution.'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d)(4) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(4)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (B) and amending subparagraph (A) to read
 as follows:
 `(4)(A) Whenever, in the opinion of the Board--
 `(i) any association-related party, directly or indirectly, has committed
 any violation of law, rule, or regulation, or of a cease-and-desist order
 which has become final, or has engaged or participated in any unsafe or
 unsound practice in connection with any association or other business
 institution, or has committed or engaged in any act, omission, or practice
 which constitutes a breach of its fiduciary duty;
 `(ii) such association or other business institution has suffered or will
 probably suffer substantial financial loss or other damage or the interests
 of savings account holders have been or could be seriously prejudiced by
 reason of such violation, practice, or breach, or the association-related
 party has received financial gain by reason of such violation, practice,
 or breach; and
 `(iii) such violation, practice, or breach involves personal dishonesty
 on the part of the association-related party, or demonstrates willful or
 continuing disregard for the safety or soundness of the association or
 other business institution,
the Board may serve upon such association-related party a written notice of its
intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit the party's further
participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any institution.';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (E) as subparagraphs
 (B) through (D) respectively, and by amending subparagraph (C) (as so
 redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(C) In respect to any association-related party or any other person
 referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph, the Board may,
 if it deems it necessary for the protection of the association or the
 interests of its savings account holders, by written order to such effect
 served upon such party, suspend that party from office or prohibit that
 party from further participation in any manner in the conduct of the
 affairs of the association. Such suspension or prohibition shall become
 effective upon service of such order upon the association-related party
 and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings authorized by subparagraph
 (F) of this paragraph, shall remain in effect, pending the completion
 of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the notice served under
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph and until such time as the
 Board shall dismiss the charges specified in such notice, or, if an
 order of removal or prohibition is issued against such party, until the
 effective date of any such order. Copies of any order issued pursuant to
 this subparagraph shall also be served upon the association with which
 the party involved is presently associated.'; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (D) of subsection (d)(4) (as so
 redesignated) the following:
 `(E) Any person who, pursuant to this subsection or subsection (d)(5),
 is removed, suspended, or prohibited from participation in the conduct of
 the affairs of an association or a service corporation or a subsidiary of
 a service corporation of an association, whether partly or wholly owned,
 shall also be removed, suspended, or prohibited from participation in the
 conduct of the affairs of--
 `(i) any insured bank (as that term is defined in the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act),
 `(ii) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956),
 `(iii) any organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 `(iv) any association or any institution insured by the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation,
 `(v) any service corporation or subsidiary of a service corporation of
 an association or an institution insured by the Federal Savings and Loan
 Insurance Corporation,
 `(vi) any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and
 loan holding company,
 `(vii) any depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National
 Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, and
 `(viii) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971,
without the prior written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory
agency, as that term is defined in section 8(k) of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Act, to continue participation in the affairs of such institution.'.
SEC. 526. RETENTION OF JURISDICTION.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(k) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(k)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs (3) and (4),
 respectively, and by inserting the following after paragraph (1):
 `(2) The jurisdiction and authority of the Corporation to proceed under
 this section against any institution-related party shall not be affected
 by the resignation, termination of employment, or other separation of such
 person from an institution.'; and
 (2) by inserting after `this section' in the first sentence of paragraph
 (4)(A) of subsection (k) (as redesignated) the following: `or any of the
 provisions of this title, or any regulation issued pursuant thereto,'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d)(8) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(8)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (A) as subparagraph (B) and subparagraph
 (B) as subparagraph (C), and by inserting the following at the beginning
 of subsection (d)(8):
 `(A) The jurisdiction and authority of the Board to proceed under this
 section against any association-related party shall not be affected by
 resignation, termination of employment, or other separation of such person
 from an association.'; and
 (2) by inserting after `this subsection' in the first sentence of the
 redesignated paragraph (8)(C)(i) of subsection (d) the following: `or any
 of the provisions of this Act, or any regulation issued pursuant thereto,'.
SEC. 527. PENALTIES.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(p) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(p)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(p) PENALTIES- (1) Any person against whom there is outstanding and
 effective any order served upon such person under paragraph (3) or (4) of
 subsection (g) or under subsection (h) who, directly or indirectly, without
 the prior written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory agency, as
 that term is defined in section 8(k) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act--
 `(A) participates in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of
 any insured institution, any insured bank (as that term is defined
 in the Federal Deposit Insurance Act), any service corporation of an
 insured institution or subsidiary of a service corporation, any bank
 holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company (as those terms
 are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956), any organization
 organized and operated under section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act or
 operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act, any savings and
 loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and loan holding company
 (as these terms are defined in the National Housing Act), any depository
 institution whose accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share
 Insurance Fund, or any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of
 1971, from which that person has been suspended, removed, or prohibited,
 or solicits or procures, or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes
 or attempts to vote any proxies, consents, or authorizations in respect
 to any voting rights in such institutions; or
 `(B) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any manner in the conduct
 of the affairs of any insured institution, any insured bank or any other
 institution described in paragraph (i) of this subsection,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. Any order
issued under subsection (g) of this section may prohibit any act that would
violate this subsection.
 `(2) Except with the prior written consent of the Corporation, no person
 shall serve as a director, officer, or employee of an insured institution
 or shall participate in the conduct of the affairs of such institution who
 has been convicted, or who is hereafter convicted, of any criminal offense
 involving dishonesty or a breach of trust. For each knowing violation of
 this prohibition, the institution or the individual involved shall each be
 subject to a penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day this prohibition
 is violated, which the Corporation may recover by suit or otherwise for
 its own use.'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d)(12) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(12)) is amended by striking paragraphs
 (A) and (B) and inserting the following:
 `(12) PENALTIES- (A) Any person against whom there is outstanding and
 effective any order served upon such person under subparagraph (C) or (D)
 of paragraph (4) or under (5) who, directly or indirectly, without the
 prior written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory agency (as
 that term is defined in section 8(k) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act)--
 `(i) participates in any manner in the conduct of any association or
 institution insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,
 any insured bank (as that term is defined in the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act), any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956), any
 organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the Federal
 Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and loan
 holding company (as those terms are defined in the National Housing Act),
 any depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National
 Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, any association or other institution
 insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, any service
 corporation of an association or institution insured by the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation or subsidiary of a service corporation, or
 any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, from which
 he has been suspended, removed, or prohibited, or solicits or procures,
 or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes or attempts to vote any
 proxies, consents or authorizations in respect to any voting rights in
 such institutions; or
 `(ii) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any manner in the conduct
 of the affairs of any insured institution, any insured bank, or any other
 institution described in subparagraph (A)(i) of this subsection;
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. Any
order issued under subsection (d)(4) of this section may prohibit any act
that would violate this subsection.
 `(B) Except with the prior written consent of the Board, no person shall
 serve as a director, officer, or employee of an association or shall
 participate in the conduct of the affairs of such association who has
 been convicted, or who is hereafter convicted, of any criminal offense
 involving dishonesty or a breach of trust. For each knowing violation of this
 prohibition, the association or the individual involved shall be subject to
 a penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day this prohibition is violated,
 which the Board may recover by suit or otherwise for its own use.'.
SEC. 528. CIVIL PENALTY.
 Section 407(q)(17) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730(q)(17))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(17)(A) Any person who violates any provision of this subsection, or any
 regulation or order issued by the Corporation pursuant thereto, shall
 forfeit and pay a civil money penalty of not more than $10,000 per day
 for each day during which such violation continues. The Corporation may,
 in its discretion, compromise, modify, or remit any civil money penalty
 which is subject to imposition or has been imposed. The penalty may be
 assessed and collected by the Corporation by written notice. As used in this
 section, the term `violates' includes without any limitation any action
 (alone or with another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about,
 participating in, counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.
 `(B) In determining the amount of the penalty the Corporation shall take
 into account the appropriateness of the penalty with respect to the size of
 financial resources and good faith of the person charged, the gravity of
 the violation, the history of previous violations, and such other matters
 as justice may require.
 `(C) The person assessed shall be afforded an opportunity for agency
 hearing, upon request made within ten days after issuance of the notice of
 assessment. In such hearing all issues shall be determined on the record
 pursuant to section 554 of title 5, United States Code. The Corporation's
 determination shall be made by final order which may be reviewed only as
 provided in subparagraph (D). If no hearing is requested as herein provided,
 the assessment shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
 `(D) Any insured institution or person against whom an order imposing a
 civil money penalty has been entered after agency hearing under this section
 may obtain review by the United States court of appeals for the circuit in
 which the home office of the insured institution is located, or the United
 States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, by filing
 a notice of appeal in such court within 20 days from the service of such
 order, and simultaneously sending a copy of such notice by registered or
 certified mail to the Corporation. The Corporation shall promptly certify
 and file in such Court the record upon which the penalty was imposed, as
 provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. The findings of
 the Corporation shall be set aside if found to be unsupported by substantial
 evidence as provided by section 706(2)(E) of title 5, United States Code.
 `(E) If any person fails to pay an assessment after it has become a final
 and unappealable order, or after the court of appeals has entered final
 judgment in favor of the agency, the agency shall refer the matter to the
 Attorney General, who shall recover the amount assessed by action in the
 appropriate United States district court. In such action, the validity
 and appropriateness of the final order imposing the penalty shall not be
 subject to review.
 `(F) All penalties collected under authority of this section shall be paid
 into the Treasury of the United States.'.
SEC. 529. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(r) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730(r)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) through (D) of paragraph (1) as
 subparagraphs (C) through (E), respectively;
 (2) by striking subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) and inserting the
 following:
 `(A) The term `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and `order
 which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other order
 issued by the Corporation (i) with the consent of the institution or the
 institution-related party concerned; (ii) with respect to which no petition
 for review of the action of the Corporation has been filed and perfected
 in a court of appeals as specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (j) of
 this section; (iii) with respect to which the action of the court in which
 such a petition is so filed is not subject to further review by the Supreme
 Court of the United States in proceedings provided for in subsection (j);
 or (v) an order issued under subsection (h) of this section.
 `(B) The term `institution-related party' means a director, officer,
 controlling person, employee, agent, or other person participating in
 the conduct of the affairs of an insured institution or of any service
 corporation or any subsidiary of a service corporation or an insured
 institution, whether partly or wholly owned, or of any savings and loan
 holding company or any subsidiary of a savings and loan holding company as
 those terms are defined in section 408 of this title; and any person who has
 filed or is required to file a change-in-control notice with the Corporation
 under subsection (q) of this section. For the purpose of enforcing any
 law, rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist order in connection with an
 interlocking relationship, `institution-related party' includes an employee
 or officer with management functions, an advisory or honorary director,
 a trustee of an association under the control of trustees, or any person
 who has a representative or nominee serving in any such capacity.'; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following:
 `(4) As used in subsections (e), (f), (g), (h), and (p) of this section,
 the term `insured institution' means any institution the deposits of which
 are insured by the Corporation, any institution that retains deposits
 insured by the Corporation notwithstanding termination of its status as
 an insured institution, a Federal savings bank the deposits of which are
 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and any former Federal
 savings bank that retains deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation notwithstanding termination of its status as an insured bank.'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) of paragraph (13)(A)
 as paragraphs (3) through (5) respectively; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (1) of paragraph (13)(A) and inserting the
 following:
 `(1) The terms `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and
 `order which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other
 order issued by the Board (A) with the consent of the association or the
 association-related party concerned; (B) with respect to which no petition
 for review of the action of the Board has been filed and perfected in a
 court of appeals as specified in paragraph (7)(B) of this subsection; (C)
 with respect to which the action of the court in which such a petition
 is filed is not subject to further review by the Supreme Court of the
 United States in proceedings provided for in paragraph (7)(B); or (D)
 under paragraph (5) (A) or (C) of this subsection.
 `(2) The term `association-related party' means--
 `(A) a director, officer, controlling person, employee, agent, or other
 person participating in the conduct of affairs of an association or of any
 service corporation or of any subsidiary of a service corporation of an
 association, whether partly or wholly owned, or of any savings and loan
 holding company or any subsidiary of a savings and loan holding company,
 as those terms are defined in section 408 of the National Housing Act, or
 of any association with respect to which the Federal Home Loan Bank Board
 now or hereafter has any statutory power of examination or supervision
 under any Act or joint resolution of Congress other than this Act, the
 Federal Home Loan Bank Act and the National Housing Act; or
 `(B) any person who has filed or is required to file a change-in-control
 notice with the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation under
 subsection (q) of section 407 of the National Housing Act.
For the purpose of enforcing any law, rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist
order in connection with an interlocking relationship, `association-related
party' includes an employee or officer with management functions, an advisory
or honorary director, a trustee of an association under the control of
trustees, or any person who has a representative or nominee serving in any
such capacity.'; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (14) and inserting the following:
 `(14)(A) As used in paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), and (12) of this
 subsection, the term `association' includes any former association
 that retains deposits insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation notwithstanding termination of its status as an institution
 insured by such Corporation, and any Federal savings bank whose deposits are
 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and any former Federal
 savings bank that retains deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation notwithstanding termination of its status as an insured bank.
 `(B) As used in this subsection, the terms `Federal savings and loan
 association' and `association' include any institution with respect to
 which the Federal Home Loan Bank Board now or hereafter has any statutory
 power of examination or supervision under any Act or joint resolution
 of Congress other than this Act, the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, and the
 National Housing Act.
 `(C) References in this subsection to savings account holders and to
 members of associations shall be deemed to be references to holders of
 withdrawable accounts in institutions over which the Board has any statutory
 power of examination or supervision as provided in this paragraph, and
 references therein to boards of directors of associations shall be deemed
 to be references to boards of directors or other governing boards of such
 institutions. The Board shall have power by regulation to define, for the
 purposes of this paragraph, terms used or referred to in the preceding
 sentence and other terms used in this subsection.'.
SEC. 530. REPORTS OF CONDITION.
 Section 407 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(u) REPORTS OF CONDITION; PENALTIES-
 `(1) Each insured institution or Federal saving bank shall make reports of
 condition to the Corporation which shall be in such form and shall contain
 such information as the Corporation may require. The Corporation may require
 reports of condition to be published in such manner, not inconsistent with
 any applicable law, as it may direct.
 `(2) Any insured institution or Federal saving bank which fails to obtain
 and furnish any report or information required by the Corporation under
 this section within the period of time the Corporation specifies or which
 submits any false or misleading report or information shall be subject to
 a penalty of $1,000 each day during which such failure continues or is not
 corrected. Such penalty shall be assessed and collected in the manner as
 prescribed by section 407(q)(17) of this title.'.
SEC. 531. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 (a) NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- Section 407(h) of the National Housing Act (12
 U.S.C. 1730(h)) is amended by striking `(1), (2), (3), or (4)' from the
 fifth sentence of paragraph (1) and inserting `(1), (2), or (3)'.
 (b) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT OF 1933- Section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)) is amended by striking `(A), (B), (C) or
 (D)' from the fifth sentence of subparagraph (5)(A) and inserting `(A),
 (B) or (C)'.
SEC. 532. PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO REPORT.
 Section 408 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a) is amended by
 adding at the end of subsection (b)(2) thereof the following: `Every savings
 and loan holding company which fails to make such reports within the period
 of time specified by the Corporation or which submits or publishes any
 false or misleading report or information shall be subject to a penalty of
 $1,000 for each day during which such failure continues or such information
 is not corrected; such penalty to be assessed and collected in the same
 manner as prescribed by subsection (j)(4) of this section.'.
SEC. 533. REPEALER.
 Section 5(d)(15) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(15))
 is repealed, and section 5(d)(16) (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(16)) is redesignated
 as section 5(d)(15) (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(15)).
Part C--Credit Unions
SEC. 541. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 206.
 (a) Section 206 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786) is amended--
 (1) by striking the following phrases:
 (A) `director, officer, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such a credit union';
 (B) `director, officer, committee member, employee, agent, or other person';
 (C) `director, officer, committee member, or employee';
 (D) `director, officer, or committee member';
 (E) `director, committee member, or officer';
 (F) `director, committee member, officer, or other person';
 (G) `officer, director, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such a credit union';
 (H) `officer, director, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such credit union';
 (I) `director, committee member, or officer or other person';
 (J) `director, officer, committee member, or other person'; and
 (K) `director, committee member, or officer of an insured credit union,
 or other person participating in the conduct of the affairs of such
 credit union';
each place they appear and inserting `institution-related party';
 (2) at the end of paragraph (1) of subsection (e), by striking the period
 and inserting the following: `including, without limitation, reimbursement,
 restitution, indemnification, rescission, the disposal of loans or assets,
 guarantees against loss, or other action the Board deems appropriate. Such
 order may place limitations on the activities or functions of the credit
 union or any institution-related party necessary to correct the conditions
 resulting from any such violation or practice.';
 (3) after the first sentence of paragraph (1) of subsection (f), by inserting
 the following sentence: `Such order may place limitations on the activities
 or functions of the credit union or any institution-related party.';
 (4) in subsection (f), by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph
 (1) the following new paragraph:
 `(2) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that any insured credit
 union's books and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the Board
 is unable with reasonable effort to determine the financial condition of
 that credit union or the details or purpose of any transactions that may
 have a substantial effect on the financial condition of that credit union,
 the Board may issue a temporary order requiring cessation of any activities
 the Board deems appropriate until completion of proceedings conducted under
 paragraph (1) of subsection (e) of this section. Such order shall become
 effective upon service, and, unless set aside, limited, or suspended by a
 court in proceedings authorized by paragraph (3) of this subsection, shall
 remain effective and enforceable pending completion of the administrative
 proceeding initiated under such notice or until the Board determines by
 examination or otherwise that the credit union's books and records are
 accurate and capable of reflecting the financial condition of the credit
 union.';
 (5) by striking paragraph (2) and amending paragraph (1) of subsection
 (g) to read as follows:
 `(1) Whenever the Board determines that--
 `(A) any institution-related party, directly or indirectly, has violated any
 law, rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist order which has become final, or
 has engaged or participated in any unsafe or unsound practice in connection
 with any insured credit union or other business institution, or has committed
 or engaged in any act, omission, or practice which constitutes a breach of
 his fiduciary duty, or by conduct or practice has evidenced his personal
 dishonesty or unfitness to continue as an institution-related party; and
 `(B) such insured credit union or other business institution has suffered
 or will probably suffer substantial financial loss or other damage, or the
 interests of its insured members have been or could be seriously prejudiced
 by reason of such violation, practice, or breach, or the institution-related
 party has received financial gain by reason of such violation, practice,
 or breach,
the Board may serve upon such institution-related party a written notice of
its intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit his further
participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured
credit union.';
 (6) in subsection (g), by striking `(A)' and striking subparagraph (B) in
 paragraph (7), and by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (7) of subsection
 (g) as paragraphs (2) through (6), respectively, and by amending paragraph
 (3) (as so redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(3) In respect to any institution-related party referred to in paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection, the Board may, if it deems necessary for
 the protection of the credit union or the interests of its members, by
 written order to such effect served upon such party, suspend that party
 from office or prohibit that party from further participation in any
 manner in the conduct of the affairs of the credit union. Such suspension
 or prohibition shall become effective upon service of such order on the
 institution-related party and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings
 authorized by paragraph (5) of this subsection, shall remain in effect
 pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the
 notice served under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection and until
 such time as the Board shall dismiss the charges specified in such notice,
 or, if an order of removal or prohibition is issued against such party,
 until the effective date of any such order. Copies of any order issued
 pursuant to this paragraph shall also be served upon any institution where
 the party involved is presently associated.';
 (7) in subsection (g)(6), as redesignated, by striking all that follows
 `National Housing Act),' and inserting `and any institution chartered
 under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, unless the party involved has received
 the prior written approval of the appropriate Federal regulatory agency
 to continue such affiliation or to continue participating in the affairs
 of such institution.';
 (8) in subsection (g)(5) (as redesignated), by striking `(4)' and inserting
 `(3)', and by striking `(1), (2), or (3)' and inserting `(1) or (2)';
 (9) by redesignating paragraph (1) of subsection (k) as paragraph (2),
 by redesignating paragraph (2) of subsection (k) as paragraph (3), and by
 inserting after `(k)' the following:
 `(1) The jurisdiction and authority of the Board to proceed under this
 section against any institution-related party shall not be affected by
 the resignation, termination of employment, or other separation of such
 person from an insured credit union.';
 (10) in the first sentence of paragraph (3)(A) of subsection (k) (as
 redesignated), by inserting after `this section' the following: `or any
 condition imposed in writing by the Board in connection with the granting
 of any application or other request by the credit union', and by striking
 `subsection (e), (f), or (q)' and inserting `subsection (e), (f), or (p)';
 (11) by amending subsection (l) to read as follows:
 `(l) Any person against whom there is outstanding and effective any order
 served upon such person under paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (g)
 or under subsection (i) who, directly or indirectly, without the prior
 written approval of the Board--
 `(1) participates in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of--
 `(A) any insured institution,
 `(B) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956),
 `(C) any organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 `(D) any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and loan
 holding company (as those terms are defined in the National Housing Act), or
 `(E) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971,
from which he has been suspended, removed, or prohibited, or solicits or
procures, or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes or attempts to vote
any proxies, consents, or authorization in respect to any voting rights in
such institution; or
 `(2) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 committee member, employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any
 manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured institution, any bank
 holding company or subsidiary thereof, or any other institution described
 in paragraph (1) of this subsection,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. Any order
issued under subsection (g) of this section may prohibit any act that would
violate this subsection.';
 (12) by striking subsection (m) and redesignating subsections (n),
 (o), (p) and (q) of this section as subsections (m), (n), (o) and (p)
 respectively; and
 (13) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(q) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) The term `appropriate Federal regulatory agency' has the same meaning
 as in section 8(k) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(2) The terms `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and
 `order which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other
 order issued by the Board (A) with the consent of the credit union or the
 institution-related party concerned; (B) with respect to which no petition
 for review of the action of the agency has been filed and perfected in a
 court of appeals as specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (j) of this
 section; (C) with respect to which the action of the court in which such
 a petition is so filed is not subject to further review by the Supreme
 Court of the United States in proceedings provided for in that paragraph;
 or (D) under paragraphs (1) or (3) of subsection (i) of this section.
 `(3) The term `institution-related party' means a director, officer,
 committee member, employee, agent, or other person participating in the
 conduct of the affairs of an insured credit union.
 `(4) The term `insured institution' means an insured credit union, as
 defined in section 101, or a depository institution whose accounts are
 insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 `(5) The term `violation' includes without limitation any action (alone or
 with another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating
 in, counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.
 `(r) EFFECT OF OTHER LAW- The authority granted to the Board under this
 section shall be in addition to, and not restricted by, any other authority
 provided by Federal or State law.'.
SEC. 542. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 205.
 Section 205 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1785) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of subsection (d), by inserting after the phrase
 `insured credit union' `or shall participate in the conduct of the affairs
 of such insured credit union';
 (2) by striking the second sentence of subsection (d) and inserting
 `For each knowing violation of this subsection, the credit union or the
 individual involved shall each be subject to a penalty of not more than
 $1,000 for each day this prohibition is violated, which the Board may
 recover for its use.'; and
 (3) in the first sentence of paragraph (2) of subsection (e), by inserting
 a period after the word `standards' and striking the phrase `and shall
 require the submission of periodic reports with respect to the installation,
 maintenance, and operation of security devices and procedures'.
TITLE VI--TRUTH IN SAVINGS AND INVESTMENTS
SEC. 601. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Truth in Savings and Investments Act'.
SEC. 602. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress hereby finds that economic stability would
 be enhanced, competition among depository institutions and investment
 companies would be improved, and the ability of the consumer to make
 informed decisions regarding accounts and investments would be strengthened
 if there was uniformity in the disclosure of terms and conditions on which
 interest and earnings are paid and fees are assessed.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this title to require the clear and
 uniform disclosure of--
 (1) the rates of interest and yields which are payable on accounts and
 investments; and
 (2) the fees that are assessable against accounts and investments,
so that consumers can make meaningful comparisons among the competing claims
of depository institutions and investment companies.
SEC. 603. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this title--
 (1) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- The term `depository institution' has the
 meaning given such term in clauses (i) through (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A)
 of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (2) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System.
 (3) ACCOUNT- The term `account' means any account offered to 1 or more
 individuals or an unincorporated nonbusiness association of individuals by
 a depository institution into which a customer deposits funds, including
 demand accounts, time accounts, negotiable order of withdrawal accounts,
 and share draft accounts.
 (4) INTEREST- The term `interest' includes dividends paid with respect to
 share draft accounts which are accounts within the meaning of paragraph (3).
 (5) MULTIPLE RATE ACCOUNT- The term `multiple rate accounts' means any
 account that has 2 or more annual rates of simple interest which take
 effect in succeeding periods and which are known at the time of disclosure.
 (6) ANNUAL PERCENTAGE YIELD- The term `annual percentage yield' shall be
 equal to the total amount of interest that would be received on a $100
 deposit under the terms described in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section
 605(c) over a year, expressed as a percentage calculated by a method which
 shall be prescribed by the Board in regulations.
SEC. 604. DISCLOSURE OF YIELDS AND TERMS OF ACCOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each advertisement,
 announcement, or solicitation initiated by any depository institution
 relating to any account which includes any reference to a specific rate of
 interest payable on amounts held in such account, or to a specific yield or
 rate of earnings on amounts so held, shall state the following information,
 to the extent applicable, in a clear and conspicuous manner:
 (1) The annual percentage yield (which shall be noted in greater prominence
 than any other stated rate).
 (2) The period during which such annual percentage yield is in effect.
 (3) All minimum account balance and time requirements which must be met
 in order to earn the advertised yield (and, in the case of accounts for
 which more than 1 yield is stated, each annual percentage yield and the
 account minimum balance requirement associated with each such yield shall
 be in close proximity and have equal prominence).
 (4) The minimum amount of the initial deposit which is required to open
 the account in order to obtain the yield advertised, if such minimum amount
 is greater than the minimum balance necessary to earn the advertised yield.
 (5) A statement that regular fees or other conditions could reduce the yield.
 (6) A statement of any penalty imposed for early withdrawal.
 (b) BROADCAST AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING EXCEPTION-
 The Board may, by regulation, exempt advertisements, announcements,
 or solicitations made by any broadcast or electronic medium or outdoor
 advertising display not on the premises of the depository institution from
 any disclosure requirements described in paragraph (4) or (5) of subsection
 (a) if the Board finds that any such disclosure would be unnecessarily
 burdensome.
 (c) MISLEADING DESCRIPTIONS OF FREE OR NO-COST ACCOUNTS PROHIBITED-
 No advertisement, announcement, or solicitation made by any depository
 institution may refer to or describe an account as a free or no-cost
 account if--
 (1) in order to avoid fees or service charges for any period--
 (A) a minimum balance must be maintained in the account during such
 period; or
 (B) the number of transactions are limited during such period; or
 (2) any regular service or transaction fee is imposed.
 (d) MISLEADING OR INACCURATE ADVERTISEMENTS, ETC., PROHIBITED- No depository
 institution shall make any advertisement, announcement, or solicitation
 relating to a deposit account that is inaccurate or misleading or that
 misrepresents its deposit contracts.
SEC. 605. ACCOUNT SCHEDULE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each depository institution shall maintain a schedule of
 fees, charges, yields, and other terms and conditions applicable to each
 class of accounts offered by the depository institution, in accordance with
 the requirements of this section and regulations which the Board shall
 prescribe. The schedule for each class may be in the form of separate
 schedules or one comprehensive document. The Board shall specify, in
 regulations, which fees, charges, penalties, terms, conditions, and
 account restrictions must be included in a schedule required under this
 subsection. A depository institution need not include in such schedule
 any information not specified in such regulation.
 (b) INFORMATION ON FEES AND CHARGES- The schedule required under subsection
 (a) with respect to any account shall contain the following information:
 (1) A description of all fees, periodic service charges, and penalties which
 may be charged or assessed against the account (or against the account holder
 in connection with such account), the amount of any such fees, charges,
 or penalties (or the method by which such amounts will be calculated),
 and the conditions under which any such amounts will be assessed.
 (2) All minimum balance requirements that affect fees, charges, and
 penalties, including a clear description of how each minimum balance
 is calculated.
 (3) Any minimum amount required with respect to the initial deposit in
 order to open the account.
 (c) INFORMATION ON YIELDS- The schedule required under subsection (a)
 with respect to any account shall include the following information:
 (1) Any annual percentage yield.
 (2) The period during which any annual percentage yield will be in effect.
 (3) Any annual rate of simple interest.
 (4) The frequency with which interest will be compounded and credited.
 (5) A clear description of the method used to determine the balance on
 which interest is paid.
 (6) The information described in paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) shall be
 provided for each period during which a different annual rate of simple
 interest is in effect (or, if applicable, the method for computing such
 information).
 (7) Any minimum balance which must be maintained to earn the rates and
 obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and a clear
 description of how such minimum balance is calculated.
 (8) A clear description of any minimum time requirement which must be met
 in order to obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and
 any information described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) that will
 apply if any time requirement is not met.
 (9) A statement, if applicable, that any interest which has accrued but
 has not been credited to an account at the time of a withdrawal from the
 account will not be paid by the depository institution or credited to the
 account by reason of such withdrawal.
 (10) Any provision or requirement relating to nonpayment of interest,
 including any charge or penalty for early withdrawal, and the conditions
 under which any such charge or penalty may be assessed.
 (d) OTHER INFORMATION- The schedule required under subsection (a) shall
 include such other disclosures as the Board may determine to be necessary
 to allow consumers to understand and compare accounts, including frequency
 of interest rate adjustments, account restrictions, and renewal policies
 for time accounts.
 (e) STYLE AND FORMAT- Schedules required under subsection (a) shall be
 written in clear and plain language and be presented in a format designed
 to give consumers the ability to readily understand the terms of the
 accounts offered.
SEC. 606. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ACCOUNTS.
 The Board shall by regulation prescribe such modifications in the disclosure
 requirements under this title relating to annual percentage yields as may
 be necessary to carry out the purposes of this title in the case of--
 (1) accounts with respect to which determination of annual percentage yield
 is based on an annual rate of interest that is guaranteed for a period of
 less than 1 year;
 (2) variable rate accounts;
 (3) accounts which, pursuant to law, do not guarantee payment of a stated
 rate; and
 (4) multiple rate accounts.
SEC. 607. DISTRIBUTION OF SCHEDULES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any schedule required under section 605 shall be--
 (1) mailed to holders of the account not more than 90 days after the
 effective date of the initial regulations prescribed by the Board under
 this Act;
 (2) made available to any person upon request; and
 (3) provided to any potential customer before an account is opened or a
 service is rendered.
 (b) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF CERTAIN INITIAL DEPOSITS- If--
 (1) a depositor is not physically present at an office of a depository
 institution at the time an initial deposit is accepted with respect to an
 account established by or for such person; and
 (2) the schedule required under section 605(a) has not been furnished
 previously to such depositor,
the depository institution shall mail the schedule to the depositor at the
address shown on the records of the depository institution for such account
not later than 10 days after the date of the initial deposit.
 (c) DISTRIBUTION OF NOTICE OF CERTAIN CHANGES- If--
 (1) any change is made in any term or condition which is required to be
 disclosed in the schedule required under section 605(a) with respect to
 any account; and
 (2) the change may reduce the yield or adversely affect any holder of the
 account, all account holders who may be affected by such change shall be
 notified and provided with a description of the change by mail at least
 30 days before the change takes effect.
 (3) This subsection does not apply to changes in annual percentage yields
 of variable rate accounts.
 (d) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED BY MORE THAN 1 INDIVIDUAL
 OR BY A GROUP- If an account is established by more than 1 individual or
 for a person other than an individual, any distribution described in this
 section with respect to such account meets the requirements of this section
 if the distribution is made to 1 of the individuals who established the
 account or 1 individual representative of the person on whose behalf such
 account was established.
SEC. 608. PAYMENT OF INTEREST.
 (a) DETERMINATION OF BALANCE ON WHICH INTEREST IS CALCULATED- Except as
 provided in subsection (b), interest shall be calculated on the principal
 balance in an interest-bearing account at a depository institution by
 using the average daily balance method, which is the sum of each day's
 closing balance divided by the number of days in the period.
 (b) SPECIAL RULE FOR CREDIT UNIONS- Subsection (a) shall not apply to an
 account at a depository institution described in section 19(b)(1)(A)(iv)
 of the Federal Reserve Act if the depository institution--
 (1) calculates the accrual of interest or dividends by a method other
 than the method described in subsection (a) with respect to all funds,
 including cash, deposited in such account; and
 (2) provides notice of interest payment policy in the manner required by
 section 605(e) of the Expedited Funds Availability Act.
 (c) CALCULATED ON FULL AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL- Interest on an interest-bearing
 account at any depository institution shall be calculated by such institution
 on the full amount of principal in the account for each day of the stated
 calculation period at the rate or rates of interest disclosed pursuant to
 this title.
 (d) NO PARTICULAR METHOD OF COMPOUNDING INTEREST REQUIRED- Subsection
 (c) shall not be construed as prohibiting or requiring the use of any
 particular method of compounding or crediting interest.
SEC. 609. REGULATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Board, after consultation with each agency referred to in section
 610(a) and after providing public notice and opportunity for comment,
 shall prescribe regulations to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
 title. The regulations may contain any classification, differentiation,
 or other provision, and may provide an exception for any class of accounts
 which, in the judgment of the Board, may be necessary or proper to carry
 out the purposes of this title, to prevent circumvention or evasion of
 the requirements of this title, or to facilitate compliance with the
 requirements of this title.
 (b) Model Forms and Clauses-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall publish model forms and clauses for common
 disclosures to facilitate compliance with this title. In devising such
 forms, the Board shall consider the use by depository institutions of data
 processing or similar automated machines.
 (2) USE OF FORMS AND CLAUSES DEEMED IN COMPLIANCE- Nothing in this title
 may be construed to require a depository institution to use any such
 model form or clause prescribed by the Board under this subsection. A
 depository institution shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
 disclosure provisions of this title if the depository institution--
 (A) uses any appropriate model form or clause published by the Board; or
 (B) uses any such model form or clause and changes it by--
 (i) deleting any information which is not required by this title; or
 (ii) rearranging the format,
if in making such deletion or rearranging the format, the depository
institution does not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence
of the disclosure.
 (3) PUBLIC NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR COMMENT- The Board shall adopt
 model disclosure forms and clauses after giving appropriate notice and
 opportunity for public comment in accordance with section 553 of title 5,
 United States Code.
SEC. 610. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Compliance with the requirements imposed under this title
 shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in the case of--
 (A) national banks, by the Comptroller of the Currency;
 (B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System (other than national banks),
 by the Board; and
 (C) depository institutions described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of
 section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (other than member banks
 of the Federal Reserve System) by the Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 (2) section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, section 407 of
 the National Housing Act, and sections 6(i) and 17 of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act, by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (acting directly or
 through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation) in the case
 of depository institutions described in clause (v) or (vi) of section
 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act;
 (3) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National Credit Union Administration
 Board in the case of Federal credit unions; and
 (4) the Federal Trade Commission Act, by the Federal Trade Commission in
 the case of State-chartered credit unions.
 (b) ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS-
 (1) VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE TREATED AS VIOLATION OF OTHER ACTS- For
 purposes of the exercise by any agency referred to in subsection (a)
 of such agency's powers under any Act referred to in such subsection,
 a violation of a requirement imposed under this title shall be deemed to
 be a violation of a requirement imposed under that Act.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY UNDER OTHER ACTS- In addition to the powers
 of any agency referred to in subsection (a) under any provision of law
 specifically referred to in such subsection, each agency may exercise,
 for purposes of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under
 this title, any other authority conferred on such agency by law.
 (c) REGULATIONS BY AGENCIES OTHER THAN THE BOARD- The authority of the
 Board to issue regulations under this title does not impair the authority
 of any other agency referred to in subsection (a) to make rules regarding
 its own procedures in enforcing compliance with the requirements imposed
 under this title.
SEC. 611. CIVIL LIABILITY.
 (a) CIVIL LIABILITY- Except as otherwise provided in this section, any
 depository institution which fails to comply with any requirement imposed
 under this title or any regulation prescribed under this title with respect
 to any person is liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of--
 (1) any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of the failure;
 (2)(A) in the case of an individual action, such additional amount as the
 court may allow, except that the liability under this subparagraph shall
 not be less than $100 nor greater than $1,000; or
 (B) in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow,
 except that--
 (i) as to each member of the class, no minimum recovery shall be applicable;
 and
 (ii) the total recovery under this subparagraph in any class action or
 series of class actions arising out of the same failure to comply by the
 same depository institution shall not be more than the lesser of $500,000
 or 1 percent of the net worth of the depository institution involved; and
 (3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under
 paragraph (1) or (2), the costs of the action, together with a reasonable
 attorney's fee as determined by the court.
 (b) CLASS ACTION AWARDS- In determining the total amount of an award in
 a class action, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors--
 (1) the amount of any actual damages awarded;
 (2) the frequency and persistence of failures of compliance;
 (3) the resources of the depository institution;
 (4) the number of persons adversely affected; and
 (5) the extent to which the failure of compliance was intentional.
 (c) BONA FIDE ERRORS-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- A depository institution may not be held liable in any
 action brought under this section for a violation of this title if the
 depository institution demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error,
 notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid
 any such error.
 (2) EXAMPLES- Examples of a bona fide error include clerical, calculation,
 computer malfunction and programming, and printing errors. An error of
 legal judgment with respect to a depository institution's obligation under
 this title is not a bona fide error.
 (d) JURISDICTION- Any action under this section may be brought in any United
 States district court, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction,
 within one year after the date of the occurrence of the violation involved.
 (e) RELIANCE ON BOARD RULINGS- No provision of this section imposing any
 liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity
 with any rule, regulation, or interpretation thereof by the Board, or in
 conformity with any interpretation or approval by an official or employee
 of the Federal Reserve System duly authorized by the Board to issue such
 interpretation or approval under procedures prescribed by the Board,
 notwithstanding, the fact that after such act or omission has occurred,
 such rule, regulation, interpretation, or approval is amended, rescinded,
 or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
 (f) NOTIFICATION OF AND ADJUSTMENT FOR ERRORS- A depository institution
 shall not be liable under this section or section 610 for any failure to
 comply with any requirement imposed under this title with respect to any
 account if--
 (1) before--
 (A) the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the
 depository institution discovered the failure to comply;
 (B) any action is instituted against the depository institution by the
 account holder under this section with respect to such failure to comply; and
 (C) any written notice of such failure to comply is received by the
 depository institution from the account holder,
the depository institution notifies the account holder of the failure of
such institution to comply with such requirement; and
 (2) the depository institution makes such adjustments as may be necessary
 with respect to such account to ensure that--
 (A) the account holder will not be liable for any amount in excess of the
 amount actually disclosed with respect to any fee or charge;
 (B) the account holder will not be liable for any fee or charge imposed
 under any condition not actually disclosed; and
 (C) interest on amounts in such account will accrue at the annual percentage
 yield, and under the conditions, actually disclosed (and credit will be
 provided for interest already accrued at a different annual percentage
 yield and under different conditions than the yield or conditions disclosed).
 (g) MULTIPLE INTERESTS IN 1 ACCOUNT- If more than 1 person holds an interest
 in any account--
 (1) the minimum and maximum amounts of liability under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 for any failure to comply with the requirements of this title shall apply
 with respect to such account; and
 (2) the court shall determine the manner in which the amount of any such
 liability with respect to such account shall be distributed among such
 persons.
 (h) CONTINUING FAILURE TO DISCLOSE-
 (1) CERTAIN CONTINUING FAILURES TREATED AS 1 VIOLATION- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), the continuing failure of any depository institution to
 disclose any particular term required to be disclosed under this title with
 respect to a particular account shall be treated as a single violation for
 purposes of determining the amount of any liability of such institution
 under subsection (a) for such failure to disclose.
 (2) SUBSEQUENT FAILURE TO DISCLOSE- The continuing failure of any depository
 institution to disclose any particular term required to be disclosed
 under this title with respect to a particular account after judgment has
 been rendered in favor of the account holder in connection with a prior
 failure to disclose such term shall be treated as a subsequent violation
 for purposes of determining liability under subsection (a).
 (3) COORDINATION WITH SECTION 610- This subsection shall not limit or
 otherwise affect the enforcement power under section 610 of any agency
 referred to in subsection (a) of such section.
SEC. 612. CREDIT UNIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No regulation prescribed by the Board under this title
 shall apply directly with respect to any depository institution described
 in clause (iv) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (b) REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED BY THE NCUA- Within 90 days of the effective
 date of any regulation prescribed by the Board under this title, the
 National Credit Union Administration Board shall prescribe a regulation
 substantially similar to the regulation prescribed by the Board taking
 into account the unique nature of credit unions and the limitations under
 which they may pay dividends on member accounts.
SEC. 613. REVIEW OF DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN-END MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT
COMPANIES.
 The Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 66. REVIEW OF DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR YIELDS AND TERMS.
 `Not later than January 1, 1989, and annually thereafter, the Commission
 shall consult with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 (and any other agency it deems appropriate) to review the regulations
 prescribed under this title and the Securities Act of 1933 and the
 regulations prescribed under the Truth in Savings and Investments Act to
 determine whether such regulations are providing consumers the ability to
 effectively compare savings and investments options. If at any time as a
 result of such review, the Commission finds its regulations are not providing
 consumers the ability to effectively compare savings and investments options,
 it shall modify its regulations to insure that consumers have such ability.'.
SEC. 614. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The provisions of this title shall supersede any provisions
 of the law of any State relating to the disclosure of yields payable or
 terms for accounts to the extent such State law requires the disclosure
 of such yields or terms for accounts. The Board is authorized to determine
 whether such inconsistencies exist.
 (b) BALANCE ON WHICH INTEREST IS CALCULATED- The provisions of this
 title shall supersede any provisions of any State law relating to the
 determination of the balance on which interest is calculated to the extent
 such State law specifies the manner for determining the balance on which
 interest is calculated.
TITLE VII--INSURANCE ACTIVITIES
SEC. 701. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Bank Holding Company and National Bank
 Improvements Act of 1989'.
SEC. 702. AMENDMENTS TO THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1956 RELATING TO
INSURANCE ACTIVITIES.
 (a) DEFINITION- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1841) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(p) INSURANCE ACTIVITIES- For the purposes of this Act, the term `insurance
 activities' means providing insurance as principal, agent, or broker.
 (b) INSURANCE ACTIVITIES- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1843) is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end thereof the following subsection:
 `(j) Insurance Activities-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or
 section 3 of this Act (but subject to paragraphs (2) and (3)), a bank
 holding company or any bank or nonbank subsidiary or affiliate thereof
 shall not engage in insurance activities in the United States, except
 that a bank holding company or any bank or nonbank subsidiary or affiliate
 thereof may provide insurance--
 `(A) pursuant to subsection (c)(8) of this section;
 `(B) through a State bank or subsidiary thereof to the extent permissible
 under clause (i), (ii), (iii), (v), or (vi) of subsection (c)(8)(C) and
 under State law;
 `(C) if--
 `(i) the insurance is provided by a State bank subsidiary of a bank holding
 company, or by a subsidiary of that State bank;
 `(ii) that bank or subsidiary thereof is located in the one State where
 the operations of that bank holding company's banking subsidiaries are
 principally conducted for purposes of section 3(d) of this Act;
 `(iii) the insurance activities engaged in by the bank or subsidiary
 thereof are authorized by State law; and
 `(iv) the insurance is provided only to residents of that State, natural
 persons employed in that State, or natural persons otherwise present in
 that State; or
 `(D) pursuant to section 5136 or 5136B of the Revised Statutes.
 `(2) EXCLUSIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to insurance activities
 of any company or institution pursuant to section 3(f) or the proviso to
 subsection (a)(2) of this section.
 `(3) AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE CERTAIN ACTIVITIES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this section, a bank holding company may continue to--
 `(A) engage in any insurance activity through a State bank or subsidiary
 thereof if--
 `(i) the bank was acquired after December 31, 1984, and before March 2,
 1988, pursuant to Board approval under section 3(d) of this Act;
 `(ii) the bank provides insurance only to residents of that State, natural
 persons employed in that State, or natural persons otherwise present in
 that State; and
 `(iii) such insurance insures against the same types of risks as insurance
 provided by the bank or subsidiary as of the day before its acquisition by
 the out-of-state bank holding company or as of March 2, 1988, or against
 functionally equivalent risks;
 `(B) provide title insurance coverage through a State bank or subsidiary
 thereof if the bank was required to be empowered to provide title insurance
 as a condition of its initial chartering under State law;
 `(C) continue to engage in any insurance activity lawfully engaged in prior
 to the date of enactment of this subsection, in the State of Indiana and
 in any State contiguous thereto, if the bank holding company or subsidiary
 thereof is located in the State of Indiana and was acquired on June 30,
 1986, pursuant to Board approval under section 3(d) of this Act issued on
 May 28, 1986;
 `(D) engage in any insurance activity through a State bank or subsidiary
 thereof if--
 `(i) the bank is described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A); and
 `(ii) the insurance activity of the State bank or subsidiary thereof is
 limited (I) to life, accident, and health insurance activities for which
 it has been licensed prior to March 2, 1988, pursuant to State law enacted
 after July 20, 1987, and in effect prior to September 28, 1987, and (II)
 to the State in which it has been licensed; or
 `(E) provide through a State bank, or subsidiary thereof, pursuant to
 authorization by the appropriate State banking regulator prior to March 2,
 1988, financial guaranty insurance. For purposes of this subparagraph,
 the term `financial guaranty insurance' means insurance against the risk
 of default on State and local government debt obligations, corporate
 debt and other monetary obligations, pass-through securities (other than
 those secured by mortgages on real property which are insurable by a
 mortgage guaranty insurer), and installment purchase agreements executed
 as a condition of sale, but such term does not include life, property,
 or casualty insurance. This subparagraph does not preclude any interested
 party from challenging the legality of these described activities under
 section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as in effect on
 March 2, 1988.
 `(4) Definitions-
 `(A) INSURANCE- For purposes of this subsection and subsections (c)(8)
 and (c)(15)(J)(iv) of this section, the term `insurance' means--
 `(i) traditional insurance products and services;
 `(ii) variable annuity contracts; and
 `(iii) variable life insurance contracts.
 `(B) RESIDENT- For purposes of this subsection, the term `residents of
 that State' includes natural persons who are residents of the State and--
 `(i) companies incorporated in, or organized under the laws of, the State,
 `(ii) companies licensed to do business in the State, and
 `(iii) companies having an office in the State.'; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(8)(C)(iv), by inserting immediately before the
 semicolon at the end the following: `, except that--
 `(I) the authorization to provide insurance pursuant to this clause shall
 terminate if control of the company providing the insurance is acquired
 by a bank holding company--
 `(a) on or after October 15, 1982, in a transaction requiring Board approval
 under section 3(d) if the bank holding company did not obtain board approval
 to engage in such insurance activities under this section prior to March 2,
 1988; or
 `(b) on or after March 2, 1988;
unless such acquiring company is a successor or is and continues to be a
bank holding company with total assets of $50,000,000 or less; and
 `(II) no company that is an affiliate of a company providing insurance
 pursuant to this clause shall provide insurance pursuant to this clause
 on or after March 2, 1988, unless such affiliated company itself meets
 the requirements of this clause.'.
SEC. 703. AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL BANK ACT.
 (a) Section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a) IN GENERAL- ' immediately before `Upon duly making
 and filing'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(b) Limitation on Insurance Powers-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a national bank,
 or subsidiary (as defined in section 2(d) of the Bank Holding Company Act
 of 1956) of a national bank, may not engage in insurance activities in
 the United States except to the extent that the insurance is limited to
 assuring the repayment of the outstanding balance due on any specific
 extension of credit by the national bank in the event of the death,
 disability, or involuntary unemployment of the debtor and except to the
 extent provided in section 5136B of this title.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) does not prohibit (A) any company engaged in
 municipal bond guarantee insurance activities pursuant to authorization by
 the Comptroller of the Currency on or before May 2, 1985, from continuing
 to engage in such activities, or (B) any company lawfully engaged in
 title insurance activities as of March 2, 1988, from continuing to engage
 in such activities, if such activities are limited to the State in which
 the bank is located, and if the bank is not acquired after March 2, 1988,
 by a bank holding company the principal banking operations of which are
 conducted in another State.
 `(3) INSURANCE DEFINITION- The term `insurance' has the meaning given to
 that term in section 4(j)(4) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.
 `(4) INSURANCE ACTIVITIES DEFINED- The term `insurance activities' means
 providing insurance as principal, agent, or broker.'.
 (b) Chapter 1 of title LXII of the Revised Statutes is amended by inserting
 after section 5136A the following new section:
`SEC. 5136B. LIMITED INSURANCE POWERS FOR NATIONAL BANKS LOCATED IN RURAL
AREAS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In addition to the powers vested by law in national
 banking associations, any such association located in a place that has a
 population not exceeding 5,000 (as shown by the preceding decennial census)
 may sell insurance as defined in section 5136(b)(3) so long as such insurance
 activities are confined to that place, and the insurance is sold only to
 residents of the State in which the association is located or to natural
 persons employed in that State. For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `residents of that State' includes natural persons who are residents of the
 State and (1) companies incorporated in, or organized under the laws of,
 the State, (2) companies licensed to do business in the State, and (3)
 companies having an office in the State.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS- No national banking association described in
 subsection (a) may--
 `(1) assume or guarantee the payment of any premium on insurance policies
 issued through the agency of the association by the insurance company for
 which such association is acting as agent pursuant to subsection (a); and
 `(2) guarantee the truth of any statement made by an assured in filing
 such person's application for insurance.'.
 (c) EFFECT ON CERTAIN COMPANIES- This section shall not affect the
 ability of--
 (1) a national bank or a subsidiary thereof, located in Oregon or Washington,
 to continue to engage in insurance activities lawfully engaged in as of
 March 2, 1988, within the State in which the main office of such national
 bank is located; or
 (2) a national bank chartered in 1882 (or a subsidiary thereof) to continue
 to engage in insurance activities in which it was lawfully engaged as of
 March 2, 1988, within 30 miles of such bank's main office if such main
 office is not within 30 miles of any city that had a population exceeding
 150,000 under the 1980 census.
SEC. 704. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The provisions of this title shall take effect on March 5, 1987.
TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS
SEC. 801. STUDY OF HOSTILE ACQUISITIONS OF UNITED STATES BANKS.
 (a) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this section to require the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System (hereinafter referred to as the
 `Board') to make a study of the effects that hostile acquisitions in the
 banking industry could have on the safety and soundness of banking in the
 United States.
 (b) STUDY- The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, in
 consultation with the Attorney General, the Comptroller General of the United
 States, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, shall prepare a study
 of the effects that hostile acquisitions in the banking industry could have
 on the United States banking and financial markets. The study shall pay
 particular attention to the potential adverse effects on safety, soundness,
 and stability of banks and the banking industry of hostile acquisitions
 of United States banking institutions and shall address the following issues:
 (1) the effects that hostile acquisitions could have on consolidation
 within the banking industry, taking into consideration the continuing
 removal of barriers to interstate banking;
 (2) the effects that hostile acquisitions could have on concentration
 of economic resources generally, and the specific markets for banking
 and financial services, including securities markets in which banks are
 eligible to participate;
 (3) the effects that hostile acquisitions could have on instability,
 uncertainty and confidence in banking, and on consumer and small business
 services;
 (4) whether specific regulations are needed to process acquisition
 applications that proceed on a hostile basis rather than a consensual
 basis in order to ensure--
 (A) the adequacy and quality of capital, particularly with respect to
 equity capital, and the adverse consequences of the use of debt in hostile
 acquisitions;
 (B) the quality of assets in the surviving institution due to the disposition
 of assets to meet regulatory capital requirements;
 (C) the strength of the surviving institution against unforeseen weaknesses
 that could have been discovered had adequate due diligence been conducted
 as is done in a consensual acquisition;
 (D) the strength of the target, acquiring, or surviving institutions
 to withstand the adverse consequences of the use of special defensive
 and protective steps taken to prevent a hostile acquisition from being
 consummated;
 (5) whether special regulations are needed, once a contested application
 has been approved, to ensure that the conditions set forth in the approval
 order are met, and that the consolidation of the two institutions can proceed
 without undue disruption to either the target or acquiring institution;
 (6) whether foreign banks or other potential acquirers of banking resources
 in the United States should be permitted to make hostile acquisitions of
 United States banking institutions;
 (7) whether the stock market decline and related problems of October 1987
 impair the ability of banking institutions to raise capital to conduct or
 resist hostile acquisitions; and
 (8) any other issues which the Board deems necessary and appropriate.
 (c) HEARINGS- The Board and the other governmental agencies involved in
 the study shall hold public hearings on hostile acquisitions of banking
 institutions and solicit opinions and testimony as they deem necessary.
 (d) REPORT- Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Board shall transmit a report containing the results of the study, along
 with its recommendations for legislation, to the Committee on Banking,
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Banking,
 Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives.
SEC. 802. LIMITATIONS ON GRANDFATHERED NONBANK BANKS OWNED BY BANK HOLDING
COMPANIES.
 Section 4(g)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1843(g)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `or' at the end of subparagraph (A);
 (2) by striking out the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting
 in lieu thereof `; or'; and
 (3) by inserting at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) accept demand deposits or deposits that the depositor may withdraw
 by check or similar means for payment to third parties or others, or make
 commercial loans, unless authorized to do so by the Board as of August
 10, 1987.'.
SEC. 803. JOINT MARKETING RESTRICTIONS.
 (a) BANK HOLDING COMPANIES- Section 4(f)(3)(B)(ii) of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(f)(3)(B)(ii)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or subsection (c)(15)' after `subsection (c)(8)' the
 first place it appears; and
 (2) by striking `by or through an affiliate (other than an affiliate that
 engages only in activities permissible for bank holding companies under
 subsection (c)(8)' and inserting `in connection with products or services
 of an affiliate that are not permissible for a bank holding company to
 provide under subsection (c)(8) or subsection (c)(15)'.
 (b) SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES- Section 408(p)(2)(A) of the National
 Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a(p)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or section 4(c)(15)' after `section 4(c)(8)' the first
 place it appears; and
 (2) by striking `by or through an affiliate (other than an affiliate that
 engages only in activities permissible for bank holding companies under
 section 4(c)' and inserting `in connection with products or services of an
 affiliate that are not permissible for a bank holding company to provide
 under section 4(c)(8) or section 4(c)(15)'.
SEC. 804. INDUSTRIAL BANKS.
 (a) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- Section 2(c)(2)(H)(i)(I) of the Bank Holding Company
 Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(c)(2)(H)(i)(I)) is amended by inserting `or
 deposits' after `demand deposits'.
 (b) ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED AS OF MARCH 5, 1987- Section 2(c)(2)(H)(ii)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(c)(2)(H)(ii))
 is amended by inserting after `was not lawfully engaged' the words `,
 or authorized to engage,'.
SEC. 805. STATUS OF CERTAIN REGISTERED INVESTMENT COMPANY.
 A corporation, incorporated on March 29, 1985, under the laws of the State
 of Maryland, and duly registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940
 on February 21, 1986, all of the present shareholders of which are savings
 banks, shall be deemed to have been registered under such Act on the date
 of its incorporation.
SEC. 806. AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL POWER ACT.
 Section 305(b) of the Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 825d(b)) is amended by
 adding the following at the end of the subsection:
 `Any person now holding or proposing to hold the position of officer
 or director of a public utility and officer or director of a bank, trust
 company, or banking association is authorized to hold such positions without
 authorization of the Commission, as long as such bank, trust company, or
 banking association does not underwrite or participate in the marketing
 of securities (including commercial paper) of the public utility for which
 the person serves or proposes to serve as an officer or director.'.
SEC. 807. EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY.
 (a) REASONABLE EXCEPTIONS- Section 604 of the Expedited Funds Availability
 Act (12 U.S.C. 4003) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by inserting `subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (F)
 of subsection (a)(2) or' after `limitation established under'; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by inserting `(a)(2),' after `subsections'.
 (b) DISCLOSURE- Section 604(f) of such Act is amended by adding the
 following:
 `(4) NOTICE WITH RESPECT TO CASHIER'S, CERTIFIED, AND SIMILAR CHECKS- A
 depository institution issuing a check described in section 603(a)(2)(F)
 in excess of $5,000 shall notify the person to whom it issued that funds
 may be made available later than the time specified in section 603(a).'.
SEC. 808. PAYROLL TAX FILING SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.
 Section 2(c)(2)(D) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1841(c)(2)(D)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by inserting after `in trust funds' the following:
 `or in Treasury tax and loan accounts maintained by a payroll tax filing
 service organization,';
 (2) in clause (iii), by inserting after `third parties or others' the
 following: `, except for deposits of funds by a payroll tax filing service
 organization in Treasury tax and loan accounts or in trust pending payment
 of such funds for Federal, State, or local tax obligations,'; and
 (3) in clause (iv)(I), by inserting before the semicolon the following:
 `except in connection with the transfer by a payroll tax filing service
 organization of funds held in trust pending payment of such funds for
 Federal, State, or local tax obligations'.
SEC. 809. EFFECTUATING THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL TREATMENT FOR BANKS.
 The International Banking Act of 1978 is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following:
`NATIONAL TREATMENT
 `SEC. 15. (a) GENERAL RULE- If the President or his designee has made a
 written determination that a foreign country is described in subsection
 (b) of this section, has transmitted the determination to a Federal banking
 agency, and has not revoked the determination, the Federal banking agency
 may, notwithstanding any other provision of law, deny any application by
 an entity described in subsection (c) that requires the approval of that
 agency, or disapprove any notice by such an entity that is subject to
 disapproval by that agency, if--
 `(1) that entity is chartered or incorporated or has its principal place
 of business in that foreign country; or
 `(2) any person that directly or indirectly controls that entity resides,
 is chartered or incorporated, or has its principal place of business in
 that foreign country.
 `(b) DENIAL OF NATIONAL TREATMENT- A country is described in this subsection
 for purposes of this section if that country does not accord to United
 States banks and bank holding companies the same competitive opportunities
 as it accords to domestic banks and bank holding companies.
 `(c) CERTAIN FOREIGN ENTITIES DESCRIBED- The following entities are
 described in this subsection for purposes of this paragraph:
 `(1) a foreign bank; and
 `(2) any other company subject to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 under section 8(a) of this Act.'.
SEC. 810. EFFECTUATING THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL TREATMENT FOR BROKERS
AND DEALERS.
 Section 15(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o(b))
 is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(11)(A) The following provisions shall apply if the President or his
 designee has published a written determination that a foreign country
 is described in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph and has not revoked
 that determination:
 `(i) No person of that foreign country, acting directly or indirectly,
 shall acquire control of any registered broker or dealer unless--
 `(I) the Commission has been given notice 45 days in advance of that proposed
 acquisition, in such form as the Commission shall prescribe by rule; and
 `(II) the Commission has not prohibited that acquisition.
 `(ii) The Commission may, by order, extend the notice period with respect
 to any particular acquisition for no more than 60 days.
 `(iii) The Commission, consistent with the protection of investors and
 the maintenance of fair and orderly markets, may--
 `(I) deny any application for registration under this subsection filed by
 a person of that foreign country; and
 `(II) prohibit, by order, any person of that foreign country from
 acquiring control of a registered broker or dealer, irrespective of when
 the acquisition was initiated.
 `(B) A country is described in this subparagraph for purposes of this
 paragraph if that country does not accord to United States brokers and
 dealers the same competitive opportunities as it accords to domestic
 brokers and dealers.
 `(C) A person is a `person of a foreign country' for purposes of this
 paragraph if that person, or another person that directly or indirectly
 controls that person, is a resident of a foreign country, is organized
 under the laws of that country, or has its principal place of business in
 that country.'.
SEC. 811. STUDY OF MERGER OF COMMERCE AND BANKING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board of Governors shall conduct a study of the need, if
 any, to continue the separation of full-service banking and commerce in the
 United States. In carrying out such study, the Board shall consult with all
 appropriate departments and agencies of the United States and representatives
 of all segments of the financial services and other industries.
 (b) PARTICULAR AREAS OF STUDY- In carrying out the study under this section,
 the Board shall in particular examine--
 (1) the economic, regulatory, and consumer issues involved in continuing
 or eliminating the separation of banking and commerce;
 (2) the competitive issues involved in eliminating the separation of banking
 and commerce, including the adequacy of antitrust and other laws relating
 to the maintenance of other competition; and
 (3) organizational issues, particularly with respect to the appropriate
 types and structures of organizations that may engage in full-service
 banking, financial services, and commercial activities.
 (c) REPORT REQUIRED- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall
 transmit the report required by this section to the Congress.
SEC. 812. INCREASED PENALTIES UNDER THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT.
 (a) Section 8(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 is amended by
 striking `$1,000' and inserting `$50,000', by striking `$10,000' and
 inserting `$100,000', and by striking `one year' and inserting `three years'.
 Section 8(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1847(b)(1)) is amended by striking `$1,000' and inserting `$5,000'.
SEC. 813. FINANCIAL CONSUMERS ASSOCIATIONS.
 (a) NATIONAL BANKS- Whenever a State has by statute established a consumer
 membership organization subject to a statutory charter mandate to inform and
 represent consumers in the financial service area and subject to statutorily
 prescribed democratic rules of governance and such State has also required
 State chartered insured banks, as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act, to include in their deposit account statement mailings to
 consumers a statutorily prescribed insert concerning the consumer membership
 organization, national banks shall comply with the insert requirements.
 (b) SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS- Section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464) is amended by adding the following new subsection:
 `(t) FINANCIAL CONSUMERS ASSOCIATIONS- Whenever a State has by statute
 established a consumer membership organization subject to a statutory
 charter mandate to inform and represent consumers in the financial service
 area and subject to statutorily prescribed democratic rules of governance
 and such State has also required State chartered insured institutions as
 defined in section 401 of the National Housing Act to include in their
 deposit account statement mailings to consumers a statutorily prescribed
 insert concerning the consumer membership organization, associations,
 as defined in subsection (d), shall comply with the insert requirement.'.
 (c) CREDIT UNIONS- Title I of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751
 et seq.) is amended by adding the following new section:
`FINANCIAL CONSUMERS ASSOCIATIONS
 `SEC. 130. Whenever a State has by statute established a consumer
 membership organization subject to a statutory charter mandate to inform
 and represent consumers in the financial service area and subject to
 statutorily prescribed democratic rules of governance and such State has
 also required State chartered insured credit unions as defined in section
 101(7) of this Act to include in their deposit account statement mailings
 to consumers a statutorily prescribed insert concerning the consumer
 membership organization, Federal credit unions shall comply with the
 insert requirement.'.