HR 3813 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3813
To promote greater predictability in professional liability actions by
establishing certain standards for liability and providing for other reforms.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
November 21, 1989
Mr. RITTER introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To promote greater predictability in professional liability actions by
establishing certain standards for liability and providing for other reforms.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as `Professionals' Liability Reform Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this Act is to establish uniform standards of liability
 for professionals who provide professional service--
 (1) to promote greater uniformity and predictability with respect to
 liability arising out of such services;
 (2) to facilitate the provision of such services through interstate commerce;
 (3) to foster innovation by reducing the uncertainty of risk to professionals
 who provide professional services; and
 (4) to encourage the States to support alternative methods for resolving
 professional liability disputes in order to reduce the costs of such
 disputes to professionals and their clients.
SEC. 3. SCOPE AND PREEMPTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) This Act governs any professional liability action
 brought in any Federal or State court against a professional.
 (2) This Act shall preempt and supersede any State law to the extent that
 such law is inconsistent with this Act. This Act shall not preempt or
 supersede any State law that provides to professionals limitations of
 liability or defenses which are additional to limitations or defenses
 contained in this Act.
 (b) HARM REQUIRED- A claimant is not entitled to recover damages in a
 professional liability action except for damages which constitute harm as
 defined in section 6(4).
 (c) CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed--
 (1) to waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any law;
 (2) to waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States;
 (3) to affect the applicability of the Foreign Services Immunities Act of
 1976 (28 U.S.C. 1602 et seq.);
 (4) to preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought
 by a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; or
 (5) to affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the
 law of a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of
 a citizen of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
 (d) ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES, STANDARDS, AND SYSTEMS- Nothing in this Act
 shall prohibit States from developing or implementing alternative procedures,
 standards, or systems, which are not inconsistent with this Act, for--
 (1) expediting the adjudication of professional liability claims,
 (2) resolving professional liability disputes, and
 (3) compensating harm caused by professional services.
 (e) LIMITATION OF ACTIONS- No professional liability action shall be
 maintained unless commenced within 3 years after the claimant discovered,
 or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have discovered, that
 such claimant had suffered harm from professional services.
SEC. 4. DESCRIPTION OF PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY STANDARDS.
 (a) LIABILITY IN GENERAL- A professional shall not be liable for damages
 in any professional liability action unless the claimant establishes in
 addition to any other necessary elements of proof required by law--
 (1) except as provided in subparagraph (B), that such professional
 negligently rendered professional services and such negligence was the
 proximate cause of harm to the claimant; or
 (2) in the case of a claim for economic injury, that such professional
 negligently rendered professional services to or for the direct and
 intended benefit of the claimant, and such services were the proximate
 cause of the harm to the claimant.
 (b) EXISTENCE OF CERTAIN SCIENTIFIC, MEDICAL, LEGAL, OR TECHNICAL
 INFORMATION- A professional shall not be liable in a professional
 liability action for harm caused by professional services rendered by such
 professional unless the claimant establishes that, at the time such services
 were rendered, knowledge of the circumstances that caused the harm and a
 practical means to eliminate such circumstances were reasonably available
 in light of scientific, medical, legal, or technical information existing
 at the time the professional services were rendered.
 (c) ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY- (1) A professional shall not be
 liable in a professional liability action in which--
 (A) the professional's services were rendered to an agency of the Federal
 Government or of any State;
 (B) the Federal Government or the State established or approved reasonably
 precise contract specifications material to the claim made against the
 professional; and
 (C) the services rendered by the professional conformed to such
 specifications in all respects material to the claim.
 (2) A determination by an agency of the Federal Government or the State that
 the services rendered by the professional are in compliance with contract
 specifications shall serve as conclusive evidence of such conformity.
 (d) PERIODIC PAYMENTS- (1) In any professional liability action in which
 the award of future damages exceed $100,000, no person may be required to
 pay for future loss in a single payment, but such person shall be permitted
 to make such payments periodically based on a projection of when damages
 are likely to occur.
 (2) The court may require such person to purchase an annuity making such
 periodic payments, if the court finds a reasonable basis for concluding
 that the person may not make the periodic payments.
 (3) The judgment of the court awarding such periodic payments may not be
 reopened at any time to contest, amend, or modify the schedule or amount
 of the payments in the absence of fraud.
 (4) This subsection shall not be construed to preclude a settlement
 providing for a single payment.
 (f) COLLATERAL SOURCE BENEFITS- (1) Any award of damages to a claimant
 in a professional liability action shall be reduced by any other past or
 future payment or benefit covered by this subsection which the person has
 received or for which the person is eligible on account of the harm for
 which damages are awarded.
 (2) As used in this subsection, the term `payment or benefit covered by
 this subsection' means--
 (A) any payment or benefit by or paid, in whole or in part, by any agency
 or instrumentality of the United States, a State, or local government; and
 (B) any payment or benefit by a worker's compensation system, a health
 insurance program, or income replacement program.
 (3) This subsection shall not preempt or supersede any State law which
 provides that damage awards may be reduced by payments or benefits other
 than those covered by this section.
 (4) This subsection shall not apply to any payments or benefits received
 before judgment if the application of this subsection would reduce the
 amount of income that would otherwise be considered under section 402(a)(17)
 of the Social Security Act.
 (5) The amount by which an award of damages to an individual for an
 injury shall be reduced under paragraph (1) shall be an amount equal to
 the difference between--
 (A) the total amount of the payments (other than such award) which have
 been made or which will be made to such individual to compensate such
 individual for such injury, minus
 (B) the amount paid by such individual (or by the spouse or parent of such
 individual) to secure the payments described in subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (2).
 (g) LIMITATION ON ATTORNEYS' FEES- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 in any professional liability action in which claimant receives settlement
 proceeds or an award of damages, the amount of payments to such individual's
 attorney shall not exceed--
 (A) 33 1/3 percent of the first $250,000 recovered,
 (B) 25 percent of the next $250,000 recovered, and
 (C) 20 percent of any amount recovered in excess of $500,000.
 (2) In any civil action to which paragraph (1) applies, the court may,
 after receiving a petition from the attorney representing the individual
 who receives settlement proceeds or an award of damages, permit such
 attorney to be paid an amount of fees in excess of the amount specified
 by such paragraph if the court determines that the petition has adduced
 evidence justifying such additional fees.
 (h) LIABILITY OF CODEFENDANTS- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), in
 a professional liability action, the trier of fact shall determine, with
 respect to each person responsible for the harm, the percentage of that
 person's responsibility for the harm for which the action was brought. If
 damages are awarded to the claimant in such action, a professional shall
 be liable, if otherwise liable to the claimant for damages, only for the
 percentage of the damages which equals the percentage of that professional's
 responsibility for the harm for which the action was brought.
 (2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to persons engaged in
 concerted action which proximately caused the harm complained of by the
 claimant. For purposes of this subsection, the term `concerted action' means
 the participation in joint conduct by 2 or more persons who consciously
 and deliberately agreed to jointly participate in such conduct with actual
 knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct.
 (i) PUNITIVE DAMAGES- (1) Punitive damages may, if otherwise permitted by
 applicable law, be awarded to any claimant who establishes, by clear and
 convincing evidence, that the harm suffered was the result of conduct--
 (A) manifesting a professional's malicious and reckless disregard of those
 persons who might be harmed as a result of the performance of professional
 service; and
 (B) constituting an extreme departure from accepted standard of conduct.
 (2) A failure to exercise reasonable care in choosing among alternative
 types of services, designs, formulations, instructions, or warnings does
 not, in and of itself, constitute the conduct described in paragraph (1).
 (3) Punitive damages may not be awarded in the absence of a compensatory
 award.
 (4) Punitive damages may not be awarded for the negligent provision of
 professional services.
 (5) In determining whether punitive damages are to be awarded, the trier
 of fact shall consider--
 (A) the likelihood at the relevant time that serious harm would arise from
 the professional's conduct described in paragraph (1),
 (B) the degree of the professional's awareness of that likelihood,
 (C) the duration of the conduct and any concealment of it by the
 professional,
 (D) the attitude and action of the professional upon discovery of the
 conduct and whether the conduct has been terminated, and
 (E) whether the harm suffered by the claimant was also the result of
 the claimant's--
 (i) disregard for personal safety;
 (ii) failure to provide the professional with all material information or
 other matters relevant to the rendering of professional services; or
 (iii) disregard for the consequences of any action taken by the claimant
 in reliance on professional services.
 (6) At the request of the professional, the trier of fact shall consider in a
 separate proceeding whether punitive damages are to be awarded. If a separate
 proceeding is requested, evidence relevant only to the claim of punitive
 damages, as determined by applicable State law, shall be inadmissible in
 any proceeding to determine whether compensatory damages are to be awarded.
 (7) If the trier of fact determines that a professional has engaged in
 conduct described under paragraph (1), the court may award punitive
 damages. In determining the amount of such damages, the court shall
 consider--
 (A) the factors described in paragraph (4),
 (B) the profitability to the professional of the conduct for which punitive
 damages are to be awarded,
 (C) the total effect of other punishment imposed or likely to be imposed upon
 the professional as a result of the conduct, including punitive damage awards
 to persons similarly situated to the claimant and the severity of civil
 or criminal penalties to which the professional has been or may be subjected.
 (8)(A) A claimant's actual recovery of punitive damages awarded under
 paragraph (5) may not exceed 3 times the amount of compensatory damages
 awarded to such claimant.
 (B) Any punitive damages awarded by the court in excess of the amount
 referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be paid to--
 (i) the State in which the case is litigated, if the case is litigated in
 State court; or
 (ii) to the Federal Government, if the case is litigated in Federal court.
 (C) Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), the court may award attorneys' fees
 from such damages to the claimant's attorney as compensation for work
 attributable to obtaining an award of such damages.
 (j) COUNSEL'S LIABILITY FOR FRIVOLOUS SUITS- If the court finds in any
 professional liability action that such action was commenced--
 (1) without a good faith belief by the attorney representing the claimant
 that there was a reasonable basis in law and in fact for recovery of the
 relief requested, or
 (2) by such attorney merely for purposes of achieving a monetary settlement
 where there was no reasonable prospect for an award of damages,
the attorney shall be liable for costs, fees, and expenses, including attorney
fees, reasonably incurred by the defendant.
SEC. 5. FORMATION OF RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State should encourage professional organizations,
 whose membership includes professionals who practice within the State, to put
 into effect risk management programs including peer review of professional
 office policies and practices, organization, and quality of performance.
 (b) RECORDS INADMISSIBLE AS EVIDENCE- Records of the implementation of
 and conclusions reached by such risk management programs, including peer
 review of professional office policies and practices, organization, and
 quality of performance, shall not be admissible in evidence against any
 professional who is the subject of such records.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act the following terms have the following meanings:
 (1) The term `professional' means--
 (A) any person engaged in work (i) predominantly intellectual and varied
 in character as opposed to routine mental, manual, mechanical, or physical
 work; (ii) involving the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment
 in its performance; (iii) of such a character that the output produced
 or the result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given
 period of time; and (iv) requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a
 field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course
 of specialized intellectual instruction and study in an institution of
 higher learning or a hospital, as distinguished from a general academic
 education or from an apprenticeship or from training in the performance
 of routine mental, manual, or physical processes; or
 (B) any person, who (i) has completed the courses of specialized intellectual
 instruction and study describe in clause (iv) of subparagraph (A), and (ii)
 is performing related work under the supervision of a professional to qualify
 himself or herself to become a professional as defined in subparagraph (A).
 (2) The term `State' means each of the several States, the District of
 Columbia, the Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
 the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of
 the United States.
 (3) The term `claimant' means any person--
 (A) who has suffered harm from the provision of professional services and
 who brings a professional liability action, or
 (B) who brings such an action on behalf of any person who has suffered
 harm from the provision of professional services or who brings such an
 action because a person suffered harm from such services.
 (4) The term `harm' means--
 (A) illness, bodily injury, or the death of the claimant,
 (B) mental anguish of, or emotional harm to, the claimant caused by the
 claimant's illness or bodily injury,
 (C) physical damage to property, or
 (D) economic injury.
 (5) The term `professional liability action' means a civil action brought
 against a professional for personal injury, property damage, or harm
 suffered by the claimant because of the provision of professional services.