HR 8 SC2
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 8
To provide for an equitable and universal national health plan administered
by the States, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 3, 1991
Ms. OAKAR (for herself, Mr. STOKES, Mr. RAHALL, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia,
Mr. ANNUNZIO, Mr. TOWNS, Mr. ABERCROMBIE, and Mr. HAYES of Illinois)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees
on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
March 6, 1991
Additional sponsors: Mr. TORRES, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. STAGGERS, Mr. RANGEL,
Mr. SERRANO, Ms. NORTON, Mr. MARTINEZ, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. KILDEE, Mr. MFUME,
Mr. BONIOR, Mr. MCNULTY, and Mr. Traficant
September 24, 1991
Additional sponsors: Mr. FORD of Tennessee, Mr. WEISS, and Mr. Dymally
A BILL
To provide for an equitable and universal national health plan administered
by the States, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Health Care for All Americans
 Act' and also may be cited as the `Claude Pepper Comprehensive Health
 Care Act'.
SEC. 2. HONORING CLAUDE PEPPER.
 The comprehensive health care program provided under this Act is enacted in
 honor of Senator Claude Pepper and his 50 years of public service efforts
 to provide comprehensive health care and long-term care for Americans of
 all ages.
SEC. 3. DIVISION OF ACT.
 This Act is divided into 5 divisions as follows:
 DIVISION A--Comprehensive Health Care Act
 DIVISION B--Life Care Long-Term Care Protection
 DIVISION C--Grants to States for Establishment and Implementation of State
 Health Objectives Plans
 DIVISION D--Independence for Older Americans
 DIVISION E--Authorization of Additional Funds for Research for AIDS,
 Hypertension, Sickle Cell Anemia, Infant Mortality, and Breast Cancer
Division A--Comprehensive Health Care Act
SEC. 100. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This division may be cited as the `Comprehensive Health
 Care Act'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this division is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. General definitions.
TITLE I--UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
Sec. 101. Universal eligibility.
Sec. 102. Enrollment.
Sec. 103. Choice of qualified health plan.
Sec. 104. Issuance of Comprehensive Health Care card.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
Sec. 201. Basic covered health services.
Sec. 202. Exclusions.
Sec. 203. Provider standards.
Sec. 204. State approval of qualified health plans.
TITLE III--FINANCING
SUBTITLE A--BUDGET PROCESS
Sec. 301. National health budget.
Sec. 302. State health budgets.
Sec. 303. Payments to States.
Sec. 304. Establishment of exchange program.
SUBTITLE B--PAYMENTS TO QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS AND TO PROVIDERS
Sec. 311. Payments to qualified health plans.
Sec. 312. Payments to providers.
Sec. 313. Payments to institutional providers.
Sec. 314. Payments for physicians' services.
Sec. 315. Application to medicare program.
SUBTITLE C--SOURCES OF REVENUES
Sec. 331. State sources of revenues.
Sec. 332. Cost-sharing.
Sec. 333. Trust fund and allocations.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 401. National Comprehensive Health Care Board.
Sec. 402. State comprehensive health care programs.
Sec. 403. Commissions on Quality.
Sec. 404. National Advisory Commission on Technology Assessment and Clinical
Effectiveness.
Sec. 405. National Resources Equalization Fund.
TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATES; TRANSITION; RELATION TO OTHER PROGRAMS
Sec. 501. Effective dates.
Sec. 502. Transition.
Sec. 503. Treatment of medicare and medicaid programs.
Sec. 504. Treatment of certain programs.
Sec. 505. Treatment of ERISA.
SEC. 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
 In this division:
 (1) The term `basic covered health services' means those basic covered
 health services specified in section 201.
 (2) The term `medicare' means the program of health insurance established
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (3) The term `medicaid' means the program of medical assistance of States
 approved under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 (4) The term `National CHC Board' means the National Comprehensive Health
 Care Board.
 (5) The term `qualified health plan' means a health plan (whether offered
 by an insurer, health maintenance organization, or other entity) approved
 by a State under section 204.
 (6) The term `State CHC Board' means a State Comprehensive Health Care Board.
 (7) The term `State CHC program' means a State comprehensive health care
 program approved under section 402.
 (8) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
 the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern
 Mariana Islands.
 (9) Except as otherwise provided, the definitions contained in section
 1861 of the Social Security Act shall apply in this division.
TITLE I--UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
SEC. 101. UNIVERSAL ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each individual who is a resident of the United States
 and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (c)) is eligible to enroll with a qualified health
 plan for coverage for health benefit under this division under the State CHC
 program in the State in which the individual maintains a primary residence.
 (b) Treatment of Certain Nonimmigrants-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The National CHC Board may make eligible to enroll for
 coverage for health benefits under this division such classes of aliens
 admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants as the Board may provide.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1),
 the Board shall consider reciprocity in health care benefits offered to
 United States citizens who are nonimmigrants to other foreign states,
 and such other factors as the Board deems appropriate.
 (3) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 division, in the case of aliens made eligible under this subsection, the
 National Board shall provide such financial assistance to States as to
 assure that States are not required to contribute to the costs of health
 care benefits provided to such aliens.
 (c) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- In this section, the term `lawful resident
 alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and any other
 alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States under color of law,
 including an alien with lawful temporary resident status under section 210,
 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT IN QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) Enrollment Process-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State CHC program shall specify an understandable and
 readily available process for the enrollment of eligible individuals residing
 in the State in qualified health plans. Such enrollments may occur at
 places of employment, offices of the State CHC program, and other locations.
 (2) DEFAULT ENROLLMENT- In the case of an eligible individual who otherwise
 is not enrolled in a qualified health plan under any State CHC program, the
 State shall provide a process for enrollment of the individual at the time
 and place at which the individual first is provided (after the effective
 date of benefits under this division) basic covered health services.
 (3) ISSUANCE OF CHC CARD- Upon enrollment in a qualified health plan, each
 eligible individual shall be issued a Comprehensive Health Care card, which
 indicates the qualified health plan in which the individual is enrolled.
 (b) TREATMENT OF MARRIED INDIVIDUALS- A State may not require married
 individuals to enroll in the same qualified health plan.
 (c) TREATMENT OF MINOR DEPENDENTS- In the case of an unmarried individual
 under 18 years of age, enrollment in a qualified health plan shall be
 effected, in a manner specified under each State CHC program in accordance
 with guidelines of the National CHC Board, by a parent or guardian of the
 child. Except in such cases as the Board may provide, such enrollment shall
 be in the qualified health plan in which the enrolling parent or guardian
 is enrolled.
 (d) TREATMENT OF MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Individuals entitled to
 benefits under medicare shall be enrolled in a qualified health plan in
 the same manner as other eligible individuals, but such enrollment shall
 only apply to benefits under such a plan that are not otherwise provided
 under medicare.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
SEC. 201. BASIC COVERED HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 202, the basic covered health services
 provided under this division by each qualified health plan are as follows:
 (1) HOSPITAL CARE- Subject to subsection (b)(2) (relating to special
 limitation on mental health care), inpatient and outpatient hospital care.
 (2) PHYSICIANS SERVICES AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL MEDICAL SERVICES- Subject to
 subsection (b)(2) (relating to special limitation on mental health care),
 physicians' services and professional services of nurse practitioners,
 nurse midwives, social workers, physicians' assistants, and similar health
 professionals who are authorized to provide health services under State
 law while not under the direct supervision of a physician.
 (3) TESTS- Diagnostic and screening tests.
 (4) PRE-NATAL AND WELL-BABY CARE- Pre-natal and well-baby care (for infants
 under 1 year of age).
 (5) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES- Subject to subsection (b)(2), diagnosis,
 evaluation, treatment, and crisis intervention for a mental illness.
 (6) DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT PROGRAMS- Subject to subsection (b)(3),
 inpatient and outpatient drug and alcohol abuse treatment services provided
 under a treatment program approved by the State and through provider
 organizations that meet State qualification standards, including--
 (A) for acute care--
 (i) intervention,
 (ii) assessment, diagnosis, and referral (by State-certified alcohol and
 drug professionals),
 (iii) medical detoxification according to individual need,
 (iv) minimum 14-day primary treatment program and post-detoxification,
 (v) aftercare treatment,
 (vi) outpatient treatment, and
 (vii) day treatment; and
 (B) for long-term care--
 (i) long-term halfway house care,
 (ii) three-quarter way house care,
 (iii) primary youth treatment,
 (iv) detoxification and long-term treatment for pregnant, addicted women
 to rehabilitate mother and prevent addicted infant births,
 (v) relapse prevention programs in nontraditional settings, and
 (vi) outpatient counseling and group therapy.
 (7) HOSPICE CARE- Hospice care for individuals certified to be terminally
 ill, including case-management services, provided by a hospice program
 approved under medicare or approved by the State.
 (8) POST-HOSPITAL SKILLED NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- Subject to the
 limitations on nursing facility services and personal care services in
 subparagraph (B) and (C) of paragraph (9), post-hospital skilled nursing
 services and home health services.
 (9) Long-term care-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this paragraph,
 nursing facility services and personal care services for individuals
 determined (in a manner specified under the State CHC program, in accordance
 with guidelines of the National CHC Board) to be impaired in 2 or more
 activities of daily living (as defined by the National CHC Board) or to have
 a severe cognitive impairment creating a comparable need for such services.
 (B) Beneficiary limitation-
 (i) INITIAL PHASE- During an initial phase (of at least 2 years, but not
 more than 5 years, duration, beginning on the effective date of benefits
 under this division) to be specified by the National CHC Board, benefits
 under this paragraph are limited to individuals entitled to benefits
 under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, except that, in
 determining entitlement to such benefits, any references to required periods
 of disability in section 226(b) of such Act shall be reduced by 18 months.
 (ii) Transition to entire population-
 (I) INFANTS- After the initial phase, the benefits under this paragraph
 shall be made available to eligible individuals under 1 year or age.
 (II) OTHERS- In a manner and time specified by the National CHC Board,
 the benefits under this paragraph shall also be made available to all
 eligible individuals without regard to medicare entitlement or age.
 (C) Limitation on amount-
 (i) INITIAL PHASE- During the initial phase referred to in subparagraph
 (B)(i), benefits under this paragraph with respect to any individual are
 limited to 90 days in any calendar year. Days of receipt of such benefits
 under paragraph (8) shall not be counted against the limitation specified
 in this clause.
 (ii) TRANSITION TO ELIMINATE LIMITATION ON AMOUNT- In a manner and time
 specified by the National CHC Board, the benefits under this paragraph
 shall be increased to cover all days in a year.
 (D) INCLUSION OF CASE MANAGEMENT- Benefits under subparagraph (A) include
 benefits for case management services, including assessment of care needs,
 prior authorization and arrangement for services, and continuing review
 of care needs.
 (10) PREVENTIVE HEALTH SERVICES- As defined by the National CHC Board:
 (A) Basic immunizations.
 (B) Pre-natal and post-natal care.
 (C) Well-child care (including periodic physical examinations, hearing
 and vision screening and developmental screening and examinations) for
 individuals under 23 years of age.
 (D) Annual screening mammography and periodic colorectal examinations and
 examinations for prostat cancer.
 (E) Annual pap smears.
 (F) Such other health services as are designed to prevent, or to minimize
 the effect of, illness, disease, or medical condition as specified by the
 National CHC Board.
 (11) OTHER MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICES- Other medical and health services
 specified by the National CHC Board, including the following:
 (A) Services and supplies incidental to the provision of physicians'
 services.
 (B) Hospital services incidental to physicians' services rendered to
 outpatients.
 (C) Appropriate medical services relating to treatment of infection with
 the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or
 treatment for (or prevention of) opportunistic diseases relating to AIDS.
 (D) Diagnostic services furnished to outpatients of hospitals.
 (E) Outpatient physical therapy services, outpatient speech pathology
 services, and outpatient occupational therapy services.
 (F) Health clinic services, including rural health clinic services.
 (G) Home dialysis supplies and equipment.
 (H) Diagnostic x-ray tests, diagnostic laboratory tests, and other
 diagnostic tests.
 (I) X-ray (and related) therapy.
 (J) Durable medical equipment used in the patient's home.
 (K) Ambulance service, to the extent provided in regulation.
 (L) Prosthetic devices (other than dental) which replace all or part of
 an internal body organ (including lens after cataract surgery), including
 replacements of such devices.
 (M) Leg, arm, back, and neck braces, and artificial legs, arms, and eyes,
 including necessary replacements.
 (N) Opthalmological examinations.
 (O) Upon a determination of a certified audiologist or physician that a
 hearing problem exists and is caused by a condition which can be corrected
 by use of a hearing aid--
 (i) audiometric examination,
 (ii) hearing aid evaluation test, and
 (iii) a hearing aid specified by prescription as a result of the hearing
 aid evaluation test (including binaural hearing aids in exceptional cases
 prescribed by a physician).
 (P) Health care and health promotion services designed to prevent or
 minimize the effect of illness, disease, or medical condition, as the
 National CHC Board may, in its discretion, specify.
 (b) Limitations on Amount, Duration, and Scope-
 (1) NO LIMITS IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, a
 qualified health plan may not limit the amount, duration, or scope of
 services for benefits required under subsection (a) beyond those specified
 in the State plan.
 (2) LIMITATION ON MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES- A qualified health plan is not
 required under subsection (a) to provide--
 (A) inpatient mental health services for an individual unless the individual
 requires continuing professional care and the individual's mental condition
 is determined to be amenable to modification through treatment in an
 inpatient setting; or
 (B)(i) more than 45 days of inpatient mental health services with respect
 to any individual for a calendar year, or (ii) more than 20 outpatient
 mental health visits with respect to any individual for a calendar year.
 (3) STATE LIMITATIONS ON SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT PROGRAMS- A State CHC
 program may limit the amount, duration, or scope of substance treatment
 services required to be provided by a qualified health plan under subsection
 (a)(6).
 (c) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 limiting the health care benefits that a State or qualified health plan
 may provide.
 (d) NO DUPLICATE PRIVATE INSURANCE- No private insurance may be sold
 which provides for benefits that duplicates basic covered health services
 described in subsection (a).
 (e) STATE-FINANCING OF SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS- There is no Federal financing
 available under this Act for benefits other than basic covered health
 services described in subsection (a).
SEC. 202. EXCLUSIONS.
 (a) GENERAL EXCLUSIONS- Basic covered health services do not include items
 and services for which payment may not be made under medicare, including
 the following items and services:
 (1)(A) Except for items and services described in the succeeding
 subparagraphs, items and services not reasonable and necessary for the
 diagnosis or treatment of illness, injury, or condition, or to improve
 the functioning of a malformed body member.
 (B) In the case of preventive health services (including immunizations),
 services which are not reasonable and necessary for the prevention of
 illness.
 (C) In the case of hospice care, care which is not reasonable and necessary
 for the palliation or management of terminal illness.
 (D) In the case of personal care services, services which are not reasonable
 and necessary to assure the health and condition of the individual is
 maintained in the individual's noninstitutional residence.
 (2)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), items and services not provided within
 the United States.
 (B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to--
 (i) emergency hospital or physicians' services available in Canada or Mexico
 if the hospital or physician is closer to the individual's residence than
 a hospital or physician in the United States, or
 (ii) items and services required by a citizen of the United States while
 traveling en route between a residence in the United States and Alaska.
 (3) Services which constitute personal comfort items.
 (4) Items and services, other than preventive health services, for routine
 physical checkups, eyeglasses, and hearing aids.
 (5) Cosmetic surgery, except for prompt repair of accidental injury or
 for improvement of the functioning of malformed body member.
 (6) Services rendered by immediate relatives of the individual or members
 of the individual's household.
 (7) Services, other than preventive health services, in connection with the
 care, treatment, filling, removal, or replacement of teeth or structures
 directly supporting teeth, except for inpatient hospital services in
 connection with treatment of an underlying medical condition.
 (8)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), treatment of flat feet conditions and the
 prescription of supportive devices thereof, the treatment of subluxations
 of the foot, or routine foot care (including the cutting or removal of
 corns or calluses, the trimming of nails, and other routine hygienic care).
 (B) Subparagraphs (A) shall not apply to services or treatment required
 to prevent serious handicapping for patients with a diagnosed case of
 diabetes mellitus.
 (b) EXCLUSIONS OF NON-MEDICARE INDIVIDUALS- Basic covered health services
 do not include, for individuals who are not entitled to benefits under
 medicare, the following items and services:
 (1) Orthopedic shoes or other supportive devices for the feet.
 (2) Professional services of chiropractors.
 (3) Inpatient hospital services furnished outside the United States and
 described in section 1814(f) of the Social Security Act.
 (c) ADDITIONAL EXCLUSIONS- The National CHC Board, after consultation with
 the National Advisory Board and the Commission on Quality, may stipulate,
 upon the basis of the cost and effectiveness of providing particular health
 care items or services, that payment may not be made by a qualified health
 plan, under this division, or under medicare, for such an item or service.
SEC. 203. PROVIDER STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this division, the provisions
 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act with respect to--
 (1) definitions of terms and descriptions of health care providers (under
 section 1861 of such Act), and
 (2) conditions of participation for health care providers (under section
 1866 of such Act) and the use of State or other agencies in determining
 compliance with standards (under sections 1863 and 1864 of such Act),
shall apply to basic covered health care services provided under qualified
health plans to the same extent as they apply to items and services for
which payment may be made under title XVIII of such Act.
 (b) Additional Conditions for Provisions of Certain Services-
 (1) UNDER THIS DIVISION- In the case of high-risk, high-cost, elective,
 or over-utilized items or services, specified by the National CHC Board,
 for which payment may otherwise be made under this division or medicare,
 the Board may restrict coverage of such items or services to a provider--
 (A) that is certified by an appropriate specialty board in the relevant
 medical specialty, or
 (B) that is adequately equipped and staffed (in accordance with regulations
 of the Board) to furnish the items or services.
 (2) UNDER MEDICARE- Notwithstanding any provision of title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act to the contrary, payment may only be made under such
 title for an item or service for which a restriction is in effect under
 paragraph (1) if it is provided by a provider who meets the requirements
 of such paragraph.
 (c) ORGANIZED APPROACHES TO DELIVERY OF SERVICES- The National CHC
 Board shall sponsor efforts to encourage State CHC Board and providers
 of services to develop and expand organized approaches to the delivery of
 health services, including health maintenance organizations, hospital-based
 and community-oriented team health services, and neighborhood-hospital-home
 health care plans.
 (d) HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICE WORKERS- Health and social service workers
 providing care under this division, under medicare, or under title XXI
 of the Social Security Act shall be sensitive to the needs of racial and
 ethnic minorities.
SEC. 204. STATE APPROVAL OF QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State CHC program shall provide for the review and
 approval or disapproval of health plans as qualified health plans in the
 State for purposes of this division.
 (b) REQUIREMENTS- A State may not approve a health plan as a qualified health
 plan under its State CHC program unless the State finds that the plan--
 (1) provides for benefits at least equal to the minimum benefits specified
 in section 202,
 (2) provides for enrollment of individuals in a manner consistent with
 this division,
 (3) provides for establishment of budgets and payments for services in a
 manner consistent with this division,
 (4) establishes a responsive grievance procedure for the receipt and
 resolution of grievances concerning the enrollment of individuals and
 delivery of services under this division,
 (5) provides for benefits in an acceptable quality (as determined by
 the State),
 (6) does not discriminate in its enrollment and provision of benefits on
 the basis of race, religion, sex, marital status, health status, or other
 impermissible basis (as specified by the National CHC Board),
 (7) provides for economic operation and administration,
 (8) provides for minimum retention charges,
 (9) provides for simplified procedural requirements, and
 (10) meets such other requirements as the National CHC Board may specify
 to insure against fraud and abuse under this division.
 (c) Limitations on Non-HMO Qualified Health Plans-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A State may limit the number of qualified health plans
 which may be offered in a State.
 (2) EXCEPTION FOR HEALTH MAINTENANCE PLANS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to
 qualified health plans that are qualified health maintenance organizations
 (as defined in section 1310(d) of the Public Health Service Act) or meet
 the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (C) of section 1876(b)(2)
 of the Social Security Act.
 (d) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL- If a State determines that a health plan, that
 has been previously approved as a qualified health plan, no longer meets
 the requirements of a qualified health plan, the State shall withdraw
 approval of the plan and shall provide a procedure whereby individuals
 enrolled in the plan may be enrolled in other qualified health plans.
TITLE III--FINANCING
Subtitle A--Budget Process
SEC. 301. NATIONAL HEALTH ESTIMATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The National CHC Board shall establish every 2 years a
 biennial estimate of expenditures and revenues under this division which
 estimates--
 (1) the expenditures to be made in the period covered under the estimate by
 States and the Federal Government for required benefits under this division
 (including administrative costs),
 (2) the revenues required to meet such expenditures, and
 (3) an average per capita level of Federal contribution for each State.
Such estimate shall not include expenditures or revenues attributable to
the operation of medicare.
 (b) Initial National Estimate-
 (1) EXPENDITURES- The level of expenditures in the first year of the
 program under this division shall be based on the average of State and
 Federal expenditures for required health care benefits for a base period
 (identified by the National CHC Board) increased to the first year by
 the percentage increase in the medical care component of the consumer
 price index for all urban consumers between the base period and the first
 year. Such estimate shall treat as expenditures for the base period those
 expenditures that would have resulted from the delivery of free or discounted
 care for required services.
 (2) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS- The average per capita annual level of Federal
 contribution for each State in the first year shall be equal to the sum of--
 (A) the amount of the annual expenditures of the Federal Government
 made during the base period (identified under paragraph (2)) on required
 services (other than under medicare) for residents of the State, computed
 on an average per capita basis, increased by the percentage increase in the
 medical care component of the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 between the base period and the first year, and
 (B) 1/3 of the amount of additional expenditures (as estimated by the
 National CHC Board) required to be made in the State on an annual basis
 for required services in the first year for which expenditures were not
 being made during the base period, computed on an average per capita basis.
 (c) Subsequent National Health Estimates-
 (1) EXPENDITURES- The level of expenditures provided under subsequent
 national health estimates shall be based on the level of expenditures
 in the previous national health estimate increased or decreased by the
 percentage increase or decrease, respectively, during the previous 2 years
 in the gross national product of the United States.
 (2) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION- The average per capita annual levels of Federal
 contribution for each State in each subsequent national health estimate shall
 be based on the average annual per capita levels of Federal contribution
 for the State in the previous estimate period increased or decreased by the
 percentage increase or decrease, respectively, during the previous 2 years
 in the gross national product of the United States. The National CHC Board
 may adjust such average annual per capita levels of Federal contribution
 (A) in order to take into account the changes in required services and
 changes in the relative per capita expenditures required for services
 due to change in demography of the population and (B) among the States
 in order to make equitable adjustments based on changes in the required
 services and changes in the relative per capita expenditures for required
 services among the States and in order to take into account each State's
 past performance in containing costs of such services in the State.
SEC. 302. STATE HEALTH BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State CHC Board shall establish every 2 years a
 biennial State health budget which provides for--
 (1) the expenditures to be made under the State CHC program in the period
 covered under the budget under this division (including administrative
 costs), and
 (2) the revenues to meet such expenditures. Such budget shall not include
 expenditures or revenues attributable to the operation of medicare.
 (b) COORDINATION- Each State health budget shall be coordinated, in a
 manner specified by the National CHC Board, with the national health
 estimate established under section 301(a).
 (c) Maintenance of Effort-
 (1) FIRST YEAR- Each State health budget for the first year shall provide for
 a contribution by the State of amounts not less than the amounts provided by
 the State in the base year (identified by the National CHC Board) increased
 by the percentage increase in the medical care component of the consumer
 price index for all urban consumers between the base period and first year.
 (2) SUBSEQUENT BUDGET PERIODS- Each State health budget for a subsequent
 budget period shall provide for a contribution by the State of amounts
 not less than the amounts provided by the State in the previous budget
 period increased or decreased by the percentage increase or decrease,
 respectively, during the previous 2 years in the gross national product
 of the United States.
 (d) ANNUAL PUBLICATION- The State shall provide for the publication annually
 of the most recent State health budget established under this section.
SEC. 303. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State with an approved State CHC program is entitled
 to receive, from amounts in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, an
 amount equal to the product of (1) the average number of residents of the
 State, and (2) the average annual per capita Federal contribution level
 (computed under section 301), adjusted to take into account differences
 in the health care consumption pattern of the State, from the national
 average, resulting from the age and sex composition of the population of
 the State, compared to the national average for all States. The National
 CHC Board shall provide for periodic adjustments in payments under this
 section to take into account the differences between the actual average
 number of residents of each State (and their age and sex composition)
 compared to such number (and composition) used under the previous sentence.
 (b) Use of Comprehensive Health Care Funds-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All revenues (including deductible and coinsurance payments)
 provided to finance the program under this division shall be deposited,
 with respect to each State, into a Comprehensive Health Care Fund for the
 State. Payments to qualified health plans shall be made from such Funds.
 (2) NATIONAL AMOUNTS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to such revenues as are
 required to provide for the National CHC Board and national administrative
 expenses.
SEC. 304. ESTABLISHMENT OF EXCHANGE PROGRAM.
 The National CHC Board shall establish a program under which, if a State
 furnishes covered health services to residents of another State, the
 first State would receive credit for payments for the services against
 the amounts to which the other State is otherwise entitled to receive.
Subtitle B--Payments to Qualified Health Plans and to Providers
SEC. 311. PAYMENTS TO QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) COMPUTATION OF ADJUSTED AVERAGE PER CAPITA COST- Based on a methodology
 established by the National CHC Board, each State CHC program shall compute
 an adjusted average per capita cost for required services under the program
 in the State for different classes of individuals. Such adjusted average per
 capita cost shall reflect the average per capita level of expenditures that
 the State estimates (based on actual experience or actuarial equivalent,
 with appropriate adjustments to assure actuarial equivalence) is required
 to provide for expenditures in the State for services (and related
 administrative costs) under the State CHC program. Such adjusted average
 per capita cost shall be computed for individuals based on age and sex
 and such other factors as will assure actuarial equivalence and otherwise
 provide for equitable distribution of funds to qualified health plans.
 (b) PAYMENT TO PLANS- Each State CHC program shall provide for payment
 to qualified health plans, for individuals enrolled under this division,
 on a monthly basis in an amount equal to the adjusted average per capita
 cost computed under subsection (a) with respect to such individuals. The
 program may provide for retroactive adjustment in such payments to take
 into account any difference between the actual number (or composition)
 of individuals enrolled under the plan and the number of such individuals
 estimated to be so enrolled in determining the amount of the advance payment.
SEC. 312. PAYMENTS TO PROVIDERS UNDER QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State CHC program shall provide for the payment
 of providers by qualified health plans in a manner consistent with this
 subtitle.
 (b) MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT- Each provider of services or other practitioner
 that receives funding under this division agrees to accept the payment
 amount recognized under the State CHC program for services covered under
 the program as payment in full for such services and may not impose any
 charges for such services other than those permitted with respect to such
 services under section 332.
 (c) CONTINUUM OF CARE- The National CHC Board, in order to avoid fragmented
 care, shall develop financial incentives, in the payment methods provided
 under this subtitle, to promote a continuum of care.
 (d) DIRECT PAYMENT FOR CERTAIN HEALTH PROFESSIONALS- A State CHC program
 shall require qualified health plans (other than health maintenance plans)
 to provide for direct payment to nurse practitioners, nurse midwives,
 physicians' assistants, and similar health professionals who are authorized
 to provide health services under State law while not under the direct
 supervision of a physician.
SEC. 313. PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONAL PROVIDERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Payment for institutional care, including hospital services
 and nursing facility services, shall be made in each State on the basis
 of a biennial prospective budgeting system, established by the State
 consistent with its State health budget established under section 302
 after negotiations with institutional providers.
 (b) WAIVERS- The National CHC Board may waive the requirement of subsection
 (a) in the case of a State, but only if the State demonstrates that the
 payment methodology used will not result in expenditures exceeding those
 provided under its State health budget.
SEC. 314. PAYMENTS FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, payment for
 physicians' services shall be based on payment schedules established by
 each State CHC Board. Such schedules--
 (1) shall be established after negotiations with organizations representing
 physicians,
 (2) shall be based on a national relative value scale, developed by the
 National CHC Board taking into account the relative value scale developed
 under section 1848 of the Social Security Act, and
 (3) shall be in amounts consistent with the State health budget adopted
 under section 302.
 (b) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT MECHANISMS- Payment for physicians' services may be
 based on alternative payment methodologies, including capitation methods,
 annual salary and hourly payments, so long as the amount of payments under
 such methodology do not exceed, in the aggregate, the amount of payments that
 would otherwise be made under the methodology described in subsection (a).
SEC. 315. APPLICATION TO MEDICARE PROGRAM.
 Payment methodologies established under this subtitle in a State shall also
 be applied to payments under medicare for services furnished in the State.
Subtitle C--Sources of Revenues
SEC. 331. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for establishing a financing
 program for the implementation of the State CHC program in the State. Such
 financing program may include State funding from general revenues, earmarked
 taxes, sales taxes, subject to section 332, employer and employee health
 insurance premiums and cost-sharing, and such other measures consistent
 with this division as the State may provide.
 (b) START-UP FUNDS- In order to assist each State in the development
 and implementation of the State CHC program, each State is entitled to
 receive $10,000,000.
 (c) ON-GOING ENTITLEMENT- Each State with a State CHC program approved
 by the National CHC Board is entitled to funding from the Board in the
 amounts provided under section 303.
SEC. 332. COST-SHARING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, a State CHC program
 may permit qualified health plans to charge premiums and cost-sharing for
 services under this division.
 (b) LIMITATION ON COST-SHARING-
 (1) INCOME UNDER POVERTY LINE- No premiums or other cost-sharing may be
 imposed with respect to any individual in a family the income of which
 (as determined in accordance with standards specified by the National CHC
 Board) in the previous year is less than 200 percent of the income official
 poverty line (as defined in paragraph (5)).
 (2) OTHER SERVICES- No deductibles or other cost-sharing may be imposed
 with respect to--
 (A) items and services provided to a pregnant woman,
 (B) well-baby care, for an individual in a family the income of which
 (as so determined) in the previous year is less than 150 percent of the
 income official poverty line.
 (3) GENERAL LIMIT ON COST-SHARING- Subject to paragraph (6), premiums in
 a calendar year and cost-sharing with respect to expenses incurred in a
 calendar year for required items and services other than long-term care
 may not exceed--
 (A) a deductible of more than $200 for a family consisting of 1 individual
 or $500 for family consisting of more than 1 individual,
 (B) a coinsurance rate of 20 percent, and
 (C) total premiums and cost-sharing for a family consisting of 1 individual
 of $1,000 or $2,500 for a family consisting of more than 1 individual.
 (4) PAYMENT AMOUNT IS PAYMENT IN FULL- No individual shall be liable for
 payment of any amounts for basic covered health care services furnished
 under this division except as permitted in this section.
 (5) INCOME OFFICIAL POVERTY LINE DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `income official poverty line' means the income official poverty line,
 as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981, applicable to a family of the size involved.
 (6) INDEXING- The dollar amounts specified in paragraph (3) shall be
 increased, for years after 1994, by the same percentage as the percentage
 increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (U.S. city
 average) between January 1993 and January of the previous year. If such
 dollar amounts are not a multiple of $10, they shall be rounded to the
 nearest multiple of $10.
 (c) COMMUNITY-RATED PREMIUMS- Premiums charged by a qualified health plan
 under this division shall be community-rated and shall not reflect the
 health status of individuals or insured groups.
SEC. 333. TRUST FUND AND ALLOCATIONS.
 (a) USE OF TRUST FUND-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Federal Long-Term
 Care Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the `Trust Fund'). The
 Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may be made (as is
 hereby authorized to be received) and such amounts as may be deposited in,
 or appropriated to, such fund as provided in this division.
 (2) APPROPRIATION- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to 100 percent of the additional revenues received as a result
 of the provisions of section 333(a) of this Act. The amounts appropriated
 by the preceding sentence shall be transferred from time to time (not
 less frequently than monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to
 the Trust Fund, such amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by
 the Secretary of the Treasury of the revenues, specified in the preceding
 sentence, paid to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments
 shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior
 estimates were in excess of or were less than the revenues specified in
 the preceding sentence.
 (3) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections
 (b) through (i) of section 1841 of the Social Security Act shall apply to
 the Trust Fund in the same manner as they apply to the Federal Supplemental
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any reference to the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services or the Administrator of the Health Care Financing
 Administration shall be deemed a reference to National CHC Board.
 (b) Allocation to States-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Payments in each calendar year to each State from the Trust
 Fund for long-term care benefits in the State shall be in an amount equal
 to the Federal matching percentage for the State of the product of--
 (A) the number of residents of the State in the calendar year who are
 within each age group (specified under paragraph (3)), and
 (B) the Federal per capita allocation for individuals within the age group.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `Federal matching percentage' for
a State means 100 percent minus the ratio of the per capita income of the
State to the per capita income of the 50 States (and the District of Columbia).
 (2) Determination of federal per capita allocation-
 (A) INITIALLY- The Secretary shall establish initial Federal per capita
 allocations for individuals within each of the age groups. Such allocations
 shall be established in a manner so that--
 (i) the ratios of the allocations among the different age groups reflects
 the ratios of the average per capita costs incurred in providing long-term
 care to the population of individuals within the respective age groups
 nationwide, and
 (ii) the average level of the allocation reflects the level of expenditures
 for such services under current law.
 (B) LIMITATION ON INCREASE IN FEDERAL PER CAPITA ALLOCATION- After 1994,
 the amount of each of the Federal per capita allocation for a calendar
 year shall be such Federal per capita allocation for the previous
 calendar year increased by an index (specified by the Secretary) that
 reflects the year-to-year rate of increase in average, nationwide costs
 of a representative marketbasket of the items and services composing
 long-term care.
 (3) AGE GROUPS- For purposes of this subsection, each of the following
 shall be considered a separate age group of individuals:
 (A) Individuals over 64, and under 75, years of age.
 (B) Individuals over 74, and under 85, years of age.
 (C) Individuals over 84 years of age.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 401. NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE BOARD.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established as an independent agency a
 National CHC Board (in this section referred to as the `National Board').
 (b) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS- The National Board shall consist
 of 7 individuals approved by the President, with the advice and consent
 of the Senate. Such individuals shall serve for a term of 5 years, except
 that the terms of individuals initially appointed shall be (as specified
 by the President) for such fewer number of years as will provide for the
 expiration of terms on a staggered basis.
 (c) DUTIES- The National Board is responsible for the overall administration
 of this division, as well as the development of specific guidelines to
 permit States to carry out this division.
 (d) REPORT- The National Board shall report to Congress on the status
 of expenditures under this division, long-range plans and goals for the
 organization and delivery of personal health services, differences in
 the health status of the populations of the different States, as well as
 opportunities for improvements in the program provided under this division.
 (e) NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD-
 (1) The National Board shall provide for appointment of a National Advisory
 Board to advise the National Board on its activities.
 (2) Such Advisory Board shall consist of 15 members who are representatives
 of employers, unions, health care providers, health care insurers, consumer
 organizations, State CHC Boards, and public health professionals, as well
 as the general public. Such members shall serve for terms of 3 years,
 except that, in the initial appointment, 5 members shall be each appointed
 for terms of 1-year, 2-years, and 3-years.
 (3) Such Advisory Board shall sponsor site visits and studies that are
 concerned with issues of access to health care services, utilization of
 health care services, and consumer participation and satisfaction in the
 provision of health care services.
SEC. 402. STATE COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall submit to the National CHC Board a plan
 for its State CHC program in the State.
 (b) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PLANS- The National CHC Board shall review plans
 submitted under subsection (a) and determine whether such plans meet the
 requirements for approval. The Board shall not approve such a plan unless
 it finds that the plan provides, consistent with the provisions of this
 division, for--
 (1) adequate financing of health services under the plan,
 (2) freedom of choice of eligible individuals in the selection among
 qualified health plans,
 (3) effective cost containment measures and payment methodologies consistent
 with title III,
 (4) adequate administration, including the designation of a single State
 agency responsible for administration of the program and the establishment
 of a public advisory board (with board representation of interested parties),
 (5) appropriate safeguards and grievance procedures,
 (6) responsive quality control mechanisms (including the establishment of
 a State Commission on Quality),
 (7) organization of a State commission to develop programs and schedules
 to reduce excess hospital beds, and
 (8) an organized grievance procedure available to consumers through
 which complaints about the organization and administration of personal
 medical care services may be filed and hearings held (at the discretion
 of the State CHC Board). Programs under paragraph (7) shall provide for
 appropriate plans to refinance outstanding hospital debt (for hospitals
 in which beds will be reduced) and to retrain (where necessary) staff
 displaced by a reduction in excess hospital beds.
 (c) OPERATIONAL STATUS- A State CHC program in a State shall not be
 considered operational unless it is approved under subsection (b) and it
 has enrolled at least 90 percent of the eligible individuals in the State
 under the program.
 (d) FAILURE OF APPROVAL-
 (1) If the National CHC Board finds that a State plan submitted under
 subsection (a) does not meet the requirements for approval under subsection
 (b) or that a State plan, previously approved, no longer meets such
 requirements the Board shall provide notice to the State CHC Board of such
 failure and that unless corrective action is taken within a period of 90
 days the sanctions described in paragraph (2) may be applied, effective
 90 days after the end of such 90-day period.
 (2) The sanctions described in this paragraph are--
 (A) that expenses of employers in the State for health-related items may
 not be deducted from income under section 212 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986, and
 (B) amounts otherwise payable under this division to the State shall be
 reduced by 10 percent.
SEC. 403. COMMISSIONS ON QUALITY.
 (a) NATIONAL COMMISSION ON QUALITY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The National CHC Board shall provide for appointment
 of a National Commission on Quality to establish, evaluate, and update
 national minimum standards to assure the quality of services provided
 under this division and to monitor efforts by State CHC Boards to assure
 the quality of such services. Members of the Board shall be appointed to
 serve for fixed (and staggered) terms and in a manner as to provide for
 representation of the viewpoints of relevant health professions, health
 institutions and programs, the general public (including representation
 of various population groups in the public).
 (2) NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS- The national minimum standards under
 paragraph (1) shall be established for institutional providers of services,
 physicians and other individual health care personnel, and organized
 delivery programs. Such standards shall include elements relating to--
 (A) adequacy and quality of facilities,
 (B) competence of personnel,
 (C) comprehensiveness of service,
 (D) continuity of service,
 (E) patient satisfaction (including waiting time and access to services), and
 (F) performance standards (including organization, facilities, and structure
 of services, and outcome in palliation, improvement of health, stabilization,
 cure, or rehabilitation).
 (3) ANNUAL REPORT- The National Commission on Quality shall prepare an
 annual report on quality assurance under this division. Such report shall
 include an assessment of the impact of this division on health care quality,
 access, and beneficiary cost.
 (4) EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION- The National Commission on Quality shall
 provide for an exchange, at least annually, among State Commissions on
 Quality of information respecting quality assurance and cost containment.
 (b) STATE COMMISSION ON QUALITY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State CHC Board shall provide for an appointment of
 a State Commission on Quality to implement national minimum standards in
 each State. Members of such a Board shall be appointed to serve for fixed
 (and staggered) terms and in a manner as to provide for representation
 of the viewpoints of relevant health professions, health institutions
 and programs, the general public (including representation of various
 population groups in the public).
 (2) MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS- Each State Commission on Quality may,
 with the consent of the National Commission on Quality, provide for the
 application of modified national minimum standards due to special conditions
 or opportunities in the State.
SEC. 404. NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMISSION ON TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT AND CLINICAL
EFFECTIVENESS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The National CHC Board shall establish a National
 Advisory Commission on Technology Assessment and Clinical Effectiveness
 (in this section referred to as the `Commission').
 (b) DUTIES- The Commission shall, in close consultation with the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services, make recommendations related to--
 (1) technological development and clinical treatment effectiveness;
 (2) outcomes of drugs, devices, and clinical procedures; and
 (3) possible inclusion of new drugs and technological procedures as covered
 health services and discontinuance of payment for inefficient procedures.
SEC. 405. NATIONAL RESOURCES EQUALIZATION FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established a National Resources
 Equalization Fund, to be administered by the National CHC Board.
 (b) PURPOSE- The Fund shall be used by the Board to augment the capability
 of medically under-developed areas to provide services under this division
 and to strengthen their abilities to provide local services.
 (c) FUNDING- There are authorized to be appropriated for the Fund for
 fiscal year 1994, $1,000,000,000, and, for each fiscal year thereafter,
 amounts equal to 1 percent of the expenditures to be made under this
 division in that fiscal year.
 (d) GRANTS- The Board shall provide, upon application, for making amounts
 available in the fund to States and localities.
TITLE V--EFFECTIVE DATES; TRANSITION; RELATION TO OTHER PROGRAMS
SEC. 501. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The comprehensive health care program established under
 this division shall first apply to health care services furnished during
 the 3rd calendar year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) EXCEPTION- However, such program shall not apply with respect to any
 calendar year unless, before the beginning of the year, the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services has determined that at least 1/2 of the number
 of States have enacted legislation necessary to implement this division
 in such States.
SEC. 502. TRANSITION.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for each of 3 fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act such sums as may be necessary to provide for financial assistance
 to States in the planning and development of State CHC programs.
 (b) FEHBP- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no health benefits
 plan may be offered under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, after
 the effective date of this division unless the plan is a qualified health
 plan under this division.
SEC. 503. TREATMENT OF MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
 (a) MEDICARE PROGRAM-
 (1) Except as specifically provided in this division, nothing in this
 division shall be construed as changing medicare.
 (2) To the extent that individuals who are entitled to benefits under
 medicare are enrolled under a State CHC program under this division, the
 medicare program shall be primary payor with respect to any duplicative
 benefits.
 (b) MEDICAID PROGRAMS- Except as specifically provided in this division,
 the medicaid program shall not apply in any State with a State CHC program
 approved and in operation under this division.
SEC. 504. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PROGRAMS.
 Nothing in this division shall be construed as making any changes in
 the programs of health care under title 10 (relating to military medical
 programs and CHAMPUS) and title 38 (relating to Veterans' health care)
 of the United States Code.
SEC. 505. RELATION TO ERISA.
 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act are superseded
 to the extent inconsistent with the requirements of this division.
Division B--Life Care Long-Term Care Protection Act
SEC. 1001. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This division may be cited as the `Lifecare Long-Term
 Care Protection Act'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this division is as follows:
Sec. 1001. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 1002. Lifecare long-term care protection program.
`TITLE XXI--LIFECARE LONG-TERM CARE PROTECTION PROGRAM
`Part A--General Provisions
`Sec. 2101. Definitions.
`Sec. 2102. Long-term care agencies.
`Sec. 2103. Contribution of State funds.
`Sec. 2104. Involvement of family.
`Part B--Coverage of Home and Community-Based Care Services
`Sec. 2111. Benefits.
`Sec. 2112. Eligibility.
`Sec. 2113. Respite care.
`Sec. 2114. Qualified service providers.
`Sec. 2115. Payment for services.
`Sec. 2116. Home and Community-Based Advisory Council.
`Sec. 2117. Quality assurance boards and community advisory boards.
`Sec. 2118. Home and community-based care quality assurance.
`Sec. 2119. Certification.
`Sec. 2120. Reimbursement.
`Part C--Coverage of First 6 Months of Nursing Home Care
`Sec. 2121. Benefits.
`Sec. 2122. Eligibility.
`Sec. 2123. Limitations on payment.
`Sec. 2124. Reimbursement.
`Sec. 2125. Relationship to other entitlement programs.
`Part D--Insurance Coverage for Nursing Home Care That Exceeds 6 Months
`Sec. 2131. Establishment of Federal Long-Term Care Insurance Program.
`Sec. 2132. Eligibility.
`Sec. 2133. Premium rates.
`Sec. 2134. Benefits.
`Sec. 2135. Qualified service providers.
`Sec. 2136. Reimbursement.
`Sec. 2137. Extension of eligibility to individuals of any age.
`Part E--Training and Research
`Sec. 2141. Grants for training for home and community-based care for the
elderly.
`Sec. 2142. Grants for home health aides.
`Sec. 2143. Grants for model consumer training programs.
`Sec. 2144. Centers for long-term care planning and technical assistance.
`Part F--Demonstration Projects
`Sec. 2151. Demonstration projects for seriously mentally ill individuals.
`Sec. 2152. Demonstration projects for working age individuals with severe
functional limitations.
`Sec. 2153. General authority.'.
Sec. 1003. Effective date.
SEC. 1002. LIFECARE LONG-TERM CARE PROTECTION PROGRAM.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--LIFECARE LONG-TERM CARE PROTECTION PROGRAM
`PART A--GENERAL PROVISIONS
`SEC. 2101. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title:
 `(1) ACTIVITY OF DAILY LIVING- The term `activity of daily living' includes:
 `(A) BATHING- Getting water and cleansing the whole body, including turning
 on the water for a bath, shower, or sponge bath, getting to, in, and out
 of a tub or shower, and washing and drying oneself;
 `(B) DRESSING- Getting clothes from closets and drawers and then getting
 dressed, including putting on braces or other devices and fastening
 buttons, zippers, snaps, or other closures, selecting appropriate attire,
 and dressing in the proper order;
 `(C) TOILETING- Going to a bathroom for bowel and bladder function,
 transferring on and off the toilet, cleaning after elimination, and
 arranging clothes;
 `(D) TRANSFERRING- Moving in and out of bed and in and out of a chair or
 wheelchair; or
 `(E) EATING- Transferring food from a plate or its equivalent into the body,
 including cutting food so as to make possible safe ingestion.
 `(2) ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE- The term `adult day health care' means a
 community-based group program designed to--
 `(A) meet the need for adult day health care for functionally impaired
 individuals in a structured, comprehensive program; and
 `(B) provide a variety of health and social services furnished by an adult
 day health care center in an ambulatory group care setting during any part
 of a day, but on a less than 24-hour basis, to an individual described in
 section 2112.
 `(3) ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE CENTER-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `adult day health care center' means a public
 agency or private organization (or a subdivision thereof), with an
 identifiable administrative unit headed by a Director, that meets such
 standards for personnel, program, physical characteristics of the facility,
 recordkeeping, and such other aspects of the function of such center as
 the Secretary considers necessary or desirable for the health, safety,
 and effective treatment of patients and establishes by regulation.
 `(B) PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION STANDARDS- In promulgating such regulations,
 the Secretary shall carefully consider certification standards established
 by the National Council on Aging and its professional membership unit,
 the National Institute for Adult Day Care.
 `(C) PERSONNEL- Such standards shall include the participation in the
 provision of the services of the center of a multidisciplinary group of
 personnel that includes at least--
 `(i) one physician or nurse practitioner, which could be the individual's
 own physician or nurse practitioner;
 `(ii) one registered professional nurse;
 `(iii) one social worker;
 `(iv) individuals with skills representing physical, recreational, or
 occupational therapy or speech-language pathology; and
 `(v) a dietitian.
`Such personnel may be employed directly by the center or on a consultant
basis, as specified by the Secretary by regulation.
 `(D) STATE CERTIFICATION- To be considered an adult health care center
 under this title, a center shall be certified by a State, pursuant to
 regulations issued by the Secretary.
 `(4) CARE PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `care plan' means a plan that has been developed
 by a Case Management Agency, or a home care or home health agency working
 under contract with the Case Management Agency to provide case management
 services. Such a care plan shall be based on the results of a comprehensive
 needs assessment of an eligible individual conducted by a case management
 team in cooperation with the individual, the family of the individual,
 or other informal caregivers, and in consultation with such other health
 professionals as the case management team considers appropriate for the
 needs of the individual. A care plan developed by a home care or home
 health agency is subject to review and approval by the Case Management
 Agency. Any entity performing case management services for individuals
 determined eligible for services under this title shall not be allowed to
 self-refer for services included in the care plan of such individual.
 `(B) CONTENTS- The plan shall--
 `(i) include a definition of specific outcome goals on which improvement,
 reduced rate of decline, maintenance, or improved quality of life for the
 individual is expected; and
 `(ii) identify the specific mix of services necessary to meet the outcome
 goals allotted to the patient and reimbursable under this title as determined
 by the procedure described in section 2102.
 `(5) Case management services-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `case management services' means services
 performed by a case management team that include--
 `(i) conducting a comprehensive needs assessment in cooperation with an
 individual and the family of an individual and in consultation with such
 other health professionals (including a physical therapist, occupational
 therapist, nurse practitioner, certified dietitian, or physician) as the
 case management team considers appropriate for the needs of the individual
 to assess the physical, social, cognitive, and environmental status of
 the individual;
 `(ii) developing, implementing, and modifying (when necessary) the care
 plan of an individual;
 `(iii) coordinating the services provided under the care plan;
 `(iv) monitoring the care plan to ensure the quality, quantity, timeliness,
 and effectiveness of the services;
 `(v) monitoring the progress of an individual toward achievement of the
 goals specified in the care plan; and
 `(vi) reviewing and revising, as necessary, the care plan at least once
 every three months or earlier in the event that the condition of the
 individual changes.
 `(B) REQUIREMENT- Individuals providing case management services to children
 and the disabled under this title shall demonstrate their experience with
 the special needs of these populations.
 `(C) RESPONSIVE TO FAMILY NEEDS- The case management services provided
 shall be responsive to family needs and individuals providing the services
 shall appropriately involve and consult family members.
 `(6) CASE MANAGEMENT TEAM- The term `case management team' means a registered
 professional nurse and a qualified social worker (who is licensed or
 certified, if applicable, in the State in which the individual is providing
 services), working in consultation with other health professionals as needed,
 who are employed by a Case Management Agency or by a certified home health
 agency, home care agency, or other private nonprofit organization under
 contract with the agency to provide case management services pursuant to
 the requirements of this title and standards prescribed by the Secretary by
 regulation. Such nurse and social worker shall meet standards of education,
 training, and experience established by the Secretary by regulation to
 qualify to provide case management services under this title. The case
 management team for any person determined eligible for services under
 this title, as defined under section 2112(a)(2)(B)(ii), shall also include
 a physician.
 `(7) COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENT- The term `comprehensive needs
 assessment' means a comprehensive interdisciplinary assessment of the status
 and needs of an individual that is conducted by a case management team. The
 assessment shall address functional status (including activities of daily
 living), instrumental activities of daily living (such as housekeeping,
 shopping, transportation, meal preparation, and taking medication), medically
 defined conditions, drug regimen, nutrition status, mental status, living
 arrangement, and availability of caregiver support.
 `(8) HEAVY CHORE SERVICES- The term `heavy chore services' means heavy
 cleaning and minor home repair. Chore services may not be used to perform
 activities that are the responsibility of a housing authority or landlord,
 or both. Heavy chore services shall be provided by personnel not requiring
 special training but who work under supervision of the case management
 agency or other qualified provider. Heavy chore services include those
 services determined by a case manager to be necessary to protect the health
 and safety of an individual such as washing floors and walls, woodcutting,
 changing storm windows, replacing window panes, door and window locks,
 installing minor home adaptations, snow shoveling, weatherization, and
 such other needed heavy chore services as are specified by a case manager.
 `(9) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SERVICES- The term `home and
 community-based care services' means items and services provided to an
 individual--
 `(A) under a written plan of care for furnishing such items and services
 to the individual;
 `(B) except as provided clauses (iv), (v), and (xii) of subparagraph (C),
 on a visiting basis in a place of residence of the individual and in other
 facilities (but not including a nursing facility); and
 `(C) that include--
 `(i) homemaker services;
 `(ii) home health aide services;
 `(iii) heavy chore services;
 `(iv) adult day health care provided at an adult day health care center;
 `(v) respite care;
 `(vi) home mobility aids and minor adaptations to the home of the individual
 that promote independence (such as installation of an emergency alarm
 system, railings, ramps, and special toilets) that are approved by the
 case manager and included in the care plan of the individual;
 `(vii) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse;
 `(viii) medical social work services;
 `(ix) physical, occupational, or speech therapy or rehabilitative services
 to preserve and restore functional capability or to prevent functional
 deterioration;
 `(x) transportation to and from health or social services;
 `(xi) nutrition and dietary counseling provided by or under the supervision
 of a qualified dietitian; and
 `(xii) any of the items and services referred to in clauses (i) through
 (xi)--
 `(I) that are provided on an outpatient basis, under arrangements made by
 the case manager, at a hospital or nursing facility, or at a rehabilitation
 center that meets such standards as may be prescribed in regulation; and
 `(II) the furnishing of which cannot readily be made available to the
 individual in such place of residence, or can be provided more economically
 or effectively in such hospital, facility, or center.
 `(10) HOME CARE AGENCY- The term `home care agency' means an agency in any
 State that has been certified by the State to provide home care services
 pursuant to regulations of the Secretary. Such services include homemaker
 services, heavy chore services, and respite services.
 `(11) HOME HEALTH AGENCY- The term `home health agency' means an agency
 in any State that has been certified by the Secretary to provide home
 health services. Such services shall include home health aide services,
 homemaker services, nursing services, respite services, medical social
 work services, and occupational, physical, speech therapy, and nutrition
 and dietary counseling.
 `(12) HOME HEALTH AIDE SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `home health aide services' means the services
 provided by a home health aide who meets such educational, training, and any
 other requirements as the Secretary shall establish by regulation and who is
 employed by a home health or home care agency or whose services are provided
 under a contract with, or subcontract on behalf of, a Case Management Agency.
 `(B) SERVICES- Such services shall include--
 `(i) providing personal care in following the instructions of the case
 management team of an individual under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse or, if appropriate, a physical, speech, or occupational
 therapist;
 `(ii) assisting the individual with activities of daily living;
 `(iii) assisting the individual with the taking of medications ordered by
 a physician, that are ordinarily self-administered;
 `(iv) assisting and reinforcing the individual with necessary self-help
 skills; and
 `(v) reporting to the registered professional nurse supervisor any change
 in the condition or family situation of the individual.
 `(13) HOMEMAKER SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `homemaker services' means services provided by a
 homemaker who meets such educational, training, and any other requirements
 as the Secretary shall establish by regulation and who is employed by a
 home health or home care agency or who are working under contract with,
 or subcontract on behalf of, a Case Management Agency.
 `(B) SERVICES- Homemaker services may include--
 `(i) organizing the homemaking activity of the household with the active
 participation of an individual, if possible, and other responsible family
 members;
 `(ii) coordinating efforts of other family members in planning and carrying
 out the duties necessary for the normal functioning of the household;
 `(iii) performing routine housekeeping tasks, planning and preparing meals,
 doing the marketing and simple errands, and taking care of light laundry;
 `(iv) assisting the individual with personal care services including
 performing activities of daily living; and
 `(v) performing such incidental household services as are essential
 to the care of an individual at home, such as reporting to a registered
 professional nurse supervisor changes in the condition or family situation
 of the individual and following a written case plan established by a case
 management team.
 `(14) Nursing facility-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `nursing facility' means an institution that meets
 such requirements as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation to ensure
 the safe and efficient provision of nursing home services under this title.
 `(B) Requirements-
 `(i) REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL NURSE- All nursing facilities shall maintain at
 least one registered professional nurse on duty at all times. The Secretary
 may provide limited waivers of such requirement if--
 `(I) the facility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that
 it has been unable, despite diligent efforts (including offering wages at
 the community prevailing rate) to recruit and retain appropriate personnel;
 `(II) the Secretary determines that a waiver of the requirement will not
 endanger the health, safety, or well being of residents of the facility;
 `(III) the facility meets any other requirements that the Secretary may
 establish for the approval of such a waiver; and
 `(IV) such waiver is not for a period in excess of 6 months, but such may
 be renewed on a limited basis for additional periods not to exceed 6 months.
 `(ii) REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SOCIAL WORKER- All nursing facilities shall
 maintain at least one full-time registered professional social worker to
 direct its social services program.
 `(15) RESPITE CARE- The term `respite care' means a temporary break provided
 to an individual who supplies regular care to a dependent relative or
 friend. For purposes of this title, the break may not exceed 30 days
 or 720 hours, in a calendar year. The term includes institutional or
 noninstitutional patient supervisory services to temporarily relieve the
 caregiver of an eligible individual as determined by a Care Management
 Agency and included in the care plan of the individual.
 `(17) SPELL OF ILLNESS- The term `spell of illness' means a period of
 consecutive days beginning with the first day on which an individual
 is furnished a covered service and ending with the close of the first
 6 consecutive months thereafter during which the individual is not an
 inpatient of a hospital or a nursing facility.
`SEC. 2102. LONG-TERM CARE AGENCIES.
 `(a) Long-Term Care Screening Agency-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall contract with entities to act
 as Long-Term Care Screening Agencies (hereinafter referred to in this
 title as the `Screening Agency') for each designated area of a State. It
 shall be the responsibility of such agency to assess the eligibility of
 individuals residing in the geographic jurisdiction of the agency, for
 services provided under this title according to the requirements of this
 title and regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY- The Screening Agency shall determine the eligibility of
 an individual based on the results of a preliminary telephone or written
 questionnaire (completed by the applicant, by the caregiver of the applicant,
 or by the legal guardian or representative of the applicant) that shall
 be validated through the use of a screening tool administered in person
 by a physician, nurse practitioner, or registered professional nurse, to
 each applicant determined eligible through initial telephone or written
 questionnaire interviews not later than 15 days from the date on which
 such individual initially applied for services under this part.
 `(3) QUESTIONNAIRES AND SCREENING TOOLS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a telephone or written
 questionnaire and a screening tool to be used by the Screening Agency to
 determine the eligibility of an individual for services under this title
 consistent with requirements of this title and standards established by
 the Secretary by regulation.
 `(B) QUESTIONNAIRES- The questionnaire shall include questions about the
 functional impairment, mental status, and living arrangement of an individual
 and other criteria that the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation.
 `(C) SCREENING TOOLS- The screening tool should measure functional impairment
 caused by physical or cognitive conditions as well as information concerning
 cognition disability, behavioral problems (such as wandering or abusive and
 aggressive behavior), the living arrangement of an individual, availability
 of caregivers, and any other criteria that the Secretary shall prescribe
 by regulation. The screening tool shall be administered in person.
 `(4) NOTIFICATION- Not later than 15 days after the date on which an
 individual initially applied for services under this part (by phone or
 written questionnaire), the Screening Agency shall notify such individual
 that such individual is not eligible for benefits, or that such individuals
 must schedule an in-person screening to determine final eligibility
 for benefits under this title. The Screening Agency shall notify such
 individual of its final decision not later than 2 working days after the
 in-person screening.
 `(5) IN-PERSON SCREENING- An individual (or the legal guardian or
 representative of such individual) whose application for long-term care
 benefits under this title is denied on the basis of information provided
 through a telephone or written questionnaire, shall be notified of such
 individual's right to an in-person screening by a nurse or appropriate
 health care professionals.
 `(6) APPEALS- The Secretary shall establish a mechanism for hearings and
 appeals in cases in which individuals contest the eligibility findings of
 the Screening Agency.
 `(7) FUNDING LEVEL- The Screening Agency shall be responsible for determining
 the estimated funding level that shall be allotted for individuals eligible
 for home and community-based care, pursuant to standards established under
 section 2115(e) and regulations of the Secretary.
 `(b) LONG-TERM CARE CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCY-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall contract with a State or, in any
 case in which a State declines to contract with the Secretary, a private
 nonprofit organization, to establish and administer a Long-Term Care
 Case Management Agency (hereinafter referred to in this title as `Case
 Management Agency') for each designated area of a State. Such agency shall
 demonstrate expertise in the delivery of health and social services to
 the chronically ill and disabled pursuant to requirements established in
 this title and such standards as the Secretary may establish by regulation
 (including standards for training and qualification of personnel, financial
 responsibility, and governance).
 `(2) DUTIES- A Case Management Agency shall provide case management
 services for eligible individuals directly or through contracts with home
 care or home health agencies that meet the requirements of this title and
 standards prescribed by the Secretary by regulation for providing case
 management services.
 `(3) CARE PLAN- The Case Management Agency shall develop a care plan
 for each individual determined to be eligible by a Screening Agency. In
 developing a care plan for an individual, the Case Management Agency shall
 design a plan that meets the service needs of the individual, consistent
 with the resources available to the agency.
 `(4) Funding-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The actual level of funding allotted to an eligible
 individual by the Case Management Agency to cover services included in the
 individual's care plan may fall above or below the estimated annualized
 level allotted to the individual by the Screening Agency based on the
 detailed assessment and plan of care provided by the Case Management Agency.
 `(B) LIMITATION- The Case Management Agency shall allocate the resources
 available from the Screening Agency (as described in section 2115(a)) to
 ensure that the total expenditures for home and community-based care for
 individuals eligible for services covered under this title residing within
 the geographic jurisdiction of the agency do not exceed the total amount
 available monthly to the Case Management Agency, pursuant to this section,
 for home and community-based services. The Case Management Agency shall
 establish specific financial controls (including authorizing the amount,
 scope, and duration of services to be provided to an individual) to carry
 out this subparagraph.
 `(c) REGISTRY- A Case Management Agency shall maintain a registry of
 qualified providers of home and community-based and nursing home care in
 the State and shall assist individuals in choosing qualified providers to
 carry out the care plan. An individual eligible for services under this
 title shall be free to choose from the registry the home care agency,
 home health agency, or other qualified provider of services to carry out
 the care plan of such individual. The Case Management Agency shall assist
 the individual in locating alternative providers if the individual becomes
 dissatisfied with the provider initially chosen.
 `(d) MONITORING- A State shall, along with the Secretary, monitor the
 performance of all designated Case Management Agencies and assure the
 fiscal stability of such agencies. A State shall act as the financial
 guarantor of each agency.
`SEC. 2103. CONTRIBUTION OF STATE FUNDS.
 `(a) ESTIMATE- The Secretary shall estimate the amount that a State would
 have spent during each calendar year for individuals eligible for long-term
 care services under each Federal-State entitlement program in the absence
 of the program established by this title. Such estimate shall be updated
 annually based on the projected increases in the cost of carrying out
 this title.
 `(b) CONTRIBUTION- For residents of a State to be eligible to participate
 in the program established by this title during a calendar year, the State
 shall contribute the amount estimated under subsection (a) to the Secretary
 to share in the costs of providing services to such State residents under
 the program established by this title for such calendar year.
`SEC. 2104. INVOLVEMENT OF FAMILY.
 `In the provision of long-term care under this title, health and social
 service workers shall, to the maximum extent feasible, treat the family
 as a partner in the provision of such care.
`PART B--COVERAGE OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SERVICES
`SEC. 2111. BENEFITS.
 `An individual who meets the eligibility criteria prescribed in section
 2112 shall be eligible under the program established by this part for
 coverage for home and community-based care services that are--
 `(1) determined to be necessary by a Case Management Agency;
 `(2) described in the care plan of the individual;
 `(3) services for which the individual is eligible; and
 `(4) consistent with the need for care of the individual, regulations
 issued by the Secretary, and standards established under this part.
`SEC. 2112. ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- An individual shall be eligible for benefits under this
 part only if the individual--
 `(1)(A) with respect to benefits before January 1 of the fourth year that
 begins after the date of the enactment of this title, is--
 `(i) 65 years of age or older; or
 `(ii) eligible for benefits under part A of title XVIII as the result of
 a disability; and
 `(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency through a screening process
 (conducted in accordance with section 2102) to be--
 `(i) completely dependent (does not participate) in at least one
 age-appropriate activity of daily living or unable to perform two or more
 age-appropriate activities of daily living without human assistance or
 supervision; or
 `(ii) so cognitively impaired (due to adult onset, acquired chronic
 organic disease of the brain occurring in clear consciousness, and
 including those individuals who would meet such criteria except for the
 presence of a transient delirium in such individuals) as to require constant
 supervision from another individual because such impaired individual engages
 in inappropriate behavioral patterns that pose a substantial health and
 safety hazard to such impaired individual or to others; or
 `(2)(A) is under 19 years of age; and
 `(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency through a screening process
 (conducted in accordance with section 2102)--
 `(i) to be unable to perform one or more age-appropriate activities of
 daily living without human assistance or supervision; or
 `(ii) to require both a medical device to compensate for the loss of a
 vital body function that is necessary to avert death or major loss of
 bodily functional capacity and substantial and ongoing nursing care to
 avert death or further disability; or
 `(3)(A) would be eligible for benefits under title XVIII on the basis of
 a disability except for the required 24-month waiting period;
 `(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency through a screening process
 (conducted in accordance with section 2102) to be completely dependent
 (does not participate) in at least one age-appropriate activity of daily
 living or unable to perform two or more age-appropriate activities of
 daily living without human assistance or supervision; and
 `(C) has a medical prognosis that such individual's life expectancy is 12
 months or less.
 `(b) APPLICATION- An individual shall be eligible for benefits under this
 part only if--
 `(1) the individual has filed an application for, and is in need of,
 benefits covered under this part;
 `(2) the legal guardian of the individual has filed an application on behalf
 of an individual who is in need of benefits covered under this part; or
 `(3) the representative of an individual who is cognitively impaired,
 who has no legal guardian, and who is in need of benefits covered under
 this part, files an application on behalf of the individual.
`SEC. 2113. RESPITE CARE.
 `(a) ELIGIBILITY- An individual shall be eligible for respite care benefits
 under this part if--
 `(1)(A) the individual meets the requirements established in section 2112;
 `(B) the individual is dependent on a daily basis on a primary caregiver
 and is assisting the individual without monetary compensation in the
 performance of at least two age-appropriate activities of daily living; and
 `(C) without such assistance the individual could not perform such activities
 of daily living; or
 `(2) the individual has dementia or other cognitive impairments, as
 determined by a Screening Agency.
 `(b) DETERMINATION OF NEED- The determination of the need of an individual
 for respite care shall be made by the Case Management Agency. An analysis
 of such need shall be included in the care plan of the individual.
 `(c) SERVICES- Respite care services under this section may include home
 and community-based services or nursing home services described in section
 2121(b).
 `(d) PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Coverage for such services shall be for short
 periods of time of not to exceed 30 days or 720 hours during a given
 calendar year.
 `(e) REIMBURSEMENT RATES- Reimbursement rates for respite care services
 covered under this section shall be the same as rates established elsewhere
 in this part for home and community-based services and nursing home services.
`SEC. 2114. QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Services provided to eligible individuals pursuant to a plan
 of care under this part shall be provided by qualified service providers.
 `(b) TYPES- A qualified service provider shall include--
 `(1) a home care agency certified by the State;
 `(2) a home health agency certified by the Secretary;
 `(3) an adult day health care center certified by the State; and
 `(4) other certified or licensed provider of specific services including
 a registered professional nurse, qualified social worker, physician,
 nurse practitioner, physical, occupational or speech therapist, certified
 dietitian, and other providers as the Secretary shall designate by regulation
 that meet standards established by the Secretary.
 `(c) APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR REIMBURSEMENT- No individual or agency shall be
 eligible for reimbursement for services provided to an individual under
 this part unless the Case Management Agency approves the provision of
 services to such individual or agency.
`SEC. 2115. PAYMENT FOR SERVICES.
 `(a) CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCIES- The Secretary shall pay an amount monthly to
 each Case Management Agency that equals the sum of the amounts allotted by
 the Screening Agency for eligible individuals in the geographic jurisdiction
 of such Case Management Agency who have been determined by such Screening
 Agency to be eligible to receive services covered under this part.
 `(b) SERVICE PROVIDERS-
 `(1) DIRECT PAYMENTS- The Case Management Agency shall make direct payments
 to certified home care and home health agencies, and other qualified
 providers of home and community-based services reimbursable under this
 part, in accordance with such methods as the State may establish pursuant
 to regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 `(2) FULL PAYMENT FOR SERVICES- All providers of home and community-based
 care services under the program established under this part shall accept
 payment rates established by the Case Management Agency as payment in full
 for services and shall not pass on additional charges to beneficiaries
 for services rendered under a plan of care.
 `(c) PROVIDERS OF CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES- If a Case Management Agency
 contracts with a home health or home care agency to provide case management
 services, the Case Management Agency shall make direct payments to such
 organization in accordance with such methods as the State may establish
 pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 `(d) LIMIT ON PAYMENT FOR HOME HEALTH AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES-
 `(1) INITIAL PERIOD- During the 3-year period beginning on the date of
 enactment of this title, the maximum amount of payments that may be made
 to a Case Management Agency for home and community-based services provided
 to an individual who resides in the geographic jurisdiction of the agency
 and who is eligible for services under this part shall be, on an annualized
 basis, not more than 65 percent of the average amount payable, including
 the cost of ancillary services, for the same number of care days in a
 skilled nursing facility under title XVIII in the area in which the home
 and community-based care is provided.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT YEARS- In years subsequent to the period referred to in
 paragraph (1), the maximum amount referred to in such paragraph shall be
 established by the Secretary according to such prospective payment methods
 as the Secretary may establish by regulation to assure that no payment is
 made for home and community-based services that will exceed the cost of
 an alternative placement in a nursing facility, less a reasonable estimate
 of the cost of room and board in such facilities or in the community.
 `(e) AMOUNT OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (d) and other provisions of this
 subsection, the amount of coverage allotted to an eligible individual shall
 be the amount necessary to carry out the service needs of the individual.
 `(2) MAXIMUM AVERAGE AMOUNT- In the case of an individual in a given
 geographic area, the average amount payable for such individual shall not
 exceed an amount determined by multiplying--
 `(A) the maximum amount prescribed in subsection (d); by
 `(B) a measure of the severity of the need for services of the individual.
 `(3) SEVERITY OF NEED FOR SERVICES- For purposes of paragraph (2), the
 severity of the need for services of an individual shall be estimated by
 such statistical models and techniques, that shall include a measure of the
 severity of dependency in activities of daily living, cognitive impairment,
 living arrangement, age, and such other factors as the Secretary shall
 specify by regulation, except that all individuals determined to be eligible
 for services under this part shall be presumed to face a monthly need for
 services of at least 5 percent of the maximum allotment. In determining
 eligibility, the Secretary shall not use any measures of the income and
 assets of the individual. Expenditures authorized by this paragraph shall
 be made only for the services specified in this part in accordance with
 a written care plan prepared through case management services provided
 by the Case Management Agency or a home care or home health agency under
 contract with the agency to provide case management services.
 `(4) CHRONICALLY-ILL INDIVIDUAL- The amount of coverage allotted in a
 month to an eligible individual who is a chronically-ill individual, as
 described in section 2112(a)(2)(B)(ii), who resides in a State shall be an
 amount that the Secretary estimates is equal to 100 percent of the amount
 that would be payable, under the plan of the State approved under title
 XIX during the month if such individual were provided appropriate care in
 an appropriate institutional setting, if no limit on amount, duration, or
 scope of covered institutional services applied other than medical necessity.
`SEC. 2116. HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- No later than 60 days after the date of enactment of
 this title, there shall be established an independent body to be known as
 the `Home and Community-Based Care Advisory Council' (hereinafter referred
 to in this section as the `Council').
 `(b) Membership-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Council shall be composed of 13 individuals appointed
 by the Secretary.
 `(2) EXPERTISE- To the maximum extent practicable, the Council shall
 include individuals with expertise in pediatrics, geriatrics, gerontology,
 disability, case management of home and community-based services and
 home and community-based care reimbursement, home and community-based care
 consumers and their representatives, home and community-based care providers
 and their representatives, professionals with expertise in long-term care
 including nurses, social workers, discharge planners, third party payors,
 long-term care ombudsmen, and State and local health and social service
 agency representatives.
 `(3) TERM- An appointment to the Council shall be for a term of not to
 exceed 4 years.
 `(c) PURPOSE- The purpose of the Council shall be--
 `(1) to assist the Secretary in assuring the prompt and efficient
 implementation of this part;
 `(2) to regularly review the implementation of this part; and
 `(3) to recommend to the Secretary and Congress any necessary modifications
 of this part.
 `(d) CONSULTATION- The Secretary shall regularly and closely consult with
 the Council in the implementation and administration of this part.
 `(e) MEETINGS- To carry out this section, the Secretary shall meet with
 the Council at least once every month during the 24-month period beginning
 60 days after the date of enactment of this title and at least quarterly
 after such period.
`SEC. 2117. QUALITY ASSURANCE BOARDS AND COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
 `(a) QUALITY ASSURANCE BOARD- A State shall establish and appoint members to
 a quality assurance board that will monitor the quality of care provided
 under this part in a given area of the State, pursuant to procedures
 established by the Secretary by regulation.
 `(b) COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARD- A State shall establish and appoint members
 to a community advisory board for each Case Management Agency pursuant
 to regulations by the Secretary. The advisory board shall be composed
 of consumers of services and their families, representatives of agencies
 and organizations, professionals providing services to the elderly, and
 public members. Public members and consumers and their families shall form
 a majority of the members of the advisory board.
`SEC. 2118. HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 `(a) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SERVICES CONSUMERS' BILL OF RIGHTS-
 The Secretary shall promulgate regulations that shall establish a bill
 of rights for consumers of home and community-based services (hereafter
 referred to in this section as the `consumer'), that shall recognize the
 following as the rights of consumers that may be asserted by the consumer or
 the representative (including a family member) or guardian of the consumer:
 `(1) TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUAL- To be treated with courtesy, respect, and
 full recognition of one's dignity, individuality, and right to control
 one's own household and lifestyle.
 `(2) FULL INFORMATION- To be fully informed by the individual's case
 management team of his or her condition.
 `(3) REFUSAL OF TREATMENT- To refuse all or part of any treatment, care,
 or service, and to be informed of the likely consequences of such refusal.
 `(4) NONDISCRIMINATION- To receive treatment, care, and services
 in compliance with all State and local laws and regulations without
 discrimination in the provision or quality of services based on race,
 religion, gender, age, or creed (except as provided under the Age
 Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.)), or because of a
 change in the source of payment.
 `(5) FREEDOM FROM ABUSE- To be free from mental and physical abuse, neglect,
 and exploitation, and to be free from chemical and physical restraints.
 `(6) RESPECT AND PRIVACY- To receive respect and privacy in the home care
 consumer's treatment, care, and services in caring for personal needs,
 in communications, and in all daily activities.
 `(7) CONFIDENTIALITY- To be assured of the confidential treatment of
 personal and financial records and to approve or refuse the release of
 such records to any individuals outside the agency except as otherwise
 required by law or third-party payment contract.
 `(8) EXERCISE OF RIGHTS- To be free to fully exercise the consumer's civil
 rights and to be assisted in doing so when assistance is needed.
 `(9) TRANSITION OF SERVICES- To receive assistance to assure a smooth
 transition in services consistent with the welfare of the home care consumer.
 `(b) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED PROVIDER QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to such other requirements as may apply, the
 Secretary shall promulgate regulations that require that in order to receive
 funding under this title for the provision of home or community-based
 services (hereinafter referred to in this section as `services'), all
 qualified providers shall, not later than 6 months after the date of the
 publication of such regulations--
 `(A) comply with the consumers' bill of rights promulgated under subsection
 (a);
 `(B)(i) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving the
 grievances of consumers; and
 `(ii) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such procedures
 to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer)
 who receives services provided by a qualified provider;
 `(C) ensure that each provider employed by or under contract with a home
 care or home health agency receives training--
 `(i) sufficient to meet a level of proficiency established by the Secretary
 in regulations (in consultation with representatives of the elderly,
 disabled, and children, home health and home care agencies, and experts
 in the fields of geriatric nursing, pediatric nursing, geriatric social
 work, pediatric social work, mental health, rehabilitation, and other
 appropriate health care professionals) that are appropriate in content
 and amount as are consistent with the requirements of section 4021(b)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987;
 `(ii) that develops separate levels of proficiency in and is reflective
 of the range of skills required of providers that provide different levels
 of services; and
 `(iii) the extent of which shall be made available on request to each
 consumer with respect to the amount of training or level of certification
 achieved by each provider;
 `(D) supervise all care providers employed by or under contract with
 a qualified provider in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
 Secretary (including regular random on-site supervisory visits by registered
 nurses or other appropriate health care professionals); and
 `(E) perform annual evaluations of the quality of services provided by
 providers employed by or under contract with a qualified provider that
 shall document consumer involvement through a process that shall include
 client interviews.
 `(2) DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT SERVICES- In addition to such other
 requirements as may apply, to receive funding for the provision of durable
 medical equipment services under this title, a qualified provider shall
 in each case of a consumer to which such services are provided--
 `(A) issue written instructions for the operation of such equipment;
 `(B) provide sufficient training to the consumer, the family of the
 consumer, and the staff to permit the appropriate and safe operation of
 all such equipment; and
 `(C) formulate an emergency plan that is appropriate for the services
 provided to the home care consumer.
 `(c) CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCY QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS- In addition
 to such other requirements as may apply, the Secretary shall promulgate
 regulations requiring that an agency, to receive funding for the provision
 of case management services under this title, shall, not later than 6
 months after the date of the publication of such regulations--
 `(1)(A) comply with the consumers' bill of rights promulgated under
 subsection (a); and
 `(B) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such bill of
 rights to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer)
 who receives services under this title;
 `(2)(A) implement procedures for the prompt review and resolution of the
 grievances of consumers; and
 `(B) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such procedures
 to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of such consumer)
 who receives services from the agency;
 `(3) provide to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of
 the consumer) a written statement of the services to be provided to the
 consumer and the schedule for the provision of such services, as agreed
 on by the consumer;
 `(4) provide to each consumer a clear written statement as to how the
 consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer), may appeal
 the benefit and level decisions made by the agency;
 `(5) maintain procedures that assure prompt access by eligible consumers
 to services;
 `(6) ensure that the personnel that provide case management services to
 each consumer have received adequate training as prescribed in regulations
 promulgated by the Secretary, in consultation with the appropriate Home
 Care Quality Assurance Board; and
 `(7) establish and implement case management procedures that shall include--
 `(A) a plan of care that establishes reasonable and measurable client
 objectives and the services to be provided to meet such objectives;
 `(B) a plan of care that employs outcome measures of care insofar as they
 are appropriate and available for each consumer served;
 `(C) methods for a review that shall be conducted at least once during
 every 3-month period of--
 `(i) the needs of the consumer; and
 `(ii) the plan of care for the consumer;
 `(D) methods for follow-up and on-going monitoring of patient and services
 delivery; and
 `(E) a statement of the criteria and procedures to be applied for the
 discharge or transfer of the consumer to another agency, program, or service.
 `(d) STANDARD AND EXTENDED SURVEY- Sections 1891 (c) and (d) shall apply
 to home health agencies certified to receive payments for services provided
 under this title.
 `(e) SURVEY- The Secretary shall develop and implement a standard and
 extended survey of home care agencies certified to receive payments for
 services provided under this title.
`SEC. 2119. CERTIFICATION.
 `(a) Requirement-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State shall--
 `(A) survey home care agencies, home health agencies, and adult day health
 care centers to determine their eligibility to participate in the program
 established under this part; and
 `(B) certify such an agency or center as eligible to participate in such
 program if the agency meets the requirements of this part and regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary.
 `(2) FREQUENCY- A State shall conduct the survey and certification required
 under paragraph (1) not less than once during each fiscal year.
 `(b) INDIVIDUAL PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- To be eligible to be reimbursed for services covered
 under this part, a qualified service provider referred to in section 2114
 shall be licensed or, if applicable, certified by the State in which the
 provider practices pursuant to the requirements of this part and regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary.
 `(2) HOMEMAKERS AND HOME HEALTH AIDES- To be reimbursed for services covered
 under this part, a homemaker or home health aide must be a trained employee
 of a certified home care or home health agency working under professional
 supervision.
 `(3) WAIVER- The Secretary may waive the certification requirement for
 providers that do not provide direct patient care.
`SEC. 2120. REIMBURSEMENT.
 `(a) ACCEPTANCE OF REFERRALS AND REIMBURSEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a home health or home
 care agency or other provider certified by a State to provide services
 reimbursable under this part shall provide services to all individuals
 referred to the provider by a Case Management Agency or by an organization
 under contract with the agency to provide case management services and
 accept as payment in full the reimbursement amounts provided under this part.
 `(2) EXCEPTION- The service requirement imposed under paragraph (1)
 shall not apply if the requirement would be in conflict with the operating
 policies under which the provider was certified (such as the maximum number
 of individuals an agency may care for at any time).
 `(b) ADDITIONAL SERVICES- Nothing contained in this part shall be construed
 to preclude any individual who is eligible to receive services under
 this part from purchasing home and community-based services that are more
 generous than services provided for in the care plan of the individual. If
 an individual purchases more generous services, a provider may not charge
 such individual higher rates for such services than the amount the provider
 is reimbursed under this part.
 `(c) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, in the case of any service covered under this part that
 is also covered under another Federally administered entitlement program,
 the Secretary shall act as a secondary payer under this part.
 `(d) REIMBURSEMENT- Reimbursement for services provided under this part
 shall be subject to the requirements of this part and regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary.
`PART C--COVERAGE OF FIRST 6 MONTHS OF NURSING HOME CARE
`SEC. 2121. BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsections (c) and (d), an individual who meets
 the eligibility criteria prescribed in section 2122 shall be eligible under
 the program established by this part for coverage for services described in
 subsection (b) provided to the individual by a nursing facility that are
 required by the individual, while the individual is an inpatient of the
 facility, for a period of time not to exceed 6 months for a spell of illness.
 `(b) TYPES- Coverage may be provided under this part for--
 `(1) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse;
 `(2) bed and board in connection with the furnishing of nursing care;
 `(3) physical, occupational, or speech therapy furnished by a facility or
 by others under arrangements with a facility;
 `(4) medical social services;
 `(5) drug, biological, supply, appliance, and equipment for use in the
 facility, that is ordinarily furnished by the facility for the care and
 treatment of an inpatient;
 `(6) medical service of an intern or resident-in-training under an approved
 teaching program of a hospital with which a facility has in effect a
 transfer agreement or other diagnostic or therapeutic service provided by
 a hospital with which a facility has in effect a transfer agreement; and
 `(7) such other health services necessary to the health of a patient as
 are generally provided by a nursing home facility.
 `(c) BENEFITS AFTER COVERED STAYS- An individual shall be eligible for
 additional nursing home coverage under this part subsequent to a covered
 stay if--
 `(1) the individual has not been an inpatient in a hospital or nursing
 facility for at least 6 consecutive months after any covered stay; and
 `(2)(A) the individual has a diagnosis that is different from that provided
 for the preceding nursing home stay; or
 `(B) there has been a substantial worsening of the condition of the
 individual since the latest discharge of the individual.
`SEC. 2122. ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- An individual shall be eligible for benefits under this
 part if--
 `(1)(A) for benefits provided before January 1 of the fourth year that
 begins after the date of the enactment of this title, the individual is--
 `(i) 65 years of age or older; or
 `(ii) eligible for benefits under part A of title XVIII as the result of
 disability; and
 `(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency through a screening process
 (conducted in accordance with section 2102) to be--
 `(i) completely dependent with respect to at least one age-appropriate
 activity of daily living or unable to perform two or more age-appropriate
 activities of daily living without human assistance or supervision; or
 `(ii) so cognitively impaired (due to adult onset, acquired chronic organic
 disease of the brain occurring in clear consciousness, and including
 those individuals who would meet such criteria except for the presence
 of a transient delirium in such individuals) as to require constant
 supervision from another individual because such impaired individual
 engages in inappropriate behavior patterns that pose a substantial health
 and safety hazard to such impaired individual or to others;
 `(2) the individual is--
 `(A) under 19 years of age; and
 `(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency through a screening process
 (conducted in accordance with section 2102)--
 `(i) to be unable to perform one or more age-appropriate activities of
 daily living without human assistance or supervision; or
 `(ii) to require both a medical device to compensate for the loss of a
 vital body function that is necessary to avert death or major loss of
 bodily functional capacity and substantial and ongoing nursing care to
 avert death or further disability;
 `(3) the individual (or legal guardian) has filed an application for such
 benefits, and is in need of, benefits covered under this title;
 `(4) receiving nursing home services in a nursing facility would be in
 the best interest of the individual; and
 `(5) the Secretary determines that the individual meets the eligibility
 requirements imposed under this subsection.
 `(b) CURRENT INDIVIDUALS- An individual who is in a hospital or nursing home
 on the date of the enrollment of the individual in the program established
 by this part shall be ineligible for coverage under this section until
 the individual's first spell of illness beginning after such date.
`SEC. 2123. LIMITATIONS ON PAYMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Monthly reimbursement for nursing home services
 covered under this part shall be an amount the Secretary determines to
 be reasonable and appropriate, taking into account the average cost of
 providing appropriate care.
 `(b) PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT- To the extent feasible, the Secretary shall
 establish a prospective payment mechanism for payment for nursing home
 services covered under this part that takes into account the expected
 resource utilization of individual patients based on the degree of impairment
 of the patients and other factors affecting service requirements.
`SEC. 2124. REIMBURSEMENT.
 `Certified nursing homes shall accept payment for services rendered under
 this part as payment in full and shall not be allowed to pass on additional
 charges to beneficiaries for covered services.
`SEC. 2125. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS.
 `Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the case of any service
 covered under this part that is also covered under any other Federally
 administered entitlement program, the Secretary shall act as a secondary
 payer under this part.
`PART D--INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR NURSING HOME CARE THAT EXCEEDS 6 MONTHS
`SEC. 2131. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 `The Secretary shall establish an optional insurance program for individuals
 45 years of age and older (and, under section 2137, for individuals of
 any age) to cover nursing home stays that exceed 6 months.
`SEC. 2132. ELIGIBILITY.
 `(a) Determination-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A Screening Agency shall determine whether an individual
 is eligible to receive benefits covered under this part.
 `(2) SCREENING TOOL- The agency shall use the same screening the first 6
 months of nursing home care under part C in order to determine the continued
 need of an individual for nursing home care and therefore eligibility for
 benefits under this part.
 `(3) PERIODIC EVALUATION- The Case Management Agency shall continue to make
 such an evaluation periodically, pursuant to regulations of the Secretary,
 as long as an individual remains in a nursing home.
 `(b) ELECTION OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the other provisions of this subsection and
 section 2137, an individual shall have the option to purchase coverage
 under this part at 45 years of age or at 65 years of age.
 `(2) INITIAL YEAR- During the 1-year period beginning on the effective
 date of this part, an individual who is 45 years of age or over shall
 be eligible to purchase insurance under this part, except that such an
 individual shall not be eligible to purchase insurance while confined to a
 hospital or nursing home or within 6 months after a period of confinement
 in a nursing home or 90 days after a period of confinement in a hospital.
 `(3) EXTENSION BEYOND INITIAL YEAR- If an individual is confined to a
 nursing home or hospital during a period that extends beyond the first year
 after the effective date of this part, an individual shall be eligible to
 enroll in the program established by this part during the 60-day period
 beginning after the individual's first spell of illness.
 `(4) SUBSEQUENT YEARS- During years subsequent to the period referred to in
 paragraph (2), an individual shall be eligible to purchase insurance under
 this part within 6 months of the 45th or 65th birthday of the individual.
 `(5) ACTIVATION OF BENEFITS- To receive coverage under the insurance program
 established by this part, an individual shall have purchased such coverage
 at least 1 month prior to admission to a nursing facility, unless the reason
 for the need of services is because of an accident or stroke subsequent
 to the date that such individual signed up for coverage under this part.
`SEC. 2133. PREMIUM RATES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under section 2137(b), the Secretary
 shall determine one premium rate for individuals electing to purchase
 coverage under this part at age 45 (or between ages 45 and 64 during the
 initial enrollment period) and a separate rate for those who elect such
 coverage at age 65 (or at age 65 and over during the initial enrollment
 period).
 `(b) REVISION- The Secretary shall revise the premiums annually.
 `(c) RATES- In developing premium rates under the program established by
 this part, the Secretary shall establish rates that are expected to cover
 45 percent of the estimated costs of nursing home stays that exceed 6
 months for those individuals enrolled in the program.
 `(d) Cost Sharing for Low-Income Individuals-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall pay--
 `(A) an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount of the premium charged
 an eligible individual under this section if the income of the individual
 does not exceed 100 percent of the poverty line for a single individual
 (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act
 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)));
 `(B) an amount equal to 75 percent of the amount of the premium charged
 an eligible individual under this section if the income of the individual
 is between 100 percent and 150 percent of the poverty line for a single
 individual (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block
 Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))); and
 `(C) an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of the premium charged
 an eligible individual under this section if the income of the individual
 is between 150 percent and 200 percent of the poverty line for a single
 individual (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block
 Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))).
 `(2) MINIMUM PAYMENT- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), an eligible individual
 who elects to purchase insurance under this part shall pay not less than
 $5 per month as part of the premium for such insurance.
`SEC. 2134. BENEFITS.
 `(a) TYPES- An eligible individual who elects to purchase insurance
 under this part shall be eligible to receive from a nursing facility
 for an unlimited period of time (contingent on the continued need of the
 individual for services)--
 `(1) nursing care, provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse;
 `(2) physical, occupational, or speech therapy furnished by the facility
 or by others under arrangements with the facility;
 `(3) medical social services;
 `(4) drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment for use in
 the facility, that are ordinarily furnished by the facility for the care
 and treatment of inpatients;
 `(5) medical services of interns and residents-in-training under an approved
 teaching program of a hospital with which the facility has in effect a
 transfer agreement and other diagnostic or therapeutic services provided
 by a hospital with which the facility has in effect a transfer agreement; and
 `(6) such other health services necessary to the health of patients as
 are generally provided by nursing facilities.
 `(b) DURATION- The duration of benefits covered under this part shall
 be unlimited as long as the Case Management Agency determines, through
 its periodic review of a patient, that the patient continues to require
 nursing home services.
`SEC. 2135. QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Covered nursing home services under this part shall be
 provided by qualified service providers.
 `(b) TYPES- A provider shall be considered a qualified service provider
 under this part if the provider is a nursing facility that is certified by
 the State and meets the requirements of this part and any other standards
 established by the Secretary by regulation for the safe and efficient
 provision of services covered under this part.
`SEC. 2136. REIMBURSEMENT.
 `(a) AMOUNT- Monthly reimbursement for nursing home services under this
 part shall be 65 percent of the amount the Secretary determines to be
 reasonable and appropriate to cover the cost of care provided under this
 part, taking into account the average cost of providing appropriate care
 in the most efficient manner.
 `(b) PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT- To the extent feasible, the Secretary shall
 establish a prospective payment mechanism for payment for nursing home
 services under this part that takes into account the expected resource
 utilization of individual patients based on their degree of disability
 and other factors determining service requirements.
 `(c) ROOM AND BOARD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding section 2132(b)(2), payment for room and
 board under this part shall be made by an individual participating in the
 program established by this part for those days spent in a nursing facility
 beyond 6 months.
 `(2) MANNER OF PAYMENT- Subject to paragraph (4), such payments for room
 and board shall be made by an individual directly to the nursing facility
 and shall be reduced by the amount of payments made by the Secretary under
 paragraph (4).
 `(3) RATES- Charges for room and board shall be 35 percent of the average
 per diem rate paid by the Secretary to nursing facilities receiving
 reimbursement under this part.
 `(4) PAYMENT BY SECRETARY FOR CERTAIN LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS- The Secretary
 shall pay directly to the nursing facility--
 `(A) an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount of the room and board
 charges imposed under this subsection for an eligible individual under
 this section if the income of the individual does not exceed 100 percent
 of the poverty line for a single individual (as defined in section 673(2)
 of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)));
 `(B) an amount equal to 75 percent of the amount of such room and
 board charges for an eligible individual whose income is between 100
 percent and 150 percent of the poverty line for a single individual
 (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act
 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))); and
 `(C) an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of such room and
 board charges for an eligible individual whose income is between 150
 percent and 200 percent of the poverty line for a single individual
 (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act
 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))).
`SEC. 2137. EXTENSION OF ELIGIBILITY TO INDIVIDUALS OF ANY AGE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this part,
 the Secretary shall provide, in accordance with this section, the option
 for individuals to purchase coverage under this part without regard to age.
 `(b) SEPARATE PREMIUM RATES- In the case of individuals who purchase coverage
 under this section, the Secretary shall apply premium rates (which may vary
 for classes of such individuals) that provide for average, per individual
 subsidies that approximate the average, per individual subsidies that are
 provided under this part for individuals not enrolled under this section.
 `(c) EFFECTIVE DATE OF OPTION- This section shall only apply to benefits
 for periods beginning on or after January 1 of the fifth year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this section.
`PART E--TRAINING AND RESEARCH
`SEC. 2141. GRANTS FOR TRAINING FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE FOR THE
ELDERLY.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants to schools of nursing,
 social work, allied health, and public health of accredited universities
 to develop and conduct programs to train individuals in the provision,
 supervision, planning, and analysis of home and community-based care and
 nursing home care for the elderly, disabled, and chronically ill children
 and in the administration of such programs.
 `(b) USE OF FUNDS- Funding made available under this section may be used for
 curriculum development, faculty support, and traineeships and fellowships.
 `(c) GRANT PREFERENCES- In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary
 shall give a preference to programs that--
 `(1) provide for the development or conduct of programs for continuing
 education and certification of professionals currently working in the
 field of geriatric health in the provision of services to the chronically
 impaired and working in the field of pediatric care specialization in
 the provision of care services to chronically ill, disabled, and medical
 technology dependent children;
 `(2) have established or will establish affiliations with nursing homes,
 agencies providing home and community-based care, senior citizen centers,
 adult day care centers, and other institutions and agencies providing
 health and social services to the impaired elderly, for the purpose
 of providing in-service training to individuals being trained at the
 grant-receiving institution and technical assistance to the institution
 providing services; and
 `(3) have established or will establish affiliations with programs
 of geriatric training based in accredited medical schools or schools of
 nursing, or both.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, $20,000,000
 for fiscal year 1993, and $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
`SEC. 2142. GRANTS FOR HOME HEALTH AIDES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants to State approved programs
 (that meet requirements established by the Secretary relating to minimum
 course hours, curriculum content, competency evaluation, and qualifications
 of instructors) to develop and conduct programs to train individuals in
 the provision of home health aide services. Such training programs shall be
 designed and conducted according to guidelines and requirements established
 by the Secretary by regulation.
 `(b) GRANT PREFERENCES- Preference shall be given to programs that have
 established or will have established affiliations with nursing homes,
 agencies providing home and community-based care, senior citizen centers,
 adult day health care centers, and other institutions providing health
 and social services to the impaired elderly, for the purpose of providing
 in-service training to individuals being trained at the grant-receiving
 program and technical assistance to the institution providing services.
 `(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1992
 and 1993 and $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
`SEC. 2143. GRANTS FOR MODEL CONSUMER TRAINING PROGRAMS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants available to accredited
 university schools of nursing to develop model consumer training
 programs. Such programs shall provide information and training about
 the delivery of home care services for caregivers as well as general
 information about the home and community-based care service system for
 consumers or potential consumers of home care or home health services,
 or both, pursuant to regulations established by the Secretary.
 `(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, $10,000,000
 for fiscal year 1993, and $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
`SEC. 2144. CENTERS FOR LONG-TERM CARE PLANNING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall through grants or contracts, or both,
 assist public or private nonprofit entities in meeting the costs of planning
 and developing new centers, and operating existing and new centers, for
 multidisciplinary health planning development and assistance under this
 section for the purpose of--
 `(1) assisting the Secretary in carrying out this part;
 `(2) providing such technical and consulting assistance as States may
 require;
 `(3) conducting research, studies, and analysis of planning and resource
 development for the provision of long-term care services; and
 `(4) developing long-term care planning approaches, methodologies, policies,
 and standards.
 `(b) NUMBER OF CENTERS- The Secretary shall provide assistance under this
 section so that at least 6 such centers shall be in operation by January
 1, 1992.
 `(c) CASE-MANAGEMENT AGENCIES- Agencies assisted under this section--
 `(1) may enter into arrangements with Case Management Agencies for the
 provision of such services as may be appropriate and necessary in assisting
 the agencies in performing their functions under this part; and
 `(2) shall develop and use methods (satisfactory to the Secretary)
 to disseminate to such agencies long-term care planning approaches,
 methodologies, policies, and standards.
 `(d) Staff-
 `(1) DIRECTOR- Each center shall have a full-time director who possesses
 a demonstrated capacity for substantial accomplishment and leadership in
 the field of planning and resource development in the area of long-term care.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL STAFF- Each center shall employ such other additional staff
 as may be appropriate. The staff of the center shall meet such additional
 requirements as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
 `(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1992 and $15,000,000
 for each of the fiscal years 1993 and 1994.
`PART F--DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
`SEC. 2151. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR SERIOUSLY MENTALLY ILL INDIVIDUALS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall conduct at least 5 (but not more than
 10) demonstration projects to determine the relative effectiveness, cost,
 and impact on quality of long-term home care of using different models
 of providing and reimbursing long-term home care services for seriously
 mentally ill individuals and family caregivers.
 `(b) DEFINITION- As used in section, the term `seriously mentally ill
 individual' means an individual who a licensed mental health professional
 in the individual's State of residence certifies--
 `(1) has schizophrenia, bipolar or unipolar disorder or other significant
 mental illness that restrict the ability of the individual to function in
 activities of daily living, employment, and social interaction;
 `(2) has been previously institutionalized or is at risk of being
 institutionalized in the absence of the services provided under this
 section; and
 `(3) is not institutionalized at the time of the certification.
 `(c) REQUIREMENTS- Demonstration projects conducted under this section
 shall--
 `(1) each be conducted over a period of 3 years;
 `(2) be conducted in sites that are chosen to be geographically diverse
 and include at least one rural site;
 `(3) be sensitive to the needs of racial and ethnic minorities;
 `(4) include outreach and case management activities;
 `(5) be responsive to family needs and concerns and appropriately involve
 and consult with family members regarding the provision of services under
 this section;
 `(6) specify, at the time of application, specific outcome expectations
 to be met by the project and identify appropriate mechanisms for measuring
 such outcomes; and
 `(7) include testing the use of different agencies as Case Management
 Agencies and providing for the selection of such agencies in consultation
 with the Comptroller General.
 `(d) OTHER SERVICES- Demonstration projects conducted under this section
 may--
 `(1) provide services or reimbursement for nursing care, homemaker
 or homehealth aide services, psychosocial services, medical services,
 including the provision, monitoring, and testing of necessary medications,
 client and family education, training, and counseling, respite care, crisis
 intervention, information and referral services, and rehabilitation; and
 `(2) provide services to seriously mentally ill individuals or provide
 services to home caregivers (including family members) when such services
 augment and support home caregivers in the care of seriously mentally
 ill individuals.
 `(e) EVALUATION- The Secretary shall provide for the evaluation of
 the projects on a concurrent basis and shall prepare and submit to the
 appropriate Committees of Congress, not later than 18 months after the
 initiation of the projects and on the completion of the projects, a report
 on the findings of the evaluation. Such evaluation shall measure the cost
 and effectiveness of funded projects against the outcome expectations
 identified in the initial applications and include relevant data on client
 and family satisfaction and perceived benefits, together with such additional
 information as the Secretary may consider appropriate.
 `(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund for each of the fiscal years
 1992, 1993, and 1994, not to exceed $10,000,000 to carry out demonstration
 projects under this section and not to exceed $1,000,000 to carry out the
 evaluation of such projects under subsection (e).
`SEC. 2152. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR WORKING AGE INDIVIDUALS WITH SEVERE
FUNCTIONAL LIMITATIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall conduct at least 5 and not more than 10
 demonstration projects to determine the feasibility of providing long-term
 home care benefits under title XVIII of this Act for working-age individuals
 with severe functional limitations (as defined in subsection (b)).
 `(b) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `working-age individual
 with severe functional limitations' means an individual who is over 18
 years of age, but under 65 years of age, who is not entitled to benefits
 under title XVIII but who is a chronically ill individual, within the
 meaning of section 1861(jj)(1)(A)(i).
 `(c) REQUIREMENTS- Demonstration projects under this section--
 `(1) shall include, in the items and services covered under long-term home
 care, personal care services, short term respite, and emergency assistance
 and shall permit coverage of items and services provided either by home
 health agencies or by other qualified persons;
 `(2) may provide for limited cost-sharing for long-term home care;
 `(3) shall provide that payment rates for long-term home care provided by
 persons other than home health agencies shall be comparable to the payment
 rates for such care provided by home health agencies;
 `(4) shall provide that each plan of care for an individual shall take into
 account the capability of the individual to direct the long-term home care
 of the individual and to train persons in providing that care;
 `(5) shall test the effectiveness of consumer-directed living centers that
 are primarily engaged in assisting working age individuals with severe
 functional limitations in maximizing their independence;
 `(6) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cover working age individuals
 with severe functional limitations who--
 `(A) are at imminent risk of institutionalization within 30 days if such
 individual is not provided long-term home care;
 `(B) are institutionalized but who, if provided long-term home care,
 could be discharged from the institution; or
 `(C) need long-term home care to secure or continue employment, to increase
 independence, to enable present caregivers to secure or continue employment,
 or to stabilize families;
 `(7) shall include projects under which personal care services are made
 available away from the primary residence of the individual, as well as
 at that residence; and
 `(8) shall include projects under which family members may be employed as
 caregivers if the family members would be employed if not providing such
 care or if the individual requires more than 20 hours a week of long-term
 home care.
 `(d) Consultation, Evaluation, Report-
 `(1) CONSULTATION- In designing and evaluating the projects conducted
 under this section, the Secretary shall consult with experts in the field
 of disability policy and independent living and with groups representing
 working age individuals with severe functional limitations.
 `(2) EVALUATION- The Secretary shall provide for the evaluation of
 the projects conducted under this section on a concurrent basis. Such
 evaluation shall include an evaluation of the size of the demand, cost,
 relative effectiveness, and impact on quality of life, of providing long-term
 home care to working age individuals with severe functional limitations.
 `(3) REPORT- Not later than 18 months after the date on which the projects
 conducted under this section are completed, the Secretary shall prepare
 and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress, a report concerning
 the findings of the evaluation under paragraph (2). The Secretary shall
 include in such report recommendations for appropriate legislative changes.
 `(e) FUNDING- The Secretary shall make available from the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund--
 `(1) for each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, and 1994 not to exceed $10,000,000
 to carry out demonstration projects under this section; and
 `(2) for the 3-fiscal-year period beginning with fiscal year 1992 not
 to exceed $1,000,000 to carry out the evaluation of such projects under
 this section.
`SEC. 2153. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
 `(a) PAYMENTS- Payments under demonstration projects under this part may
 be made in advance or by way of reimbursement, as may be determined by the
 Secretary, and shall be made in such installments and on such conditions
 as the Secretary finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
 `(b) MEDICARE WAIVERS- The Secretary may waive such requirements of title
 XVIII as may be required to carry out demonstration projects under this
 section.'.
SEC. 1003. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, this division
 and the amendments made by this division, shall become effective on the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) COVERAGE OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SERVICES- Part B of title
 XXI of the Social Security Act (as added by section 1002 of this Act)
 shall require payment for services provided in accordance with such part
 after 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) COVERAGE FOR NURSING HOME CARE- Part C of such title shall apply to
 nursing home care provided in accordance with such part on or after January
 1 of the third year that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) FEDERAL LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE PROGRAM- Part D of such title shall
 require the establishment of a Federal long-term care insurance program
 in accordance with such part on and after January of the second year that
 begins after the date of enactment of this Act. Payment for nursing care
 under such part shall begin on January 1 of the third year that begins
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) TRAINING AND RESEARCH- Part E of such title shall require training and
 research programs in accordance with such part on and after January 1, 1992.
Division C--Grants to States for Establishment and Implementation of State
Health Objectives Plans
SEC. 2001. SHORT TITLE.
 This division may be cited as the `Health Objectives 2000 Act'.
SEC. 2002. REFERENCES.
 Whenever in this division an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of
 an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference
 shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.).
SEC. 2003. PURPOSE.
 It is the purpose of this division to implement the Year 2000 National
 Health Objectives through the provision of assistance to Designated Official
 State Public Health Agencies to--
 (1) provide sufficient capacity and resources to States and localities
 to assist such States and localities in achieving the Year 2000 National
 Health Objectives, including--
 (A) reducing tobacco, alcohol, and other drug use and abuse;
 (B) improving nutrition;
 (C) increasing physical activity and fitness;
 (D) improving mental health and preventing mental illness;
 (E) reducing environmental health hazards, improving occupational safety
 and health, and preventing and controlling unintentional injuries;
 (F) reducing violent and abusive behavior;
 (G) preventing and controlling HIV infection and AIDS and sexually
 transmitted diseases;
 (H) immunizing against and controlling infectious diseases;
 (I) improving maternal and infant health;
 (J) improving oral health;
 (K) reducing adolescent pregnancy and improving reproductive health;
 (L) preventing, detecting, and controlling high blood cholesterol and high
 blood pressure;
 (M) preventing, detecting, and controlling cancer and other chronic diseases
 and disorders;
 (N) maintaining the health and quality of life of older individuals;
 (O) improving health education and access to preventive health services; and
 (P) improving surveillance and data systems;
 (2) create and develop a partnership of Federal, State, and local health
 agencies, voluntary health organizations, and other health groups to
 develop initiatives for preventing disease and illness;
 (3) enable States and localities to address national health policy issues;
 and
 (4) assess the health status of the population of the United States.
SEC. 2004. AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
 Title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`Part D--National Health Objectives Grants To States
`SEC. 1941. DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATION.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS- As used in this part:
 `(1) ADVISORY COMMITTEE- The term `Advisory Committee' means the National
 Health Objectives Advisory Committee established under section 1948(a).
 `(2) CORE PRIORITIES- The term `Core Priorities' means the National Health
 Priorities that are designated by the Secretary as `Core National Health
 Priorities' and that must be included in the State health objectives
 provided in the State health objectives plan of each State.
 `(3) NATIONAL HEALTH PRIORITIES- The term `National Health Priorities'
 means the priorities established under section 1948(b).
 `(4) STATE AGENCY- The term `State agency' means the department, agency,
 commission, or other entity designated and vested with authority under
 State law over matters concerning public health.
 `(5) STATE PLAN- The term `State plan' means the health objectives plan
 of a State submitted under section 1946.
 `(6) STATE REPORT- The term `State report' means the annual report of a
 State required under section 1947.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION- The Secretary shall carry out this part through the
 Centers for Disease Control.
`SEC. 1942. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `For the purpose of making allotments to States to carry out this part,
 there are authorized to be appropriated--
 `(1) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 `(2) $700,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;
 `(3) $800,000,000 for fiscal year 1994;
 `(4) $900,000,000 for fiscal year 1995; and
 `(5) $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.
`SEC. 1943. ALLOTMENTS.
 `(a) Amount-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall use not to exceed 90 percent of
 the amounts appropriated under section 1942 for each fiscal year to make
 allotments in accordance with paragraphs (2) and (3).
 `(2) POPULATION- From amounts available for allotments under paragraph
 (1), the Secretary shall allot in each fiscal year to each State an amount
 that equals--
 `(A) $25,000, if the population of the State does not exceed 50,000;
 `(B) $75,000, if the population of the State exceeds 50,000 but does not
 exceed 450,000;
 `(C) $1,000,000, if the population of the State exceeds 450,000 but does
 not exceed 1,000,000;
 `(D) $1,500,000, if the population of the State exceeds 1,000,000 but does
 not exceed 3,000,000;
 `(E) $2,000,000, if the population of the State exceeds 3,000,000 but does
 not exceed 6,000,000;
 `(F) $2,500,000, if the population of the State exceeds 6,000,000 but does
 not exceed 10,000,000;
 `(G) $3,000,000, if the population of the State exceeds 10,000,000 but
 does not exceed 15,000,000; and
 `(H) $4,000,000, if the population of the State exceeds 15,000,000.
 `(3) RELATIVE POPULATION- To the extent that all amounts available for
 allotment under paragraph (1) for each fiscal year are not otherwise
 allotted to States under paragraph (2), such excess shall be allotted to
 each State in an amount that bears the same ratio to such excess amount
 for such fiscal year as the total population of the States bears to the
 population of all States.
 `(4) ADJUSTMENT- If for any fiscal year the amount appropriated under
 section 1942 is less than the total of all amounts listed under paragraph
 (2), the amount allotted to each State shall be an amount that bears the
 same ratio to the total of all amounts available for allotment under such
 section as the amount of the allotment that the State is entitled to under
 paragraph (2) bears to the total of all such amounts under such paragraph.
 `(b) UNALLOTTED AMOUNTS- To the extent that all the amounts appropriated
 under section 1942 for a fiscal year and available for allotment in such
 fiscal year are not otherwise allotted to States because one or more State
 has notified the Secretary that such State does not intend to use the
 full amount of their allotment, such excess shall be allotted among each
 of the remaining States in proportion to the amount otherwise allotted to
 such States for such fiscal year under subsection (a)(3).
 `(c) ADMINISTRATION AND TRAINING- The Secretary shall use not to exceed
 10 percent of the amounts appropriated under section 1942 for each fiscal
 year as provided for in section 1948(f).
`SEC. 1944. PAYMENTS UNDER ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.
 `(a) In General-
 `(1) PLAN REQUIREMENT- For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall make
 payments from amounts appropriated for that fiscal year, as provided for in
 section 6503(a) of title 31, United States Code, to each State, if such State
 has submitted an approved State plan, from its allotment under section 1943.
 `(2) CARRYOVER FUNDS- Any amount paid to a State for a fiscal year and
 remaining unobligated at the end of such year shall remain available for
 the next fiscal year to such State for the purposes for which it was made.
 `(b) Reduction in Amount-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, at the request of a State, may reduce
 the amount of payments that a State is entitled to under subsection (a)
 in an amount equal to--
 `(A) the fair market value of any supplies or equipment furnished the
 State; and
 `(B) the total amount of any pay, allowances, and travel expenses of any
 officer or employee of the Federal government when detailed to the State
 and the amount of any other costs incurred in connection with the detail
 of such officer or employee;
when the furnishing of such supplies or equipment or the detail of such
officers or employees is for the convenience and at the request of the State
and for the purpose of conducting activities described in section 1945.
 `(2) USE OF REDUCTION- The amount by which any payment is reduced under
 paragraph (1) shall be available for payment by the Secretary of the
 costs incurred in furnishing the supplies or equipment or in detailing the
 personnel, on which the reduction of the payment is based, and the amount
 shall be considered to be part of the payment and to have been paid to
 the State.
`SEC. 1945. USE OF ALLOTMENTS.
 `(a) STATE PLAN- Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), a State
 shall utilize amounts paid to it under section 1944, from the allotment of
 such State under section 1943(a), to develop and implement a State plan,
 in accordance with section 1946, for--
 `(1) each of the fiscal years 1991 and 1992, that--
 `(A) develops and collects data to assess the public health needs and
 status of the individuals that reside in the State;
 `(B) requires and provides assistance for planning necessary to assist
 projects and programs described in the State plan; and
 `(C) provides for the availability of assistance to projects and programs
 described in the State plan; and
 `(2) fiscal year 1993, and for each fiscal year thereafter during which
 the State receives payments under section 1944, that in addition to the
 activities described in paragraph (1), provides for the funding of projects
 and programs authorized under sections 1904 and 1910.
 `(b) LIMITATIONS- A State shall not use amounts paid to it under section
 1944, to--
 `(1) provide inpatient services;
 `(2) make cash payments to intended recipients of health services;
 `(3) purchase or improve land, purchase, construct, or permanently improve
 (other than minor remodeling) any building or other facility, or purchase
 major medical equipment; or
 `(4) satisfy any requirement for the expenditure of non-Federal funds as
 a condition for the receipt of Federal funds.
 `(c) ADMINISTRATION- Not more than 10 percent of the total amount paid
 to a State under section 1944 from the State allotment under section
 1943(a) for any fiscal year shall be used for administering the funds
 made available under section 1944. The State shall pay from non-Federal
 sources any additional costs of administering such funds. For purposes
 of this subsection, the term `administration' shall not be construed to
 include collection or assessment of data.
`SEC. 1946. STATE HEALTH OBJECTIVES PLAN AND DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- To receive a payment under section 1944 from the State
 allotment for a fiscal year under section 1943(a), a State shall prepare
 and submit, to the Secretary, a State health objectives plan at such time,
 in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary shall
 require. Such State plan shall meet the requirements of subsection (b)
 and shall contain assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the State
 will meet the requirements of subsection (c).
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS- A State plan submitted under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) contain a specific set of not less than five State health objectives
 that shall be chosen from the National Health Priorities described by the
 Secretary under section 1948, and that shall include all Core Priorities
 identified under such section;
 `(2) contain an annual budget that describes the manner in which the payments
 made under section 1944 are to be used by the State, and such budget shall--
 `(A) specify the portion of such funds that are to be used at each level of
 the State or local government, and the portion of such funds that are to be
 allocated for grants to local agencies of public health, community-based
 health organizations, voluntary nonprofit health organizations, and other
 entities selected by the State help meet State objectives under paragraph
 (6); and
 `(B) commit the State to use not less than 80 percent of such payments
 to meet State objectives that, as determined by the State agency after
 an analysis of the National Health Priorities, and based on the available
 State data described in paragraph (3), are critical to improving the health
 status of the individuals who reside within the State;
 `(3) in terms of each State objective--
 `(A) provide assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that there is a
 minimum set of data available to satisfactorily measure the health status
 of individuals who reside within the State;
 `(B) utilize the date described in subparagraph (A) to identify the
 improvement that the State expects to make in the health status of
 individuals who reside within the State during the term of the State plan;
 `(C) specify the particular strategies, projects and programs intended
 to be used by the State to improve the health status of individuals who
 reside within the State;
 `(D) specify the methods intended to be used by the State to evaluate the
 progress made by the State in improving the health status of individuals
 who reside within the State; and
 `(E) provide services targeted at improving the health status of individuals
 who reside within the State at the level of State or local government
 that the State determines is most likely to be effective in achieving the
 State objectives;
 `(4) provide for the establishment of procedures through which the State
 shall monitor the progress of local health agencies, community-based
 organizations, and health organizations in implementing the State objectives;
 `(5) identify public health personnel requirements that the State determines
 are reasonably necessary and appropriate to permit the State to achieve
 the State objectives;
 `(6) identify the mechanism by which the State shall select, and allocate
 assistance provided under this part to local units of government, local
 agencies of public health, community-based health organizations, voluntary
 nonprofit health organizations, and other entities within the State to
 help meet the State objectives; and
 `(7) contain a description (that may be revised throughout the year as may
 be necessary to reflect substantial changes in the projects and programs
 assisted by the State) of the intended use of the payments the State will
 receive under section 1944 for the fiscal year for which the State plan is
 submitted, including information concerning the projects and programs to
 be supported and services to be provided, which shall be made available to
 the public within the State in a manner that will facilitate comment from
 any individual during the period of the development of the description
 and after the transmittal of such.
 `(c) ASSURANCES- As part of the State plan required under subsection
 (a), a State shall provide assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that
 such State--
 `(1) shall use the amounts allotted to it under section 1943 in accordance
 with the requirements of the State plan and of this part;
 `(2) shall establish reasonable criteria for the evaluation of the effective
 performance of entities that receive assistance from the allotment to the
 State under this part;
 `(3) shall identify those populations, areas, and localities in the State
 that demonstrate a need for the services for which funds may be provided
 by the State under this part; and
 `(4) shall use amounts made available under section 1944 for any period
 to supplement and increase the level of State, local, and other Federal
 assistance that would, in the absence of amounts available under section
 1944, be made available for the programs and activities for which funds
 are provided for under this part, and shall not use funds made available
 under this part to supplant such State, local, and other Federal funds.
`SEC. 1947. STATE HEALTH OBJECTIVES REPORT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year
 for which assistance is provided under this part, each State, in cooperation
 with participating local units of government, shall prepare and submit,
 to the Secretary, an annual State health objectives report concerning the
 activities of the State under this part, that meets the requirements of
 this section.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS- A State report submitted under subsection (a) shall
 be in such form and contain such information as the Secretary determines,
 after consultation with the heads of the State agencies and the Comptroller
 General, to be necessary--
 `(1) to determine whether funds were expended by the State in accordance
 with this part and consistent with the needs within the State as proscribed
 in the State plan;
 `(2) to secure a description of the projects and programs within the State
 operated or assisted with amounts provided under allotments made under
 this part; and
 `(3) to secure a record of--
 `(A) the purposes for which amounts provided under this part were expended;
 `(B) the recipients of such funds; and
 `(C) the progress made toward achieving the purposes for which such funds
 were provided.
 `(c) UNIFORM DATA ITEM- A State report submitted under subsection (a)
 shall include information concerning at least one uniform data item on each
 National Health Priority addressed in the State plan, to be determined in
 consultation with the Secretary.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL CONTENTS- The Secretary may require States to include
 additional information in the State report submitted under this section
 if such requirements are not unduly burdensome.
 `(e) AVAILABILITY- The State shall ensure that the State report is available
 for public inspection within the State, and the Secretary shall provide
 copies, on request, to any interested individual.
`SEC. 1948. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SECRETARY.
 `(a) Advisory Committee-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee,
 to be known as the `National Health Objectives Advisory Committee', to
 advise the Secretary concerning National Health Priorities.
 `(2) COMPOSITION- The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 9 members,
 of which--
 `(A) one member shall be the Assistant Secretary for Health, who shall
 serve as chairperson;
 `(B) two members shall be appointed by the Secretary from the general public;
 `(C) one member shall be appointed by the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency;
 `(D) two members shall be appointed by the Association of State and
 Territorial Health Officials;
 `(E) one member shall be appointed by the National Association of County
 Health Officials;
 `(F) one member shall be appointed by the United States Conference of
 Local Health Officials; and
 `(G) one member shall be appointed by the Association of Schools of
 Public Health.
 `(3) MEETINGS AND DUTY- The Advisory Committee shall meet not less than once
 each year for the purpose of providing advice to the Secretary concerning
 the selection, revision, implementation, and evaluation of the National
 Health Priorities.
 `(b) NATIONAL HEALTH PRIORITIES- The Secretary, in consultation with the
 heads of other Federal agencies and the Advisory Committee, and taking
 into account the `Year 2000 Health Objectives' developed by the United
 States Public Health Service, shall establish--
 `(1) National Health Priorities that shall form the basis for all activities
 that receive assistance under this part;
 `(2) from the priorities established under paragraph (1), a set of Core
 Priorities that shall be included in each State plan; and
 `(3) in cooperation with other appropriate national organizations, an
 estimate of the personnel and training that will be needed throughout the
 United States to accomplish the priorities established under paragraph (1).
 `(c) REVIEW OF STATE PLANS- The Secretary shall review each proposed State
 plan, and each proposed amendment thereto, submitted by a State under
 section 1946, and approve each such plan or amendment, or each portion of
 such plan or amendment, that the Secretary determines complies with the
 requirements of this part.
 `(d) STATE REPORT- The Secretary shall receive and review each State report
 submitted by a State under section 1947, and shall compile, evaluate,
 and prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress, and the
 President, an annual National Health Objectives Report concerning the data
 and information contained in such State.
 `(e) OTHER ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall provide consultation, guidance,
 and technical assistance to State and local units of government, and to
 other entities participating in the programs created under this part, to--
 `(1) assist in the development of data sets as required under section 1946,
 and uniform data items required under section 1947; and
 `(2) assist States with State plans, or amendments to such plans, that the
 Secretary determines does not comply with the requirements of this part,
 in revising such plans or amendments to comply with the requirements of
 this part.
 `(f) RESEARCH AND TRAINING- From amounts made available under section
 1943(c), the Secretary shall--
 `(1) utilize not more than 5 percent, or $5,000,000 whichever is less,
 to administer the assistance made available to States under such section;
 `(2) utilize 50 percent of all such remaining amounts to provide assistance
 for the professional training of public health personnel, including--
 `(A) the identification of new knowledge bases and skills for State and
 local public health personnel that are reasonably necessary and appropriate
 to permit the States to achieve the National Health Priorities; and
 `(B) encouraging the training and education of appropriate numbers of such
 personnel in such knowledge bases and skills by establishing operative
 agreements with schools of public health and other institutions that train
 and educate such personnel; and
 `(3) utilize all such remaining amounts to provide assistance for research,
 pilot and demonstration projects and programs that the Secretary determines
 to show the potential impact of regional or national significance with
 respect to the National Health Priorities.'.
SEC. 2005. REPEAL.
 Effective October 1, 1993, sections 1901, 1902, 1903, 1905, 1906, 1907,
 1908, 1909, and 1910A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w,
 300w-1, 300w-2, 300w-4, 300w-5, 300w-6, 300w-7, 300w-8, 300w-9) are repealed.
Division D--Independence for Older Americans
SEC. 3001. SHORT TITLE.
 This division may be cited as the `Independence for Older Americans Act'.
SEC. 3002. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) by the year 2020 the number of Americans aged 65 and over will increase
 to over 50,000,000; by the year 2040 will more than double from present
 levels to 67,000,000 and those 85 and older will more than quadruple
 to 13,000,000;
 (2) more than 1 of every 5 persons 65 years of age or older will be
 hospitalized during the next year;
 (3) one of every 4 Americans over age 65 has some degree of activity
 limitation in performing daily tasks such as walking, buying groceries, and
 doing housework; and many more older Americans face numerous psychological,
 social, economic and environmental obstacles to living independently;
 (4) death rates among older people from acute conditions have decreased
 dramatically from the year 1900, while chronic conditions which inhibit
 independence are now the prevalent health problem for older Americans and
 will increase greatly during the next century;
 (5) the diseases and conditions of aging that result in dependency
 are widespread, including 4,000,000 victims of Alzheimer's disease,
 50,000,000 older Americans suffering from arthritis and related disorders,
 and 5,000,000 victims of incontinence;
 (6) older people require a large proportion of the Nation's health care
 resources and face a higher average out-of-pocket medical cost burden than
 younger people; approximately one-third of the Nation's health care costs,
 an estimated $180,000,000,000 in 1989, will be spent on people over age
 65; the average per capita out-of-pocket cost of persons 65 years of age
 or older is expected to equal 18.5 percent of income by 1991;
 (7) Americans of all ages desire an independent, healthy existence for
 older individuals;
 (8) advances in biomedical, psychological, and social research offer promise
 of major breakthroughs in diseases and conditions that rob the elderly of
 their independence; and
 (9) independence for older Americans is an achievable goal for our Nation's
 research and health care systems.
TITLE I--GERIATRIC RESEARCH AND TRAINING CENTERS
SEC. 3101. REVISION OF PROGRAM.
 Section 445A of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 202 of
 the Home Health Care and Alzheimer's Disease Amendments of 1990, is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of subsection (a), by inserting before the period
 at the end the following: `and for the demonstration and dissemination of
 the applications of such research';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting `(A)' after `(1)' and by inserting
 before the period at the end the following: `, (B) be a comprehensive
 center (including research, training, and demonstration and dissemination
 activities relating to enhancing the independence of older Americans),
 and (C) be affiliated with one or more nursing facilities';
 (3) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (A),
 by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 `(C) development and demonstration of applications of research findings
 to increase the independence of older Americans;
 `(D) development and demonstration of training programs for older Americans
 and their families to prolong independence;
 `(E) training of health care professionals in acute and chronic care
 methods which promote independence; and
 `(F) research and demonstration of public education and prevention programs
 to improve the health and independence of older Americans.';
 (4) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following:
`Such research shall particularly focus on those diseases, disorders, and
complications which reduce the ability of the elderly to live independently.';
and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 `(e) To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated
 $32,500,000 in fiscal year 1992, $40,000,000 in fiscal year 1993, and
 $50,000,000 in fiscal year 1994.'.
TITLE II--AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION TO HEALTH PROFESSIONALS, OLDER AMERICANS,
AND THE GENERAL PUBLIC
SEC. 3201. NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE FOR OLDER AMERICANS INFORMATION PROGRAM.
 The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute on
 Aging, shall prepare a comprehensive plan for a National Independence for
 Older Americans Information Program. The plan shall contain provisions to
 implement the provisions of this title.
SEC. 3202. INFORMATION CLEARINGHOUSE.
 (a) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall establish a clearinghouse to make available information
 on the latest developments to improve the health and independence of older
 Americans available to Federal agencies, States, health care professionals,
 and the general public. A computer-based data system shall be established
 to aid in the accomplishment of these responsibilities.
 (b) The clearinghouse shall support programs to develop model curricula
 for the training of health professionals and other methods to speed the
 transfer of medical research developments designed to improve the health
 and independence of older Americans to health care providers.
 (c) The Secretary shall establish a toll-free telephone communications
 system to provide health care professionals and the general public with
 information and advice designed to increase and maintain the independence
 of older Americans.
 (d) The Secretary may enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with,
 and make grants to, public and private nonprofit entities to carry out
 this section.
SEC. 3203. PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS.
 (a) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall make grants to nonprofit and to public entities concerned
 with the health and independence of older Americans, and may enter into
 contracts with public and private entities, for the development and
 delivery of public service announcements and paid advertising messages
 about the importance of health and nutrition, and screening techniques,
 such as pap smears and mammograms, in avoiding and preventing illnesses
 and conditions which inhibit the independence of older Americans. Such
 information shall also inform the general public on the availability of
 treatments for conditions such as immobility, incontinence, and memory
 loss which reduce the need for the dependent care of older Americans.
 (b) The Secretary shall determine the form and manner of such agreements
 necessary to carry out this section.
SEC. 3204. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 To carry out this title, there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000
 in fiscal year 1992 and such sums as necessary in fiscal year 1993 and 1994.
TITLE III--PREVENTION OF AND RECOVERY FROM CHRONIC ILLNESS
SEC. 3301. COMPREHENSIVE GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT.
 (a) The National Institute on Aging, in cooperation with the Health Care
 Financing Administration, shall support research to determine (1) the
 most effective techniques of geriatric assessment; (2) the most effective
 method of targeting comprehensive geriatric assessment to appropriate
 populations of older persons to determine their health care needs; and (3)
 the most effective means of providing for such needs to maximize health
 and independence.
 (b) The report shall include an evaluation of the feasibility and cost
 of a geriatric assessment to be done at admission or enrollment in all
 institutional or community-based health services for older persons. Such
 an assessment shall include, but not be limited to, evaluating factors
 such as physical and mental health, nutrition, prescription medications
 and the average amount of physical activity performed by said persons.
 (c) The National Institute on Aging and the Health Care Financing
 Administration shall report to Congress on the results of this research
 and recommended guidelines on or before March 1, 1995.
SEC. 3302. FRAILTY AND IMMOBILITY PREVENTION AND REHABILITATION.
 (a) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall develop (1) model techniques to aid in the prevention and
 rehabilitation of older persons from frailty and other mobility problems;
 and (2) model curricula for the health professions for training in the
 use of such techniques.
 (b) The National Institute on Aging may establish up to 5 demonstration
 programs at Comprehensive Independence Research Training and
 Demonstration Centers to prevent the loss of mobility and to help
 frail older persons regain independence, using existing and experimental
 techniques. Physiological, behavioral, and environmental factors shall be
 considered in this investigation.
 (c) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall conduct research to the extent which falls are associated
 with loss of confidence to function independently and increase the need
 for long-term care.
SEC. 3303. RECOVERY FROM CHRONIC ILLNESS.
 (a) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall develop (1) model techniques to aid in the recovery and
 rehabilitation of older persons from chronic and debilitating illness,
 especially those residing in nursing homes; and (2) model curricula for
 the health professions for training in the use of such techniques.
 (b) The Secretary shall report to Congress on or before March 1, 1993,
 on the results of model development for frailty and rehabilitation,
 including the design of programs for the recovery of nursing home patients.
SEC. 3304. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 To carry out this title, there are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000
 in fiscal year 1992, and $5,000,000 for each fiscal year 1993 through 1996.
TITLE IV--RESEARCH ON HEALTH, RETIREMENT, AND INDEPENDENCE
SEC. 3401. HEALTH CARE DATA.
 (a) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute on
 Aging, shall commence a 10-year health and retirement history survey. Said
 survey shall include information on health functioning and expenditures;
 longevity; labor force and retirement; women in the labor force; housing
 and living arrangements; and financial status of older Americans.
 (b) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Institute
 on Aging, shall establish an advisory panel on data collection to review
 existing government surveys and census data to coordinate information on the
 health and retirement status of older Americans. Said panel shall include,
 but not be limited to, representatives from the Bureau of the Census;
 the Department of Labor; the Federal Reserve Board; the National Center
 for Health Statistics; the Social Security Administration; and the Health
 Care Financing Administration.
SEC. 3402. HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION DATA.
 (a) The National Center for Health Statistics shall include persons age
 75 and over in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
 (b) The Director of the National Center for Health Statistics shall develop
 questions related to health promotion and disease prevention appropriate
 for older persons to be included in the National Health Interview Survey
 and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
 (c) The Director of the National Center for Health Statistics shall develop
 questions related to the health promotion and disease prevention practices
 of health care providers with special relevance to older persons to be
 included in the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey.
SEC. 3403. INVESTIGATOR-INITIATED RESEARCH GRANTS.
 (a) The National Institute on Aging shall request proposals from individual
 and team investigators on behavioral, social, and environmental mechanisms
 for promoting the health and independence of older Americans.
 (b) Such investigation shall include, but not be limited to, social support
 of older persons, environmental factors, and psychological implications
 of aging.
SEC. 3404. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 To carry out this title, there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000
 in fiscal year 1992, $7,200,000 in fiscal year 1993, $7,500,000 in fiscal
 year 1994, and such sums as necessary in subsequent fiscal years.
TITLE V--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR NIH
SEC. 3501. AUTHORIZATION.
 The National Institutes of Health are authorized to be appropriated
 $1,000,000,000 in fiscal year 1992, to be added to the National Institute
 on Aging and other institutes in proportion to their current spending
 levels on aging research.
Division E--Authorization of Additional Funds for Research for AIDS,
Hypertension, Sickle Cell Anemia, Infant Mortality, and Breast Cancer
SEC. 4001. ADDITIONAL AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 In addition to the sums authorized to be appropriated for under titles III,
 IV, and XXIII of the Public Health Service Act for each of fiscal years
 1992 through 1996, there are authorized to be appropriated--
 (1) such amounts as may be necessary to provide for $1,200,000,000 for
 research relating to acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
 (2) such amounts as may be necessary to provide for $200,000,000 for
 research relating to hypertension,
 (3) such amounts as may be necessary to provide for $75,000,000 for research
 relating to sickle cell anemia,
 (4) such amounts as may be necessary to provide for $300,000,000 for
 research relating to infant mortality, and
 (5) to the National Cancer Institute $25,000,000 for research into prevention
 and cure of breast cancer (other than research which involves treatment
 or clinical trials).