HR 2379 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2379
To amend the Clean Air Act to protect against interstate transport of
pollutants, to control existing and new sources of acid deposition, and for
other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 16, 1989
Mr. SOLOMON introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to protect against interstate transport of
pollutants, to control existing and new sources of acid deposition, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Acid Deposition Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the deposition of acid compounds from the atmosphere is causing and
 contributing to widespread, long-term ecosystem degradation in many parts
 of the Nation;
 (2) the principal source of the acid compounds in the atmosphere and their
 precursors is sulfur dioxide, a by-product of the combustion of fossil fuels;
 (3) the health, welfare and environment of several States are threatened
 by current levels of sulfur dioxide emissions originating not only from
 within their own boundaries but from interstate sources as well;
 (4) the long-range and intrastate transport of sulfur dioxide and their
 transformation products is an interstate, national, and international
 problem;
 (5) the problem of acid deposition is nationwide in scope and of national
 and international significance and can not be addressed adequately without
 Federal coordination and involvement;
 (6) reduction of the total atmospheric loading of sulfur dioxide will
 mitigate the damage to affected ecosystems and enhance protection of public
 health and welfare and the environment;
 (7) current and future generations of American citizens will be adversely
 affected by delayed action, so that efforts to remedy the problem should
 begin as soon as possible;
 (8) creation of a two-phase pollution control program, contemplating an
 evaluation period of new research efforts prior to the implementation of
 the second phase, will allow the second phase of the program to be revised
 and altered as necessary to incorporate the results of the research and
 produce increased protection of sensitive areas and increased mitigation
 of further environmental damage;
 (9) to preserve scarce resources for protection of the environment, Federal
 policy should permit and, in proper cases, encourage the use of the most
 cost-effective means of solving environmental problems; and
 (10) Federal policy should, where possible, require those responsible for
 pollution to pay for its control.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to initiate a program to protect health and welfare and the environment
 from any actual or potential adverse effect caused by ambient concentrations
 and deposition of sulfur dioxide and the products of atmospheric
 transformation of these air pollutants;
 (2) to enhance the ability of States to protect the public health and welfare
 and the environment of their citizens from air pollution originating in
 other States;
 (3) to encourage States to take the steps necessary to mitigate and reduce
 sulfur dioxide emissions originating within their own borders;
 (4) to protect current employment levels from being jeopardized as a result
 of the effort to control and reduce acid deposition;
 (5) to identify and protect areas which are sensitive to sulfate and
 nitrate deposition, including but not limited to aquatic and terrestrial
 resources; and
 (6) to achieve a just and efficient solution to the problem of acid
 deposition by requiring those responsible for pollution to pay for
 cost-effective controls.
TITLE I--ACID DEPOSITION CONTROL PROGRAM
SEC. 101. AMENDMENT OF CLEAN AIR ACT.
 Title I of the Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new part
 at the end thereof:
`Part E--Acid Deposition Control
`SEC. 181. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 `(a) SOURCES SUBJECT TO NSPS- Nothing in this part shall be construed to
 limit emissions from any electric utility unit or other source of sulfur
 dioxide, the construction or modification of which began after December 31,
 1980. Emissions from such sources, to the extent they are in compliance
 with new source performance standards, shall not be added to the amount of
 sulfur dioxide emissions which the State in which the sources are located
 is required to reduce.
 `(b) CONVERSION TO COAL- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing in
 this part shall be construed to limit emissions from any oil- or gas-fired
 electric utility unit or other oil- or gas-fired source which converts to
 the use of coal after December 31, 1980.
 `(2) Any electric utility unit in the acid deposition impact region which
 converts from oil or gas to coal after December 31, 1980, shall meet an
 emission standard not in excess of 1.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
 British thermal units.
`SEC. 182. ESTABLISHMENT OF REGION.
 `There is established a long-range transport region (hereafter in this
 part referred to as the `acid deposition impact region' or `the region')
 which shall consist of the States of Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut,
 Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana,
 Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
 New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
 Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia,
 Wisconsin, and the District of Columbia.
`SEC. 183. ACID PRECURSOR CONTROLS.
 `(a) 10,000,000 TON REDUCTION- There shall be achieved a reduction in
 annual emissions of sulfur dioxide in the acid deposition impact region of
 10,000,000 tons below the total actual annual level of such emissions in
 such region between January 1, 1980, and December 31, 1980. For purposes
 of measuring the amount of emissions in any State for purposes of this
 part, emissions of sulfur dioxide from any new source or new conversion
 (described in section 181) shall not be included. Such reduction shall be
 achieved pursuant to a two-phase reduction program and completed no later
 than January 1, 2002.
 `(b) FIRST PHASE PROGRAM- (1)(A) The first phase of the program established
 pursuant to subsection (a) shall achieve a reduction in annual emissions
 of sulfur dioxide in the acid deposition impact region of 5,000,000 tons
 below the total actual level of such emissions in such region between
 January 1, 1980, and December 31, 1980. The first phase of such program
 shall be completed no later than January 1, 1997.
 `(B) During the first phase of the reduction program, an accelerated
 research program to examine the pattern of effects of atmospheric loading of
 pollutants such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides shall be implemented
 by the Administrator. The results of this research program shall be made
 freely available to the States. The research program shall include but
 shall not be limited to--
 `(i) high terrain modeling;
 `(ii) regional tracer studies to identify source-receptor relationships
 in the continental United States, Mexico, and Canada, with particular
 emphasis on the analysis of such relationships as they affect national
 parks and high mountain areas of the Western United States;
 `(iii) research on the impacts of emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
 oxides and their transformation products on visibility and air quality
 related values in the continental United States, with particular emphasis
 on such impacts as they affect national parks and high mountain areas of
 the Western United States;
 `(iv) the identification of sulfate and nitrate sensitive geographic areas
 in the continental United States;
 `(v) the identification of the causes of aquatic, terrestrial, and materials
 air pollution damage in the United States, including an examination of the
 relative role of emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons,
 and their transformation products, individually and in combination, and the
 role of natural stress factors and other potential causes of such damage; and
 `(vi) coal precombustion, combustion, and postcombustion technologies
 designed to achieve reduced emissions of sulfur dioxides and nitrogen oxides.
 `(C) The accelerated research program required under subparagraph (B)
 shall expand on the research being conducted pursuant to other authority
 of law. The authorization for appropriations for the accelerated research
 program under subparagraph (D) is intended to supplement and not replace
 funds authorized and appropriated pursuant to other authority of law.
 `(D) To implement the accelerated research program, there are authorized to
 be appropriated not in excess of $25,000,000 for each fiscal year beginning
 after September 30, 1991, and ending before October 1, 1996.
 `(E) The accelerated research program shall include a program for the
 monitoring by a nonprofit or university facility of the effects of acid
 deposition on waters. The Administrator shall within 6 months after the
 enactment of this part enter into a contract for such purposes with a
 nonprofit or university facility which has a working data base, covering
 at least 30 years, of the impacts of acid deposition on a body of water
 in the acid deposition region. There is authorized to be appropriated to
 carry out this subparagraph not more than $2,750,000 in the first fiscal
 year beginning after the enactment of this subparagraph and $750,000 for
 each of the succeeding 9 fiscal years.
 `(F) The accelerated research program required under subparagraph (B)
 shall be completed no later than January 1, 1996.
 `(2)(A) An evaluation of the results of the accelerated research program
 required under paragraph (1)(B), and to the extent possible, an evaluation
 of the effects of the reductions in emissions under the first phase of the
 program under paragraph (1)(A), shall be conducted by the Administrator
 during a period beginning no later than October 1, 1994, and ending no
 later than October 1, 1997.
 `(B) To carry out the evaluations required under subparagraph (A), there
 are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal years
 beginning after September 30, 1996, and ending before October 1, 2002.
 `(c) SECOND PHASE- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the second
 phase of the program established pursuant to subsection (a) shall achieve
 a further reduction in annual emissions of sulfur dioxide in the acid
 deposition impact region of 5,000,000 tons (in addition to the reduction of
 5,000,000 tons required under the first phase of such program). The second
 phase of such program shall be completed no later than January 1, 2002.
 `(2)(A) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Administrator may determine
 that changes should be made in the second phase of the program based on
 the intensive evaluations conducted pursuant to subsection (b)(2)(A). If
 the Administrator does not find that the second phase of the program
 should be changed, the second phase shall be implemented pursuant to the
 provisions of sections 183, 184, and 185. If, taking into consideration
 the research conducted under section 183 and other available research,
 the Administrator determines that any changes in the second phase of the
 program should be made, the Administrator shall propose a rule by formal
 rulemaking pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code. The
 Administrator shall publish a notice describing proposed changes in the
 Federal Register no later than October 1, 1997. Any person shall have the
 opportunity to comment on such proposed changes no later than January 1,
 1998. The Administrator shall promulgate the final rule no later than
 April 1, 1998.
 `(B) Pursuant to subparagraph (A), the Administrator is authorized to
 alter the second phase of the program only in the following respects on
 the basis of findings made pursuant to subsection (C):
 `(i) Excluding States in the region which participated in the first phase
 of the program from the second phase of the program.
 `(ii) Increasing or decreasing individual State targets for States in
 the region.
 `(iii) Placing restrictions on the reallotment among agreeing States in
 the region of the reductions required under section 184(a)(1).
 `(iv) Establishing requirements for individual States in the region
 for reduction of emissions of nitrogen oxides below the State's annual
 nitrogen oxides emission level in addition to the other emissions reduction
 requirements of part E. The Administrator shall select an appropriate base
 year against which to measure such reductions.
 `(v) Including States in the second phase of the program which did not
 participate in the first phase of the program.
 `(vi) Increasing or decreasing the aggregate regional reduction target
 for the second phase of the program.
Provided, however, That in the case of an alteration proposed under the
authority of subparagraph (B)(v), the action shall be taken on the basis
of findings which also satisfy the requirements of subsection (E)(2):
And provided further, That in the case of an alteration proposed under the
authority of subparagraph (B)(vi), the action shall be taken on the basis
of findings which also satisfy the requirements of subsection (E).
 `(C) Prior to altering the second phase of the program pursuant to
 subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall report to Congress concerning
 such alterations, and must demonstrate through the rulemaking procedures
 that a change in the program will result in--
 `(i) increased protection of sensitive areas, and
 `(ii) increased mitigation of identified aquatic and terrestrial damage
 from sulfate and nitrate deposition.
 `(D) If the Administrator determines pursuant to subparagraph (C) that
 individual State reduction requirements should not be established for
 nitrogen oxides pursuant to subparagraph (B)(v), the Administrator shall
 report to Congress no later than October 1, 1998, the reasons for such
 determination.
 `(E)(i) The Administrator shall not eliminate or reduce the aggregate
 5,000,000 tons sulfur dioxide emission reduction requirement of the second
 phase of the program pursuant to subparagraph (A) unless the Administrator
 reports to Congress, and demonstrates through the rulemaking procedures
 by clear and convincing evidence that emissions of sulfur dioxide are
 not causing damage, and are not reasonably anticipated to cause damage,
 to areas sensitive to sulfate deposition (including but not limited to
 aquatic and terrestrial resources) identified by the research program
 under subsection (b)(1)(B).
 `(ii) The Administrator shall not increase the emissions reduction
 requirement for the second phase of the program pursuant to subparagraph
 (A) above an aggregate of 5,000,000 tons of sulfur dioxide emissions,
 or include additional States outside the acid deposition impact region
 in the reduction program under the authority of subparagraph (B)(v),
 unless the Administrator reports to Congress, and demonstrates through
 the rulemaking procedures by clear and convincing evidence that emissions
 of sulfur dioxide are causing, or are reasonably anticipated to cause,
 damage to areas sensitive to sulfate deposition (including but not limited
 to aquatic and terrestrial resources) identified by the research program
 under subsection (b)(1)(B) which will not be adequately mitigated by full
 compliance with the 5,000,000 ton second phase reduction requirements of
 the program by the States listed in section 182.
`SEC. 184. STATE SULFUR DIOXIDE REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) GENERAL PROVISIONS- (1) Each State shall be required to achieve within
 its borders two equal reductions in annual sulfur dioxide emissions equal
 to that fraction of 10,000,000 tons which is the ratio of all the actual
 utility emissions in the period January 1 through December 31, 1980, in
 such State in excess of 1.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million British
 thermal units to the total in the period January 1 through December 31,
 1980 in all States in the region of all the actual utility emissions in
 excess of 1.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million British thermal units.
 `(2) Reductions in annual sulfur dioxide emissions that are achieved in
 a State after December 31, 1980, and before the enactment of this Act
 shall be credited on a ton for ton basis towards that State's reduction
 requirement, unless the reductions were necessary to bring sources into
 compliance with the State implementation plan for sulfur dioxide (now in
 effect or hereafter adopted).
 `(3) Any State may elect to achieve more than its first phase reduction
 requirement during the first phase time period and shall receive credit
 toward its second phase reduction requirement equal to the amount of
 emissions reductions achieved in excess of its first phase reduction
 requirement.
 `(4) The Governors of any two or more States within the region may by
 agreement reallot among agreeing States the reductions required under
 paragraph (1) if the total reductions equal the total required under
 paragraph (1).
 `(b) COMPLIANCE PLANS AND TIMETABLES- (1) Not later than 2 years after
 the date of the enactment of this part, each State shall adopt enforceable
 measures to achieve the first phase and second phase of the reductions in
 sulfur dioxide emissions required by subsection (a), including emission
 limitations and schedules for compliance for sources within such State
 and other means of emission reduction in accordance with section 186. The
 Governor of such State shall submit such measures to the Administrator
 for review in accordance with paragraph (4) and section 110(a)(3), and
 to the Governors of all other States in the acid deposition impact region
 for comment. The measures submitted for review under this subsection shall
 be sufficient to achieve the State's reduction requirement in each of the
 first and second phases of the program.
 `(2) Revisions to measures to achieve the emission reductions required in
 the second phase of the program may be submitted to the Administrator by
 the Governor of each State not later than September 1, 1998.
 `(3) If the Administrator proposes alterations to the second phase of
 the program, the Governor of each State shall submit revised measures to
 achieve emission reductions to the Administrator no later than September
 1, 1998, except that, if the Administrator reduces a State's second phase
 reduction requirement, the Governor of that State may elect not to submit
 revisions to measures submitted previously pursuant to subsection (a).
 `(4) Review and approval of measures submitted under this subsection shall
 be as provided in section 110(a)(3). The Administrator shall approve within
 four months measures submitted by the Governor of a State under paragraphs
 (1), (2), and (3) if, taking into consideration the comments of Governors
 of other States in such region, the Administrator finds that such measures--
 `(A) contain enforceable requirements for continuous emission reduction,
 or alternate measures permitted under section 186;
 `(B) contain requirements for monitoring by the source and enforcement
 agencies to assure that the emission limitations are being met; and
 `(C) are adequate to achieve the reductions in sulfur dioxide emissions
 for such State required by this section within the time period specified
 by section 183.
 `(c) COMPLIANCE WITH CERTAIN EXISTING LAWS- (1) In addition to the reduction
 requirement established under section 184(a), in the case of any major
 stationary source in a State listed in section 182, if by December 31,
 1992, either--
 `(A) the source is not in full compliance with the applicable implementation
 plan for sulfur dioxide in effect on January 1, 1981, or
 `(B) if there is not in effect by the date of enactment of this part an
 implementation plan for the State for sulfur dioxide, and the State does not
 adopt, and the Administrator does not promulgate, such a plan sufficient to
 allow it to meet the primary and secondary National Primary and Secondary
 Ambient Air Quality Standards for sulfur dioxide by December 31, 1993,
 and require the source to comply with it, the owner or operator of such
 source shall be subject to--
 `(i) a requirement that the annual tonnage reduction in sulfur dioxide
 emissions determined by the Administrator to be necessary to achieve full
 compliance with the implementation plan or the ambient standards, as the
 case may be, at such source, shall be added to any reduction responsibility
 that shall be established by the State pursuant to the provisions of this
 part for such source, and
 `(ii) a noncompliance penalty established under section 120 for each
 such source or facility, including each electric generating facility,
 for the period from the original date for compliance under the applicable
 implementation plan until actual compliance with the emission limitation
 established under this paragraph.
 `(2) If any major stationary source referred to in subsection (1) of this
 subsection fails to achieve the emissions reductions required pursuant to
 subsection (1) of this subsection by January 1, 1997, the owner or operator
 of such source shall be subject to the emission limitation established
 by section 185 for all facilities in such State owned or operated by such
 owner or operator.
 `(d) SCHEDULES- (1) The enforceable measures adopted under this subsection
 shall include schedules for compliance which specify actions to be
 performed leading toward final compliance and increments of progress to
 be achieved by dates in advance of the dates by which the State requires
 each particular source to comply with the emission limitation necessary
 to attain the reductions in each phase for such State under section 183 or
 184. The State in adopting such measures and the Administrator in reviewing
 such measures shall stage or phase such compliance dates so that to the
 maximum extent practicable the largest amount of emissions reductions
 occurs in the early years of each phase.
`SEC. 185. MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCE SULFUR DIOXIDE REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) EMISSION LIMITATION- In any State in the acid deposition impact region
 established by section 182 of this Act which has not in accordance with
 section 184(b)(1) of this Act adopted measures to achieve the reduction
 required by section 184(a) of this Act within 2 years after enactment of
 this part, or which has not had such measures approved by the Administrator
 under section 184(b)(2) of this Act within 6 months after the submission of
 such measures, the owner or operator of each fossil-fuel-burning electric
 generating facility which is a major stationary source which is not subject
 to section 111(a) shall comply with an emission limitation or limitations
 for all such facilities owned or operated by the same entity in such region
 equivalent to an average among such facilities of 1.2 pounds of sulfur
 dioxide per million British thermal units of heat input on a 30-day average;
 except that facilities otherwise subject to this limitation shall not be
 subject to the limitation if they are located in a State which then has
 in effect an approved plan for compliance with the first or second phase
 of the program, as appropriate.
 `(b) PLAN AND SCHEDULE- The owner or operator of each facility referred to
 in subsection (a) shall submit to the Administrator a plan and schedule of
 compliance for achieving such emission limitation or equivalent emission
 reduction in accordance with section 186 of this Act, not later than
 3 years after the enactment of this part or 6 months after the date on
 which such owner or operator becomes subject to such emission limitation,
 whichever is later. The Administrator shall approve such plan and schedule
 for compliance if it--
 `(1) contains enforceable requirements for continuous emission reduction
 or alternate measures permitted under section 186;
 `(2) contains requirements for monitoring by the source and enforcement
 agencies to assure that the emission limitations are being met; and
 `(3) will achieve the emission reduction required by this section in a
 manner consistent with the schedule established in subsection 184(b)(5),
 or otherwise at the earliest practicable date, but no later than January
 1, 2000.
 `(c) FAILURE- Failure of such owner or operator to submit such approvable
 plan and schedule within the time provided in this section, failure to
 comply with the plan and schedule of compliance, or failure to achieve the
 emission reduction required by this section at the earliest practicable
 date, but no later than January 1, 2000, shall be violations of emission
 limitations for the purposes of sections 113, 120, and 304 of this Act.
`SEC. 186. ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS FOR ENFORCEABLE EMISSION REDUCTIONS.
 `(a) NET REDUCTION METHODS- For the purposes of maintaining the limitation
 on emissions required by section 183, or attaining emission reductions
 required by section 183, 184, or 185, the following methods or programs for
 net emission reduction may be used, in addition to enforceable continuous
 emission reduction measures, by a State or the owner or operator of a source,
 if emission limitations under such methods or programs are enforceable
 by the Federal Government, States other than those in which the emissions
 occur, and citizens under section 304 of this Act:
 `(1) Least emissions dispatch to meet electric generating demand at existing
 generating facilities.
 `(2) Retirement of major stationary sources at an earlier date than provided
 in schedules on file with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the
 Internal Revenue Service, or State utility regulatory agencies.
 `(3) Investments in energy conservation where reductions in emissions can
 be identified with such investments.
 `(4) Trading of emission reduction requirements and actual reductions
 on a State or regional basis, for which States and the Administrator are
 authorized to establish emission reduction banks or brokerage institutions
 to facilitate such trading.
 `(5) Precombustion cleaning of fuels.
 `(6) Fuel substitution.
 `(b) NOX- A State or the owner or operator of a source required to achieve
 emission reductions under section 183, 184, or 185 may substitute reductions
 in emissions of oxides of nitrogen for required reductions in emissions
 of sulfur dioxide, at a rate of 2 units by weight of oxides of nitrogen
 for each unit of sulfur dioxide.
`SEC. 187. NORTH AMERICAN AIR QUALITY AGREEMENTS.
 `(a) AUTHORITY- The President and the Secretary of State are hereby
 directed to enter into, or continue, (as the case may be), negotiations
 with the Government of Canada and with the Republic of Mexico to protect
 air quality in the United States against emissions by air pollution sources
 in those countries. In particular:
 `(b) CANADA- The Administrator, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of
 Commerce, and the Secretary of State shall take all measures, to the maximum
 extent practicable, to induce Canada to achieve percentage reductions in
 annual emissions of sulfur dioxide comparable to reductions established
 pursuant to section 183(a).
 `(c) ELECTRIC ENERGY IMPORTS- After the date of enactment of this part, the
 Secretary of Energy shall not approve any agreements for the importation
 of electric energy from Canada under the Federal Power Act until the
 Administrator has certified to the Secretary of Energy that progress is
 being made by Canada to achieve comparable percentage reductions in annual
 emissions of sulfur dioxide, as provided for in this section.
 `(d) SMELTERS- The President and Secretary of State are directed to seek
 the installation, use and monitoring of adequate air pollution control
 equipment on copper or other metal smelters, or other major emissions
 sources, scheduled to begin or expand operations in Mexico after January
 1, 1985. In the event that the Republic of Mexico is unwilling to require
 installation of pollution controls which are adequate to protect air quality
 in the United States (particularly in sensitive areas of the western
 United States) against the adverse effects (particularly the effects of
 acid deposition) of emissions from smelters or other major sources, the
 President and Secretary of State are directed to reconsider the desirability
 of measures taken or contemplated by the United States in other areas of
 international cooperation with the Republic of Mexico. The President shall
 report periodically to the Congress on the progress of negotiations and on
 the desirability on continuing or expanding such international cooperation.
 `(e) SAVINGS CLAUSE- Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to modify
 the Administrator's responsibilities under section 115.
`SEC. 188. COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
 `Promptly after the date established by section 185, the Administrator
 shall submit to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the
 United States Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the United
 States House of Representatives a report describing the emission limitation
 and other enforceable measures adopted by the States and approved by the
 Administrator under section 184(b) or in effect under section 185, for
 all States in the acid deposition impact region established by section 182.'.