HR 2430 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2430
To require additional testing of hazardous liquid pipeline facilities and
additional training of operators of such pipeline facilities to reduce the
danger of spills, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 18, 1989
Mr. SKELTON introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To require additional testing of hazardous liquid pipeline facilities and
additional training of operators of such pipeline facilities to reduce the
danger of spills, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PIPELINE FACILITY INTEGRITY ASSESSMENTS.
 Section 210 of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 (49
 U.S.C. 2009) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(e) PERIODIC INTEGRITY ASSESSMENTS- Not later than 6 months after the
 date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall issue regulations
 requiring each operator of pipeline facilities subject to this title to--
 `(1) periodically assess the integrity of all such pipeline facilities
 through hydrostatic testing or other appropriate methods; or
 `(2) reduce the maximum operating pressure of such pipeline facilities to
 a level that ensures an appropriate margin of safety.
In establishing schedules for compliance with requirements adopted under this
subsection, the Secretary shall consider the factors listed in subsection
(d)(2)(A) through (F), and shall require pipeline facilities constructed of
pipe manufactured by electric resistance weld process before April 1, 1970,
which have not previously been hydrostatically tested, to be assessed within
one year after the date of enactment of this subsection.'.
SEC. 2. OPERATOR TRAINING.
 The second sentence of section 203(c) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. 2002(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `may' and inserting in lieu thereof `shall'; and
 (2) by inserting `, including the ability to recognize and appropriately
 react to abnormal operating conditions which may indicate a dangerous
 situation' after `perform such functions'.
SEC. 3. LEAK DETECTION EQUIPMENT STUDY.
 The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study of advanced hazardous
 liquid pipeline facility leak detection equipment and techniques that have
 been or are being developed and the feasibility of requiring the use of
 such equipment and techniques. The Secretary shall submit recommendations
 based on the findings of the study to the Congress within one year after
 the date of enactment of this Act.