S 761 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 761
To reduce hazardous pollution.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 21 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. LIEBERMAN (for himself, Mr. DURENBERGER, and Mr. LAUTENBERG) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To reduce hazardous pollution.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Hazardous Pollution Prevention Planning Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the United States Environmental Protection Agency estimates that
 billions of pounds of toxic chemicals are released into the environment
 each year;
 (2) the release of these toxic chemicals into the environment can harm
 public health, welfare, and the environment;
 (3) traditional approaches to environmental regulation which have emphasized
 controlling pollution after it has been created are not sufficient to
 address all our environmental problems;
 (4) hazardous pollution prevention (reductions in byproducts and in the use
 of toxic chemicals) must become the centerpiece of our long-term strategy
 for achieving environmental protection;
 (5) there are proven and cost-effective technologies and management
 practices that can achieve hazardous pollution prevention;
 (6) hazardous pollution prevention can have a tremendous cost benefit
 for industry by avoiding costs of control, cleanup, and liability, and
 by leading to increases in industrial efficiency and productivity through
 savings in purchases of chemicals, energy, water, and other input materials;
 (7) hazardous pollution prevention often prevents the solution to one
 environmental problem from re-emerging as another type of environmental
 problem;
 (8) an important step in hazardous pollution prevention is the development
 of plans with numerical goals for reduction;
 (9) there is a need to provide technical assistance and training to firms,
 especially smaller firms, in preparing such plans;
 (10) there is a need to conduct research to develop new industrial
 technologies and practices that will reduce the social, economic, and
 institutional barriers to preventing hazardous pollution; and
 (11) the expanded use of environmental audits, conducted by qualified
 auditors, has the potential to help facilities which are lagging behind in
 prevention of hazardous pollution and compliance with the environmental laws.
SEC. 3. GOAL.
 The Congress declares it to be the national policy of the United States to
 achieve by 1996 a 50 percent reduction in toxic chemical byproduct levels,
 from 1991 levels of such byproducts.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `Agency' means the Environmental Protection Agency;
 (2) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency;
 (3) `byproduct' means all nonproduct outputs of toxic chemicals generated
 prior to handling, transfer, treatment, or release;
 (4) `emission' means a release of a toxic chemical into the environment;
 (5) `environment' shall have the same meaning as in section 329(2) of the
 Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986;
 (6) `environmental laws' mean those laws administered by the Administrator
 or delegated by the Administrator to a State to administer;
 (7) `facility' means any building, equipment, structure, or any other
 stationary item which is located on a single site or on contiguous or
 adjacent sites and which is owned or operated by the same person, or by
 any person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with,
 such person;
 (8) `hazardous waste' shall have the same meaning as in section 261.3 of
 title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
 (9) `large quantity generator' shall have the same meaning as defined in
 the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976;
 (10) `large quantity toxic user' means a facility that manufactures or
 processes 75,000 pounds of a toxic chemical per year or otherwise uses
 10,000 pounds of a toxic chemical per year;
 (11) `manufacture' shall have the same meaning as in section 313(b)(1)(C)(i)
 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986;
 (12) `product' means a desired result of a production process that is used
 as a commodity in the same form in which it is produced;
 (13) `process' shall have the same meaning as in section 313(b)(1)(C)(ii)
 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986;
 (14) `production unit' means a process, line, method, activity, or technique
 or combination or series thereof, used to produce a product;
 (15) `release' shall have the same meaning as in section 329(8) of the
 Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986;
 (16) `SIC Code' means the identification code assigned to facilities by
 the Department of Commerce;
 (17) `source reduction' shall have the same meaning as in the Pollution
 Prevention Act of 1990;
 (18) `toxic chemical' shall have the same meaning as provided in section
 329(10) of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986;
 (19) `toxic use reduction' shall mean any source reduction method that
 reduces or eliminates the use of toxic chemicals manufactured, processed,
 or used without creating new risks of concern to public health, welfare
 or the environment; and
 (20) `user segment' means a class of facilities that may be distinguished
 by at least one of the following: use of a toxic chemical or class of
 chemicals in its industrial processes, similar industrial processes,
 members of a generally recognized group (Standard Industrial Classification).
SEC. 5. HAZARDOUS POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
 (a) COVERED OWNERS AND OPERATORS- Each owner or operator of a facility
 required to submit a toxic chemical release form under section 313 of
 the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 shall prepare a
 Hazardous Pollution Prevention Plan.
 (b) CONTENTS OF PLAN- (1) Each Plan shall, at a minimum, include the
 following for each toxic chemical for which the owner or operator is
 required to submit a toxic chemical release form:
 (A) Statement of overall scope and objectives of the Plan.
 (B) An evaluation of the amount of the toxic chemical manufactured,
 processed, or used for the facility as a whole and for each production
 unit and the quantity of byproduct for each production unit.
 (C) An analysis of the economic impacts of the use of each toxic chemical in
 the production unit, including regulatory and compliance costs, potential
 liability costs, raw material costs, and byproduct storage, handling,
 and treatment costs.
 (D) Two- and 5-year numerical goals for reductions (i) in the use of the
 toxic chemical and byproduct for the facility as a whole; (ii) in use of
 the toxic chemical per unit of product produced for each production unit
 and in byproduct per unit of product produced for each production unit
 through toxic use reduction or other source reduction methods. The Plan
 shall specify the amount of reductions to be achieved through reductions
 in use of the toxic chemical and in byproduct. The owner or operator may
 elect not to specify use reduction goals; however, the owner or operator
 shall provide a detailed explanation as to why such goals were not included.
 (E) A comprehensive economic and technical evaluation of all methods for
 potentially achieving reductions in use per unit of product produced for
 each production unit and in byproduct per unit of product produced in each
 production unit and on a facility-wide basis, including a payback period
 for each method and any obstacles to achieving reductions. The calculations
 used for determining the payback period shall be set forth in detail.
 (F) Identification of technologies, procedures, and training programs
 to be implemented to achieve reduction goals, including a description
 of the costs of implementing each and anticipated savings from each. If
 the Plan does not include any of the measures identified in subparagraph
 (E) as having a payback period of 2 years or less, the owner or operator
 shall provide a detailed explanation identifying the reasons for failing
 to include these measures.
 (G) An evaluation, and to the extent practicable, a quantification, of the
 effects of the chosen hazardous pollution prevention method on emissions
 to air, water, or land.
 (H) A schedule of implementation of each technology, procedure, and training
 program identified in subparagraph (F).
 (I) A certification by the chief executive officer or a senior corporate
 officer designated by the chief executive officer who shall certify under
 penalty of perjury as to (i) the accuracy and completeness of the Plan;
 (ii) that the Plan complies with the requirements of this Act; and (iii)
 that the measures in the Plan are being implemented.
 (2) If the covered facility is also a large quantity generator, the Plan
 shall include the additional information:
 (A) For each hazardous waste stream which results from ongoing processes or
 operations that has a yearly volume exceeding 5 percent of the total yearly
 volume of hazardous waste generated at the facility, the Plan shall state:
 (i) Two- and 5-year goals for reductions in hazardous waste generated per
 unit of product produced in a production unit and on a facility-wide basis.
 (ii) A comprehensive economic and technical evaluation of all methods for
 potentially achieving reductions, including a payback period for each method,
 and any technological obstacles to achieving reductions. The calculations
 used for determining the payback period shall be set forth in detail.
 (iii) Identification of technologies, procedures, and training programs
 to be implemented to achieve reduction goals, including a description of
 the costs of implementing and anticipated savings from each technology,
 procedure and program.
 (iv) A schedule of implementation of each technology, procedure, and
 training program identified in clause (iii) of this subparagraph.
 (v) A certification by the chief executive officer or a senior corporate
 officer designated by the chief executive officer who shall certify under
 penalty of perjury as to (I) the accuracy and completeness of the Plan;
 (II) that the Plan complies with the requirements of this Act; and (III)
 that the measures in the Plan are being implemented.
If the Plan does not include any of the measures identified in clause
(iii) of this subparagraph as having a payback period of 2 years or less,
the owner or operator shall provide a detailed explanation identifying the
reasons for failing to include such measures.
 (C) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to hazardous wastes
 which are covered under the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 (c) SCHEDULE- (1) The owner or operator of a facility that is a large
 quantity toxic user shall complete a Plan no later than 24 months after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall update the Plan every 12
 months thereafter. The owner or operator of all other covered facilities
 shall complete a Plan no later than 36 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act, and shall update the Plan every 24 months thereafter.
 (2) The Administrator may grant any covered facility an extension of up to
 12 months to comply with the provisions of this subsection upon a showing
 of good cause.
 (d) IMPLEMENTATION- (1) The owner or operator of a covered facility shall
 implement all measures identified in the Plan according to the implementation
 schedule contained in the Plan.
 (2) An owner or operator of a covered facility may determine not to implement
 a measure identified in the Plan only if the owner or operator demonstrates,
 based on new information not available at the time the Plan was prepared,
 or unexpected conditions beyond the control of the owner or operator that
 the selected measure--
 (A) is not technically feasible;
 (B) would result in adverse effects on product quality; or
 (C) would result in harm or the threat of harm to public health or the
 environment.
 (3) If the owner or operator, based on the factors set forth in paragraph
 (2), elects not to implement any of the measures in the Plan, the owner
 or operator shall, within 30 days following such election, amend the Plan
 to reflect this election and include in the Plan, proper documentation
 identifying the rationale for the election.
 (e) MAINTENANCE OF PLAN- (1) Each owner or operator shall maintain the Plan,
 all analyses conducted pursuant to subsection (c), and all data used in
 the development of the Plan for a minimum of 3 years.
 (2) For purposes of administering this Act, the owner or operator shall
 make the Plan and any other documents, records, files, data, and analyses
 available to the Administrator or a State authorized to carry out the
 provisions of this Act and any duly designated representative of the
 Administrator or the State for inspection and copying upon reasonable notice
 and at reasonable times. Documents and other information obtained or reviewed
 under this paragraph shall not be deemed public records or documents.
SEC. 6. REPORTS.
 (a) CONTENTS- The owner or operator of any covered facility shall submit a
 report and from time to time, an update of such report, to the Administrator
 or an authorized State. The report shall include the following:
 (1) a summary of the Plan's goals and schedules for the facility as a whole
 and for each production unit as required pursuant to section 5, including
 a statement of how the baseline data for measuring reductions was derived;
 (2) a summary of the economic and technical evaluations of technologies
 considered for achieving reductions;
 (3) a copy of the Plan certification by a senior corporate officer; and
 (4) a numerical statement demonstrating progress towards meeting the goals
 of the Plan or an explanation of the reasons why any goal is not being
 met or progress is not being made towards meeting the goal.
 (b) SCHEDULE- Commencing no later than 24 months after the date of
 enactment of this Act, and every 12 months thereafter, the owner or
 operator of a facility that is a large quantity toxic user shall submit a
 report with each annual filing of its annual toxic chemical release form.
 Commencing no later than 36 months after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, and every 24 months thereafter, the owner or operator of all other
 covered facilities shall submit a report with each annual filing of its
 annual toxic chemical release form.
 (c) AVAILABILITY- Subject to the provisions of section 18, all reports and
 updates shall be available to the public at the covered facility during
 normal working hours. Any written comments on such a report that are
 submitted by the Administrator or the State shall also be available to
 the public at the facility.
SEC. 7. FORMS.
 Within 12 months following the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Administrator shall publish uniform forms for plans and reports required
 under this Act.
SEC. 8. REVIEW.
 The Administrator or an authorized State shall evaluate the report submitted
 under section 6 of this Act and may evaluate the Plan to determine if the
 owner or operator of a covered facility is complying with the terms of this
 Act. If the Administrator or an authorized State determines that the report
 or Plan does not comply with the terms of this Act, the Administrator or
 State shall issue a notice of noncompliance, specifying deficiencies in
 the report or Plan, or both. The owner or operator shall submit a revised
 report addressing any deficiencies in the report within 90 days and shall
 revise any deficiencies in the Plan within 90 days.
SEC. 9. STATE DELEGATION.
 Beginning 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, any
 State may submit a hazardous pollution prevention program to exercise the
 authorities in sections 5, 6, and 8 of this Act for review and approval to
 the Administrator. A State program may be approved by the Administrator if
 the State demonstrates that the program includes the following elements,
 and provisions for adequate enforcement--
 (1) requirements for evaluation of plans and reports and identification of
 covered facilities that fail to comply with the provisions of this Act; and
 (2) requirements for assisting the Administrator in identifying priority
 user segments as set forth in section 13 of this Act.
SEC. 10. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Administrator shall make matching grants to the
 States to provide assistance for hazardous pollution prevention planning
 required pursuant to this Act.
 (b) CRITERIA- In making grants to the States under this section, the
 Administrator shall consider whether the proposed program will--
 (1) facilitate assistance by private or public consultants, including
 onsite consultation at covered facilities, in developing and implementing
 the Plan with a particular emphasis on smaller facilities;
 (2) conduct programs, seminars, workshops, training programs and other
 similar activities to assist in developing and implementing the Plan; and
 (3) provide training and assistance for citizens, workers, and local
 government groups to assist these individuals and groups in understanding
 reports required to be submitted under this Act.
 (c) MATCHING FUNDS- Federal funds used in any State program under this
 section shall provide no more than 50 percent of funds made available to
 a State in each year of that State's participation in the program.
SEC. 11. RESEARCH.
 The Administrator shall establish at the Hazardous Substance Research Centers
 operated pursuant to section 311(d) of the Comprehensive Environmental
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, a research program
 to assist the Agency's Office of Pollution Prevention in performing its
 functions. The program shall include--
 (1) basic research into technological barriers to reductions in the use
 of toxic chemicals and byproducts and the development of strategies for
 overcoming these barriers;
 (2) basic research into social, economic and institutional barriers to
 reducing the reliance of society on toxic chemicals and the development
 of strategies for overcoming these barriers;
 (3) developing, evaluating, and demonstrating methods to assess reductions
 resulting from toxic use or other source reduction methods; and
 (4) research or pilot projects to develop and demonstrate innovative
 technologies for source reduction and toxic use reduction methods.
SEC. 12. REGULATORY INCENTIVES.
 (a) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS- Within 12 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish a demonstration
 program to provide regulatory incentives for achieving reductions in use
 of toxic chemicals and byproducts. The Administrator may designate up to
 50 facilities for inclusion in the demonstration program.
 (b) AUTHORITY TO MODIFY- (1) The Administrator, as part of the demonstration
 program, is authorized to modify the requirements imposed by terms of all
 or part of any permit or agreement. Any modification granted under this
 subsection shall specify the requirements being modified and the length
 of time the modification is to be in effect.
 (2) At least 60 days before approval of any such modification, the
 Administrator shall--
 (A) publish a notice and explanation of the proposed modification, and
 appropriate documentation supporting the modification; and
 (B) provide a reasonable opportunity for submission of written comments
 and oral comments and an opportunity for a public meeting at or near the
 facility regarding the proposed modification.
 (3) The Administrator may approve a modification if the Administrator
 determines that--
 (A) the facility applying for the modification is in compliance with
 the terms of existing environmental laws, regulations, permits, orders,
 or other requirements applicable to the facility and has a history of
 compliance which the Administrator and the State deems satisfactory;
 (B) greater net protection of human health and the environment than that
 required under existing environmental laws will result, with a special
 consideration to ensuring that the risks are not shifted from one
 environmental medium to another;
 (C) a significant increase in reductions in use of toxic chemicals and
 in byproduct will result, as compared to the reductions that would have
 resulted, under existing environmental laws; and
 (D) the modification provided for in this section will contribute to
 achieving greater reductions in use of toxic chemicals and in byproduct.
 (4) The Administrator's approval of a modification shall be accompanied
 by a response to each of the significant comments and date submitted in
 written and oral comments.
 (5) As part of any modification granted pursuant to this section,
 the Administrator shall require that the owner or operator granted the
 modification shall undertake monitoring operations adequate to determine
 compliance with the modified terms of any permit or agreement. Such
 monitoring shall be carried out at such time as the Administrator shall
 provide. Such owner or operator, as the case may be, shall report the
 results of the monitoring operations in such form and at such times as
 the Administrator shall require.
 (6) The duration of any modification shall not exceed 12 months. Upon
 expiration of any modification granted pursuant to this section, the
 Administrator may renew the modified permit or agreement for a period not
 to exceed the original modification, if he determines that the requirements
 of paragraph (3) continue to be met.
 (7) Within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Administrator shall submit a report to the Committee on Environment and
 Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce the
 House of Representatives concerning the implementation of this section. The
 Administrator shall include recommendations on whether or not the scope
 of the regulatory incentives program should be expanded.
SEC. 13. PRIORITIZING USER SEGMENTS.
 Commencing no later than 60 months after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, and every 12 months thereafter, the Administrator in consultation
 with the Governor of each State, shall identify by regulation no more than
 5 user segments which the Administrator determines need improvements in
 reducing the amount of byproduct, when compared to the national goal, and
 in reducing the use of toxic chemicals and designate those user segments as
 `priority user segments'. The Administrator shall designate an additional
 5 user segments each 12 months. The Administrator shall also consider the
 following when identifying priority user segments--
 (1) the technical and economic feasibility of achieving reductions in the
 use of toxic chemicals and byproduct;
 (2) the social, health, and economic benefits and costs of designation as
 a priority user segment;
 (3) the extent to which facilities within a user segment are emitting
 toxic chemicals to more than one environmental medium; and
 (4) the amount of toxic chemicals from the facility which are recycled.
SEC. 14. HAZARDOUS POLLUTION PREVENTION GUIDANCE.
 No later than 12 months after the Administrator's designation of priority
 user segments pursuant to section 13, the Administrator shall publish,
 after notice and opportunity to comment, guidance for obtaining reductions
 in use of toxic chemicals and byproducts at facilities within each priority
 user segment. The Administrator shall issue guidance which is based on
 reasonably available technology for achieving the reductions.
SEC. 15. ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITS.
 (a) HAZARDOUS POLLUTION PREVENTION AUDITS- (1) No later than 24 months
 after the Administrator's designation under section 13 of a priority user
 segment, each large quantity toxic user within an identified priority
 user segment shall conduct a hazardous pollution prevention audit.
 (2) A hazardous pollution prevention audit shall contain specific
 recommendations for reductions in accordance with the guidance issued
 by the Administrator under section 14 of this Act, and a timetable for
 implementation of the recommendations.
 (3) The owner or operator of the facility shall submit the recommendations
 contained in the audit to the Administrator.
 (4) The owner or operator of each facility required to prepare a hazardous
 pollution prevention audit shall implement the recommendations contained
 in the audit according to the schedule contained in the audit.
 (5) The Administrator may extend the requirements of this subsection to
 other covered toxic users within a priority user segment.
 (b) AUDITS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE- (1) The Administrator shall require a
 compliance audit at any covered facility which the Administrator finds,
 based on the facility's non-compliance and history of noncompliance with the
 terms of permits issued under the environmental laws or other provisions
 or regulations promulgated under the environmental laws, may present a
 threat to human health, welfare, or the environment.
 (2) The Administrator shall provide notice by certified mail to the owner
 or operator of each facility required to prepare an audit pursuant to
 this section.
 (3) No later than 6 months after receipt of notice required under paragraph
 (2), any facility identified by the Administrator pursuant to paragraph
 (1) of this subsection shall conduct a compliance audit to establish the
 compliance of the facility with the terms, requirements, and conditions of
 permits or other requirements of the environmental laws and regulations, and
 provide recommendations for improving the degree and extent of compliance,
 including a timetable for implementation of the recommendations. Each such
 facility shall conduct audits until such time as the Administrator certifies,
 based on the audits and other available data, that the condition giving rise
 to the Administrator's determination under paragraph (1) has been corrected.
 (4) The owner or operator shall submit the recommendations contained in
 the audit to the Administrator.
 (5) Each facility required to prepare a compliance audit shall implement
 the recommendations contained in the audit in accordance with the schedule
 contained in the audit.
 (c) CERTIFIED AUDITOR- Any audit conducted pursuant to this section shall
 be conducted by a firm, person, or organization who is certified to conduct
 audits pursuant to section 16 of this Act.
 (d) REGULATIONS- Within 180 days following the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Administrator shall, by regulation, establish requirements
 concerning the form and content of audits required pursuant to this section.
SEC. 16. ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION.
 (a) TRAINING PROGRAMS- (1) The Administrator shall develop and conduct
 programs to train individuals to conduct both hazardous pollution prevention
 and compliance audits (hereinafter referred to as `environmental audits')
 and shall certify individuals, firms, and organizations as proficient in
 environmental auditing. The Administrator may contract with institutions
 of higher learning or other organizations or firms to conduct such training
 programs.
 (2) The Administrator shall publish, within 180 days following the date
 of enactment of this Act, and periodically thereafter, a general manual
 of methods, practices, and protocols of environmental auditing.
 (b) CERTIFICATION- (1) The Administrator shall certify an individual,
 firm, or organization as a `certified environmental auditor' upon the
 satisfactory completion of a program of testing to determine the knowledge,
 skills, and abilities of such individual, firm, or organization.
 (2) The Administrator, within 180 days following the date of enactment
 of this Act, shall promulgate regulations governing the testing and
 certification of auditors pursuant to this section.
 (3) A certification pursuant to this section shall apply for a period of
 not more than 5 years, after which time an individual, firm, or organization
 must be recertified pursuant to this section in order to act as a certified
 environmental auditor.
 (4) The Administrator is authorized to collect fees for training and
 certification pursuant to this section equal to the administrative costs
 of such training and certification programs. Fees collected pursuant to
 this subsection shall be deposited into an environmental audit fund.
SEC. 17. AUDIT OVERSIGHT AND EVALUATION.
 (a) OVERSIGHT- The Administrator shall provide for oversight and evaluation
 of environmental audits conducted and required by the Administrator pursuant
 to this Act.
 (b) EVALUATION- The Administrator shall provide for random tests of the
 accuracy and reliability of data, measurements, assessments and analyses
 conducted by firms or organizations certified to conduct environmental
 audits pursuant to this Act.
 (c) BOARD- (1) There is established an Environmental Audit Oversight Board
 (hereafter referred to in this subsection as the `Board').
 (2) The purpose of the Board is to advise the Administrator in the
 development and implementation of audits and the certification of auditors
 pursuant to this Act.
 (3) The Board shall be established within 180 days following the date of
 enactment of this Act and shall be exempt from section 14 of the Federal
 Advisory Committee Act.
 (4) The Board shall be comprised of not more than 15 individuals, appointed
 by the Administrator to serve terms of not to exceed 3 years.
 (5) The Board shall represent the scientific community, regulated parties,
 and public interest groups and shall represent various regions of the
 country.
 (6) Such clerical and technical assistance as may be necessary to discharge
 the duties of the Advisory Committee shall be provided by personnel of
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (7) Members of the Board shall, while attending meetings or conferences
 of the Board or otherwise engaged in the business of the Board, be
 compensated at a rate to be fixed by the Administrator, but not to exceed
 the daily equivalent of the base rate of pay in effect for grade GS-15 of
 the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day (including traveltime) during which they are engaged in the
 actual performance of duties vested in the Board. While away from their
 homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the
 Board, members of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed
 intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section
 5703(b) of title 5 of the United States Code.
SEC. 18. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN INFORMATION.
 (a) CONFIDENTIALITY AND AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN RECORDS AND INFORMATION-
 (1) Any records, reports, or information obtained from any person under
 section 15 (relating to audits), section 6 (relating to reports), or
 the provisions of section 8 (relating to reports), shall be available to
 the public, except that upon a showing satisfactory to the Administrator
 (or the State, as the case may be) by any person that records, reports,
 or information, or particular part thereof (other than health or safety
 effects data), to which the Administrator (or the State, as the case may be)
 or any officer, employee, or representative has access under such sections if
 made public would divulge information entitled to protection under section
 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code, such information or particular
 portion thereof shall be considered confidential in accordance with the
 purposes of that section, except that such record, report, document or
 information may be disclosed to other officers, employees, or authorized
 representatives of the United States concerned with carrying out this Act,
 or when relevant in any proceeding under this Act.
 (2) Any person not subject to the provisions of section 1905 of title 18 of
 the United States Code who knowingly and willfully divulges or discloses
 any information entitled to protection under this subsection shall, be
 subject to a civil penalty under section 19 of this Act.
 (3) In submitting data under this Act, a person required to provide such
 data may--
 (A) designate the data which such person believes is entitled to protection
 under this subsection, and
 (B) submit such designated data separately from other data submitted under
 this Act.
A designation under this paragraph shall be made in writing and in such
manner as the Administrator may prescribe by regulation.
 (4) Notwithstanding any limitation contained in this section or any other
 provision of law, all information reported to or otherwise obtained by
 the Administrator under this Act shall be made available, upon written
 request of any duly authorized committee of the Congress, to such committee.
 (5) No person required to provide information under section 6, the provisions
 of section 8 (relating to reports), or section 15 may claim that the
 information is entitled to protection under this paragraph unless such
 person shows each of the following:
 (A) such person has not disclosed the information to any other person,
 other than a member of a local emergency planning committee established
 under title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986,
 an officer or employee of the United States or a State or local government,
 an employee of such person, or a person who is bound by a confidentiality
 agreement, and such person has taken reasonable measures to protect the
 confidentiality of such information and intends to continue to take such
 measures;
 (B) the information is not required to be disclosed, or otherwise made
 available, to the public under any other Federal or State law;
 (C) disclosure of the information is likely to cause substantial harm to
 the competitive position of such person; and
 (D) the specific chemical identity, if sought to be protected, is not
 readily discoverable through reverse engineering.
 (b) UNPROTECTED INFORMATION- The following information with respect to any
 toxic chemicals or hazardous waste at the facility shall not be entitled
 to protection under this paragraph:
 (1) the trade name, common name, or generic class or category of the toxic
 chemical or hazardous waste;
 (2) the physical properties of the substance, including its boiling point,
 melting point, flash point, specific gravity, vapor density, solubility
 in water, and vapor pressure at 20 degrees Celsius;
 (3) the hazards to public health or the environment posed by the substance,
 including physical hazards (such as explosion) and potential acute and
 chronic health hazards;
 (4) the potential routes of human exposure to the substance at the facility;
 (5) the location of disposal of any waste stream;
 (6) any monitoring data or analysis of monitoring data pertaining to
 disposal activities;
 (7) any hydrogeologic or geologic data; and
 (8) any ground water monitoring data.
SEC. 19. PENALTIES.
 (a) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) The owner or operator of a facility which is
 required to conduct an audit pursuant to section 15 of this Act and the
 certified auditor shall provide such assurance as the Administrator shall
 require concerning the accuracy and completeness of any audit document
 or related report. Any person who submits a false certification shall be
 subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $200,000.
 (2) Any person required to conduct an audit pursuant to section 15 of
 this Act who fails to submit reports or other information required by the
 certified auditor or who fails to implement the recommendations in the
 audit shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $25,000 per day
 for each violation.
 (3) Any person who violates the provisions of section 18(a)(2) shall be
 subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $200,000 for each violation.
 (4) Any person who fails to submit a report, an update of a report to
 the Administrator as required pursuant to section 6 of this Act, or a
 revised version of a report as required pursuant to section 8 of this Act,
 shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 per day for each
 violation. Any person who fails to prepare or implement a Plan as required
 pursuant to section 5 or revise a Plan as required pursuant to section 8
 of this Act shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 per
 day for each violation.
 (b) JURISDICTION- The Administrator may issue an administrative order
 assessing a penalty or requiring compliance with the terms of this Act or
 both, or may bring an action to assess and collect the penalty and to secure
 a permanent or temporary injunction to require compliance with the provisions
 of this Act or an administrative order in the United States district court
 for the district in which the person for whom the penalty is sought resides
 or in which the person's principal place of business is located.
 (c) PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- (1) Any person against whom a
 civil penalty is assessed by administrative order under this section may
 obtain review thereof in the appropriate United States district court by
 filing a notice of appeal in such court within 30 days after the date of
 such order and by simultaneously sending a copy of such notice by certified
 mail to the Administrator. The Administrator shall promptly file in such
 court a certified copy of the record upon which such violation was found or
 such penalty imposed. If any person fails to pay an assessment of a civil
 penalty after it has become a final and unappealable order or after the
 appropriate court has entered final judgment in favor of the United States,
 the Administrator may request the Attorney General of the United States to
 institute a civil action in an appropriate United States district court
 to collect the penalty, and such court shall have jurisdiction to hear
 and decide any such action. In hearing such action, the court shall have
 authority to review the violation and the assessment of the civil penalty
 on the record.
 (2) The Administrator may issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony
 of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books, or documents in
 connection with hearings under this section. In case of contumacy or refusal
 to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this paragraph and served upon any
 person, the district court of the United States for any district in which
 such person is found, resides, or transacts business, upon application by
 the United States and after notice to such person, shall have jurisdiction
 to issue an order requiring such person to appear and give testimony before
 the administrative law judge, or both, and any failure to obey such order
 of the court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof.
SEC. 20. RELATION TO OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL STATUTES.
 (a) STATE LAW- Nothing in this Act shall preclude or deny the right of any
 State or political subdivision to adopt or enforce any law, regulation,
 requirement, or standard that is more stringent than this Act or, a
 regulation, requirement, or standard of performance in effect under this
 Act, or to impose any additional liability.
 (b) DENIAL OF PERMITS- The Administrator or a State delegated authority
 under this Act may deny a permit under any environmental law to the
 owner or operator of any covered facility, if the owner or operator has
 not prepared and implemented a Plan or submitted reports and updates,
 as required under sections 5, 6, and 8 of this Act. The Administrator
 may also deny a permit to the owner or operator of any facility which is
 required to submit information pursuant to the requirements of section
 15 relating to audits and fails to submit the information or fails to
 implement the recommendations in the audit.
SEC. 21. AUTHORIZATIONS.
 There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator $10,000,000 for
 each of fiscal years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 for the purposes of
 carrying out the provisions of section 10 of this Act. There is authorized
 to be appropriated to the Administrator $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal
 years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the provisions of this
 Act other than section 10.