HR 2406 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2406
To amend the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
to strengthen the restraints upon clearcutting and certain other cutting
practices in the National Forests of the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 18, 1989
Mr. BRYANT (for himself, MR. MINETA, Mr. QUILLEN, Mr. BENNETT, Mr. DONNELLY,
and Mrs. PATTERSON) introduced the following bill; which was referred to
the Committee on Agriculture
A BILL
To amend the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
to strengthen the restraints upon clearcutting and certain other cutting
practices in the National Forests of the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clearcutting Restraint Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this Act is to protect the national forests in the United
 States from excessive clearcutting and certain other intensive cutting
 methods, and from the soil erosion, nutrient losses, diversity reduction,
 recreation impairment, wildlife, hunting and fishing disadvantages, and
 other harms which result from such cutting practices.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENT OF FOREST AND RANGELAND RENEWABLE RESOURCES PLANNING ACT
OF 1974.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
 Planning Act (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (g)(3)(B) to read as follows:
 `(B) in each stand throughout each forest, preserve substantially the
 relative abundance and dominance of species, ecological communities, and
 intraspecies genetic diversity that would inhabit that stand in the absence
 of human impact, permitting ecological succession to proceed as it would
 occur without the influence of human beings, with the only exceptions
 being during the extraction stage of authorized mineral development,
 during authorized construction projects, and during harvesting of timber
 under a resource management plan that complies with all other sections of
 this Act and prescribes a harvesting practice that temporarily upsets the
 balance of nature;'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(n) LIMITATION ON USE OF CERTAIN CUTTING METHODS-
 `(1) In the case of any national forest in the United States where one-tenth
 of the acreage of available commercial timberland has been cut by one of
 the methods listed in this subsection, or any combination of such methods,
 the guidelines under subsection (g)(3)(F) shall prohibit any future use
 of any of the following cutting methods in such national forest--
 `(A) clearcutting,
 `(B) seed tree cutting,
 `(C) shelterwood cutting,
 `(D) group selection cutting of more than one-tenth acre per group, and
 `(E) group selection cutting of more than one acre per four acres of any
 one stand.
 `(2) For the purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `available commercial timberland' means land that is being
 managed for timber production on a regular basis;
 `(B) the term `group selection cutting' means the removal of trees in
 small groups with a result of maintaining different age groups in a given
 stand; and
 `(C) the term `stand' means a plant community with enough identity by
 location, topography, or dominant species to be considered as a unit,
 not to exceed 100 acres.
 `(3) Any person, State, or Federal agency may, in a civil action, obtain
 appropriate relief to enforce this subsection. In an action under this
 subsection, the court may award the prevailing plaintiff a reasonable
 attorney's fees and costs of litigation. No notice shall be required to
 bring an action under this subsection.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 6(g)(2)(F) of the Forest and Rangeland
 Renewable Resources Planning Act (16 U.S.C. 1604(g)(2)(F)) is amended by
 inserting `in accordance with subsection (n) and' after `National Forest
 System lands'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by this Act shall not apply with respect to any contract
 to harvest timber which was awarded on or before the date of enactment of
 this Act.