HR 48 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 48
To establish the California Ocean Sanctuary.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 3, 1989
Mrs. BOXER (for herself and Mr. LEVINE of California) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Interior and Insular
Affairs and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To establish the California Ocean Sanctuary.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `California Ocean Sanctuary and Fisheries
 Enhancement Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the California coast possesses unique historical, ecological,
 educational, recreational, economic, and research values which are
 appropriate for protection under Federal law;
 (2) there is an existing and mounting threat to this sensitive national
 treasure in the form of fossil fuel exploration and development, mineral
 extraction, and the burning and dumping of toxic and hazardous wastes,
 which could result in irreparable damage to this coastal resource; and
 (3) establishment of an ocean sanctuary off the coast of California would
 enhance recreational and commercial fisheries and the use of renewable
 resources within that sanctuary.
SEC. 3. DESIGNATION.
 The area described in section 6 is designated as the California Ocean
 Sanctuary (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the `Sanctuary').
SEC. 4. RESTRICTIONS.
 (a) MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION-
 (1) ISSUANCE OF LEASES, PERMITS, AND LICENSES- Notwithstanding any other
 law, no Federal agency shall issue a lease, permit, or license for the
 exploration for or extraction of oil, gas, or other minerals on or from
 submerged lands located within the Sanctuary.
 (2) EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION- (A) Notwithstanding any other law, no
 person shall explore for or extract oil, gas, or other minerals on or from
 submerged lands located within the Sanctuary after the date--
 (i) of the cancellation, expiration, transfer, relinquishment, or termination
 of a lease, permit, or license which permits such exploration or extraction;
 (ii) of the suspension of such exploration or extraction operations under
 regulations described in subparagraph (C); or
 (iii) on which a lease, permit, or license for such exploration or extraction
 in any way becomes inactive under regulations described in subparagraph (C).
 (B) This Act shall not prohibit exploration for or extraction of oil, gas,
 or other minerals on or from submerged lands--
 (i) under the terms of a lease, permit, or license in effect on the date of
 the enactment of this Act which permits such exploration or extraction; and
 (ii) before the date referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (C) The regulations referred to in paragraphs (A)(ii) and (iii) are
 regulations implementing the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43
 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), as in effect on January 1, 1986.
 (b) OCEAN INCINERATION-
 (1) ISSUANCE OF LEASES, PERMITS, AND LICENSES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, no Federal agency shall issue a lease, permit, or license--
 (A) for ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping within the Sanctuary; or
 (B) for any onshore facility which facilitates ocean incineration or
 harmful ocean dumping within the Sanctuary.
 (2) TRAVEL BY VESSELS EN ROUTE TO INCINERATION- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, no vessel shall travel within the Sanctuary while en
 route to or from ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping.
SEC. 5. FISHING.
 This Act shall not regulate, restrict, or prohibit commercial or recreational
 fishing or other harvesting of ocean life in the Sanctuary.
SEC. 6. DESCRIPTION OF AREA WITHIN SANCTUARY.
 The area referred to in section 3 is the area of the outer Continental
 Shelf extending 200 miles seaward from the seaward boundary of California
 (as approved and confirmed by section 4 of the Submerged Lands Act (43
 U.S.C. 1312)).
SEC. 7. OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF.
 For purposes of this Act, the term `outer Continental Shelf' has the meaning
 given such term in section 2(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
 (43 U.S.C. 1331(a)).