HR 2922 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 2922
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish an entitlement of States
and certain political subdivisions of States to receive grants for the
abatement of health hazards associated with lead-based paint, and to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax and establish a
trust fund to satisfy the Federal obligations arising from such entitlement.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 17, 1991
Mr. CARDIN (for himself, Mr. WAXMAN, and Ms. SCHROEDER) introduced the
following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy and
Commerce and Ways and Means
June 5, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. SIKORSKI, Mr. YATES, Ms. NORTON, Mr. TOWNS,
Mr. EVANS, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. JEFFERSON, Mr. FROST, Mr. OWENS of Utah,
Mr. TORRES, Mr. LANCASTER, Mr. STARK, Mr. BROWN, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey,
Mr. WEISS, Mr. ROE, Mr. KILDEE, Mr. RANGEL, Mrs. MORELLA, Mr. MCDERMOTT,
Mr. BERMAN, Mr. CONYERS, Mr. MOODY, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. DONNELLY,
Mr. OLIN, Mr. FORD of Tennessee, Mr. MCNULTY, Mrs. UNSOELD, Mr. LAFALCE,
Mr. ENGEL, Mr. DIXON, Mr. LEVINE of California, Mr. MATSUI, Mr. LEWIS
of Georgia, Mr. BACCHUS, Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. GUARINI, Ms. PELOSI,
Mr. HOCHBRUECKNER, and Mr. MILLER of California
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish an entitlement of States
and certain political subdivisions of States to receive grants for the
abatement of health hazards associated with lead-based paint, and to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to impose an excise tax and establish a
trust fund to satisfy the Federal obligations arising from such entitlement.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Lead-Based Paint Hazard Abatement Act'.
TITLE I--ABATEMENT OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS
SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF ENTITLEMENT PROGRAM OF FORMULA GRANTS.
 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting after section 317A the following new section:
`FORMULA GRANTS FOR ABATEMENT OF LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS
 `SEC. 317B. (a) ALLOTMENTS FOR STATES AND CERTAIN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For the purposes described in subsection (d), the Secretary
 shall for fiscal year 1993 and each subsequent fiscal year make an allotment
 for each eligible public entity, which allotment shall be made in an amount
 determined in accordance with subsection (j). For each of such years,
 the Secretary shall make a grant to each such entity of the allotment made
 for the entity for the year, subject to paragraph (3).
 `(2) ELIGIBLE PUBLIC ENTITIES- For purposes of this section, the term
 `eligible public entity' means any public entity that--
 `(A) submits to the Secretary for the fiscal year involved a plan in
 accordance with subsection (h); and
 `(B)(i) is a State;
 `(ii) is a city that has a population of 100,000 or more individuals; or
 `(iii) is an urban county that has a population of 200,000 or more
 individuals (excluding the population of any such city therein that has
 so submitted such a plan).
 `(3) TERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY IN CASE OF INSUFFICIENT ALLOTMENT UNDER
 FORMULA- If the allotment under subsection (a) for a fiscal year for an
 eligible public entity is equal to or less than $250,000, the entity may
 not receive any payment from the allotment and the allotment for the entity
 shall be terminated for the fiscal year.
 `(b) LEAD ABATEMENT TRUST FUND; ENTITLEMENT STATUS OF GRANTS-
 `(1) TRUST FUND- The Secretary shall make grants under subsection (a) only
 from amounts in the Lead Abatement Trust Fund established in section 9511
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Amounts in the Fund on October 1 of
 the fiscal year involved shall be allotted for the grants in accordance
 with subsection (a). Any amounts credited to the Fund during the period
 of the fiscal year occurring after October 1 shall not be available for
 allotment during such period, except that amounts in the Fund pursuant to
 any termination of allotments under subsection (a)(3) for a fiscal year
 shall be allotted for the fiscal year in accordance with subsection (j)(4).
 `(2) ENTITLEMENT STATUS-
 `(A) Subject to paragraph (3)--
 `(i) each eligible public entity is entitled to a grant under subsection
 (a) for fiscal year 1993 and each subsequent fiscal year; and
 `(ii) clause (i) constitutes budget authority for each such year in advance
 of appropriations Acts, and represents the obligation of the Federal
 Government to make a grant each such year to each eligible public entity.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) may not be construed to establish, with respect
 to this section, an entitlement of any individual to have carried out on
 behalf of the individual any activity authorized in subsection (d).
 `(3) LIMITATIONS- An entitlement is established pursuant to subsection
 (a) for a fiscal year for an eligible public entity--
 `(A) only to the extent that there are amounts in the Fund and only to
 the extent of the amount of the allotment made under such subsection for
 the entity;
 `(B) only to the extent of the Federal payments corresponding to the amount
 of non-Federal contributions made by the entity under subsection (c);
 `(C) only if subsection (a)(3) has not terminated the allotment; and
 `(D) only if paragraph (4) has not terminated the availability of the
 grant made from the allotment.
 `(4) AVAILABILITY OF GRANT- With respect to the 18-month period beginning
 on the date on which a grant under subsection (a) for a fiscal year becomes
 available to an eligible public entity, any portion of the grant that is
 not obligated by the entity before the expiration of such period shall
 lapse into the Fund and be available for grants under such subsection for
 the following fiscal year.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT OF MATCHING FUNDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may not make a grant under subsection (a)
 unless the public entity involved agrees, with respect to the costs of
 the program to be carried out by the entity pursuant to such subsection,
 to make available (directly or through donations from public or private
 entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that--
 `(A) for the first fiscal year for which the entity receives the grant,
 is not less than 5 percent of such costs;
 `(B) for the second such fiscal year, is not less than 10 percent of
 such costs;
 `(C) for the third such fiscal year, is not less than 15 percent of
 such costs;
 `(D) for the fourth such fiscal year, is not less than 20 percent of such
 costs; and
 `(E) for each subsequent such fiscal year, is not less than 25 percent of
 such costs.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF NON-FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION- Non-Federal
 contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly
 evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services. Amounts provided by the
 Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant
 extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the
 amount of such non-Federal contributions.
 `(d) Purpose of Grants-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2) and subsection (e), a grant
 under subsection (a) may be expended for--
 `(A) inspecting residential structures and child day-care structures to
 identify which of the structures poses a significant hazard to human health
 as a consequence of--
 `(i) the presence of lead-based paint on the exterior or in the interior
 of the structure; or
 `(ii) the presence of lead in surface dust in the interior of the structure;
 `(B)(i) abating such significant hazards through--
 `(I) the encapsulation of such paint, the removal of such paint, or the
 replacement of structural components with respect to which such paint
 exists; and
 `(II) the removal of such dust and the cleanup and reordering of the
 premises involved;
 `(ii) disposing of debris resulting from any of the activities described
 in clause (i); and
 `(iii) providing temporary housing for the occupants of the structures
 vacated during the period in which activities under clause (i) or (ii)
 are conducted for the structures;
 `(C) monitoring each of the sites at which abatement activities are
 conducted in order to determine the safety and effectiveness of the
 activities, including determining--
 `(i) the safety of individuals in conducting the activities; and
 `(ii) whether, with respect to significant lead-based paint hazards,
 the activities have rendered the structures involved adequately cleaned,
 reordered, and safe for occupancy;
 `(D) training individuals to conduct the activities described in any of
 subparagraphs (A) through (C); and
 `(E) providing counseling on lead poisoning associated with lead-based paint
 to occupants of significant-hazard structures and to parents of children
 with elevated blood-lead levels, including counseling on preventive and
 protective measures.
 `(2) LIMITATION ON ANNUAL AMOUNT OF EXPENDITURES FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES-
 `(A) Not more than 10 percent of a grant under subsection (a) may be
 expended for inspection activities.
 `(B) Not more than 5 percent of such a grant may be expended for monitoring
 activities.
 `(C) Not more than 5 percent of such a grant may be expended for training
 activities.
 `(D) Not more than 3 percent of such a grant may be expended for lead
 counseling.
 `(E) Not more than 2 percent of such a grant may be expended for
 administrative expenses regarding the grant.
 `(e) Certain Requirements-
 `(1) REQUIREMENT REGARDING ABATEMENT OF LOW-INCOME HOUSING- A grant
 under subsection (a) may be expended for abatement activities regarding a
 residential structure only if the income of the occupant or occupants of
 the structure is equal to or less than 80 percent of the median income of
 residents of the geographic area involved.
 `(2) IDENTIFICATION BY PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF SIGNIFICANT-HAZARD STRUCTURES-
 A grant under subsection (a) may be expended for abatement activities
 regarding an eligible structure only if the public health agency of the
 State or political subdivision involved has made a determination that the
 structure involved is a significant-hazard structure.
 `(3) APPROVAL BY PUBLIC HOUSING AGENCY OF PLANS FOR SIGNIFICANT-HAZARD
 STRUCTURES- A grant under subsection (a) may be expended for abatement
 activities regarding a significant-hazard structure only if a written plan
 for the activities is submitted to the public housing agency of the State
 or political subdivision involved, and the agency--
 `(A) has approved the plan as proposing safe and effective activities
 that will adequately abate the significant lead-based paint hazards of
 the structure; and
 `(B) has approved the costs of implementing the plan as reasonable and
 commensurate with the extent of such hazards.
 `(4) CERTIFICATION OF PERSONNEL-
 `(A) A grant under subsection (a) may be expended for abatement activities
 regarding an eligible structure only if the activities are conducted by
 individuals who have been certified as competent to conduct the activities
 by an entity that routinely evaluates individuals to determine whether
 the individuals are so competent.
 `(B) The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall ensure that,
 not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Lead-Based
 Paint Hazard Abatement Act, there has been established a program for
 approving entities for purposes of subparagraph (A) and for purposes of
 other Federal programs regarding the prevention of lead poisoning. If the
 program is not established by such date, the Secretary shall independently
 establish such a program for purposes of subparagraph (A) only.
 `(f) ISSUANCE OF PROGRAM STANDARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall issue regulations for carrying out
 this section.
 `(2) NOTICE AND COMMENT PROCEDURES- The Secretary shall issue the regulations
 required in paragraph (1) (and any revisions of the regulations) through
 rulemaking in accordance with the procedures established under section 553
 of title 5, United States Code, regarding substantive rules, except that
 in the case of any revision in the regulations, the revision shall take
 effect on October 1 of the first fiscal year beginning after the date on
 which the final rule for the revision is issued, or upon the expiration
 of the 180-day period beginning on the date on which such rule is issued,
 whichever occurs later.
 `(3) DATE CERTAIN FOR ISSUANCE; CONTINGENT INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN
 REGULATIONS-
 `(A) The Secretary shall issue the final rule for purposes of paragraph
 (2) not later than the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the
 date of the enactment of the Lead-Based Paint Hazard Abatement Act. Not
 later than 18 months after the date on which the final rule is issued,
 and every 24 months thereafter, the Secretary shall review the regulations,
 and make revisions as appropriate.
 `(B)(i) If the Secretary has not issued a final rule for purposes of
 paragraph (2) by the expiration of the period described in subparagraph
 (A), the regulations described in clause (ii) shall be deemed to be the
 final rule, with the regulations applying with respect to the Federal
 Government in a manner equivalent to the manner in which the regulations
 apply with respect to the State of Massachusetts. No provision of the
 regulations shall apply if inconsistent with any provision of this section.
 `(ii) The regulations referred to in clause (i) are regulations issued by
 the State of Massachusetts, as in effect on the expiration of the period
 described in subparagraph (A), and codified in the Code of Massachusetts
 Regulations in sections 460.120 through 460.170, in sections 460.400 through
 460.430, in sections 460.740 and 460.740, and in such other sections as
 are necessary to the operation of the sections of such regulations that
 are expressly cited in this sentence. Revisions in the regulations made
 by such State after the expiration of the period described in subparagraph
 (A) may not be construed to apply with respect to this section.
 `(4) REQUIRED CONSULTATIONS; ADVISORY COUNCIL-
 `(A) In developing and revising the regulations required in paragraph
 (1), the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 and the advisory council established under subparagraph (B).
 `(B)(i) Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of the
 Lead-Based Paint Hazard Abatement Act, the Secretary shall establish
 an advisory council to provide advice to the Secretary regarding the
 administration of the program established in this section. Such council
 (hereafter in this subparagraph referred to as the `Council') shall continue
 in existence until otherwise provided by law after such date of enactment.
 `(ii) The Council shall consist of 3 nonvoting ex officio members designated
 by the Secretary, and 9 individuals who are not officers or employees of
 the Federal Government and who are appointed by the Secretary as follows:
 `(I) 1 physician knowledgeable on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment
 of lead poisoning in children.
 `(II) 1 individual representing the interest of the States.
 `(III) 1 individual representing the interest of local governments.
 `(IV) 1 individual representing the interest of low-income individuals
 with respect to housing.
 `(V) 1 individual representing the interest of the public with respect to
 the protection of the environment and the public health.
 `(VI) 1 individual experienced in the business of abating lead-based
 paint hazards.
 `(VII) 1 individual representing the interest of employees in the business
 described in subclause (VI).
 `(VIII) 1 individual in the business of providing financing for the
 construction, rehabilitation, or purchase of housing.
 `(IX) 1 individual representing the interest of individuals in the business
 of providing insurance against legal liability.
 `(iii) The appointed members of the Council shall receive compensation for
 each day (including traveltime) engaged in carrying out the duties of the
 Council. Such compensation may not be in an amount in excess of the maximum
 rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General Schedule. Members of
 the Council who are officers or employees of the Federal Government may
 not receive compensation for service on the Council in addition to the
 compensation otherwise received for duties carried out as such officers
 or employees. All members of the Council may be reimbursed for travel,
 subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the
 duties of the Council.
 `(g) CERTAIN STANDARDS REGARDING AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The regulations issued under subsection (f)(1) shall
 specify standards for conducting inspection activities, abatement activities
 (including the disposal of resulting debris), monitoring activities,
 training activities, and lead counseling.
 `(2) IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS- The regulations
 issued under subsection (f)(1) regarding inspection activities shall
 specify standards for identifying significant lead-based paint hazards
 in eligible structures, including methods and standards for determining
 the level of lead in paint and in interior surface dust, as determined by
 laboratory analysis or on-site methods. Such standards shall specify that,
 for purposes of this section, a significant lead-based paint hazard may
 be considered to exist only if 1 or more of the following applies:
 `(A) The lead-based paint involved is in a deteriorated condition.
 `(B) The interior surface dust involved contains an excessive level of lead.
 `(C) The lead-based paint involved is on a surface subject to significant
 abrasion.
 `(D) The surface of the lead-based paint involved is susceptible to chewing.
 `(3) DETERMINATION OF ADEQUATE ABATEMENT- In the case of a significant-hazard
 structure, the regulations issued under subsection (f)(1) shall specify
 standards for making a determination that abatement activities have
 adequately abated the lead-based paint hazards involved and rendered the
 structure safe for occupancy.
 `(4) CIRCUMSTANCES WARRANTING TEMPORARY HOUSING- The regulations issued
 under subsection (f)(1) shall specify, in the case of a significant hazard
 structure, standards for making a determination that the significant
 lead-based paint hazards involved, or the abatement activities undertaken
 with respect to the hazard, or both, warrant the provision of temporary
 housing for purposes of subsection (d)(1)(B).
 `(h) PLAN REGARDING ACTIVITIES OF GRANTEE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- With respect to a grant under subsection (a) for a public
 entity for a fiscal year, a plan is in accordance with this subsection
 for purposes of subsection (a)(2)(A) only if--
 `(A) not later than May 1st of the preceding fiscal year, the entity
 submits to the Secretary a plan containing the agreements described in
 this subsection, and the agreements are made through certification by the
 chief executive officer of the entity;
 `(B) for fiscal year 1994 and subsequent fiscal years, the plan contains
 assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that there is in effect throughout
 the jurisdiction of the entity a law described in paragraph (4) (relating
 to compliance with standards for conducting inspection activities, abatement
 activities, and monitoring activities);
 `(C) the plan contains the information described in paragraph (6);
 `(D) the plan contains the certification described in paragraph (7),
 in the case of a public entity that has previously received such a grant;
 `(E) the plan contains the report described in subsection (i), in the case
 of a public entity that has previously received such a grant; and
 `(F) the plan is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such
 agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be
 necessary to carry out this section.
 `(2) STANDARDS FOR PLAN- The regulations issued under subsection (f)(1)
 shall specify standards regarding the submission of a plan in accordance
 with this subsection.
 `(3) APPLICABILITY OF PROGRAM STANDARDS- An agreement referred to
 in paragraph (1)(A) is that, during the period in which a grant under
 subsection (a) is received by the public entity involved, all authorized
 activities conducted by the entity will be conducted in accordance with
 the standards issued under subsection (f)(1), without regard to whether
 the activities are conducted with the grant.
 `(4) LAW IN JURISDICTION OF ENTITY REGARDING COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS-
 The law referred to in paragraph (1) is a law, in effect throughout the
 jurisdiction of the public entity involved (without regard to whether the
 entity or another governmental unit in the State involved establishes the
 law), that--
 `(A) incorporates the standards under subsection (f)(1) for inspection
 activities, abatement activities, and monitoring activities, as in effect
 or to be in effect for the fiscal year for which a plan under paragraph
 (1) is submitted;
 `(B) establishes a requirement that the activities be conducted in accordance
 with the standards so incorporated; and
 `(C) provides for the enforcement of the requirement.
 `(5) CONTINUED OCCUPANCY OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES BY LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS-
 `(A)(i) In the case of any significant-hazard structure with respect to
 which the public entity involved expends a grant under subsection (a)
 to conduct abatement activities, an agreement referred to in paragraph
 (1)(A) is that, subject to subparagraph (C)--
 `(I) during the period described in clause (ii), the structure will be
 occupied only by individuals whose income is equal to or less than 80 percent
 of the median income of residents of the geographic area involved; and
 `(II) if, during such period, the structure is occupied by any individual
 whose income exceeds such 80 percent, the Secretary may recover from the
 entity all or part of the expenditures of the grant made for inspection
 activities, abatement activities, and monitoring activities conducted
 with respect to the structure.
 `(ii) In the case of the residential structure involved, the period referred
 to in clause (i) and accruing with respect to a fiscal year is a period
 consisting of a number of consecutive months equal to the quotient resulting
 from dividing the amount of expenditures described in clause (ii) by 85.0.
 `(B) An agreement referred to in paragraph (1)(A) is that the public entity
 involved will not conduct abatement activities for any privately-owned
 residential structure unless the entity has, pursuant to the consent of
 the owner of the structure, recorded a lien on the structure in the amount
 of the expenditures made for inspection activities, abatement activities,
 and monitoring activities for the structure, with the Secretary as the
 holder of the lien, in order for the structure to serve as collateral for
 a promise made by the owner that the structure will, during the period
 described in subparagraph (A)(ii), be occupied only by individuals whose
 income does not exceed 80 percent of the median income of residents of
 the geographic area involved.
 `(C) No agreement made under subparagraph (A) or (B) (including agreements
 made by owners for purposes of subparagraph (B)) may be considered to
 have been violated by reason of the fact that the income of the occupant
 or occupants of the residential structure involved has increased to a
 level in excess of 80 percent of the median income of residents of the
 geographic area involved if--
 `(i) the income of the occupant or occupants of the structure was at or
 below such level on the date on which abatements activities were commenced
 with respect to the structure; or
 `(ii) in the case of subsequent such occupant or occupants, the income of
 the occupant or occupants was at or below such level on the date on which
 the occupants began residing in the structure.
 `(D) Any amounts recovered by the Secretary under subparagraph (A) or (B)
 shall be credited to the Fund.
 `(6) CERTAIN INFORMATION- The information referred to in paragraph
 (1)(C) is--
 `(A) a description of the outreach and planning efforts of the public
 entity for the training and employment of local, low-income residents in
 neighborhoods with substantial numbers of significant-hazard structures; and
 `(B) a description of the processes and mechanism's of the entity to ensure
 efficient coordination among health, housing, and environmental agencies.
 `(7) CERTIFICATION OF PREVIOUS COMPLIANCE- With respect to fiscal year 1994
 and subsequent fiscal years, the certification referred to in paragraph
 (1)(D) is a certification made by the chief executive officer of the
 public entity involved that, for the most recent fiscal year for which
 the entity received a grant under subsection (a), the entity complied with
 the standards issued under subsection (f)(1).
 `(i) ANNUAL REPORTS TO SECRETARY- With respect to fiscal year 1994 and
 subsequent fiscal years, the report referred to in subsection (h)(1)(E)
 is a report by the public entity involved that, for the most recent fiscal
 year for which the entity received a grant under subsection (a), provides
 the following information:
 `(1) The sources and amounts from which the entity obtained the non-Federal
 contributions required in subsection (c).
 `(2) The number of children who have been screened for elevated blood-lead
 levels and the number of children determined pursuant to such screenings
 to have elevated blood-lead levels.
 `(3) The amount of funds provided under subsection (a) that were expended
 for each of the categories of authorized activities.
 `(4) The amount of funds provided under subsection (a) that were expended
 for abatement activities with respect to each of public housing,
 Federally-subsidized housing, State or locally subsidized housing,
 owner-occupied units, and private rental units.
 `(5) The number of eligible structures with respect to which--
 `(A) inspection activities were conducted;
 `(B) significant lead-based hazards were identified;
 `(C) abatement activities were commenced;
 `(D) abatement activities were completed and were determined to have
 adequately abated the significant lead-based hazards involved; and
 `(E) abatement activities were completed and were determined to have failed
 to adequately abate the significant lead-based hazards involved.
 `(6) With respect to the abatement of significant lead-based hazards,
 a description of the status of eligible structures described in paragraph
 (5)(E) and the reasons underlying such status.
 `(7) A list of the addresses of the eligible structures with respect to which
 authorized activities have been conducted and the owners of such structures.
 `(j) DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF ALLOTMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The amount of an allotment under subsection (a) for an
 eligible public entity for a fiscal year shall be an amount equal to the
 product of--
 `(A) the amount in the Fund that under subsection (b)(1) is available for
 allotments for the fiscal year; and
 `(B) a percentage equal to the mean of the 3 percentages determined under
 paragraph (2) with respect to the entity.
 `(2) PERCENTAGES REGARDING RELEVANT FACTORS- Subject to paragraph (3), the
 3 percentages referred to in paragraph (1)(B) with respect to an eligible
 public entity are as follows:
 `(A) The percentage equal to the quotient of--
 `(i) an amount equal to the number of children residing in the jurisdiction
 of the entity whose families have incomes equal to or below the official
 poverty line; divided by
 `(ii) an amount equal to the sum of the respective amounts determined
 under clause (i) for each eligible public entity.
 `(B) The percentage equal to the quotient of--
 `(i) an amount equal to the number of families residing in the jurisdiction
 of the entity that--
 `(I) have incomes equal to or less than 100 percent of such poverty line;
 `(II) have 1 or more children whose ages do not exceed 18 years; and
 `(III) reside in residential structures whose construction was completed
 by not later than January 1, 1950; divided by
 `(ii) an amount equal to the sum of the respective amounts determined
 under clause (i) for each eligible public entity.
 `(C) The percentage equal to the quotient of--
 `(i) an amount equal to the number of families residing in the jurisdiction
 of the entity that--
 `(I) have incomes equal to or less than 150 percent of such poverty line;
 `(II) have 1 or more children whose ages do not exceed 18 years; and
 `(III) reside in residential structures whose construction was completed
 by not later than January 1, 1960; divided by
 `(ii) an amount equal to the sum of the respective amounts determined
 under clause (i) for each eligible public entity.
 `(3) PROHIBITION AGAINST DUPLICATIVE COUNTING- In the case of any eligible
 public entity within whose jurisdiction there exist the jurisdiction
 of another eligible public entity, the calculations made under each of
 subparagraphs (A) through (C) of paragraph (2) regarding percentages may
 not include any numbers representing children or families (as the case
 may be) who reside in the jurisdiction of the other eligible public entity.
 `(4) REALLOTMENT OF TERMINATED ALLOTMENTS- In the case of amounts in the
 Fund pursuant to any termination of allotments under subsection (a)(3)
 for a fiscal year--
 `(A) the Secretary shall make an allotment for the fiscal year for each
 remaining eligible public entity in an amount equal to the product of--
 `(i) an amount equal to the aggregate amount of any allotments so
 terminated; and
 `(ii) the percentage determined for the entity under paragraph (1)(B); and
 `(B) the Secretary shall make a grant to each such entity of the amount
 of the allotment made for the entity under subparagraph (A), subject to
 the same conditions as grants under subsection (a).
 `(k) CITIZENS' SUITS- Any person may bring an action against the Secretary
 where there is alleged a failure of the Secretary to perform any act of
 duty under this section that is not discretionary with the Secretary. The
 court, in issuing any final order in any action brought pursuant to this
 subsection, may award costs of litigation (including reasonable attorney and
 expert witness fees) to the prevailing or substantially prevailing party,
 whenever the court determines that such an award is appropriate. Nothing
 in this subsection shall restrict any right that any person (or class of
 persons) may have under any statute or common law.
 `(l) EVALUATION OF PROGRAM; REPORTS TO CONGRESS-
 `(1) EVALUATIONS- The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with
 public or private entities, carry out evaluations of representative programs
 carried out by eligible public entities pursuant to this section.
 `(2) REPORTS- Not later than February 1 of 1994 and of each year thereafter,
 the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report--
 `(A) summarizing evaluations carried out pursuant to paragraph (1) during
 the preceding fiscal year; and
 `(B) summarizing recommendations submitted to the Secretary by the advisory
 council established under subsection (f)(2) and the actions undertaken by
 the Secretary in response to the recommendations.
 `(m) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `abatement activities', with respect to eligible structures,
 means any of the activities described in subsection (d)(1)(B).
 `(2) The term `authorized activities', with respect to eligible structures,
 means the activities described in subsection (d)(1).
 `(3) The term `child day-care structure' means a structure--
 `(A) whose purpose includes housing children pursuant to the business of
 providing child care; and
 `(B) that is operated by an entity licensed by a State or political
 subdivision of a State to engage in such business.
 `(4) The term `city' has the meaning given such term in section 102 of
 the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.
 `(5) The term `eligible public entity' has the meaning given such term in
 subsection (a)(2).
 `(6) The term `eligible structure' means a child day-care structure or a
 residential structure.
 `(7) The term `Fund' means the Lead Abatement Trust Fund established in
 section 9511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(8) The term `inspection activities', with respect to eligible structures,
 means activities described in subsection (d)(1)(A).
 `(9) The term `interior surface dust' means surface dust in the interior
 of an eligible structure.
 `(10) The term `lead counseling' means the counseling described in subsection
 (d)(1)(E).
 `(11) The term `lead-based paint hazards', with respect to eligible
 structures, means hazards described in subsection (d)(1)(A).
 `(12) The term `monitoring activities' means the activities described in
 subsection (d)(1)(C).
 `(13) The term `public entity' means a State, urban county, or city.
 `(14) The term `residential structure' means any single-family dwelling
 and any unit in a multi-family dwelling (without regard to whether the
 structures are owned by the occupants of the structures or whether the
 structures are rented by the occupants of the structures).
 `(15) The term `significant-hazard structure' means an eligible structure
 that has been identified under subsection (d)(1)(A) as posing a significant
 lead-based paint hazard.
 `(16) The term `State' means each of the several States, the District of
 Columbia, and each of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa,
 Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands,
 and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
 `(17) The term `training activities' means the activities described in
 subsection (d)(1)(D).
 `(18) The term `urban county' has the meaning given such term in section
 102 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, except that in
 determining whether 200,000 or more individuals reside in the county,
 the population of any metropolitan cities (as defined in such section)
 in the county shall be included.'.
TITLE II--LEAD ABATEMENT TRUST FUND
SEC. 201. EXCISE TAX ON LEAD AND LEAD PRODUCTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 environmental taxes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subchapter:
`Subchapter E--Lead and Lead Products
`Sec. 4686. Lead and lead products.
`SEC. 4686. LEAD AND LEAD PRODUCTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed a tax on--
 `(1) lead removed from any United States smelter, and
 `(2) lead and any taxable lead product entered into the United States for
 consumption, use, or warehousing.
 `(b) RATE OF TAX-
 `(1) LEAD- The amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a)(1) shall be--
 `(A) 75 cents per pound on primary lead, and
 `(B) 37 cents per pound on secondary lead.
 `(2) IMPORTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the amount of
 the tax imposed by subsection (a)(2) shall be 75 cents per pound.
 `(B) LOWER RATE IF IMPORTER ESTABLISHES LEAD USED WAS SECONDARY LEAD- If
 the person liable for the tax imposed by subsection (a)(2) establishes to
 the satisfaction of the Secretary that any portion of the lead subject to
 tax is secondary lead, the amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a)(2)
 on such secondary lead shall be 37 cents per pound.
 `(c) LIABILITY FOR TAX-
 `(1) REMOVAL- The tax imposed by subsection (a)(1) shall be paid by the
 operator of the United States smelter.
 `(2) IMPORTATION- The tax imposed by subsection (a)(2) shall be paid by
 the person entering the lead or taxable lead product into the United States
 for consumption, use, or warehousing.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) PRIMARY LEAD- The term `primary lead' means lead that has not been
 previously used in any finished or unfinished product.
 `(2) SECONDARY LEAD- The term `secondary lead' means lead that has been
 previously used in any finished or unfinished product.
 `(3) TAXABLE LEAD PRODUCTS- The term `taxable lead products' means any
 product more than 0.06 percent of the dry weight of which is attributable
 to lead.
 `(4) UNITED STATES SMELTER- The term `United States smelter' means any
 facility in the United States at which lead is smelted.
 `(e) TERMINATION- No tax shall be imposed by this section after the 10-year
 period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of subchapters for chapter 38 of such
 Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Subchapter E. Lead or lead products.'
SEC. 202. LEAD ABATEMENT TRUST FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to trust fund) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section:
`SEC. 9511. LEAD ABATEMENT TRUST FUND.
 `(a) CREATION OF TRUST FUND- There is hereby established in the Treasury
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Lead Abatement Trust
 Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to
 such trust fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
 `(b) TRANSFERS TO TRUST FUND- There are hereby appropriated to the Lead
 Abatement Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the taxes received in the
 Treasury under section 4686 (relating to tax on lead and lead products).
 `(c) EXPENDITURES FROM TRUST FUND- Amounts in the Lead Abatement Trust Fund
 shall be available for purposes of making grants under section 317B(a) of the
 Public Health Service Act, and shall not be available for any other purpose.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such subchapter A is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 9511. Lead Abatement Trust Fund.'
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 301. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) FORMULA GRANTS- The amendments made by title I shall take effect
 October 1, 1991, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever
 occurs later.
 (b) IMPOSITION OF EXCISE TAX; ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND- The amendments made
 by title II shall take effect upon the date of the enactment of this Act.