HR 5746 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5746
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to establish provisions
regarding the composition and labeling of dietary supplements.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 31, 1992
Mr. RICHARDSON (for himself, Mr. PANETTA, and Mr. ORTON) introduced the
following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to establish provisions
regarding the composition and labeling of dietary supplements.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Health Choices Freedom Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DIETARY SUPPLEMENT- Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 paragraph:
 `(gg) The term `dietary supplement' means an article that--
 `(1) includes, and is intended to supplement the diet with--
 `(A) a vitamin;
 `(B) a mineral;
 `(C) an herb; or
 `(D) another similar nutritional substance, including a concentrate or
 extract of an item described in clause (A), (B), or (C); and
 `(2)(A) is intended for ingestion in a form described in paragraph (1)(B)(i)
 or (2) of section 411(c), or another similar form; or
 `(B) complies with section 411(c)(1)(B)(ii).'.
 (b) DRUG- Section 201(g)(1) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) is amended
 by adding at the end the following: `A dietary supplement shall not be
 considered to be a drug solely because of the potency of a substance in the
 dietary supplement. A dietary supplement shall not be considered to be a
 drug under clause (B) solely because the labeling or advertising for the
 supplement contains a claim, or provides information, that is described
 in section 413(b) and meets the requirements specified in paragraphs (1)
 and (2) of such section, or that concerns the potency of a substance in
 the supplement.'.
 (c) FOOD ADDITIVE- Section 201(s) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 321(s)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (1) through (5) as clauses (A) through
 (E), respectively;
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `(s)'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) A substance in a dietary supplement is not a food additive if the
 substance is identified in the labeling of the dietary supplement as a
 substance provided by the product to supplement the diet.'.
SEC. 3. DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 341 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 413. LABELING AND ADVERTISING OF DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS.
 `(a) DESCRIPTION-
 `(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an article that is
 a dietary supplement may be described as a dietary supplement in labeling
 or advertising.
 `(2) A dietary supplement shall bear complete ingredient labeling
 in accordance with section 403(i)(2) and shall not be deemed to be
 misbranded under section 403 solely because its label bears a listing of
 all the ingredients in the food or its advertising contains references to
 ingredients in the food which are not nutritional substances.
 `(3)(A) The labeling of any dietary supplement may not list its
 ingredients which are not nutritional substances (i) except as part of
 all the ingredients of such food, as required by section 403(i)(2), and
 (ii) unless such ingredients are listed in a format in accordance with
 applicable regulations under section 403. To the extent compliance with
 clause (i) is impracticable or results in deception or unfair competition,
 exemptions shall be established by the Secretary.
 `(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (A), the labeling
 and advertising for any dietary supplement may not give prominence to or
 emphasize ingredients which are not--
 `(i) nutritional substances; or
 `(ii) represented as sources of nutritional substances.
 `(C) For purposes of this subsection, the term `nutritional substances'
 means--
 `(i) natural or synthetic vitamins and minerals;
 `(ii) herbs and their extracts and concentrates; and
 `(iii) other safe substances that occur naturally or their synthetic
 counterparts.
 `(b) RELATIONSHIP TO DISEASE OR HEALTH-RELATED CONDITION- Notwithstanding
 any other provision of this Act, labeling or advertising for a dietary
 supplement may include a claim or other information that characterizes the
 relationship of the dietary supplement, or of one or more of the substances
 provided by the dietary supplement, or of the absence of one or more of
 the substances, to a disease or health-related condition, if--
 `(1) the information is truthful and not misleading, and is premised upon
 a reasonable scientific basis; and
 `(2) the label or labeling discloses the extent of scientific agreement
 about the claim or other information if there is no `significant scientific
 agreement' as that term is used in section 403(r) about the claim or
 other information.
For purposes of paragraph (1), a reasonable scientific basis may consist
of clinical studies, published or unpublished scientific reports, expert
scientific opinion, epidemiological evidence or other data. Neither a
consensus of scientific opinion nor `significant scientific agreement'
as that term is used in section 403(r) shall be required to support such a
claim or other information.
 `(c) PRIOR NOTIFICATION- At least 30 days prior to the introduction
 into interstate commerce of any literature containing a claim pursuant
 to subsection (b), or prior to the making of such a claim through any
 other means, a person responsible for marketing the dietary supplement to
 which such claim refers shall provide notification to the Secretary of the
 wording of such claim only if such claim has not previously been made for
 such dietary supplement by such person. Documentation that is intended to
 support such claim may be submitted with such notice.'.
 `(d) SAFETY ASSESSMENT-
 `(1) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations within 18 months of the date
 of the enactment of this section to require notification to the Secretary by
 manufacturers of raw materials utilized in dietary supplements of significant
 changes in manufacturing practices of such materials or of any potential
 problems of safety or contamination to ensure the safety of such materials.
 `(2) Unless the Secretary has been notified within 18 months of the date of
 the enactment of this section that a study has been initiated by qualified
 experts or independent organizations to evaluate the safety of nutritional
 substances, other than essential nutrients, the Secretary may contract
 with an independent organization to conduct such a study.
 `(3) The Secretary shall affirm as generally recognized as safe all
 essential nutrients for dietary supplement use.
 `(e) ACTIONS-
 `(1) RIGHT OF ACTION- If the Secretary asserts that labeling or advertising
 for a dietary supplement includes such a claim or other information that
 fails to comply with paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b), whether the
 Secretary makes the assertion in a warning letter issued by an officer
 or employee of the Department, or in connection with another action to
 enforce a provision of this Act, the manufacturer, processor, packer,
 distributor, or retailer, of the dietary supplement, or other person to
 whom the assertion is addressed, may--
 `(A) bring an action in a United States district court in any appropriate
 judicial district under section 1391 of title 28, United States Code,
 to secure a declaratory judgment regarding the validity of the assertion; and
 `(B) obtain any other means of judicial review authorized by law.
 `(2) INFERENCE- The absence of any action described in subparagraph (A)
 or (B) of paragraph (1) with respect to an assertion shall not establish
 any inference that the assertion is valid.'.
 (b) NUTRITION LABELING- Section 403(q)(1)(E) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 343(q)(1)(E)) is amended by inserting before
 the period at the end the following: `, except that the required labeling
 shall state the quantity of such nutrients on a per day basis and not on
 a per unit basis'.
 (c) UNITED STATES RECOMMENDED DAILY ALLOWANCES (U.S. RDA'S)-
 (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall arrange for the
 conduct of a study by an organization independent of the Food and Drug
 Administration, to determine--
 (A) whether the current United States Recommended Daily Allowances
 (U.S. RDAs) and the standards upon which they are based adequately reflect
 the nutritional needs of the population, taking into account the function
 of nutrients in protecting against specific diseases;
 (B) how the U.S. RDAs are understood and used by the public generally; and
 (C) how, if at all, the U.S. RDAs should be revised in order to provide
 adequate dietary guidance to promote health and reduce the risk of chronic
 disease.
 (2) Within 18 months of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall report to the Committee on Labor and
 Human Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of
 the House of Representatives--
 (A) the results of the studies conducted pursuant to subsection (a)
 (including supporting data and other materials provided by the entity
 which conducted the study),
 (B) the recommendations, if any, of such entity for legislative or regulatory
 action, and
 (C) such recommendations for legislative action as the Secretary deems
 necessary.
 (3) During the 24-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary may not implement or enforce any regulations that alter
 existing labeling requirements with respect to the use of the U.S. RDAs.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 403(r)(5) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(5))
 is amended by striking out subparagraph (D).