HR 4571 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4571
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to ensure that resident and community
interests are fully considered during corrective action at hazardous waste
sites, to assist affected residents in better understanding health risks posed
by hazardous waste sites, to add additional requirements and authority to
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 25, 1992
Mr. GEPHARDT (for himself, Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr. MARKEY, Mr. TOWNS, and
Mr. WAXMAN) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to ensure that resident and community
interests are fully considered during corrective action at hazardous waste
sites, to assist affected residents in better understanding health risks posed
by hazardous waste sites, to add additional requirements and authority to
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Community and Residents Education at Hazardous
 Waste Sites Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND AUTHORITY FOR AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
AND DISEASE REGISTRY.
 Section 3019 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6939a) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Subsection (d) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `(d) PRIORITY- ' and inserting in lieu thereof `(3)';
 (B) by striking out `in subsection (f)' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `in subsection (j)'; and
 (C) by transferring such subsection (as redesignated) to the end of
 subsection (b).
 (2) Such section is amended by striking out subsection (c) and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following:
 `(c) HEALTH STUDIES- (1) The Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances
 and Disease Registry (hereinafter in this section referred to as `ATSDR')
 may conduct health studies at any facility covered by this subtitle and
 may take other appropriate action with respect to any risks to human health
 posed by the facility as authorized by this section and by sections 104(b)
 and 104(i) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980.
 `(2) If a health study for such a facility contains a finding that the
 exposure (to a release or threatened release of hazardous waste or hazardous
 constituents, or contamination resulting from such a release) concerned may
 present a potential risk to human health, the Administrator of ATSDR shall
 so notify the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the
 State in the case of a State with an authorized program. The Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency or the State shall order the owner
 or operator of the facility to take such steps as may be necessary to
 reduce such exposure and eliminate or substantially mitigate such risk.
 `(d) PUBLIC PARTICIPATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- (A) The ATSDR shall involve the public in any health
 studies it carries out. In carrying out this subsection, the ATSDR shall
 attempt to address principal community concerns about potential or actual
 health effects of exposure to hazardous substances that are the subject
 of a health study.
 `(B) The ATSDR shall notify the affected population and the State and
 local health departments of any proposed health study before the study
 is begun. The notification shall be accomplished through advertisements
 in local newspapers and other methods of outreach as necessary, and shall
 include an explanation of the study and its purpose, an identification of
 the hazardous substances suspected to be present in the area, the health
 effects and symptoms of exposure to such substances, and information on
 how the public can comment or otherwise get involved in the conduct of
 the health study.
 `(C) The ATSDR shall hold a public meeting before any health study is begun,
 to discuss the purpose, scope, methodology, and design of the study and to
 solicit questions, comments, suggestions, and discussion from the public
 about the study. The ATSDR shall consider and respond to the comments and
 suggestions from the public in designing and conducting the study.
 `(D) After the ATSDR has completed a design and protocols for a health
 study, but before the study is begun, the ATSDR shall provide a 30-day
 period for public comment on the proposed design and protocols. The ATSDR
 also shall provide a copy of the proposed design and protocols to the Peer
 Review Board established pursuant to section 3021 and Citizen Review Board
 established pursuant to section 3022.
 `(E) A health study shall be reported or adopted only after a 30-day period
 for public comment on the study.
 `(F) Upon completion of a health study, the ATSDR shall notify the public
 through advertisements in local newspapers about the availability of the
 report on the study and shall make efforts to provide a copy of the report
 to those persons attending any public meetings held on the study. The ATSDR
 shall also provide a copy of the study to any interested individual upon
 request. In addition, whenever practicable the ATSDR shall hold a public
 meeting after the study is completed to explain the results of the study,
 including the risks and potential risks of exposure to hazardous substances
 in the affected area and recommendations on ways to eliminate or mitigate
 those risks.
 `(G) The Administrator may suspend or modify the 30-day comment periods
 under (D) and (E) in this section if he determines that such action is
 needed to protect public health.
 `(2) SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION BY PUBLIC- Any member of the public may
 submit evidence of release of, or exposure to, hazardous constituents from a
 landfill or surface impoundment, or evidence concerning the risks or health
 effects associated with such releases or exposure, to the Administrator
 of the ATSDR, the Administrator, or the State (in the case of a State with
 an authorized program).
 `(3) PETITIONS FOR HEALTH STUDIES- In addition to the authority in section
 104(i)(6)(B) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
 Liability Act of 1980, a person may submit a petition to the Administrator
 of ATSDR at any time to request the performance of a health study at a
 facility covered by this Act. The Administrator of ATSDR shall respond to
 any petition submitted under this section not later than 120 days after
 receipt of the petition. If the Administrator of ATSDR does not perform the
 requested health study, the Administrator of ATSDR shall provide a written
 explanation of why a health study is not appropriate. The ATSDR shall provide
 a copy of each such written explanation to the Citizen Review Board.'.
 (3) Such section is further amended by redesignating subsections (e),
 (f), and (g) as subsections (g), (h), and (i), respectively, and by
 inserting after subsection (d) (as added by paragraph (2)) the following
 new subsections:
 `(e) PUBLIC PROTECTION- (1) In addition to the authority in section
 104(i)(11) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
 Liability Act of 1980, if a health study contains a finding that exposure
 to hazardous substances from a facility presents a potential risk to human
 health, the Administrator of ATSDR shall recommend to the Administrator of
 the Environmental Protection Agency and the State in the case of a State
 with an authorized program actions necessary to reduce the exposure and
 eliminate or substantially mitigate the risks present.
 `(2) At the time the recommendations under paragraph (1) are submitted to
 the Environmental Protection Agency, the Administrator of ATSDR shall--
 `(A) publish in the Federal Register the recommended actions; and
 `(B) notify citizens in the affected area who may be at risk (with first
 priority given to notification of members of high-risk groups), the State,
 local governments, including local public health officials, the Citizen
 Review Board (established pursuant to section 3022), and any affected
 citizen group that has received a health education grant (under section
 8008) in the area of the recommended actions.
 `(f) DATA COLLECTION- The Administrator of ATSDR may collect such public
 health data, and may request the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency to collect such environmental data, as the Administrator
 of ATSDR considers necessary to carry out a health study. The ATSDR may
 contract with universities or the private sector in order to collect
 or analyze data necessary for its health studies. In any case in which
 the ATSDR collects public health data, the ATSDR shall not release any
 information that could be used to identify a particular individual without
 that individual's permission.'.
 (4) Subsection (g) (relating to periodic reports) of such section (as
 redesignated) is amended by striking out `of such Agency' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `of ATSDR'.
 (5) Subsection (h) (relating to definition) of such section (as redesignated)
 is amended--
 (A) by striking out `DEFINITION- ' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `DEFINITIONS- (1)';
 (B) by adding after `shall be undertaken.' the following: `Another purpose
 of a health assessment is to identify, to the maximum extent practicable,
 the diseases, symptoms, and other health effects that have occurred,
 and could occur, as a result of exposure to hazardous waste or hazardous
 constituents. In carrying out an assessment, the Administrator shall
 not rely solely on environmental sampling data and shall to the maximum
 extent practicable consider the results of human health surveillance,
 citizen interviews, information from public health agencies, and other
 health-related data.'; and
 (C) by adding after the matter added by subparagraph (B) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(2) For purposes of this section, the term `health study' means any of
 the following:
 `(A) A research program referred to in section 104(i)(5) of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
 `(B) A health assessment as defined in section 104(i)(6) of such Act.
 `(C) A pilot study of health effects referred to in section 104(i)(7)(A)
 of such Act.
 `(D) An epidemiologic or other health study referred to in section
 104(i)(7)(B) of such Act.
 `(E) Any other health study carried out under section 104(i) of such Act
 or this section that is determined by the Administrator of ATSDR to be
 appropriate for inclusion in the definition of the term.'.
 (6) Subsection (i) (relating to cost recovery) of such section (as
 redesignated) is amended by inserting `or other health study' after
 `health assessment' both places it appears.
 (7) Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsections:
 `(j) AUTHORIZATION- There is authorized to be appropriated to the
 Administrator of ATSDR, for purposes of carrying out this section,
 $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1993 through 1998.
 `(k) HEALTH ASSESSMENTS REQUIRED AT CERTAIN FACILITIES- (1) The Administrator
 of ATSDR shall develop a plan to perform health assessments at facilities
 at which the treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste identified
 or listed under this subtitle is conducted. In selecting the facilities for
 health studies, the Administrator shall give priority to the 25 facilities
 that the Administrator believes present the highest risk to human health.
 `(2) Not later than July 31, 1993, the Administrator of ATSDR shall complete
 health assessments on each of the 25 high priority facilities chosen under
 paragraph (1), and shall submit to Congress a report on--
 `(A) the exposure to hazardous wastes or constituents and the risks to
 human health posed by the facilities together with a ranking of their
 potential risks to human health;
 `(B) the actions necessary to reduce the exposure and eliminate or
 substantially mitigate the risks; and
 `(C) its efforts to improve its responsiveness to communities and such
 other matters as the Administrator considers necessary or appropriate.
 `(3) Not later than September 30, 1993, the Peer Review Board established
 pursuant to section 3021 shall submit to Congress a review of the quality
 of the health assessments conducted by the ATSDR before such date.
 `(4) Not later than September 30, 1993, the Citizen Review Board established
 pursuant to section 3022 shall submit to Congress a report on the progress
 being made by, and the effectiveness of, the ATSDR in responding to the
 needs of communities for information on health effects of hazardous wastes.'.
SEC. 3. PEER REVIEW BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6921
 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 3021. ATSDR PEER REVIEW BOARD.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances
 and Disease Registry shall establish a board to be known as the `ATSDR
 Peer Review Board' (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Board').
 `(b) DUTIES- The duties of the Board are as follows:
 `(1) Under procedures established by the Administrator of the ATSDR,
 to carry out periodic technical and scientific peer review of health
 studies carried out by the ATSDR and to judge their scientific quality
 and usefulness to public health officials.
 `(2) To submit reports periodically to Congress on such peer reviews. The
 first such report shall be submitted not later than September 30, 1993,
 and at least one such report shall be submitted each year thereafter.
 `(c) MEMBERSHIP- The Board shall be composed of 7 members, appointed
 as follows:
 `(1) Three members appointed by the Administrator of the ATSDR, from among
 health professionals, the academic community, and public health officials.
 `(2) Two members appointed by the Director of the National Institute for
 Environmental Health Sciences.
 `(3) Two members appointed by the president of the National Academy of
 Sciences.
 `(d) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL SERVICE LAWS- Members of the Board
 may be appointed and paid without regard to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter
 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 `(e) COMPENSATION; TRAVEL AND CHILD CARE EXPENSES- Members of the Board
 who are officers or employees of the United States shall not receive
 compensation for service on the Board. The other members of the Board
 shall receive, for each day (including traveltime) they are engaged in the
 performance of the functions of the Board, compensation at rates not to
 exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate in effect for grade GS-18
 of the General Schedule, and reasonable child care expenses.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle C of such Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 3021. ATSDR Peer Review Board.'.
SEC. 4. CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6921
 et seq.) is further amended by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 3022. ATSDR CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established a board to be known as
 the ATSDR Citizen Review Board (in this section referred to as the `Board').
 `(b) DUTIES OF BOARD- The duties of the Board are as follows:
 `(1) To monitor involvement of citizens and communities by the Agency
 for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (in this section referred to as
 `ATSDR') and by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 (in this section referred to as `EPA') in the carrying out of the ATSDR's and
 the EPA's (respectively) functions under both this Act and the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
 `(2) To monitor the ATSDR's and EPA's responsiveness to citizen and
 community concerns.
 `(3) To make recommendations to ATSDR, EPA, and Congress on ways to improve
 citizen and community involvement, and to monitor the implementation of
 those recommendations.
 `(4) To review ATSDR and EPA documents intended for public consumption for
 readability and understandability, and to make recommendations to ATSDR
 and EPA to improve such documents.
 `(c) MEMBERSHIP-
 `(1) NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT- The Board shall be composed of 6 members,
 appointed from among individuals who live near or adjacent to toxic or
 hazardous waste sites or are members of citizens' organizations involved
 in toxic or hazardous waste issues, as follows:
 `(A) Two members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
 `(B) One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of
 Representatives.
 `(C) Two members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
 `(D) One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
 `(2) TERMS- (A) Members of the Board shall be appointed for one term of
 2 years.
 `(B) A vacancy in the Board shall be filled in the manner in which the
 original appointment was made.
 `(3) PAY- Members of the Board shall serve without pay.
 `(4) TRAVEL AND CHILD CARE EXPENSES- Each member of the Board shall receive
 travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance
 with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code, and reasonable
 child care expenses.
 `(5) QUORUM- Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum but a
 lesser number may hold hearings.
 `(6) CHAIRMAN- The Chairman of the Board shall be elected by the members
 of the Board.
 `(7) MEETINGS- The Board shall meet at least once every two months, at
 the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
 `(d) DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF BOARD; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS-
 `(1) DIRECTOR- The Board shall have a Director who shall be appointed by
 the Chairman. The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable
 for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
 `(2) STAFF- Without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States
 Code, the Board may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel
 as it considers appropriate.
 `(3) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL SERVICE LAWS- The Director and staff
 of the Board may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and
 may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III
 of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule
 pay rates, except that no individual so appointed may receive pay in excess
 of the annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-14 of the General Schedule.
 `(4) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Board may procure temporary and
 intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
 `(5) STAFF OF FEDERAL AGENCIES- Upon request of the Board, the head of any
 department or agency of the United States may detail, on a reimbursable
 basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Board to
 assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
 `(e) POWERS OF BOARD-
 `(1) HEARINGS AND SESSIONS- The Board may, for the purpose of carrying
 out this section, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take
 testimony, and receive evidence as the Board considers appropriate.
 `(2) POWERS OF MEMBERS AND AGENTS- Any member or agent of the Board may,
 if so authorized by the Board, take any action which the Commission is
 authorized to take by this section.
 `(3) OBTAINING OFFICIAL DATA- Subject to section 552 of title 5, United
 States Code, the Board may secure directly from any department or agency
 of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out
 this section. Upon request of the Chairman of the Board, the head of that
 department or agency shall furnish that information to the Board.
 `(4) GIFTS, BEQUESTS, AND DEVISES- The Board may accept, use, and dispose of
 gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal,
 for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Board. Gifts,
 bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property
 received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury
 and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Board.
 `(5) MAILS- The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the
 United States.
 `(6) ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT SERVICES- Upon the request of the Board,
 the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Board, on a
 reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the
 Board to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
 `(7) CONTRACT AUTHORITY- The Board may contract with and compensate
 government and private agencies or persons for services, without regard
 to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 U.S.C. 5).
 `(f) REPORT- The Board shall transmit a final report to the President
 and Congress at least 30 days before the termination of the Board. The
 final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and
 conclusions of the Board regarding the operation of the ATSDR, together
 with recommendations for legislation and administrative actions that the
 Board considers appropriate.
 `(g) INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED TO BOARD- Upon request from the Board,
 the Administrator of ATSDR, and the Administrator of EPA, shall provide
 to the Board copies of all studies, all petitions under section 3019 and
 the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
 Act of 1980, all responses to such petitions, all applications for health
 education grants under section 8008 and responses to such applications,
 and any other information or data requested by the Board.
 `(h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated
 for each of fiscal years 1993 through 1998 not to exceed $500,000 to carry
 out this section.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle C of such Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 3022. ATSDR Citizen Review Board.'.
SEC. 5. HEALTH EDUCATION GRANTS.
 (a) HEALTH EDUCATION GRANTS- Subtitle H of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6981 et seq) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 8008. HEALTH EDUCATION GRANTS.
 `(a) AUTHORITY- The Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and
 Disease Registry (hereinafter in this section referred to as `ATSDR') may
 make grants available to any group of individuals that may be affected by
 exposure to a release of hazardous waste, constituents, or contamination
 from a facility with respect to which the ATSDR is conducting a health
 study. Such grants may be used to obtain from epidemiologists, toxicologists,
 or other health professionals--
 `(1) information about actual and potential health threats of the exposure
 and actions that can be taken to reduce the exposure and health threats;
 `(2) assistance in interpreting and reviewing health assessments, health
 studies, and any other information developed by the ATSDR or other agencies;
 `(3) assistance in preparing public comments with respect to such
 assessments, studies, and information; and
 `(4) assistance in properly designing community health surveillance
 techniques.
 `(b) AMOUNT- The amount of any grant under this section may not exceed
 $50,000 for a single grant recipient. Each grant recipient shall be required,
 as a condition of the grant, to contribute 10 percent of the total of costs
 of the technical assistance for which such grant is made. The Administrator
 of ATSDR may waive the 10 percent contribution requirement if (1) the grant
 recipient has received a technical assistance grant under section 117 of
 the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of
 1980, (2) the average per capita income of the community is lower than the
 average per capita income of the United States (as published in the most
 recent census), or (3) otherwise at the discretion of the Administrator
 of the ATSDR. Not more than one grant may be made under this subsection
 with respect to a single facility, but the grant may be renewed at the
 discretion of the Administrator of ATSDR.
 `(c) APPLICATION PROCEDURES- The Administrator of ATSDR shall use
 a streamlined application form for grants under this section and shall
 require the least burdensome application requirements practicable and may
 provide assistance to groups in applying for a grant under this section. The
 Administrator of ATSDR shall decide whether to approve or deny a grant
 application not later than 90 days after receipt of the application. The
 Administrator of ATSDR shall make every effort to award grants before the
 initiation of health studies.
 `(d) RECOVERY OF COSTS- In any case in which a health education grant
 is granted under this paragraph, the Administrator may require, as a
 condition of issuing a permit under section 3005 of such Act, the owner
 or operator of the facility to pay to the Administrator an amount equal
 to the Administrator's cost of the grant.
 `(e) PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES- Notwithstanding any other provision of law
 or regulation, small purchase procedures or other simplified procurement
 procedures that the Administrator of ATSDR considers appropriate to carry
 out the grant program and maximize citizen participation shall apply to
 any procurement carried out by a recipient of a grant under this section.
 `(f) COST RECOVERY- In any case in which a health assessment or health study
 performed under section 3019 discloses the exposure of a population to the
 release of a hazardous substance, and a citizen group has been awarded a
 health education grant with respect to such health assessment or health
 study, the cost of the grant may be recovered as a cost of response under
 section 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 from persons causing or contributing to such
 release or, in the case of multiple releases contributing to such exposure,
 to all such releases.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle H of such Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 8008. Health education grants'.
SEC. 6. ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY GRANTS.
 (a) ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY GRANTS- Subtitle H of the Solid Waste Disposal
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6981 et seq) is further amended by adding at the end the
 following new section:
`SEC. 8009. ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY GRANTS.
 `(a) Authority-
 `(1) TREATMENT OF DIOXIN- The Administrator may make available to the
 Director of the Office of Research and Development during fiscal year 1993
 an amount not exceeding $500,000 for field engineering demonstration grants
 to demonstrate nonincineration technologies for the treatment of dioxin. Any
 technology demonstrated using a grant under this paragraph shall be capable
 of being developed on a commercial scale and shall treat dioxin to the
 standard required by the Environmental Protection Agency to be met in
 residential areas. Grants under this paragraph may be used to demonstrate
 dechlorination processes determined to be promising, including processes
 mentioned by the Office of Technology Assessment in its report titled
 `Dioxin Treatment Technologies--Background Paper', dated November 1991.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF HAZARDOUS WASTE- The Administrator may make available
 to the Director of the Office of Research and Development amounts not
 exceeding $1,000,000 for fiscal years 1994 through 1998 for grants to
 demonstrate nonincineration technologies for the treatment of hazardous
 waste and hazardous substances.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT TO CONSIDER ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES-
 The Administrator shall consider the use of nonincineration treatment
 technologies, including technologies demonstrated with grants awarded
 under this section, in the conduct of corrective action under subtitle C
 and of response actions under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
 `(c) Reports-
 `(1) The Administrator shall submit to Congress a report each year on the
 demonstrations carried out using grants awarded under this section. The
 report shall document the problems, potential problems, and success of
 each technology demonstrated during the year covered by the report.
 `(2) Upon completion of a demonstration using a grant awarded under this
 section, a report containing a summary of the demonstration shall be issued
 and made available to the public.
 `(d) PUBLIC PARTICIPATION- The Administrator shall promote public
 participation in the conduct of demonstrations carried out using grants
 awarded under this section. At a minimum, the Environmental Protection
 Agency shall hold a public meeting before any demonstration project
 to discuss, with interested members of the public, the nonincineration
 treatment technology to be demonstrated.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents for subtitle H of such Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. Alternative treatment technology grants.'.