HR 3460 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3460
To provide for the conservation and protection of the public lands in the
California desert, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 12, 1989
Mr. LEWIS of California (for himself, Mr. THOMAS of California, Mr. MCCANDLESS,
Mr. HUNTER, Mr. ANDERSON, Mr. YOUNG of Alaska, Mr. NEAL of North Carolina,
Mrs. VUCANOVICH, Mr. HERGER, Mr. COX, Mr. GALLEGELY, Mr. PASHAYAN,
Mr. DANNEMEYER, and Mr. PACKARD) introduced the following bill; which was
referred jointly to the Committees on Interior and Insular Affairs and
Armed Services
A BILL
To provide for the conservation and protection of the public lands in the
California desert, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `California Desert Conservation Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND POLICY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the federally owned desert lands of southern California known as the
 California Desert Conservation Area (CDCA), managed by the Bureau of Land
 Management, constitute a rich and diverse public land asset of incalculable
 value to all Americans and their future generations;
 (2) these lands contain unique and irreplaceable scenic, historical,
 archeological, wilderness, mineral, wildlife, cultural, national defense,
 scientific, and recreational values that can be managed, used, developed,
 and enjoyed by the Nation's citizenry, industry, and Federal, State,
 and local governmental entities;
 (3) these lands are increasingly sought by diverse interests seeking to
 dedicate them to single purpose uses;
 (4) the California Desert Conservation Area Plan of 1980, developed pursuant
 to section 601 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43
 U.S.C. 1781) and born in the spirit and reality of compromise between many
 competing interests, provides a sound basis for the future management of
 the CDCA; and
 (5) statutory land use designations and the provision of sufficient
 management resources are needed to secure the full benefits of the federally
 owned California desert lands for today's Americans and those of generations
 to come.
 (b) POLICY- In order to secure for the American people of this and future
 generations the full benefit of the heritage of the California Desert
 Conservation Area, it is hereby declared to be the policy of Congress that--
 (1) appropriate lands in the California desert shall be included within
 the National Wilderness Preservation System, in order to fulfill the intent
 of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.);
 (2) the concept of multiple use and sustained yield, as defined in the
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.),
 shall be followed by the Bureau of Land Management within the CDCA wherever
 practicable and not otherwise precluded by law;
 (3) certain lands, being necessary for the provision of the common defense
 of the Nation, be set aside as military reservations; and
 (4) a system of backcountry trails be established.
TITLE I--WILDERNESS ADDITIONS
SEC. 101. WILDERNESS ADDITIONS.
 (a) DESIGNATION- In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act
 (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) and sections 601 and 603 of the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1781, 1782), the following
 areas in the State of California are hereby designated as wilderness and,
 therefore, as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Wilderness Area Approximate Acreage BLM Map Number
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Agua Tibia Wilderness 340 CA-060-002
 Sawtooth Mountains Wilderness 22,900 CA-060-024B
 Carrizo Gorge Wilderness 15,400 CA-060-025A
 Western Otay Mountain Wilderness 4,300 CA-060-028
 Southern Otay Mountain Wilderness 6,800 CA-060-029
 Saline Valley Wilderness 392,600 CDCA-117
 Lower Saline Valley Wilderness 2,200 CDCA-117A
 Little Sand Spring Wilderness 35,800 CDCA-119
 Inyo Mountains Wilderness 58,400 CDCA-122
 Hunter Mountain Wilderness 20,000 CDCA-123
 Panamint Dunes Wilderness 90,600 CDCA-127
 Wild Rose Canyon Wilderness 14,100 CDCA-134
 Slate Range Wilderness 44,500 CDCA-142
 Funeral Mountains Wilderness 23,000 CDCA-143
 Greenwater Valley Wilderness 22,800 CDCA-148
 Nopah Range Wilderness 79,900 CDCA-150
 Owlshead Mountains Wilderness 121,900 CDCA-156
 Little Lake Canyon Wilderness 32,200 CDCA-157
 Owens Peak Wilderness 25,500 CDCA-158
 El Paso Mountains Wilderness 14,000 CDCA-164
 Golden Valley Wilderness 29,100 CDCA-170
 Newberry Mountains Wilderness 20,300 CDCA-206
 Rodman Mountains Wilderness 17,600 CDCA-207
 Bighorn Mountains Wilderness 11,100 CDCA-217
 Morongo Wilderness 6,400 CDCA-218
 Whitewater Wilderness 11,000 CDCA-218A
 Kingston Range Wilderness 34,400 CDCA-222
 Cinder Cones Wilderness 41,700 CDCA-239
 Kelso Dunes Wilderness 46,400 CDCA-250
 Bristol/Granite Mountains Wilderness 43,200 CDCA-256
 South Providence Mountains Wilderness 24,200 CDCA-262
 Providence Mountains Wilderness 59,700 CDCA-263
 Castle Peaks Wilderness 42,200 CDCA-266
 Fort Piute Wilderness 35,000 CDCA-267
 Turtle Mountains Wilderness 116,500 CDCA-307
 Chemehuevi Mountains Wilderness 61,900 CDCA-310
 Chemehuevi/Needles AD Wilderness 900 AZ-050-004
 Whipple Mountains Wilderness 72,000 CDCA-312
 Whiple Mountains AD Wilderness 1,300 AZ-050-010
 Palen/McCoy Wilderness 75,700 CDCA-325
 Coxcomb Mountains Wilderness 52,800 CDCA-328
 Eagle Mountains Wilderness 51,400 CDCA-334
 Santa Rosa Mountains Wilderness 47,100 CDCA-341
 Mecca Hills Wilderness 7,200 CDCA-343
 Orocopia Mountains Wilderness 28,200 CDCA-344
 Chuckwalla Mountains Wilderness 57,000 CDCA-348
 Julian Wash Wilderness 28,800 CDCA-355
 Gavilan Wilderness 3,800 CDCA-355A
 North Algodones Dunes Wilderness 25,700 CDCA-360
 Jucumba Wilderness 26,100 CDCA-368
 Fish Creek Mountains Wilderness 15,500 CDCA-372
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each wilderness area named in the preceding table shall be that area
recommended suitable as wilderness, as generally depicted on the map entitled
`California Wilderness Status', numbered by the corresponding BLM map number
specified in the table, and known by the name given to it in the table.
 (b) ADJUSTMENT OF BOUNDARY OF THE JUCUMBA WILDERNESS- The southern boundary
 of the Jucumba Wilderness may be adjusted, as determined by the Secretary,
 to provide for a mission of the United States Border Patrol.
 (c) FILING OF MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS- As soon as practicable after enactment
 of this title, a map and a legal description of each area designated as
 wilderness by this section shall be filed with the Committee on Energy and
 Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular
 Affairs of the House of Representatives by the Secretary of the Interior
 (hereafter in this title referred to as the `Secretary'). Each such map
 and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included
 in this title, except that the Secretary may make corrections of clerical
 and typographical errors in each such map and legal description. Each
 such map and legal description shall be on file and available for public
 inspection in the office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management,
 Department of the Interior.
 (d) BUFFER ZONES NOT INTENDED- The Congress does not intend that designation
 of an area as wilderness by this section lead to the creation of protective
 perimeters or buffer zones around that area. The fact that nonwilderness
 activities or uses can be seen or heard from areas within a wilderness
 shall not, of itself, preclude such activities or uses up to the boundary
 of that area.
SEC. 102. ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to valid existing rights, each area designated
 as wilderness by this title shall be administered by the Secretary in
 accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act. Any reference in
 such provisions to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be deemed to be a
 reference to the Secretary of the Interior.
 (b) ACCESS TO CERTAIN AREAS- (1) Motorized access through the Saline Valley
 Wilderness (CDCA-117) to the existing Saline-Eureka Valley trail shall be
 permitted, as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Motorized access through the Chemehuevi Mountains Wilderness (CDCA-310)
 to the existing Trespass Wash route shall be permitted, as determined by
 the Secretary.
 (3) Motorized access through the Julian Wash Wilderness to the existing,
 authorized Julian Wash access route shall be permitted, as determined by
 the Secretary.
SEC. 103. WILDERNESS REVIEW.
 (a) RELEASE- The Congress hereby finds and directs that all public lands in
 the Bureau of Land Management's California Desert District, and those lands
 in the State of California administered by the Bureau of Land Management's
 Yuma District, have been fully studied for wilderness designation pursuant
 to sections 202 and 603 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of
 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712, 1782). Any such lands not designated as wilderness by
 this title shall no longer be subject to the requirements of section 603(c)
 of such Act pertaining to the management of wilderness study areas in a
 manner that does not impair the suitability of such areas for preservation as
 wilderness and shall be managed for their multiple use values in accordance
 with land management plans developed pursuant to such Act.
 (b) NO FUTURE WILDERNESS STUDY- Unless expressly authorized by Congress,
 the Secretary of the Interior shall not conduct any future wilderness
 study of land released from wilderness review by subsection (a).
SEC. 104. GRAZING IN WILDERNESS AREAS.
 The grazing of livestock on lands designated as wilderness in this title,
 where established prior to the date of enactment of this Act, shall
 be continued, including continuation of motorized vehicular access and
 maintenance of facilities and water developments supporting grazing use
 as of such date.
SEC. 105. WATER RIGHTS.
 In areas designated as wilderness by this title, nothing in the Wilderness
 Act nor this Act shall constitute or be construed to constitute either an
 express or implied reservation of water or water rights for any purpose. The
 United States may acquire such water rights as it deems necessary to carry
 out its responsibilities on any lands designated as wilderness by this
 title pursuant to the substantive and procedural requirements of the laws
 of the State of California. This section shall not be construed to affect
 any reserved water right to which the United States may be entitled, or
 which it has perfected, as a result of classifications of land before the
 date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 106. MINING CLAIM ADMINISTRATION.
 For a 20-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Federal agency administering the wilderness areas designated in this title
 is prohibited from conducting validity examinations of mining claims as
 a standard procedure in the processing of mining plans of operation for
 activities within those areas.
SEC. 107. NATIVE AMERICAN USES OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
 (a) ACCESS FOR TRADITIONAL CULTURAL AND RELIGIOUS PURPOSES- In recognition
 of the past use of portions of the areas designated as wilderness by this
 title by Native Americans for traditional cultural and religious purposes,
 the Secretary of the Interior shall assure nonexclusive access to such
 areas by Native Americans for traditional cultural and religious purposes,
 including the harvesting of pine nuts. Such access shall be consistent
 with the purpose and intent of the joint resolution entitled `American
 Indian Religious Freedom', approved August 11, 1978 (42 U.S.C. 1996;
 commonly referred to as the `American Indian Religious Freedom Act')
 and the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).
 (b) TEMPORARY CLOSURE- In order to implement this section and in furtherance
 of the joint resolution entitled `American Indian Religious Freedom', the
 Secretary, upon the request of an Indian tribe that has traditionally used
 any such area for traditional cultural or religious purposes, may from time
 to time temporarily close to general public use one or more specific portions
 of an area designated as wilderness by this title in order to protect the
 privacy of religious activities in that area by Native Americans. Any such
 closure shall be made so as to affect the smallest practicable area for
 the minimum period necessary for such purposes.
SEC. 108. MILITARY OVERFLIGHTS.
 (a) FINDING- Military aircraft testing and training activities and operation
 of the various military reservations in California are an important part
 of the national defense system of the United States and are essential in
 order to secure for the American people an enduring and viable national
 defense system.
 (b) ACTIVITIES ON MILITARY RESERVATIONS AND FLIGHT OF MILITARY AIRCRAFT-
 Nothing in this title shall be construed to restrict, forbid, or interfere
 with activities on military reservations and the flight of military
 aircraft (including for purposes of military testing and training) over
 areas designated by this title as wilderness. The fact that military
 activities and overflights can be seen or heard shall not preclude such
 activities near or over such areas.
TITLE II--PRESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA DESERT BACK COUNTRY TRAILS
SEC. 201. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) California's desert history has been, in no small part, a matter of
 trails and other established routes of travel;
 (2) representative segments of these trails and routes of travel continue
 in existence today, serving the access and recreation needs of the region;
 (3) the history of these trails and routes has been one of shared use;
 (4) continued public access to these trails and routes of travel are
 essential to the region's economic and recreation needs; and
 (5) it is appropriate that back country trails and routes of travel be
 preserved and managed to ensure their continued availability to the public
 for vehicular access and prevent their abuse and incompatible use with
 the surrounding land areas.
SEC. 202. ESTABLISHMENT OF CALIFORNIA DESERT BACK COUNTRY TRAILS SYSTEM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT; ADMINISTRATION- In furtherance of policies on multiple
 land use contained in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), there is hereby established the California
 Desert Back Country Trails System (hereafter in this title referred to
 as the `System'). The System shall be administered by the Director of
 the Bureau of Land Management in coordination and cooperation with other
 Federal land holding agencies and the State of California and political
 subdivisions thereof.
 (b) COMPONENT TRAILS- The following trails and routes of travel are
 designated as initial components of the System:
 (1) A segment of the Mojave Trail/Old Government Road, a corridor of
 approximately 139 miles following the route which extends from Needles to
 Camp Cady.
 (2) The Heritage Trail, a system of approximately 640 miles of access routes
 to mining towns, communities, and ranches in the eastern California Desert.
 (3) The Tonapah and Tidewater Railroad Right-of-Way Route, a segment of an
 abandoned railroad right-of-way of approximately 135 miles extending from
 Ludlow, California, to the Nevada border. The Director shall conduct a study
 of the environmental consequences of travel through the Amargosa Canyon,
 California. If the Director finds that unacceptable impacts to rare plants
 or animals would result from such travel, the alternate by-pass route `B'
 shall be utilized.
 (4) The Bradshaw Trail, a historic road of approximately 90 miles extending
 from the Colorado River to its present terminus at the Coachella Canal.
 (5) The de Anza Trail, a segment of approximately 120 miles of the
 historic route.
 (6) The Butterfield Stage Route, a segment of approximately 120 miles of
 the historic route.
 (7) The Yuma to Picacho Road, a segment of approximately 26 miles of the
 historic supply route.
 (8) The Old Spanish Road, a segment of approximately 23 miles.
 (c) ACCESSIBILITY OF TRAILS- Except as may be provided through regulations
 promulgated under section 203 of this title, each trail designated as a
 component of the System shall be open to the public throughout its length
 each day of the year.
SEC. 203. ADMINISTRATION OF CALIFORNIA DESERT BACK COUNTRY TRAILS SYSTEM.
 Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary, acting through the Bureau
 of Land Management, and in cooperation and coordination with other Federal
 land holding agencies, the State of California and political subdivisions
 thereof, and private land holders, shall--
 (1) establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the use and
 maintenance of the System, including a permit system if deemed necessary
 by the Secretary, in order to--
 (A) provide access on an equal basis to the general public;
 (B) ensure permitted vehicle use is of a level and type commensurate with
 the capacities of individual trails and adjacent lands to sustain such use;
 (C) protect the safety of the general public;
 (D) promote compatibility with surrounding land uses; and
 (E) protect other such Federal, State, or local interests, which may now
 or later be recognized by the Secretary of the Interior;
 (2) in order to carry out the purposes of this title, obtain through
 agreement, memorandum of understanding, or acquisition rights-of-way or
 similar interests, necessary permission, or rights to permit public use
 of the trails; and
 (3) promote and encourage volunteer organization support for the maintenance
 of the System.
SEC. 204. FILING OF MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS.
 As soon as practicable after enactment of this title, a map and a legal
 description of each back country trail designated under section 202 shall
 be filed by the Secretary of the Interior with the Committee on Energy and
 Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular
 Affairs of the House of Representatives. Each such map and description shall
 have the same force and effect as if included in this title, except that
 the Secretary may make correction of clerical and typographical errors in
 each such legal description and map. Each such map and legal description
 shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the
 Director of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior.
SEC. 205. ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.
 The Secretary, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, is authorized
 to make periodic additions to, and deletions from, the System. All such
 actions shall conform to the planning requirements of section 601 of
 the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1781). In
 considering additions to the System, the Secretary may consider trails--
 (1) possessing historic significance,
 (2) which highlight various natural resources of the Desert, or
 (3) which provide important recreational opportunities.
TITLE III--WITHDRAWAL OF MILITARY LANDS
SEC. 301. WITHDRAWALS.
 (a) CHINA LAKE- Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands located
 within the boundaries of the Naval Weapons Center, within Inyo, Kern, and
 San Bernardino Counties, California, comprising approximately 1,100,000
 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `China Lake Naval Weapons
 Center Withdrawal--Proposed', dated June 1988 (hereinafter referred to as
 `China Lake') are hereby withdrawn from all forms of appropriations under
 the public land laws, but not the mineral and geothermal leasing laws and,
 to the extent provided in section 302, the mining laws, and are reserved for
 use of the Naval Weapons Center, China Lake, of the Department of the Navy--
 (1) as a research, development, test, and evaluation laboratory and range
 for air warfare weapons and weapons systems,
 (2) as a high hazard training area for aerial gunnery, rocketry, electronic
 warfare and countermeasures, tactical maneuvering and air support, and
 (3) for other defense related uses consistent with the purposes specified
 in this subsection.
 (b) CHOCOLATE MOUNTAIN- Subject to valid existing rights, approximately
 226,729 acres of public land in Riverside and Imperial Counties, California,
 as generally depicted on a map entitled `Chocolate Mountain Aerial Gunnery
 Range Withdrawal--Proposed', dated June 1988, and all other lands within the
 boundaries of the Chocolate Mountain Aerial Gunnery Range that are now or
 may become subject to the operation of the public land laws (hereinafter
 referred to as `Chocolate Mountain'), are hereby withdrawn from all
 forms of appropriations under the public land laws, but not the mineral
 and geothermal leasing laws and, to the extent provided by section 302,
 the mining laws, and are reserved for use of the Department of the Navy--
 (1) as a testing and training area for aerial bombing, missile firing,
 tactical maneuvering, and air support, and
 (2) for other defense related uses consistent with the purposes specified
 in this subsection.
 (c) MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS- (1) As soon as practicable after the date
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall--
 (A) publish in the Federal Register a notice containing the legal description
 of the lands withdrawn and reserved by this title; and
 (B) file maps and the legal description of the lands withdrawn and reserved
 by this title with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 Senate and with the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House
 of Representatives.
 (2) Such maps and legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect
 as if they were included in this Act, except that the Secretary of the
 Interior may correct clerical and typographical errors in such maps and
 legal descriptions.
 (3) Copies of the maps and legal descriptions that are filed with the
 Committees shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the
 Director, Bureau of Land Management, Washington, District of Columbia;
 the Office of the Director, California State Office of the Bureau of Land
 Management, Sacramento, California; the Office of the Commander, Naval
 Weapons Center, China Lake, California; and the Office of the Commanding
 Officer, Marine Corps Air Station, Yuma, Arizona.
 (4) The Secretary of the Navy shall reimburse the Secretary of the Interior
 for the cost of implementing this subsection.
SEC. 302. MINING AND MINERAL LEASING.
 (a) DETERMINATION OF LANDS SUITABLE FOR OPENING- As soon as possible after
 the enactment of this title and at least every five years thereafter,
 the Secretary of the Interior shall determine, with the concurrence of
 the Secretary of the Navy, which public and acquired lands covered by the
 section 301 the Secretary of the Interior considers suitable for opening
 to the operation of the Mining Law of 1872, the Mineral Leasing Act,
 and the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands of 1947, or any of such
 Acts. The Secretary of the Interior shall publish a notice in the Federal
 Register listing the lands determined suitable pursuant to this section
 and specifying the opening date.
 (b) OPENING LANDS- On the day specified by the Secretary of the Interior
 in a notice published in the Federal Register pursuant to subsection (a),
 the land identified under subsection (a) as suitable for opening to the
 operation of the laws specified in subsection (a) shall automatically be
 open to the operation of such laws subject to an orderly opening procedure
 identified in regulations promulgated under subsection (d).
 (c) EXCEPTION FOR COMMON VARIETIES- No deposit of minerals or materials of
 the types identified by section 3 of the Act of July 23, 1955 (69 Stat. 367),
 whether or not included in the term `common varieties' in that Act, shall
 be subject to location under the Mining Law of 1872 on lands described in
 section 301.
 (d) REGULATIONS- The Secretary of the Interior, with the advice
 and concurrence of the Secretary of the Navy, shall promulgate such
 regulations to implement this section as may be necessary to assure safe,
 uninterrupted, and unimpeded use of the lands described in section 301
 for military purposes. Such regulations shall also contain guidelines to
 advise mining claimants of what environmental or other requirements shall
 be required on lands opened pursuant to this section.
 (e) CLOSURE OF MINING LANDS- In the event of a national emergency or for
 purposes of national defense or security, the Secretary of the Interior,
 at the request of the Secretary of the Navy, shall close any lands that
 have been opened to mining pursuant to this section.
 (f) LAWS GOVERNING MINING ON LANDS WITHDRAWN UNDER THIS ACT- (1) Except
 as otherwise provided in this Act, mining claims located pursuant to this
 title shall be subject to the provisions of the mining laws. In the event
 of a conflict between those laws and this Act, this Act shall prevail.
 (2) All mining claims located under the terms of this title shall be subject
 to the provisions of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
 (g) PATENTS- (1) Patents issued pursuant to this title for locatable
 minerals shall convey title to locatable minerals only, together with
 the right to use so much of the surface as may be necessary for purposes
 incident to mining under the guidelines for such use established by the
 Secretary of the Interior by regulation.
 (2) All such patents shall contain a reservation to the United States
 of the surface of all lands patented and of all nonlocatable minerals on
 those lands.
 (3) For the purpose of this section, all minerals subject to location
 under the Mining Law of 1872 are referred to as `locatable minerals'.
SEC. 303. RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary of
 the Interior shall--
 (1) manage the lands and their resources, to the extent possible in
 accordance with the provisions of the Federal Land Policy and Management
 Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), and other applicable laws, for
 uses which may include (but are not limited to) grazing, management of
 wildlife habitat, mineral leasing, control of predatory animals, and
 the prevention and suppression of brush and range fires resulting from
 nonmilitary activities; and
 (2) be responsible for the issuance of all easements, leases, permits,
 and rights-of-way over the lands withdrawn and reserved by this Act.
Any such use, and the issuance of any lease, easement, or right-of-way,
shall be secondary to the military use of the lands and shall be authorized
only with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Navy.
 (b) COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF CHINA LAKE- In recognition of the successful
 management of the lands and resources of China Lake, by the Department of
 the Navy since 1943, under a cooperative arrangement with the Department of
 the Interior, the Secretaries of the Navy and the Interior are authorized
 to continue such cooperative management practices. The Secretary of
 the Interior may assign to the Secretary of the Navy the authority to
 manage the lands and resources withdrawn and reserved by this title,
 and the authority to issue all easements, nonmineral leases, permits,
 and rights-of-way on such lands, so long as such actions are consistent
 with the plan and program required by subsection (d). The Secretary of the
 Interior may not assign the authority to administer geothermal leases issued
 by the Secretary of the Interior, including the issuance of associated
 permits, rights-of-way, other authorizations, and approval of required
 environmental impact mitigation measures within the leasehold consistent
 with the Secretary of the Interior's authority under applicable Federal
 laws. Leases, permits and rights-of-way that traverse the perimeter of the
 lands withdrawn by this title and are required for activities administered
 by the Secretary of the Interior shall be issued by the Secretary of the
 Interior, with the consent of the Secretary of the Navy and subject to
 such conditions as the Secretary of the Navy may prescribe.
 (c) LAND USE AND MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR CHOCOLATE MOUNTAIN- Within five years
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior in
 consultation with the Secretary of the Navy shall develop a land use plan
 and management program in accordance with the provisions of the Federal
 Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 for the use and management of
 Chocolate Mountain.
 (d) LAND USE PLAN AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FOR CHINA LAKE- Within five years
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior
 and the Secretary of the Navy shall develop a land use plan and management
 program for the use and management of China Lake.
 (e) CHINA LAKE NATURAL RESOURCES STATUS REPORT- The Secretary of the Navy
 shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of the Interior, on an annual
 basis, a report on the status of the natural resources of the lands in
 China Lake.
SEC. 304. RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY OF THE NAVY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Navy shall have the authority to
 control the military use of the lands and may authorize use of the lands
 by other military departments and agencies of the Department of Defense,
 as appropriate.
 (b) CHINA LAKE- (1) In accordance with the provisions of section 303(b),
 the Secretary of the Navy may manage the lands and resources withdrawn and
 reserved by this title for China Lake and may also be responsible for the
 issuance of all easements, nonmineral leases, permits, and rights-of-way
 on such lands.
 (2) On China Lake, the Secretary of the Navy--
 (A) shall have responsibility for the management of the wild horses and
 borros and is authorized to utilize helicopters and motorized vehicles
 for the management and control of such animals, and
 (B) may utilize sand, gravel, or similar mineral or mineral material
 resources when the use of such resources is required for construction
 needs of China Lake.
 (3) With respect to China Lake, nothing in this title shall affect the
 geothermal exploration and development authorities granted to the Secretary
 of the Navy by section 2689 of title 10, United States Code, except that
 the Secretary of the Navy is required to obtain the concurrence of the
 Secretary of the Interior prior to taking any action under that section.
 (c) CLOSURE TO PUBLIC- When military operations, public safety, or national
 security, as determined by the Secretary of the Navy, require the closure
 to public use of any road, trail, or other portion of the lands withdrawn
 by section 301, the Secretary of the Navy is authorized to take such
 action. Such closures shall be limited to the minimum areas and periods
 required for the purposes specified in this subsection. A reasonable effort
 shall be made to maintain warning notices during closures.
 (d) BRUSH AND RANGE FIRES- The Secretary of the Navy shall take necessary
 precautions to prevent and suppress brush and range fires occurring within
 and outside the lands as a result of military activities and may seek
 assistance from the Bureau of Land Management in the suppression of such
 fires. The memoranda of understanding referenced in section 305 shall
 provide for Bureau of Land Management assistance in the suppression of
 such fires, and for a transfer of funds from the Department of the Navy
 to the Bureau of Land Management as compensation for such assistance.
SEC. 305. MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.
 The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Navy shall enter into
 a memorandum of understanding to implement the plan and program developed
 for Chocolate Mountain in accordance with section 303(c) and may continue
 the cooperative arrangement referred to in section 303(b). The term of the
 memorandum of understanding shall be the same as the term of the withdrawal
 and reservation established by this title; however, the provisions of the
 memorandum of understanding may be amended by the Secretaries.
SEC. 306. WATER RIGHTS.
 The withdrawals and reservations established by this title are not
 intended to--
 (1) reserve or otherwise withdraw any water for use in connection with
 the uses identified in section 301;
 (2) affect in any manner the future appropriation under State law, by the
 United States or others, of water in, under, or upon the lands withdrawn
 and reserved by this title; or
 (3) affect water rights acquired by the Department of the Navy or other
 components of the Department of Defense prior to the enactment of this
 title for use in connection with military operations at China Lake and
 Chocolate Mountain.
SEC. 307. DURATION OF WITHDRAWALS.
 (a) DURATION- The withdrawal and reservation established by this title
 shall terminate 25 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) EXTENSIONS OR RENEWALS- The withdrawals established by this title may
 be extended or renewed only in accordance with the Federal Land Policy
 and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
SEC. 308. ONGOING DECONTAMINATION.
 (a) PROGRAM- Throughout the duration of the withdrawals made by this title,
 the Secretary of the Navy, to the extent funds are made available, shall
 maintain a program of decontamination of lands withdrawn by this title at
 least at the level of decontamination activities performed on such lands
 in fiscal year 1986.
 (b) REPORTS- At the same time as the President transmits to the Congress
 the President's proposed budget for the fiscal year beginning after the
 date of enactment of this Act and for each subsequent fiscal year, the
 Secretary of the Navy shall transmit to the Committees on Appropriations,
 Armed Services, and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and to
 the Committees on Appropriations, Armed Services, and Interior and Insular
 Affairs of the House of Representatives a description of the decontamination
 efforts undertaken during the previous fiscal year on such lands and the
 decontamination activities proposed for such lands during the next fiscal
 year including--
 (1) amounts appropriated and obligated or expended for decontamination of
 such lands;
 (2) the methods used to decontaminate such lands;
 (3) amount and types of contaminants removed from such lands;
 (4) estimated types and amounts of residual contamination on such lands; and
 (5) an estimate of the costs for full decontamination of such lands and
 the estimate of the time to complete such decontamination.
SEC. 309. REQUIREMENTS FOR RENEWAL.
 (a) NOTICE AND FILING- (1) No later than three years prior to the termination
 of the withdrawal and reservation established by this title, the Secretary
 of the Navy shall advise the Secretary of the Interior as to whether or
 not the Secretary of the Navy will have a continuing military need for
 any of the lands withdrawn under section 301 after the termination date
 of such withdrawal and reservation.
 (2) If the Secretary of the Navy concludes that there will be a continuing
 military need for any of such lands after the termination date, the
 Secretary shall file an application for extension of the withdrawal and
 reservation of such needed lands in accordance with the regulations and
 procedures of the Department of the Interior applicable to the extension
 of withdrawals of lands for military uses.
 (3) If, during the period of withdrawal and reservation, the Secretary
 of the Navy decides to relinquish all or any of the lands withdrawn and
 reserved by this title, the Secretary shall file a notice of intention to
 relinquish with the Secretary of the Interior.
 (b) CONTAMINATION- (1) Before transmitting a notice of intention to
 relinquish pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense, acting
 through the Department of Navy, shall prepare a written determination
 concerning whether and to what extent the lands that are to be relinquished
 are contaminated with explosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials.
 (2) A copy of such determination shall be transmitted with the notice of
 intention to relinquish.
 (3) Copies of both the notice of intention to relinquish and the
 determination concerning the contaminated state of the lands shall be
 published in the Federal Register by the Secretary of the Interior.
 (c) DECONTAMINATION- If any land which is the subject of a notice of
 intention to relinquish pursuant to subsection (a) is contaminated, and the
 Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of the Navy,
 determines that decontamination is practicable and economically feasible
 (taking into consideration the potential future use and value of the land)
 and that upon decontamination, the land could be opened to operation
 of some or all of the public land laws, including the mining laws, the
 Secretary of the Navy shall decontaminate the land to the extent that
 funds are appropriated for such purpose.
 (d) ALTERNATIVES- If the Secretary of the Interior, after consultation with
 the Secretary of the Navy, concludes that decontamination of any land which
 is the subject of a notice of intention to relinquish pursuant to subsection
 (a) is not practicable or economically feasible, or that the land cannot be
 decontaminated sufficiently to be opened to operation of some or all of the
 public land laws, or if Congress does not appropriate a sufficient amount
 of funds for the decontamination of such land, the Secretary of the Interior
 shall not be required to accept the land proposed for relinquishment.
 (e) STATUS OF CONTAMINATED LANDS- If, because of their contaminated state,
 the Secretary of the Interior declines to accept jurisdiction over lands
 withdrawn by this title which have been proposed for relinquishment, or
 if at the expiration of the withdrawal made by this title the Secretary of
 the Interior determines that some of the lands withdrawn by this title are
 contaminated to an extent which prevents opening such contaminated lands
 to operation of the public land laws--
 (1) the Secretary of the Navy shall take appropriate steps to warn the
 public of the contaminated state of such lands and any risks associated
 with entry onto such lands;
 (2) after the expiration of the withdrawal, the Secretary of the Navy
 shall undertake no activities on such lands except in connection with
 decontamination of such lands; and
 (3) the Secretary of the Navy shall report to the Secretary of the Interior
 and to the Congress concerning the status of such lands and all actions
 taken in furtherance of this subsection.
 (f) REVOCATION AUTHORITY- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
 Secretary of the Interior, upon deciding that it is in the public interest
 to accept jurisdiction over lands proposed for relinquishment pursuant
 to subsection (a), is authorized to revoke the withdrawal and reservation
 established by this title as it applies to such lands. Should the decision be
 made to revoke the withdrawal and reservation, the Secretary of the Interior
 shall publish in the Federal Register an appropriate order which shall--
 (1) terminate the withdrawal and reservation;
 (2) constitute official acceptance of full jurisdiction over the lands by
 the Secretary of the Interior; and
 (3) state the date upon which the lands will be opened to the operation
 of some or all of the public lands laws, including the mining laws.
SEC. 310. DELAGABILITY.
 (a) DEFENSE- The functions of the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary
 of the Navy under this title may be delegated.
 (b) INTERIOR- The functions of the Secretary of the Interior under this
 title may be delegated, except that an order described in section 309(f)
 may be approved and signed only by the Secretary of the Interior, the Under
 Secretary of the Interior, or an Assistant Secretary of the Department of
 the Interior.
SEC. 311. HUNTING, FISHING, AND TRAPPING.
 All hunting, fishing, and trapping on the lands withdrawn by this title
 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 2671 of
 title 10, United States Code.
SEC. 312. IMMUNITY OF UNITED STATES.
 The United States and all departments or agencies thereof shall be held
 harmless and shall not be liable for any injuries or damages to persons or
 property suffered in the course of any mining, geothermal leasing or other
 authorized nonmilitary activity conducted on lands described in section 301.
SEC. 313. MISCELLANEOUS.
 (a) AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 2(c) of the Military Lands Withdrawal Act
 of 1986 (Public Law 99-606) is amended by striking `the office of the
 commander, Barry M. Goldwater Air Force Base' and inserting `the office
 of the commander, Luke Air Force Base'.
 (2) Section 3(a)(3)(A) of such Act is amended by striking `other than'
 and by inserting `including'.
 (3) Section 7(a) of such Act is amended by striking `cleanup achieved'
 and by inserting `decontamination activities performed'.
 (b) EL CENTRO RANGES- The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to permit
 the Secretary of the Navy to use until January 1, 1990 the public lands
 in Imperial County, California, generally depicted on the map entitled
 `El Centro Ranges' dated July, 1987, for the same purposes and to no
 greater extent than such lands were used by the Secretary of the Navy as
 of July 1, 1987. Such permission shall be through a cooperative agreement
 or other appropriate means. Such use shall be subject to such terms and
 conditions as the Secretary of the Interior may require so as to protect
 the natural, environmental, scientific, cultural, and other resources Šand
 values of such lands and to minimize the extent to which such use by the
 Secretary of the Navy impedes or restricts use of such other public lands
 for recreational and other purposes.
 (c) COACHELLA VALLEY- The Secretary of the Interior is authorized and
 directed to take all steps necessary to complete land exchanges between
 the Nature Conservancy and the Bureau of Land Management with regard to
 the Coachella Valley preserve, as described in Bureau of Land Management
 case files CA0918891, CA0918781, CA0917921, CA0920260, and CA0917772,
 and to consummate such exchanges.
 (d) TRAINING CENTER- Unless otherwise provided by law, the lands within the
 Toiyabe National Forest, in California, which have been used for purposes
 of the United States Marine Corps Mountain Warfare Training Center, shall
 be retained as part of such National Forest. The Secretary of Agriculture
 shall continue to make such lands available to the United States Marine
 Corps for purposes of such training center, subject to such restrictions
 as the Secretary of Agriculture finds appropriate to protect the natural,
 environmental, aesthetic, scientific, cultural, and other resources and
 values of such lands. So far as possible, consistent with use of such lands
 by the United States Marine Corps for purposes of the Mountain Warfare
 Training Center, the affected lands shall be open to public recreation
 and other uses.