HR 2941 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2941
To amend the Revised Statutes of the United States to clarify the extent of
rights against nongovernmental discrimination under certain civil rights laws.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 20, 1989
Mr. COURTER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the Revised Statutes of the United States to clarify the extent of
rights against nongovernmental discrimination under certain civil rights laws.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights Enforcement Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT TO REVISED STATUTES OF THE UNITED STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XXIV of the Revised Statutes of the United States
 is amended by inserting after section 1977 (42 U.S.C. 1981) the following:
 `SEC. 1977a. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b), the rights protected
 by section 1977 are protected against impairment by nongovernmental
 discrimination as well as against impairment by or under color of
 governmental action. Section 1977 affords all persons the same protection
 against discrimination during the course of the carrying out of a contract
 as it does in connection with the making or enforcement of that contract.
 `(b) The rights referred to in subsection (a) do not extend--
 `(1) as against an individual, to personal services provided to that
 individual not in connection with that individual's business activities; or
 `(2) to an employment relationship with an employer other than an employer
 as defined in section 701(b) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections at the beginning of title
 XXIV of the Revised Statutes of the United States is amended by inserting
 after the item relating to section 1977 the following new item:
`1977a. Rights protected against nongovernmental as well as governmental
impairment.'.