S 2538 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2538
To establish a comprehensive program to ensure the safety of fish products
intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 7 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. HOLLINGS (for himself, Mr. STEVENS, Mr. LEAHY, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. MITCHELL,
Mr. COHEN, and Mr. KERRY) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To establish a comprehensive program to ensure the safety of fish products
intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety
 Act of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. Unsafe seafood.
Sec. 5. Effect on other laws.
TITLE I--NATIONAL SEAFOOD SAFETY PROGRAM
Sec. 101. Administration of national program.
Sec. 102. Shellfish safety.
Sec. 103. Tolerance for contaminants in seafood.
Sec. 104. Monitoring of growing areas and fishing grounds.
Sec. 105. Processing and handling.
Sec. 106. Seafood inspection system.
Sec. 107. Sampling of fish products.
Sec. 108. Registration of processors and importers.
Sec. 109. State and Federal cooperation.
Sec. 110. Imports.
Sec. 111. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE II--RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
Sec. 201. Public health assessment system.
Sec. 202. Public education and advisory system.
Sec. 203. Research.
TITLE III--SEAFOOD SAFETY ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 301. Whistleblower protection.
Sec. 302. Recall.
Sec. 303. Prohibited acts and penalties.
Sec. 304. Subpoenas.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Seafood constitutes an important component of the Nation's food supply. A
 wide variety of domestic and imported fish products are consumed throughout
 the Nation. Seafood is not only harvested and marketed by a large and
 diverse commercial fishing industry, but also is caught and consumed by
 noncommercial users.
 (2) Heightened awareness of the health benefits associated with seafood
 has raised consumption rates and increased the demand for wholesome seafood.
 (3) The consumption of seafood harvested from polluted waters and the sale
 of unsafe or misbranded fish products are injurious to the public welfare,
 destroy markets for wholesome and properly labeled and packaged seafood,
 and result in injury to consumers and losses to the United States seafood
 industry.
 (4) The National Academy of Sciences, in its 1991 study entitled `Seafood
 Safety', reports that while most seafood available to the United States
 public is wholesome and unlikely to cause illness, there should be a
 comprehensive approach to known seafood safety problems.
 (5) To address such problems and to ensure consumer confidence in the
 wholesomeness of fish products, existing Federal standards and systems of
 inspection and monitoring must be strengthened.
S 2538 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2538
To establish a comprehensive program to ensure the safety of fish products
intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 7 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. HOLLINGS (for himself, Mr. STEVENS, Mr. LEAHY, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. MITCHELL,
Mr. COHEN, and Mr. KERRY) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To establish a comprehensive program to ensure the safety of fish products
intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety
 Act of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. Unsafe seafood.
Sec. 5. Effect on other laws.
TITLE I--NATIONAL SEAFOOD SAFETY PROGRAM
Sec. 101. Administration of national program.
Sec. 102. Shellfish safety.
Sec. 103. Tolerance for contaminants in seafood.
Sec. 104. Monitoring of growing areas and fishing grounds.
Sec. 105. Processing and handling.
Sec. 106. Seafood inspection system.
Sec. 107. Sampling of fish products.
Sec. 108. Registration of processors and importers.
Sec. 109. State and Federal cooperation.
Sec. 110. Imports.
Sec. 111. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE II--RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
Sec. 201. Public health assessment system.
Sec. 202. Public education and advisory system.
Sec. 203. Research.
TITLE III--SEAFOOD SAFETY ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 301. Whistleblower protection.
Sec. 302. Recall.
Sec. 303. Prohibited acts and penalties.
Sec. 304. Subpoenas.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Seafood constitutes an important component of the Nation's food supply. A
 wide variety of domestic and imported fish products are consumed throughout
 the Nation. Seafood is not only harvested and marketed by a large and
 diverse commercial fishing industry, but also is caught and consumed by
 noncommercial users.
 (2) Heightened awareness of the health benefits associated with seafood
 has raised consumption rates and increased the demand for wholesome seafood.
 (3) The consumption of seafood harvested from polluted waters and the sale
 of unsafe or misbranded fish products are injurious to the public welfare,
 destroy markets for wholesome and properly labeled and packaged seafood,
 and result in injury to consumers and losses to the United States seafood
 industry.
 (4) The National Academy of Sciences, in its 1991 study entitled `Seafood
 Safety', reports that while most seafood available to the United States
 public is wholesome and unlikely to cause illness, there should be a
 comprehensive approach to known seafood safety problems.
 (5) To address such problems and to ensure consumer confidence in the
 wholesomeness of fish products, existing Federal standards and systems of
 inspection and monitoring must be strengthened.
 (6) A national seafood safety program should be built upon the existing
 responsibilities and capabilities of the Food and Drug Administration,
 the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Food Safety
 and Inspection Service, which have extensive experience with regulatory,
 research, monitoring, enforcement, and education issues related to human
 health, fisheries, and the inspection of food.
 (7) The Federal Government should foster and support mandatory and effective
 State programs to ensure a comprehensive national seafood safety program.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `Conference' means the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference or
 any successor organization.
 (2) `contaminant' means a chemical or microbiological contaminant, parasite,
 or toxin.
 (3) `facility' includes any factory, warehouse, establishment, or vessel.
 (4) `fish' means finfish, shellfish and other mollusks, crustaceans,
 amphibians, and all other forms of aquatic life, whether from wild or
 cultured sources, except birds and mammals.
 (5) `fish product' means--
 (A) any product intended for human consumption and derived in whole or in
 part from fish; or
 (B) any fish intended for human consumption that is in the possession or
 control of any person.
 (6) `fish tender vessel' has the meaning given that term in section 2101(11c)
 of title 46, United States Code.
 (7) `fishing vessel' has the meaning given that term in section 2101(11a)
 of title 46, United States Code.
 (8) `interstate commerce' means commerce--
 (A) between a place in a State and a place outside such State (including
 a place outside the United States); or
 (B) within the District of Columbia or any territory or possession of the
 United States.
 (9) `person' means any individual (whether or not a citizen of the United
 States), any corporation, partnership, association, cooperative, or other
 entity (whether or not organized under the laws of any State), and any
 State, local, or foreign government, or any entity of such government or
 the Federal Government.
 (10) `processing' means, with respect to fish products, the commercial
 preparation, manufacture, or transportation of such fish products,
 including heading and gutting, canning, cooking, smoking, filleting,
 fermenting, freezing, dehydrating, mincing, drying, consumer packaging,
 and warehousing, except such practices as heading, gutting, or freezing
 intended solely to prepare fish products for holding on board a vessel for
 delivery to a person engaged in such commercial preparation, manufacture,
 or transportation.
 (11) `seafood' means fish products in general.
 (12) `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (13) `shellfish' means any species of oyster, clam, or mussel, either
 shucked or in the shell, and either processed or unprocessed, or any edible
 part thereof.
 (14) `shellfish shipper' means a person who transports shellfish in
 interstate commerce, or holds shellfish for such transport.
 (15) `State' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
 Islands, or any territory or possession of the United States.
SEC. 4. UNSAFE FISH.
 (a) FISH AND FISH PRODUCTS DEEMED UNSAFE FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION- For purposes
 of this Act, fish products shall be deemed to be unsafe for human consumption
 if the fish products--
 (1) contain a contaminant for which a tolerance has been established under
 section 103 and the contaminant is not within the limits of such tolerance;
 (2) are derived in whole or in part from fish that have been harvested
 from a fish growing area or fishing ground that, for the protection of
 public health, has been closed to such harvesting, under State law or
 regulations or under section 104;
 (3) have been processed, handled, stored, or transported in violation of
 standards established under section 102 or 105; or
 (4) are shellfish and are--
 (A) grown or harvested in (i) a State that does not have a program approved
 under section 102(b) or (ii) a foreign nation that is not certified for
 shellfish under section 110(f)(3);
 (B) harvested from a shellfish growing area that has not been classified
 and monitored in accordance with standards and procedures established
 under section 102(a); or
 (C) transported in interstate commerce, or held for such transport, by a
 person who is not included in the list maintained by the Secretary under
 section 102(c).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATES- The provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of
 subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act. Each
 provision of paragraph (4) of subsection (a) shall take effect upon a
 date specified by the Secretary and published in the Federal Register,
 or on the date that is 30 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 whichever is sooner.
SEC. 5. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 (a) FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT- Nothing in this Act, except as
 expressly provided, shall alter the authority of the Secretary under the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), as amended
 by this Act.
 (b) QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAMS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed
 to preclude a Federal seafood quality assurance program established under
 other law or a State seafood quality assurance program for fish products
 produced under the jurisdiction of such State.
TITLE I--NATIONAL SEAFOOD SAFETY PROGRAM
SEC. 101. ADMINISTRATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of
 Commerce, the Secretary of Agriculture, and other appropriate entities,
 shall administer a national program for the purpose of protecting human
 health by ensuring the safety of seafood consumed in the United States.
 (2) The program shall--
 (A) take into consideration the distinctive characteristics, fishing methods,
 and processing practices related to different fish species;
 (B) be based on a comprehensive analysis of the hazards associated with
 different fish and fish products and with the harvesting, processing, and
 handling of different fish and fish products, including the identification
 and evaluation of--
 (i) the severity of the potential health risks;
 (ii) the sources and specific points of potential contamination that may
 render fish products unsafe for human consumption; and
 (iii) the potential for persistence, multiplication, or concentration of
 contaminants in fish or fish products;
 (C) determine critical control points for addressing identifiable hazards;
 and
 (D) establish procedures to monitor critical control points and prevent
 identifiable hazards.
 (b) PROGRAM ELEMENTS- The program shall provide for--
 (1) administration of a comprehensive shellfish safety program;
 (2) establishment and enforcement of health-based standards for (A)
 substances which may contaminate seafood and (B) safety and sanitation in
 the processing and handling of fish products;
 (3) development of a system to identify and monitor fish growing areas
 and fishing grounds;
 (4) implementation of procedures and requirements to ensure the safety of
 imported fish products;
 (5) implementation of a national system for the inspection of fish products
 (including a sampling and testing program for contaminants in fish products)
 and for registration of processors and importers;
 (6) support for and coordination with State governments in carrying out
 inspection, enforcement, and monitoring, including compensation to the
 State for carrying out such functions;
 (7) inclusion of seafood in a national surveillance system to assess the
 health risks associated with the human consumption of food products;
 (8) development of public education and advisory programs; and
 (9) design and implementation of a research program in furtherance of the
 purposes of this Act.
 (c) FEDERAL SEAFOOD SAFETY HANDBOOK- The Secretary, in cooperation
 with the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Agriculture, and other
 appropriate entities, shall develop and update on a regular basis a concise
 and comprehensive handbook containing Federal regulations and guidelines
 relating to seafood safety. The Secretary shall ensure that the handbook
 is generally available for the purpose of disseminating information to
 the industry and encouraging integration of such Federal regulations and
 guidelines into State regulatory processes.
SEC. 102. SHELLFISH SAFETY.
 (a) STANDARDS, PROCEDURES, AND REQUIREMENTS- (1) The Secretary, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, the Conference, and other
 appropriate entities, shall administer a national shellfish safety program
 designed to protect against hazards to human health associated with the
 consumption of shellfish. Not later than 12 months after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue regulations or guidelines
 establishing standards, procedures, and requirements for the effective
 implementation of such a program, including--
 (A) standards for the growing, harvesting, handling, processing, and
 shipment of shellfish;
 (B) standards for the water quality of shellfish growing and harvesting
 areas;
 (C) procedures for classifying and monitoring all actual and potential
 shellfish growing areas to determine their suitability for shellfish
 harvesting, based on standards established under this subsection;
 (D) procedures for requesting that shellfish growing areas which are
 unsuitable for harvesting be closed by--
 (i) the Secretary of Commerce in accordance with section 104(b);
 (ii) the Governor of any affected State; or
 (iii) the Secretary of Commerce in accordance with section 104(c), whenever
 a significant risk of adverse health consequences exists;
 (E) procedures and requirements to facilitate tracing shellfish in interstate
 commerce, including a system for maintaining a list of certified shellfish
 shippers in accordance with subsection (c); and
 (F) such other standards, procedures, and requirements as are necessary
 to carry out the provisions of this section.
 (2) Regulations or guidelines issued under this section shall incorporate, to
 the extent practicable, guidelines issued in accordance with the memorandum
 of understanding between the Conference and the Food and Drug Administration,
 dated March 14, 1983, and any amendments or addendums thereto.
 (3) The Secretary shall, on a regular basis, review and revise the standards,
 procedures, and requirements established under this section, incorporating
 where practicable and appropriate any recommendations of the Conference.
 (b) STATE PROGRAMS- (1) Upon issuance of regulations or guidelines under
 subsection (a), the Secretary shall request each shellfish-producing
 State to submit a proposed State shellfish safety program. The Secretary
 in cooperation with the Secretary of Commerce shall review each proposed
 State program submitted, and not later than 120 days after each submission,
 the Secretary shall--
 (A) approve the program if it meets the requirements described under
 paragraph (2); or
 (B) disapprove the program if it does not meet such requirements, notify
 the Governor of the State identifying the reasons for the disapproval,
 and provide an opportunity for the State to correct and resubmit the
 program for approval.
 (2) The Secretary shall approve a proposed State shellfish safety program
 submitted under this subsection if the Secretary determines that the
 program--
 (A) achieves the purposes of the national program as stated in subsection
 (a);
 (B) ensures that standards established under subsection (a) are met through
 a comprehensive State monitoring system;
 (C) provides adequate enforcement to ensure that harvesting of shellfish
 occurs only in waters that (i) meet applicable standards established under
 subsection (a) and (ii) are appropriately classified as being suitable
 for harvest of shellfish in accordance with procedures established under
 subsection (a);
 (D) provides for certification of shellfish shippers that are in compliance
 with the program; and
 (E) ensures compliance with tolerances established under section 103 of this
 Act and ensures that shellfish are not deemed to be adulterated under section
 402(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)).
 (3) The Secretary shall review at least annually each State program
 approved under this subsection to determine whether the program and the
 State's implementation of the program continue to meet the requirements
 of paragraph (2).
 (4) The Secretary shall withdraw approval of a State program or any portion
 thereof that the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce
 and the Conference, determines no longer meets the requirements of paragraph
 (2) after providing notice to the State and providing an opportunity for
 corrective action. The Secretary shall promptly publish notice in the
 Federal Register regarding such determination.
 (5) The Secretary may annually grant to each State with a program approved
 under this subsection an amount not to exceed 60 percent of the cost
 of operating the program. Amounts granted under this paragraph shall be
 distributed among the States in a fair and equitable manner, in accordance
 with criteria established by the Secretary by regulation, and taking into
 account the proportion, volume, and value of--
 (A) shellfish harvesting and processing in each State during the 5 calendar
 years immediately preceding the calendar year in which the amounts are
 granted; and
 (B) classified shellfish growing areas in each State.
 (c) LISTING SHELLFISH SHIPPERS- (1) The Secretary shall publish and maintain
 a list of shellfish shippers that are certified--
 (A) by a State under a program approved pursuant to subsection (b); or
 (B) pursuant to section 110(f)(2)(D) by a foreign nation with which there
 is in effect an agreement under section 110.
 (2) The Secretary may exclude from a list under this subsection a shellfish
 shipper that is certified by a State or a foreign nation, if the Secretary
 determines that--
 (A) in accordance with subsection (b)(4), the applicable portion of such
 State's shellfish safety program no longer meets the requirements of
 subsection (b)(2);
 (B) such foreign nation no longer meets the requirements of section
 110(f)(2)(D); or
 (C) the shellfish shipper is not in compliance with--
 (i) an applicable approved State program under this section after notice
 to the State and opportunity for action;
 (ii) the applicable shellfish shipper certification system of a foreign
 nation under an agreement pursuant to section 110; or
 (iii) requirements under any Federal law relating to the safety of shellfish
 for human consumption.
SEC. 103. TOLERANCES FOR CONTAMINANTS IN SEAFOOD.
 (a) TOLERANCES- The Secretary shall establish tolerances limiting the
 quantity of contaminants that, when found in fish products, may render such
 fish products injurious to health. Such tolerances may include indicators
 (including indicator organisms) from which it may reasonably be inferred that
 a contaminant is present in fish or fish products. In developing a tolerance,
 the Secretary shall take into account the extent to which consumers may
 be exposed to such contaminant from sources other than fish products, and
 the extent to which such contaminant can be avoided or minimized in the
 harvesting of fish or the handling or processing of fish products. While
 a tolerance under this section is in effect, no fish product shall, by
 reason of bearing or containing a contaminant that complies with such
 tolerance, be deemed to be adulterated under section 402(a)(1) or (2)(A)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1) or (2)(A)).
 (b) REGULATIONS- (1) The Secretary, after notice and opportunity for
 comment, shall issue regulations to implement subsection (a) within 18
 months after the date of enactment of this Act. In issuing such regulations,
 the Secretary shall establish tolerances for the contaminants that the
 Secretary determines are most likely to be found in fish or fish products
 and which are most likely to cause fish products to be unsafe for human
 consumption. Regulations for other contaminants shall be issued by the
 Secretary on a timely basis.
 (2) A tolerance established under this section shall be based on--
 (A) a scientific analysis of the health risks attributable to the contaminant
 for which the tolerance is established; and
 (B) the recommendations of the National Academy of Sciences, to the extent
 practicable.
 (3) The Secretary shall, in a timely manner, issue revisions to the
 regulations under paragraph (1) which take into account new information. The
 Secretary may contract with the National Academy of Sciences to provide
 such other data or assistance as the Secretary determines necessary.
 (c) REPORT- The Secretary shall report to the Congress on the progress of
 the Secretary in establishing tolerances under this section. The report
 shall include a description of the research that has been conducted with
 respect to such tolerances and the research which must be conducted before
 additional tolerances may be established, the health significance of the
 lack of such additional tolerances, a timetable for the establishment of
 such tolerances, and the estimated costs, including costs of research,
 associated with the establishment of such tolerances. The report shall
 be transmitted on or about the end of the 18th month after the date of
 enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter during the 6-year period
 that begins on such date of enactment.
 (d) ADDED SUBSTANCE DEFINED- Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(bb) The term `added substance' means a substance that is not an inherent
 constituent of a food and whose intended use results, or may reasonably be
 expected to result, directly or indirectly, in its becoming a component
 of, or otherwise affecting the characteristics of, any food. Such term
 includes (1) a substance that is intentionally added to any food and (2)
 a substance that is the result of environmental, agricultural, industrial,
 or other contamination.'.
SEC. 104. MONITORING OF GROWING AREAS AND FISHING GROUNDS.
 (a) MONITORING SYSTEM- Within 24 months after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall, for waters under Federal jurisdiction
 seaward of the inner boundary of the exclusive economic zone, classify
 and monitor shellfish growing areas under section 102(a) and identify
 and monitor fish growing areas and fishing grounds from which significant
 quantities of fish (other than shellfish) are harvested. The purpose of
 such system shall be to monitor (through the collection of samples and
 other scientific information) potential hazards that are likely to render
 fish products from such areas and grounds unsafe for human consumption.
 (b) FEDERAL CLOSURE AND RESTRICTION- (1) For the purpose of protecting
 human health, the Secretary of Commerce shall prohibit or otherwise impose
 conditions on the harvesting of species of fish in a specific area of
 waters under Federal jurisdiction seaward of the inner boundary of the
 exclusive economic zone, if the Secretary determines, based on sampling
 or other scientific information, that--
 (A) fish of that species harvested from such specific area are likely to
 be in violation of tolerances established under section 103; or
 (B) fish products, derived in whole or in part from fish of that species
 harvested from such specific area, are likely to be deemed to be adulterated
 under section 402(a) (1) or (2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 342(a) (1) or (2)).
 (2) Any action taken under this subsection--
 (A) shall be promulgated in the Federal Register with immediate effect,
 together with the reasons therefor and a request for public comments; and
 (B) shall remain in effect only as long as the Secretary determines that
 the circumstances that led to the action still exist.
 (c) CLOSING OF STATE WATERS TO HARVESTING OF FISH- (1) The Secretary and
 the Secretary of Commerce shall develop guidelines to assist States in
 establishing procedures for closing waters under State jurisdiction.
 (2) If the Secretary determines that a species of fish harvested in an
 area of State waters is likely to be unsafe for human consumption, the
 Secretary shall, expeditiously and in writing, request the Governor of
 such State to close or otherwise restrict such area with respect to the
 harvesting of that species of fish until the circumstances which led to the
 request no longer exist. At the time such a request is made, the Secretary
 shall notify the Secretary of Commerce and, if the species is a species
 of shellfish or other bivalve mollusk, the Chairman of the Conference.
 (3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), if a reasonable time, not to exceed 10
 days, has passed after a request is made under paragraph (2) and the State
 has not taken the requested action within that time, and if the Secretary
 finds that a significant risk of adverse health consequences exists--
 (i) the Secretary shall request the Secretary of Commerce to close the
 affected area of State waters to the harvesting of the species involved; and
 (ii) the Secretary of Commerce shall immediately implement such closure,
 which shall remain in effect until the Secretary finds that such risk no
 longer exists.
 (B) A finding under subparagraph (A) that a significant risk of adverse
 health consequences exists with respect to a species of shellfish or other
 bivalve mollusk may be made only after the Secretary has consulted with
 the Chairman of the Conference.
 (d) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `exclusive economic zone'
 has the meaning given that term in section 3(6) of the Magnuson Fishery
 Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801(6)).
SEC. 105. PROCESSING AND HANDLING.
 (a) PROCESSING STANDARDS- The Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of
 Commerce shall, within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 prescribe by regulation such health-based and other appropriate standards,
 for facilities engaged in the processing of fish products other than
 shellfish, that the Secretary determines are necessary in accordance with
 section 101(a)(2). The standards shall--
 (1) contain requirements for the operation and maintenance of such
 facilities, including all applicable sanitation and good manufacturing
 practices;
 (2) establish procedures for the handling, storage, and transportation
 of fish products, including all applicable standards established by the
 Secretary of Commerce for vessels;
 (3) require training in fish product sanitation and quality control as
 appropriate for employees of such facilities;
 (4) not require the freezing or cooking of fish products that are intended
 for raw consumption unless the Secretary determines that such freezing
 or cooking is the only practical procedure available that will adequately
 prevent such fish products from being deemed unsafe for human consumption
 under section 4 of this Act, or adulterated under the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.); and
 (5) consider the specialized operating requirements of vessels used to
 process fish products at sea.
 (b) SEAFOOD SAFETY ON FISHING AND FISH TENDER VESSELS- (1) If after
 completion of the comprehensive analysis under section 101(a)(2) and after
 notice and opportunity for comment the Secretary of Commerce determines that
 particular seafood safety standards for vessels are needed to ensure that
 specific fish products meet the requirements of this Act, the Secretary
 of Commerce in consultation with the Secretary shall issue regulations or
 guidelines establishing necessary standards for the handling, storage,
 or transportation of such specific fish products on fishing vessels or
 fish tender vessels.
 (2) Standards may be prescribed under this subsection only to the extent
 necessary, and only if no practicable alternative exists, to prevent specific
 fish products from being deemed unsafe for human consumption under section 4.
 (3) In developing the standards described under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 of Commerce shall--
 (A) consider what measures are necessary to ensure that such fish products
 are safe for human consumption;
 (B) consider the geographic location where affected vessels will operate,
 the history of health safety problems associated with fish and fish products
 in those geographic locations, and the degree to which such standards will
 improve the safety of such fish products;
 (C) consult with the Commercial Fishing Industry Vessel Advisory Committee
 established under section 4508 of title 46, United States Code, or any
 successor committee, as well as individuals in the affected fisheries,
 to ensure that such standards do not adversely affect the safe operation
 of affected fishing vessels or fish tender vessels;
 (D) consider the specialized nature and economics of fishing and fish
 tender operations and the character, design, and construction of fishing
 vessels and fish tender vessels in affected fisheries;
 (E) ensure that any standards prescribed under this subsection cause the
 least disruption to the normal operation of fishing vessels and fish tender
 vessels affected by such standards; and
 (F) whenever possible, avoid requiring modification, replacement, or
 addition of equipment on such vessels.
 (4) With respect to regulations issued under this subsection, the Secretary
 of Commerce shall allow a reasonable amount of time for fishing and fish
 tender vessel owners affected by such regulations to complete any necessary
 modifications to their vessels before such regulations take effect.
 (5) Enforcement of regulations issued under this subsection shall be carried
 out by officers and employees duly designated by the Secretary of Commerce,
 who shall have the same powers in carrying out such enforcement as are
 provided to officers authorized to enforce the provisions of the Magnuson
 Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
SEC. 106. SEAFOOD INSPECTION SYSTEM.
 (a) ROLES OF SECRETARY AND SECRETARY OF COMMERCE- Within 30 months after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall in cooperation with the
 Secretary of Commerce establish and administer a comprehensive and efficient
 inspection system for fish products sold in interstate commerce. The
 Secretary shall provide general oversight under which the Secretary of
 Commerce shall routinely inspect processing facilities. The Secretary
 shall assure the effective operation of this inspection system through
 verification and other activities as the Secretary considers necessary.
 (b) NATURE OF INSPECTIONS- (1) The inspection system shall provide for
 unannounced inspections of facilities in which fish products are processed
 to determine if fish products are unsafe for human consumption under section
 4 of this Act or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq). Inspections shall include sampling
 of fish products.
 (2) Inspections shall be conducted with such frequency and in such manner
 as the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce may provide
 by regulation, taking into account such factors as the Secretary considers
 appropriate, including--
 (A) the potential of the operations to affect human health, based on
 the probability that fish products are susceptible to becoming unsafe for
 human consumption under section 4 of this Act, or adulterated or misbranded
 under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.);
 (B) the history of compliance with this Act and other health and safety
 laws; and
 (C) such other factors as the Secretary may determine appropriate.
 (3) Domestic facilities in which imported fish products are processed
 shall be inspected at least at the same rate as other domestic facilities
 in which fish products are processed.
 (c) CONDUCT OF INSPECTIONS- (1) An inspection under subsection (a) of any
 facility engaged in the processing of fish products shall extend to all
 things therein (including records required to be maintained under section
 108(e), processes, controls, and the premises) that bear on whether fish
 products are in compliance with this Act or the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.). Access to records may include the
 copying of such records.
 (2) In conducting inspections under subsection (a), officers or employees
 duly designated by the Secretary of Commerce, upon presenting appropriate
 credentials and a written notice to the owner, operator, or agent in charge,
 are authorized--
 (A) to enter at reasonable times any facility in which persons are engaged
 in the processing of fish products, or to enter any vehicle being used to
 transport or hold such fish products; and
 (B) to inspect in a reasonable manner such facility or vehicle and all
 pertinent equipment, finished and unfinished materials, containers, and
 labeling therein.
 (3) Upon completion of inspection and prior to leaving the premises,
 the officer or employee making the inspection shall give to the owner,
 operator, or agent in charge a report in writing setting forth any
 conditions or practices observed which indicate that any fish product in
 such facility is unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act,
 or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
 (d) PRODUCT DETENTION AND CONDEMNATION- (1) If during an inspection conducted
 under this section an officer or employee making the inspection has reason
 to believe that a fish product is unsafe for human consumption under section
 4 of this Act, or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), such officer or employee may
 order the fish product segregated, impounded, and if objection is not made
 within 48 hours, condemned. If objection is made, such fish products that
 are in perishable form may be processed to the extent necessary to prevent
 spoilage, and a hearing shall be commenced expeditiously.
 (2) If the Secretary determines that such fish product can, by relabeling
 or other action, be brought into compliance with this Act and the Federal
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), and regulations issued
 thereunder, final determination by the Secretary as to the condemnation
 of such fish product may be deferred pending the performance by the owner
 of such fish product, within a time specified by the Secretary, of such
 relabeling or other action as the Secretary may authorize. Entry of the
 fish products into interstate commerce shall be permitted if, after such
 action is performed, the Secretary determines that the fish product has
 been brought into compliance with this Act and the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), and regulations issued thereunder.
 (3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), no fresh fish product may be
 segregated and impounded for more than 48 hours and no other fish product
 may be segregated and impounded for more than 10 days.
 (B) While a hearing under paragraph (1) or judicial review is pending with
 respect to fish products segregated and impounded under this subsection,
 the presiding officer of the hearing or an appropriate court may authorize
 segregation and impoundment to continue beyond the time limitations
 specified in subparagraph (A).
 (4) Any fish product condemned without objection, or after hearing and
 judicial review, shall be destroyed.
 (e) OFFICIAL MARK- The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Commerce, shall prescribe by regulation the conditions under which any
 fish product shall display an official mark that signifies that the fish
 product has been processed in accordance with standards and procedures
 established under this Act.
 (f) OTHER INSPECTION RIGHTS AND DUTIES- Section 704 of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 374) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsection:
 `(f) The rights and duties under this section of duly designated officers
 and employees and of other persons shall apply to enforcement of the
 Consumer Seafood Safety Act of 1992 to the same extent and in the same
 manner as they apply to the enforcement of this Act.'.
SEC. 107. SAMPLING OF FISH PRODUCTS.
 (a) SAMPLING- The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Commerce
 and the Secretary of Agriculture, shall provide for the collection of samples
 of fish products under the inspection systems established under sections
 106 and 110. Such sampling shall be conducted in a reasonable manner in
 order to determine if fish products are unsafe for human consumption under
 section 4 of this Act, or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
 (b) CONTAMINANT TESTING PROCEDURES- In developing procedures to test
 samples of fish products for contaminants and poisonous or deleterious
 substances, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, make full use
 of the existing Federal analytical capability with respect to such tests,
 including that of the Department of Agriculture.
 (c) DETERMINATION OF VIOLATIVE HARVESTING AREAS- If as a result of
 sampling conducted under this section the Secretary determines that fish
 of a particular species harvested from a specific area are likely to be
 in violation of tolerances established under section 103 of this Act, or
 adulterated under section 402(a)(1) or (2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1) or (2)), the Secretary shall communicate
 that determination to the Secretary of Commerce and, in accordance with
 section 104, to any State with jurisdiction over such area.
SEC. 108. REGISTRATION OF PROCESSORS AND IMPORTERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any person who owns or operates a facility engaged in
 processing of fish products and any person who imports fish products shall
 register with the Secretary. Application for registration shall be made
 to the Secretary using such forms and containing such information as the
 Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary
 of Agriculture, shall prescribe by regulation within 24 months after the
 date of enactment of this Act. Upon receipt and review of a completed
 application, the Secretary shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
 registration unless good cause is shown why such application should be
 denied. The Secretary shall promptly notify any applicant of such denial,
 include a written explanation of the reasons for such denial, and provide
 and opportunity for a hearing upon request.
 (b) SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION- (1) The registration of a person may be
 suspended immediately by the Secretary for--
 (A) failure to permit access for inspection under this Act; or
 (B) violation of this Act or regulations issued under this Act, if the
 Secretary determines that such suspension is necessary to prevent a
 significant risk of adverse health consequences.
 (2) Any registration suspended under paragraph (1) may be reinstated
 whenever the Secretary determines that suspension is no longer necessary.
 (c) ASSIGNMENT OF REGISTRATION NUMBERS- The Secretary may assign a
 registration number (or numbers) to any person registered in accordance
 with this section.
 (d) EXEMPTION AUTHORITY- The Secretary may by regulation exempt classes
 of facilities from the requirements of subsection (a) if the Secretary
 determines that registration of persons owning or operating such facilities
 is not needed for the effective enforcement of this Act.
 (e) MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS- Each person registered under this section shall
 maintain (for a reasonable period of time as prescribed by the Secretary,
 but not to exceed 2 years unless otherwise directed by the Secretary
 for good cause) such records as the Secretary in consultation with the
 Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Agriculture may prescribe by
 regulation. The records may include information concerning--
 (1) the origin, receipt, delivery, sale, movement, and disposition of fish
 products; and
 (2) matters reasonably related to whether fish products may be unsafe for
 human consumption under section 4 of this Act, or adulterated or misbranded
 under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
SEC. 109. STATE AND FEDERAL COOPERATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce shall work
 with the States in undertaking activities and programs that contribute
 to the national seafood safety program so that State and Federal programs
 function in a coordinated and cost effective manner. With the assistance
 provided in subsection (b), the Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce
 shall encourage States to--
 (1) continue, strengthen, or establish State seafood safety programs;
 (2) establish compatible procedures and requirements for ensuring that
 fish products are not unsafe for human consumption;
 (3) implement uniform seafood safety-related systems for classifying,
 monitoring, and regulating fish growing areas and fishing grounds under
 State jurisdiction;
 (4) advise consumers and noncommercial users regarding recommended levels
 of consumption of fish products (including game fish) from lakes, rivers,
 and coastal areas through each State; and
 (5) incorporate seafood safety considerations into decisions involving
 conservation and management of fish and living marine resources, including
 planning for the siting of pollution control and aquaculture facilities
 and the regulation of fishing activities.
 (b) ASSISTANCE- (1) The Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of
 Commerce may provide to a State, for planning, developing, and implementing
 a seafood safety program--
 (A) advisory assistance;
 (B) technical and laboratory assistance and training (including necessary
 materials and equipment); and
 (C) financial and other aid.
 (2) The Secretary or the Secretary of Commerce may provide financial and
 personnel assistance to support the Conference.
 (c) SERVICE AGREEMENTS- The Secretary or the Secretary of Commerce, as
 appropriate, may, under agreements entered into with Federal, State, or local
 agencies, use on a reimbursable basis or otherwise the personnel, services,
 and facilities of such agencies in carrying out their responsibilities
 under this Act. Such an agreement shall provide that any compliance records,
 notices, or reports issued in connection with activities under the agreement
 and in the possession of the agency or government which entered into the
 agreement shall be made available in accordance with section 552 of title 5,
 United States Code. Agreements with a State under this subsection may provide
 for training of State employees. The Secretary shall pay for or reimburse
 the State for the expenses of such training and for the actual cost of
 activities performed by a State employee at the request of the Secretary.
 (d) STATE INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION SYSTEMS- (1) At any time after
 establishment of the Federal seafood inspection system under section 106,
 the Governor of any State may submit to the Secretary a full and complete
 plan of operation for the seafood inspection program the State administers
 or proposes to establish and administer under State law. In addition, such
 State shall submit a statement from the attorney general (or appropriate
 legal officer) that the laws of such State provide authority and capacity
 to carry out a program which is at least equal in effectiveness to the
 program established under this Act.
 (2) A State plan of operation submitted under paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) provide an overview of State activities related to the safety of seafood,
 including shellfish;
 (B) describe the manner in which the State administers or proposes to
 administer inspection, sampling, and registration systems consistent with
 this Act;
 (C) evaluate staffing, equipment, and other requirements for implementation
 of the State program;
 (D) estimate projected costs to the State of administering the program; and
 (E) provide for regular reports to the Secretary regarding State activities
 under the program.
 (3) Not later than 120 days after the submission of a plan of operation,
 the Secretary shall approve such plan for a period of no more than 3
 years unless the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce
 determines that the State submitting the plan does not have at least equal
 authority or capacity to--
 (A) ensure that fish products produced under the jurisdiction of such
 State are not unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act,
 or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.); or
 (B) abate violations of the State program, including civil and criminal
 penalties and other ways and means of enforcement.
 (4) If the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce approves
 a State program under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall designate those
 portions of the State program which shall be implemented and enforced
 under such approved State program in lieu of portions of the Federal program.
 (5) The Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of Commerce shall monitor
 the effectiveness of each approved State program to ensure that the program
 is at least equal in effectiveness to the program established under this
 Act. If the Secretary determines that a State with an approved program has
 failed to maintain or is not operating a program that is at least equal in
 effectiveness to the program established under this Act, the Secretary shall
 promptly notify the Governor of the State of such determination and provide
 an opportunity for the State to correct any deficiencies identified in such
 notification. If after notice and opportunity for appropriate corrective
 action the State program does not meet the requirements of this section,
 the Secretary shall withdraw approval of the State program.
 (6) Notwithstanding paragraph (4), the Secretary may enforce the Federal
 program in a State having a program approved under paragraph (3) if--
 (A) the State requests enforcement assistance; or
 (B) the Secretary finds that a significant risk of adverse health
 consequences exists and that such enforcement is necessary to address
 such risk.
Enforcement by the Secretary under this paragraph shall be discontinued no
later than 6 months after its commencement. If after 6 months the Secretary
determines that the significant risk of adverse health consequences still
exists, the Secretary shall implement procedures to withdraw approval for
such State program or portions thereof under paragraph (5).
 (7) The Secretary may annually grant to each State with a program approved
 under paragraph (3) an amount not to exceed 60 percent of the cost of
 operating the program. Amounts granted under this paragraph shall be
 distributed among the States in a fair and equitable manner, in accordance
 with criteria established by the Secretary by regulation. The Secretary
 may withhold Federal assistance under this paragraph if the Secretary
 determines that the State program has failed to meet the requirements of
 this section. Such withheld assistance shall be paid subsequently upon a
 determination that any deficiencies have been corrected.
SEC. 110. IMPORTS.
 (a) ROLES OF SECRETARY AND SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE- Within 30 months
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture and
 the Secretary of the Treasury establish and administer a comprehensive and
 efficient system to ensure the safety of seafood imported into the United
 States. The Secretary shall provide general oversight under which the
 Secretary of Agriculture shall routinely inspect processing facilities in
 exporting nations and imports at ports of entry into the United States. The
 Secretary shall assure the effective operation through verification and
 other activities as the Secretary considers necessary.
 (b) IMPORT REQUIREMENTS- (1) No fish product may be entered, or withdrawn
 from warehouse, for consumption in the United States if such fish product--
 (A) is unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act, or
 adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.);
 (B) is not marked or labelled as required by regulations for imported
 articles; or
 (C) does not comply with the requirements of this section.
 (2) Upon entry for consumption in the United States, fish products that
 are not prohibited from entry or withdrawal from warehouse under paragraph
 (1) shall be deemed to be and treated as domestic fish products, except
 that all labeling of such fish products shall identify country of origin.
 (c) INSPECTION OF IMPORTS- (1) Fish products that are offered for importation
 or entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption in the United
 States, shall be subject to examinations, inspections, sampling, and such
 other procedures at the port of entry or in the exporting nation by officers
 or employees duly designated by the Secretary of Agriculture. Such procedures
 shall be conducted with such frequency and in such manner as the Secretary in
 consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture may prescribe by regulation.
 (2) Fish products from a nation that is certified for such fish products
 under subsection (f)(3) shall be subject to random examinations,
 inspections, sampling, and other procedures. Fish products from a nation
 that is not certified for such fish products under subsection (f)(3)
 shall be subject to such intensified examinations, inspections, sampling,
 and other verification procedures as the Secretary in consultation with
 the Secretary of Agriculture determines are necessary to ensure compliance
 with this Act; except that no shellfish may be entered, or withdrawn from
 warehouse, for consumption in the United States from a nation not certified
 for shellfish under subsection (f)(3).
 (d) CONDUCT OF INSPECTIONS- (1) An inspection under this section of any
 importing facility at a port of entry into the United States shall extend
 to all things therein (including records required to be maintained under
 section 108(e), processes, controls, and the premises) that bear on whether
 fish products are in compliance with this Act or the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.). Access to records may include
 the copying of such records.
 (2) In conducting such inspections, officers or employees duly designated
 by the Secretary of Agriculture, upon presenting appropriate credentials and
 a written notice to the owner, operator, or agent in charge, are authorized--
 (A) to enter at reasonable times any facility in which persons are engaged
 in the importing of fish products, or to enter any vehicle being used to
 transport or hold such fish products; and
 (B) to inspect in a reasonable manner such importing facility or vehicle
 and all pertinent equipment, finished and unfinished materials, containers,
 and labeling therein.
 (3) Upon completion of inspection and prior to leaving the premises,
 the officer or employee making the inspection shall give to the owner,
 operator, or agent in charge a report in writing setting forth any
 conditions or practices observed which indicate that any fish product in
 such facility is unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act,
 or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
 (e) DETENTION OF IMPORTED FISH PRODUCT- If during an inspection or other
 verification procedure carried out under this section an officer or employee
 conducting the procedure has reason to believe that a fish product is
 unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act, or adulterated or
 misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301
 et seq.) such officer or employee may order the fish product segregated,
 impounded, and if objection is not made within 48 hours, condemned. If
 objection is made, such fish products that are in perishable form may be
 processed to the extent necessary to prevent spoilage, and a hearing shall
 be commenced expeditiously. The final condemnation or other disposition
 of such fish product shall be subject to the provisions of section 106(d)
 (2), (3), and (4).
 (f) AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN NATIONS- (1) The Secretary in consultation with
 the Secretary of Agriculture may enter into an agreement with any nation
 desiring to export fish products to the United States. Prior to concluding
 such an agreement, the Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of
 Agriculture shall evaluate the seafood safety program of the foreign
 nation to determine if such program is at least equal in effectiveness,
 with respect to fish products intended for export to the United States, to
 the seafood safety program established under this Act. In such evaluation,
 the Secretary shall consider--
 (A) the potential for health, sanitary, and environmental conditions within
 the foreign nation to adversely affect the safety of fish products exported
 from such nation; and
 (B) how well the seafood safety program of the foreign nation functions
 to minimize any adverse effects on such safety.
 (2) Any agreement under this subsection with a nation desiring to export
 fish products to the United States shall--
 (A) require that the exporting nation shall--
 (i) establish and maintain a seafood safety system that is adequate to
 ensure that the fish products intended for export to the United States
 are not unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act, and not
 adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.); and
 (ii) promptly notify the Secretary of any violations of harvest restrictions
 or growing area closures affecting the safety of fish products exported
 or intended for export to the United States; and
 (B) provide for such activities (whether in the exporting nation or at
 the port of entry during importation) by the Secretary of Agriculture,
 including examinations, inspections, sampling, and testing, at such stages
 in the growth or harvest of fish, or in the processing or handling of
 fish products, as the Secretary considers appropriate to ensure that
 the seafood safety program of the exporting nation with respect to fish
 products intended for export to the United States continues to be at least
 equal in effectiveness to the program established under this Act;
 (C) provide for reciprocity with respect to the treatment of seafood
 imports and exports between the United States and the exporting nation; and
 (D) in the case of a nation desiring to export shellfish, require such
 nation to establish and maintain a system for classifying, monitoring, and
 closing shellfish growing areas and for certifying shellfish shippers as
 being in compliance with the exporting nation's shellfish safety program,
 and promptly to notify the Secretary of any shellfish shipper whose
 certification is revoked by the exporting nation.
 (3) If the Secretary determines that a nation desiring to export fish
 products to the United States has a program that is at least equal in
 effectiveness (with respect to fish products intended for export to the
 United States) to the program established by this Act, the Secretary shall,
 upon entry into force of an agreement under subsection (a), certify the
 types of fish products for which the nation maintains such a program.
 (4)(A) The Secretary shall periodically or for good cause, and not less
 than once every 3 years, review certifications made under paragraph
 (3), and shall revoke the certification of any nation that the Secretary
 determines is not maintaining a seafood safety program that is at least
 equal in effectiveness to the program established under this Act.
 (B) The Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture shall
 review and modify, as needed an agreement made under paragraph (1) with
 any nation whose certification has been revoked under subparagraph (A)
 of this paragraph.
SEC. 111. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated, to carry out this
 Act, not to exceed $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $70,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1994.
 (b) ASSISTANCE TO STATES- Of the funds authorized to be appropriated under
 subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed
 $12,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1994,
 for carrying out State program assistance activities under section 109.
 (c) RESEARCH PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION- Of the funds authorized to be
 appropriated under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated
 not to exceed $14,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1993 and 1994, for
 carrying out the research program authorized by section 203.
TITLE II--RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
SEC. 201. PUBLIC HEALTH ASSESSMENT SYSTEM.
 (a) COOPERATION WITH CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL- The Secretary shall
 work, through the Centers for Disease Control, to include seafood in
 an active surveillance system, based on a representative proportion of
 the population of the United States, and to assess more accurately the
 frequency and sources of human disease in the United States associated
 with the consumption of seafood.
 (b) PUBLIC HEALTH SAMPLING- (1) Within 12 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture
 shall establish guidelines for a sampling system under which the Secretary
 of Agriculture shall take and analyze samples of fish products (except that
 samples shall not be taken by the Secretary of Agriculture at facilities
 subject to inspection under sections 106 or 109 of this Act) to assist the
 Secretary in carrying out this Act and the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
 Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), and to more accurately assess the nature,
 frequency of occurrence, and amounts of contaminants in fish products.
 (2) Such sampling system shall provide--
 (A) for the use of the Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce, statistical
 monitoring, including market basket studies, on the nature, frequency
 of occurrence, and amounts of contaminants in fish products available to
 consumers; and
 (B) at the request of the Secretary, such other information, including
 analysis of samples taken by the Secretary, the Secretary of Commerce,
 or State programs approved under section 109, as the Secretary determines
 may be useful in assessing the occurrence of contaminants in fish products.
 (3) The Secretary of Agriculture shall promptly notify the Secretary whenever
 samples of fish products analyzed under this subsection contain contaminants
 that exceed tolerances, standards, or action levels established under this
 Act or other applicable law.
 (c) ASSESSMENT OF HEALTH HAZARDS- Through the surveillance system referred
 to in subsection (a) and the sampling system described in subsection (b), the
 Secretary shall, among other things, assess health hazards associated with--
 (1) fish products that are commercially harvested and processed, as compared
 with the health hazards associated with fish products which are harvested
 for recreational or subsistence purposes and prepared noncommercially;
 (2) fish products that are domestically harvested and processed, as compared
 with the health hazards associated with fish products that are harvested
 or processed outside the United States; and
 (3) contamination originating from certain practices that occur both prior
 to and after sale of fish products to consumers, including contamination
 resulting from the manner in which consumers handle and prepare the fish
 products they purchase.
SEC. 202. PUBLIC EDUCATION AND ADVISORY SYSTEM.
 (a) PUBLIC EDUCATION- The Secretary, in cooperation with the National Sea
 Grant College Program, cooperative extension services, and appropriate
 State entities, shall design and implement a national public education
 program on seafood. The program shall provide--
 (1) information to the public regarding Federal standards and good
 practice requirements and promotion or public awareness, understanding,
 and acceptance of such standards and requirements;
 (2) advice to individuals involved in recreational and subsistence fisheries
 concerning the health hazards associated with the fish they may harvest
 and the precautions they should take to safeguard themselves and others
 from those hazards;
 (3) information to health professionals so that they may improve diagnosis
 and treatment of seafood-related illness and advise individuals whose
 health conditions place them in particular risk; and
 (4) such other information or advice to consumers and other persons as
 the two Secretaries determine will promote the purposes of this Act.
 (b) HEALTH ADVISORIES- The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Commerce and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 shall work with the States and other appropriate entities to--
 (1) develop and distribute regional and national advisories concerning
 seafood safety;
 (2) develop standardized formats for written and broadcast advisories; and
 (3) incorporate State and local advisories into the national public
 education program required under subsection (a).
SEC. 203. RESEARCH.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce may conduct
 research to assist the implementation of this Act, including studies to--
 (1) improve sanitation and seafood safety practices in the processing of
 fish products;
 (2) develop improved techniques for the monitoring of fish and inspection
 of fish products;
 (3) develop efficient, rapid, and sensitive methods for determining and
 detecting the presence of contaminants in fish and fish products;
 (4) determine the sources of contamination of fish and fish products with
 contaminants; and
 (5) develop consumption data with respect to fish products.
 (b) RESEARCH ON GROWING AND HARVESTING AREAS- The Secretary of Commerce,
 in cooperation with the Secretary and the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, shall establish and administer a 5-year research program
 to improve existing systems for monitoring and classifying fish growing
 areas and fishing grounds. Such program shall at a minimum provide for--
 (1) development of analytical techniques to detect and characterize biotoxins
 and other contaminants that occur in fish growing areas and fishing grounds;
 (2) an evaluation of the relationship between such biotoxins and contaminants
 and potential health hazards associated with human consumption of fish
 products from such fish growing areas and fishing grounds;
 (3) an environmental assessment of the occurrence of such biotoxins and
 other contaminants, including the relationship between such occurrence
 and the presence of marine phenomena such as algal blooms;
 (4) development of the ability to understand, monitor, and track the
 temporal and spatial distribution of such phenomena and to predict their
 onset and duration; and
 (5) recommendations for improving the capabilities of Federal and State
 agencies to effectively monitor and classify shellfish growing areas,
 and identify and monitor fish growing areas and fishing grounds, to ensure
 the safety of seafood intended for human consumption.
 (c) CONTRACT AUTHORITY- The Secretary and Secretary of Commerce are
 authorized to enter into contracts and agreements with any State, university,
 or other person to carry out their respective activities under this section.
TITLE III--SEAFOOD SAFETY ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 301. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION.
 (a) PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGE FOR COMPLAINTS- No person shall discharge,
 discipline, or in any manner discriminate against any employee with
 respect to the employee's compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges
 of employment because such employee (or any person acting pursuant to a
 request of the employee) has filed any complaint or caused to be instituted
 any proceeding relating to a violation of this Act or of any regulation
 issued under this Act, or has testified or is about to testify in any
 such proceeding.
 (b) WORK REFUSAL- (1) No person shall discharge, discipline, or in any
 manner discriminate against an employee with respect to the employee's
 compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment for refusing
 to perform the employee's duties when performing such duties would result
 in a substantial and specific violation of this Act or any regulation issued
 under this Act, or a substantial and specific danger to the public from fish
 products which are unsafe for human consumption under section 4 of this Act,
 or adulterated or misbranded under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.). In order to qualify for protection under this
 subsection, the employee must have sought from his or her employer, and have
 been unable to obtain, correction of the circumstances causing such refusal.
 (2) An employee is not protected under this subsection if an inspector
 is present in the establishment. In those instances, the employee is
 protected for immediate notification to the inspector of the alleged
 illegal or dangerous activity.
 (3) This subsection shall not create any right of refusal to work. An
 employee is only protected for refusing to obey an order whose implementation
 would constitute a violation of law or a substantial and specific danger
 to the public, the employee, or other workers.
 (c) EMPLOYEE RIGHTS- (1) Any employee who believes he or she has been
 discharged, disciplined, or otherwise discriminated against by any person
 in violation of subsection (a) or (b) may, within 180 days after such
 alleged violation occurs, file (or cause to be filed by any person on the
 employee's behalf) a complaint with the Secretary of Labor alleging such
 discharge, discipline, or discrimination. Upon receipt of such a complaint,
 the Secretary of Labor shall notify the person named in the complaint of
 the filing of the complaint.
 (2) The legal burdens of proof that prevail under section 1221(e) of title
 5, United States Code, shall govern adjudication of protected disclosures
 under this Act.
 (3)(A) Within 60 days of receipt of a complaint filed under paragraph (1),
 the Secretary of Labor shall conduct an investigation and determine whether
 there is reasonable cause to believe that the complaint has merit and shall
 notify the complainant and the person alleged to have committed a violation
 of this section of the findings resulting from the investigation. Where
 the Secretary of Labor concludes that there is reasonable cause to believe
 that a violation has occurred, the Secretary of Labor shall accompany
 the findings with a preliminary order providing the relief prescribed by
 subparagraph (B). Thereafter, the person alleged to have committed the
 violation and the complainant may each, within 30 days after notification,
 file objections to the findings or preliminary order, or both, and request a
 hearing on the record, except that the filing of such objections shall not
 operate to stay any reinstatement remedy contained in the preliminary
 order. Such hearings shall be expeditiously conducted. Where a hearing
 is not timely requested, the preliminary order shall be deemed a final
 order which is not subject to judicial review. The Secretary of Labor
 shall issue a final order within 120 days after the conclusion of such
 hearing. In the interim, such proceedings may be terminated at any time on
 the basis of a settlement agreement entered into by the Secretary of Labor,
 the complainant, and the person alleged to have committed the violation.
 (B) If in response to a complaint filed under paragraph (1) the Secretary
 of Labor determines that violation of subsection (a) or (b) has occurred,
 the Secretary of Labor shall order (i) the person who committed such
 violation to take affirmative action to abate the violation, (ii) such
 person to reinstate the complainant to the complainant's former position
 (taking into account any seasonal nature of such position) together with
 the compensation (including back pay), terms, conditions, and privileges
 of the complainant's employment, and (iii) compensatory damages. If such an
 order is issued, the Secretary of Labor, at the request of the complainant,
 may assess against the person against whom the order is issued a sum equal
 to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorney's
 fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the Secretary of Labor, by the
 complainant for, or in connection with, the bringing of the complaint upon
 which the order was issued.
 (d) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by an
 order issued after a hearing under subsection (c) may obtain review of the
 order in the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the
 violation with respect to which the order was issued allegedly occurred, or
 the circuit in which such person resided on the date of such violation. The
 petition for review must be filed within 60 days after the issuance of the
 order of the Secretary of Labor. Such review shall be in accordance with
 the provisions of chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code, and shall be
 heard and decided expeditiously.
 (2) An order of the Secretary of Labor, with respect to which review could
 have been obtained under this section, shall not be subject to judicial
 review in any criminal or other civil proceedings.
 (e) CIVIL ACTION- Whenever a person has failed to comply with a final order
 issued under subsection (c)(3), the Secretary of Labor shall file a civil
 action in the United States district court for the district in which the
 violation was found to occur in order to enforce such order. In actions
 brought under this subsection, the district courts shall have jurisdiction
 to grant all appropriate relief, reinstatement, and compensatory damages.
SEC. 302. RECALL.
 (a) RECALL REQUIREMENT- The Secretary may require any person who owns or
 operates a facility engaged in the processing of fish products or in the
 importing of fish products to recall any fish product if the Secretary finds
 that there is a reasonable probability that such fish product is unsafe for
 human consumption under section 4 of this Act, or adulterated or misbranded
 under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.).
 (b) VOLUNTARY RECALL- The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Commerce and the Secretary of Agriculture, shall prescribe by regulation
 the circumstances and manner under which a voluntarily initiated recall of
 fish products by a person who owns or operates a facility engaged in the
 processing of fish products or in the importing of fish products shall be
 promptly reported to the Secretary.
SEC. 303. PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES.
 (a) PROHIBITED ACTS- No person shall--
 (1) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in interstate commerce any fish
 product that is unsafe for human consumption at the time of such sale,
 transport, offer, receipt, or other disposition;
 (2) commit, with respect to any fish or fish product and while such fish
 product is being transported in interstate commerce or held for sale after
 such transportation, any act that is intended to cause or has the effect
 of causing such fish products to be unsafe for human consumption;
 (3) engage in the processing or importing of fish products without being
 registered as required under section 108;
 (4) refuse to permit entry to or inspection of any facility by any person
 carrying out inspection activities under this Act, or otherwise interfere
 with any such inspection or person;
 (5) create or maintain records that are false either by content or omission,
 or destroy records containing information required under this Act or any
 regulations issued under this Act, or refused access by a duly designated
 Federal officer or employee to records required under this Act or any
 regulations issued under this Act;
 (6) engage in the handling, processing, or importing of fish products in
 violation of this Act or any regulations issued thereunder;
 (7) label any fish product with a mark that is not authorized under this Act
 and that indicates compliance with any Federal safety standard applicable
 to fish or fish products;
 (8) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in interstate commerce any fish
 product that is not handled, processed, labeled, or imported in accordance
 with the requirements of this Act or any regulations issued thereunder;
 (9) fail to comply with any recall under section 302(a) or to report a
 voluntary recall under section 302(b); or
 (10) use to such person's advantage or reveal, other than to a duly
 designated Federal officer or employee, or to a court when relevant
 in a judicial proceeding under this Act or the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), any information acquired under this
 Act concerning any method or process which as a trade secret is entitled
 to protection.
 (b) PENALTIES- (1) Any person who violates this Act or any regulations
 issued thereunder shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty
 in an amount not to exceed $10,000. Each day of a continuing violation shall
 constitute a separate offense. A civil penalty under this paragraph shall
 be assessed by the Secretary of Commerce in the case of violations arising
 under section 105(b), and by the Secretary in the case of violations arising
 under other provisions of this Act, by an order made on the record after
 opportunity for a hearing provided in accordance with this paragraph and
 section 554 of title 5, United States Code. Before issuing such an order,
 such Secretary shall give written notice to the person to be assessed
 a civil penalty under such order of such Secretary's proposal to issue
 such order and provide such person an opportunity for a hearing on the
 order. In determining the amount of a civil penalty, such Secretary shall
 take into account the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the
 violation or violations and, with respect to the violator, ability to pay,
 effect on ability to continue to do business, any history of prior such
 violations, the degree of culpability, and such other matters as justice
 may require. Such Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or
 without conditions, any civil penalty which may be assessed under this
 paragraph. The amount of such penalty, when finally determined, or the
 amount agreed upon in compromise, may be deducted from any sums owing by
 the United States to the person charged.
 (2) If a person commits a violation described in paragraph (1) with the
 intent to defraud or mislead, such person shall be imprisoned for not more
 than 2 years or fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code,
 or both.
 (3) If a person is convicted under paragraph (2) of a violation, and is
 subject to a civil penalty for such violation or is subject to a related
 condemnation action under section 106 or 110, the identity of such person
 involved in the violation and the aggregate of any penalty imposed shall
 be published in accordance with section 705 of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 375) on the last business day of the quarter
 in which the violation was committed.
SEC. 304. SUBPOENAS.
 For the purposes of any investigation conducted pursuant to this Act, the
 Secretary, the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary of Agriculture,
 as appropriate, may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony
 of witnesses and the production of any documentation or other evidence
 that relates to any matter under investigation or in dispute before such
 Secretary and to administer oaths or affirmations.