HR 5217 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5217
To provide for aviation noise management and reduction in residential areas.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 20, 1992
Mr. ZIMMER (for himself, Mrs. MORRELLA, Mr. MANTON, and Mr. GALLO) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Public Works
and Transportation
A BILL
To provide for aviation noise management and reduction in residential areas.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Aviation Noise Limit Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds the following:
 (1) The accurate assessment and control of aviation noise impact is
 necessary to protect the public health and welfare while increasing and
 improving aviation capacity.
 (2) Airspace management without noise impact assessment and moderation
 can have a significant impact on an area distant from an airport.
 (3) The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports, which
 currently serves as the basis of noise compatibility programs receiving
 Federal assistance, does not adequately protect the public health and
 welfare.
 (4) The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports does not
 take into account the characteristics of an area, including the area's
 proximity to an airport and the area's non-aircraft background noise.
 (5) The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports is less
 restrictive than the criteria used by many State and local governments,
 usurping a zoning role normally allocated to the States.
 (6) The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports is
 inconsistent with the maintenance of accepted interior levels of quiet for
 existing residences and has been demonstrated unsuccessful in identifying
 problems and predicting community reaction.
 (7) The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports does not
 protect against significant disturbances in human activities such as sleep
 and conversation and promotes Federal interference with the constitutionally
 protected right to quiet enjoyment of private property.
 (8) Research showing that low levels of noise affects human health and
 welfare requires changes in Federal programs managing noise levels.
 (9) Population density, background noise levels, and distance from an
 airport are factors which affect an individual's expectations with respect
 to aviation noise and an individual's acceptance of aviation noise.
 (10) Changes to the noise environment of a developed and populated area
 should be treated differently from changes to the noise environment of a
 nonpopulated or industrial area.
SEC. 3. AVIATION NOISE LIMITS.
 (a) REDUCTION OF AVIATION NOISE IN AREAS IN THE VICINITY OF AIRPORTS-
 (1) DEVELOPMENT OF PLAN- The Secretary shall develop a staged plan to
 reduce by at least 75 percent on or before January 1, 2001, the number of
 individuals residing in residential areas in the vicinity of an airport
 who are exposed to a yearly day-night average sound level of 60 decibels
 or above.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In developing the plan pursuant to paragraph (1),
 the Secretary shall consider various methods for aviation noise reduction,
 including soundproofing, relocation incentives, use of quieter aircraft,
 operations restrictions, and revision of air routes.
 (3) FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES- As part of the plan to be developed
 pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make recommendations on
 actions and policy changes on the part of Federal departments and agencies
 (including but not limited to the Department of Transportation) which
 could assist in meeting the objective described in paragraph (1).
 (4) MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall modify regulations
 issued pursuant to section 102 of the Aviation and Safety Noise Abatement
 Act of 1979 to assist in meeting the objective described in paragraph (1).
 (b) MANAGEMENT AND REDUCTION OF AVIATION NOISE IN OTHER AREAS-
 (1) AIRSPACE TRAFFIC CHANGES- Beginning on the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Administrator may make an airspace traffic change only if
 the Administrator determines that the change will not result in an increase
 in aviation noise in violation of paragraph (2).
 (2) REQUIREMENTS- A violation of any of the following requirements, which
 apply only to residential areas that are not in the vicinity of an airport,
 shall be considered to be a violation of this paragraph:
 (A) HOURLY AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL- The hourly average sound level, with
 combined aviation and nonaviation sources, over any 1-hour period may not
 exceed 6 decibels above the background sound level for such 1-hour period.
 (B) SINGLE EVENT MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL- Under normal circumstances, the
 single event maximum sound level--
 (i) may not exceed 70 decibels;
 (ii) during nighttime hours, may not exceed 55 decibels; and
 (iii) may not be more than 20 decibels above the background sound level
 for the 1-hour period in which the event occurs.
The requirement of this subparagraph shall be considered to have been met
if there are no more than 3 violations of the limits contained in this
subparagraph in a 24-hour period.
 (C) DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL- If the day-night average sound level,
 with combined aviation and nonaviation sources, exceeds 45 decibels,
 then aviation activity may not contribute more than 3 decibels to such
 sound level.
 (3) PAST AIRSPACE TRAFFIC CHANGES- The Administrator shall review airspace
 traffic changes made by the Administrator which continue to be subject
 to significant complaint or controversy and shall take such actions as
 may be necessary to ensure that such air traffic changes do not result in
 increases in aviation noise which violate aviation noise limits contained
 in paragraph (2).
 (d) DETERMINATION OF VICINITY OF AIRPORT-
 (1) ALTERNATIVE BOUNDARIES- In the event that operations procedures of an
 airport result in a ground noise distribution substantially different from
 the geographic area defined in section 4(10), an airport operator may,
 on or before the 180th day following the date of the enactment of this
 Act, transmit to the Secretary for approval alternative boundaries of the
 vicinity of the airport which conform to the ground noise distribution of
 the airport; except that the geographic area enclosed by such alternative
 boundaries may not include an area with a day-night average sound level
 of less than 60 decibels for the 1-year period ending on the date of the
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY- In the event that an airspace traffic change
 or other action makes it unfeasible or impracticable to meet the sound
 level limits contained in subsection (b) within a residential area, then
 such area may be added to the area considered to be in the vicinity of the
 airport upon acquisition of the property or by acquisition of easements
 to the property by the airport operator or the Secretary of Transportation.
 (e) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing
 the plan to be developed pursuant to subsection (a)(1), and a description
 of actions taken with respect to airspace changes pursuant to subsection
 (b)(3), together with recommendations for appropriate administrative and
 legislative actions.
SEC. 4. RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION.
 In complying with this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall assume
 responsibility for all non-military aviation activity, within and outside
 controlled airspace, and will regulate such activity to ensure compliance
 with the requirements of this Act in normal circumstances.
SEC. 5. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply:
 (1) ADMINISTRATOR- The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of
 the Federal Aviation Administration.
 (2) AIRSPACE TRAFFIC CHANGE- The term `airspace traffic change' means a
 change in aircraft flight paths, operating procedures, nature of aircraft
 traffic, and quantity of aircraft traffic which is applicable in normal
 circumstances.
 (3) AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL- The term `average sound level' means the level,
 in decibels, of the mean-square, A-weighted sound pressure during a
 specified period, with reference to the square of the standard reference
 sound pressure of 20 micropascals.
 (4) BACKGROUND SOUND LEVEL- The term `background sound level' means the
 hourly average sound level, in decibels, measured at a site representative
 of a relatively quiet residential location within an area (with aircraft
 noise contributions excluded).
 (5) DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL- The term `day-night average sound level'
 means the 24-hour average sound level, in decibels, for the period from
 midnight to midnight, obtained after the addition of 10 decibels to sound
 levels during nighttime hours.
 (6) NIGHTTIME HOURS- The term `nighttime hours' means the periods between
 midnight and 7 a.m. and between 10 p.m. and midnight local time.
 (7) NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES- The term `normal circumstances' means all
 circumstances other than unusually adverse weather and emergency
 circumstances.
 (8) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
 (9) SINGLE EVENT MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL- The term `single event maximum sound
 level' means the level, in decibels, of the maximum A-weighted sound
 pressure during an aircraft overflight obtained using a standard sound
 level meter under a slow response setting.
 (10) VICINITY OF AN AIRPORT- The term `vicinity of an airport' means the
 geographic area surrounding an airport established before the date of the
 enactment of this Act described nominally as follows:
 (A) The area extending in all directions a distance of 1.5 miles from each
 runway established before such date of the enactment.
 (B) The rectangular area defined by drawing a straight center line a
 distance of 4 miles from the end of each runway established before such
 date of the enactment in the direction of heaviest traffic and extending
 1.5 miles perpendicular from the center line on each side of such runway.