[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 4892 Introduced in House (IH)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 4892

 To make certain laws applicable to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 August 3, 1994

Mr. Moakley introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly 
 to the Committees on House Administration, Education and Labor, 
 Government Operations, Rules, and the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To make certain laws applicable to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Accountability Act''.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Congressional employee.--The term ``congressional 
 employee'' means--
 (A) an individual on the payroll of an employing 
 office of the House of Representatives;
 (B) an individual on the payroll of an employing 
 office of the Senate;
 (C) an individual on the payroll of an employing 
 office of the Architect of the Capitol; and
 (D) an individual on the payroll of an employing 
 office of an instrumentality.
 (2) Employee in the house of representatives.--The term 
 ``individual on the payroll of an employing office in the House 
 of Representatives'' means--
 (A) an individual who is covered under rule LI of 
 the House of Representatives, as in effect on the day 
 before the date of enactment of this Act;
 (B) any applicant for a position that is to be 
 occupied by an individual described in subparagraph 
 (A); or
 (C) any individual who was formerly an employee 
 described in subparagraph (A) and whose claim of a 
 violation arises out of the individual's employment.
 (3) Employee in the senate.--The term ``individual on the 
 payroll of an employing office in the Senate'' means--
 (A) any employee whose pay is disbursed by the 
 Secretary of the Senate;
 (B) any applicant for a position that is to be 
 occupied by an individual described in subparagraph 
 (A)); or
 (C) any individual who was formerly an employee 
 described in subparagraph (A) and whose claim of a 
 violation arises out of the individual's employment.
 (4) Employee of the architect of the capitol.--The term 
 ``individual on the payroll of an employing office of the 
 Architect of the Capitol'' means--
 (A) an employee of the Architect of the Capitol or 
 an individual within the administrative jurisdiction of 
 the Architect of the Capitol if such employee or 
 individual is paid from funds under a law providing 
 appropriations for the legislative branch;
 (B) any applicant for a position that is to be 
 occupied by an employee or individual described in 
 subparagraph (A); or
 (C) any individual who was formerly an employee or 
 individual described in subparagraph (A) and whose 
 claim of a violation arises out of the individual's 
 employment.
 (5) Employee of an instrumentality.--The term ``individual 
 on the payroll of an employing office of an instrumentality'' 
 means--
 (A) any individual on the payroll of an 
 instrumentality of the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government;
 (B) any applicant for a position that is to be 
 occupied by an individual described in subparagraph 
 (A); or
 (C) any individual who was formerly an employee 
 described in subparagraph (A) and whose claim of a 
 violation arises out of the individual's 
 instrumentality employment.
 (6) Head of an employing office.--The term ``head of an 
 employing office'' means the individual who has final authority 
 to appoint, hire, discharge, and set the terms, conditions, or 
 privileges of the Congressional employment of an employee.

SEC. 3. APPLICATION OF LAWS.

 (a) Laws Which Will Apply.--The following laws shall apply, as 
prescribed by this subsection, to the legislative branch of the Federal 
Government:
 (1) The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 et 
 seq.), effective on the earlier of the effective date of 
 applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance under 
 section 5 or 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
 2000e et seq.), effective on the earlier of the effective date 
 of applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance under 
 section 5 or 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (3) The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 12101 et seq.), effective on the earlier of the effective date 
 of applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance under 
 section 5 or 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (4) The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 
 U.S.C. 621 et seq.) (including remedies available to private 
 employees), effective on the earlier of the effective date of 
 applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance under 
 section 5 or 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (5) Titles I and V of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 
 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611 et seq.), effective on the earlier of the 
 effective date of applicable regulations of the Office of 
 Compliance under section 5 or 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (6) The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (other 
 than section 19) (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) (subject to subsection 
 (c)), effective on the earlier of the effective date of 
 applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance under 
 section 5 or 2 years after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (7) Chapter 71 (relating to Federal labor management 
 relations) of title 5, United States Code, effective on the 
 earlier of the effective date of applicable regulations of the 
 Office of Compliance under section 5 or 2 years after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (8) The Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988 (29 
 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.), effective on the earlier of the effective 
 date of applicable regulations of the Office of Compliance 
 under section 5 or 1 year after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, except that this Act shall not apply to the United 
 States Capitol Police.
 (9) The Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act 
 (29 U.S.C. 2101 et seq.), effective on the earlier of the 
 effective date of applicable regulations of the Office of 
 Compliance under section 5 or 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (10) The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791), 
 effective on the earlier of the effective date of applicable 
 regulations of the Office of Compliance under section 5 or 1 
 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The laws referred to in this subsection which apply now to 
congressional employees shall continue to apply to such employees until 
the effective date such laws are made applicable in accordance with 
this subsection.
 (b) Laws Which May Be Made Applicable.--Any provision of Federal 
law shall, to the extent that it relates to the terms and conditions of 
employment (including hiring, promotion or demotion, salary and wages, 
overtime compensation, benefits, work assignments or reassignments, 
termination, protection from discrimination in personnel actions, 
health and safety of employees, and family and medical leave) of 
employees apply to the legislative branch of the Federal Government in 
accordance with section 5.
 (c) Compliance With OSHA.--The legislative branch of the Federal 
Government shall comply with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970 as follows: If a citation of a violation of such Act is received, 
action to abate the violation shall take place as soon as possible, but 
no later than the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the 
citation is issued.

SEC. 4. OFFICE OF COMPLIANCE.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the legislative branch 
an Office of Compliance (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the 
``Office'').
 (b) Composition.--
 (1) Board of directors.--The Office shall have a Board of 
 Directors. The Board of Directors shall consist of 8 
 individuals appointed jointly by the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives, the Majority Leader of the Senate, and the 
 Minority Leaders of the House of Representatives and the 
 Senate. Appointments of the first 8 members of the Board of 
 Directors shall be completed not later than 120 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Executive director.--The Chairperson of the Board of 
 Directors shall--
 (A) appoint,
 (B) establish the compensation of, and
 (C) terminate,
 an executive director (referred to in this Act as the 
 ``executive director''), subject to the approval of the Board 
 of Directors. The compensation of the executive director may 
 not exceed the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V 
 of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (c) Board of Directors Qualifications.--
 (1) In general.--The members of the Board of Directors 
 shall be individuals with training or expertise in--
 (A) the application of the laws referred to in 
 section 3 to employment, and
 (B) employment in the Congress.
 (2) Specific qualifications.--
 (A) Lobbying.--No individual who engages in, or is 
 otherwise employed in, lobbying of the Congress and who 
 is required under the Federal Regulation of Lobbying 
 Act to register with the Clerk of the House of 
 Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate shall be 
 considered eligible for appointment to, or service on, 
 the Board of Directors.
 (B) Office.--No member of the Board of Directors 
 appointed under subsection (b)(1) may hold or may have 
 held the position of Member of the House of 
 Representatives, Senator, or employee of the House of 
 Representatives or the Senate.
 (3) Holding office.--If during a term of office a member of 
 the Board of Directors engages in an activity described in 
 paragraph (2)(A), such position shall be declared vacant and a 
 successor shall be selected in accordance with subsection 
 (b)(1).
 (4) Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Board of Directors shall 
 be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was 
 made.
 (d) Board of Directors Term of Office.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 membership on the Board of Directors shall be for 5 years. A 
 member shall only be eligible for appointment for a single term 
 of office.
 (2) First appointments.--Of the members first appointed to 
 the Board of Directors--
 (A) 2 shall have a term of office of 2 years,
 (B) 2 shall have a term of office of 3 years,
 (C) 2 shall have a term of office of 4 years, and
 (D) 2 shall have a term of office of 5 years,
 as designated at the time of appointment by the persons 
 specified in subsection (b)(1).
 (e) Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Board of Directors shall 
be appointed from the members of the Board of Directors by the members 
of the Board.
 (f) Compensation of Members.--
 (1) Per diem.--Each member of the Board of Directors shall 
 be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the 
 annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the 
 Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such 
 member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the 
 Board.
 (2) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Board of 
 Directors shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in 
 lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of 
 agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United 
 States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the 
 performance of duties away from the home or regular place of 
 business of the member.
 (g) Office Staff.--The executive director may appoint and fix the 
compensation of such staff, including hearing officers, as are 
necessary to carry out this Act.
 (h) Detailees.--The executive director may, with the prior consent 
of the Government department or agency concerned, use the services of 
any such department or agency, including the services of members or 
personnel of the General Accounting Office Personnel Appeals Board.
 (i) Consultants.--In carrying out this Act, the executive director 
may procure the temporary (not to exceed 1 year) or intermittent 
services of individual consultants or organizations thereof.

SEC. 5. STUDY AND REGULATIONS.

 (a) Initial Action.--
 (1) In general.--The Board of Directors shall conduct a 
 study of the manner in which the laws made applicable to the 
 legislative branch of the Federal Government under section 3(a) 
 should apply. The Board of Directors shall complete such study 
 and report the results to Congress not later than 180 days 
 after the date of the first appointment of all the members of 
 the Board of Directors.
 (2) Instrumentalities.--The Board of Directors shall 
 include in its study under paragraph (1) an examination of the 
 procedures used by the instrumentalities to enforce the 
 application of laws applicable to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government and a determination as to whether to direct 
 the instrumentality to make improvements in its regulations and 
 procedures so as to assure that procedures as effective as the 
 procedures set forth in sections 7 through 12 will apply. If 
 the instrumentality has no such regulations and procedures, the 
 Board may direct the instrumentality to adopt the requisite 
 regulations and procedures, or, if deemed necessary, in lieu 
 thereof may itself adopt regulations pursuant to this section 
 or authorize use of the procedures pursuant to sections 7 
 through 12.
 (b) Continuing Action.--On an ongoing basis the Board of 
Directors--
 (1) shall determine which of the laws referred to in 
 section 3(b) should apply to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government and if it should, the manner in which it 
 should be made applicable;
 (2) shall study the application to the legislative branch 
 of the Federal Government of provisions of Federal law referred 
 to in section 3 that are enacted after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (3) may propose regulations with respect to such 
 application in accordance with subsection (c).
 (c) Regulations.--
 (1) Laws made applicable.--
 (A) General rule.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the completion of the study under 
 subsection (a), the Board of Directors shall, in 
 accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States 
 Code, propose regulations that specify the manner in 
 which the laws made applicable to the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government under section 3(a) 
 shall apply. The Board of Directors shall provide a 
 period of at least 30 days for comment on the proposed 
 regulations.
 (B) Congressional notice.-- In addition to 
 publishing a general notice of proposed rulemaking 
 under section 553(b) of title 5, United States Code, 
 the Board of Directors shall concurrently submit such 
 notice for publication in the Congressional Record.
 (C) Amendments and repeals.--When proposing 
 regulations under subparagraph (A) specifying the 
 manner in which a law referred to in section 3(a) shall 
 apply to the legislative branch of the Federal 
 Government, the Board of Directors shall recommend to 
 the Congress changes in or repeals of existing law to 
 accommodate the application of such law to the 
 legislative branch of the Federal Government.
 (D) Final regulations.--The Board of Directors 
 shall, in accordance with such section 553, issue final 
 regulations not later than 60 days after the end of the 
 comment period on the proposed regulations.
 (2) Continuing action.--
 (A) General rule.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the completion of the study or a 
 determination under subsection (b), the Board of 
 Directors shall, in accordance with section 553 of 
 title 5, United States Code, propose regulations that 
 specify which of the provisions of Federal law 
 considered in such study shall apply to the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government. The Board of 
 Directors shall provide a period of at least 30 days 
 for comment on the proposed regulations.
 (B) Congressional notice.-- In addition to 
 publishing a general notice of proposed rulemaking 
 under section 553(b) of title 5, United States Code, 
 the Board of Directors shall concurrently submit such 
 notice for publication in the Congressional Record.
 (C) Amendments and repeals.--When proposing 
 regulations under subparagraph (A) specifying which of 
 the provisions of Federal law referred to in section 
 3(b) shall apply to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government, the Board of Directors shall 
 recommend to the Congress changes in or repeals of 
 existing law to accommodate the application of such law 
 to the legislative branch of the Federal Government.
 (D) Final regulations.-- The Board of Directors 
 shall, in accordance with such section 553, issue final 
 regulations not later than 60 days after the end of the 
 comment period on the proposed regulations.
 (3) Regulation requirements.--Regulations under paragraphs 
 (1) and (2) shall be consistent with the regulations issued by 
 an agency of the executive branch of the Federal Government 
 under the provision of law made applicable to the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government, including portions relating 
 to remedies.
 (d) Transmittal.--A final regulation issued under subsection (c) 
shall be transmitted to the Congress for consideration under subsection 
(e).
 (e) Taking Effect of Regulations.--
 (1) General rule.--Subject to subsection (f), a final 
 regulation which is issued under subsection (c) shall take 
 effect upon the expiration of 60 days from the date the final 
 regulation is issued unless disapproved by the Congress by 
 concurrent resolution.
 (2) Concurrent resolution.--A concurrent resolution 
 referred to in paragraph (1) may be introduced in the House of 
 Representatives or the Senate within 5 days of session after 
 the date on which the Board of Directors issues the final 
 regulation to which the concurrent resolution applies. The 
 matter after the resolving clause of the resolution shall be as 
 follows: ``That Congress disapproves the issuance of final 
 regulations of the Office of Compliance as issued on 
 ____________ (the blank space being appropriately filled 
 in).''.
 (3) Procedure.--A concurrent resolution referred to in 
 paragraph (1) shall be referred to the appropriate committee of 
 the House involved. If no concurrent resolution is reported 
 within 15 days of session after the Board of Directors issues 
 final regulations under subsection (c)(1)(D) or (c)(2)(D), the 
 committee to which the concurrent resolution was referred shall 
 be discharged from further consideration of the first such 
 concurrent resolution introduced and the concurrent resolution 
 shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House 
 involved. Within 5 days of session after the concurrent 
 resolution is reported or discharged, it shall be in order as a 
 matter of highest privilege to move to proceed to its 
 consideration and such motion shall not be debatable. The 
 concurrent resolution shall be debatable for not to exceed 4 
 hours equally divided between proponents and opponents and it 
 shall not be subject to amendment. If, prior to the adoption of 
 a concurrent resolution by one House, that House receives a 
 concurrent resolution of the other House with respect to the 
 same regulations, then the procedure in that House shall be the 
 same as if no concurrent resolution had been received from the 
 other House, but vote on final adoption shall be on the 
 concurrent resolution of the other House. If a concurrent 
 resolution is received by a House in which no identical 
 concurrent resolution has been introduced, it shall be referred 
 to the appropriate committee and the same procedures and 20-day 
 period for action shall apply to the consideration of the 
 concurrent resolution by that House as would apply to an 
 introduced concurrent resolution.
 (f) Rulemaking Power.--The provisions of subsection (e) of this 
section are enacted by the Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they 
 shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, 
 respectively, or of that House to which they specifically 
 apply, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the 
 extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
 either House to change such rules (so far as relating to such 
 House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent 
 as in the case of any other rule of such House.

SEC. 6. OTHER FUNCTIONS.

 (a) Rules of the Office.--The executive director shall adopt rules 
governing the procedures of the Office, including the procedures of 
hearing boards, which shall be submitted for publication in the 
Congressional Record. The rules may be amended in the same manner. The 
executive director may consult with the Chairman of the Administrative 
Conference of the United States, the Legal Counsel of the Senate, and 
the General Counsel of the House of Representatives on the adoption of 
rules.
 (b) Investigative Authority.--The executive director shall have 
authority to conduct such investigations as the executive director 
requires to implement sections 8 through 10 and section 12.
 (c) Duties.--The Office shall--
 (1) carry out a program of education for Members of 
 Congress and other employing authorities of the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government respecting the laws made 
 applicable to them and a program to inform individuals of their 
 rights under laws applicable to the legislative branch of the 
 Federal Government and under sections 7 through 12,
 (2) in carrying out the program under paragraph (1), 
 distribute the telephone number and address of the Office, 
 procedures for action under sections 7 through 12, and any 
 other information the executive director deems appropriate for 
 distribution, distribute such information to Members of 
 Congress and other employing authorities of the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government in a manner suitable for 
 posting, provide such information to new employees of the 
 legislative branch of the Federal Government, distribute such 
 information to the residences of congressional employees, and 
 conduct seminars and other activities designed to educate 
 employers and employees in such information,
 (3) compile and publish statistics on the use of the Office 
 by congressional employees, including the number and type of 
 contacts made with the Office, on the reason for such contacts, 
 on the number of employees who initiated proceedings with the 
 Office under sections 7 through 12 and the result of such 
 proceedings, and on the number of employees who filed a 
 complaint under section 10, the basis for the complaint, and 
 the action taken on the complaint, and
 (4) within 180 days of the initial appointment of the 
 executive director and in conjunction with the Clerk of the 
 House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate, 
 develop a system for the collection of demographic data 
 respecting the composition of the congressional employees, 
 including race, sex, and wages, and a system for the collection 
 of information on employment practices, including family leave 
 and flexible work hours, in Congressional offices.

SEC. 7. PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS.

 The procedure for consideration of alleged violations of laws made 
applicable to the legislative branch of the Federal Government under 
the regulation promulgated under section 5(b) applicable to such laws 
consists of 4 steps as follows:
 (1) Step I, counseling, as set forth in section 8.
 (2) Step II, mediation, as set forth in section 9.
 (3) Step III, formal complaint and hearing by a hearing 
 board, as set forth in section 10.
 (4) Step IV, judicial review if a congressional employee is 
 aggrieved by a dismissal of a claim under section 10(c), a 
 final decision under section 10(g), or an order under section 
 10(h) or if a head of an employing office is aggrieved by a 
 final decision under section 10(g) or would be subject to an 
 order issued under section 10(h).
 (5) Step V, as an alternative to steps III and IV, a civil 
 action in a district court of the United States in accordance 
 with section 12.
A congressional employee may elect the procedure described in paragraph 
(3) or (5) but not both procedures.

SEC. 8. STEP I: COUNSELING.

 (a) In General.--A congressional employee alleging a violation of a 
law made applicable to the legislative branch of the Federal Government 
under section 5 may request counseling through the Office. The Office 
shall provide the employee with all relevant information with respect 
to the rights of the employee. A request for counseling shall be made 
not later than 180 days after the alleged violation forming the basis 
of the request for counseling occurred.
 (b) Period of Counseling.--The period for counseling shall be 30 
days unless the employee and the Office agree to reduce the period. The 
period shall begin on the date the request for counseling is received.

SEC. 9. STEP II: MEDIATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 15 days after the end of the 
counseling period under section 8, the employee who alleged a violation 
of a law made applicable to the legislative branch of the Federal 
Government under section 5 may file a request for mediation with the 
Office. Mediation--
 (1) may include the Office, the employee, the employing 
 office, and individuals who are recommended by organizations 
 composed primarily of individuals experienced in adjudicating 
 or arbitrating personnel matters, and
 (2) shall be a process involving meetings with the parties 
 separately or jointly for the purpose of resolving the dispute 
 between the employee and the employing office.
 (b) Mediation Period.--The mediation period shall be 30 days 
beginning on the date the request for mediation is received and may be 
extended for an additional 30 days at the discretion of the Office. The 
Office shall notify the employee and the head of the employing office 
when the mediation period has ended.

SEC. 10. STEP III: FORMAL COMPLAINT AND HEARING.

 (a) Formal Complaint and Request for Hearing.--Not later than 30 
days after receipt by the congressional employee of notice from the 
Office of the end of the mediation period under section 9, the 
congressional employee may file a formal complaint with the Office 
against the head of the employing office involved. No complaint may be 
filed unless the employee has made a timely request for counseling and 
has completed the procedures set forth in sections 8 and 9.
 (b) Hearing Board.--A board of 3 independent hearing officers 
(hereinafter in this Act referred to as a ``hearing board''), who are 
not Members of the House of Representatives, Senators, or officers or 
employees of the House of Representatives or Senate, chosen by the 
executive director (one of whom shall be designated by the executive 
director as the presiding hearing officer) shall be assigned to 
consider each complaint filed under subsection (a). The executive 
director shall appoint hearing officers from candidates who are 
recommended by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or the 
Administrative Conference of the United States. A hearing board shall 
act by majority vote.
 (c) Dismissal of Frivolous Claims.--Prior to a hearing under 
subsection (d), a hearing board may dismiss any claim that it finds to 
be frivolous.
 (d) Hearing.--A hearing shall be conducted--
 (1) in closed session on the record by a hearing board; and
 (2) no later than 30 days after filing of the complaint 
 under subsection (a), except that the Office may, for good 
 cause, extend up to an additional 60 days the time for 
 conducting a hearing.
 (e) Discovery.--Reasonable prehearing discovery may be permitted at 
the discretion of the hearing board.
 (f) Subpoena Power.--
 (1) In general.--A hearing board may authorize subpoenas, 
 which shall be issued by the presiding hearing officer on 
 behalf of the hearing board for the attendance of witnesses at 
 proceedings of the hearing board and for the production of 
 correspondence, books, papers, documents, and other records. 
 The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may 
 be required from any place within the United States.
 (2) Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to 
 obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the hearing board 
 may apply to a United States district court for an order 
 requiring that person to appear before the hearing board to 
 give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the 
 matter under investigation. The application may be made within 
 the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where 
 that person is found, resides, or transacts business. Any 
 failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the 
 court as civil contempt.
 (3) Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the hearing 
 board shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas 
 issued by a United States district court under the Federal 
 Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
 (4) Service of process.--All process of any court to which 
 application is to be made under paragraph (2) may be served in 
 the judicial district in which the person required to be served 
 resides or may be found.
 (5) Immunity.--The hearing board is an agency of the United 
 States for the purpose of part V of title 18, United States 
 Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
 (g) Hearing Board Decision.--As expeditiously as possible, but in 
no case more than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the 
hearing board shall make a decision in the matter for which the hearing 
was held. The decision of the hearing board shall be transmitted by the 
Office to the employee and the employing office. The decision shall 
state the issues raised by the complaint, describe the evidence in the 
record, and contain a determination as to whether a violation of a law 
made applicable to the legislative branch of the Federal Government 
under section 5 has occurred. Any decision of the hearing board shall 
contain a written statement of the reasons for the hearing board's 
decision. A final decision of the hearing board shall be made available 
to the public by the Office.
 (h) Remedy Order.--If the decision of the hearing board under 
subsection (g) is that a violation of a law made applicable to the 
legislative branch of the Federal Government under section 5, it shall 
order the remedies under such law as made applicable to the legislative 
branch of the Federal Government under section 5, except that no Member 
of the House of Representatives, Senator, any other head of an 
employing office, or agent of such a Member or Senator, shall be 
personally liable for the payment of compensation. The hearing board 
shall have no authority to award punitive damages. The entry of an 
order under subsection shall constitute a final decision for purposes 
of judicial review under section 11.
 (i) Funds.--There shall be established in the House of 
Representatives and in the Senate a fund from which compensation 
(including attorney's fees) may be paid in accordance with an order 
under subsection (h) or as a result of judicial review under section 
11. From the outset of any proceeding in which compensation may be paid 
from a fund of the House of Representatives, the General Counsel of the 
House of Representatives may provide the respondent with 
representation.

SEC. 11. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Types of review.--Following any hearing under section 
 10 on a complaint relating to a provision of law described in 
 section 3, any congressional employee aggrieved by a dismissal 
 of a claim under section 10(c), a final decision under section 
 10(g), a final order under section 10(h), or any head of an 
 employing office aggrieved by a final decision under section 
 10(g) or a final order under section 10(h), may petition for 
 review by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal 
 Circuit in accordance with paragraph (2).
 (2) Provisions applicable to review.--The following 
 provisions apply to a review under paragraph (1):
 (A) Law applicable.--Chapter 158 of title 28, 
 United States Code, shall apply--
 (i) with respect to section 2344 of title 
 28, United States Code, service of the petition 
 shall be on the House or Senate Legal Counsel, 
 or the appropriate entity of an 
 instrumentality, as the case may be, rather 
 than on the Attorney General;
 (ii) the provisions of section 2348 of 
 title 28, United States Code, on the authority 
 of the Attorney General, shall not apply;
 (iii) the petition for review shall be 
 filed not later than 90 days after the entry in 
 the Office of a final decision under section 
 10(g), an order under section 10(h); and
 (iv) the Office shall be an ``agency'' as 
 that term is used in chapter 158 of title 28, 
 United States Code.
 (B) Standard of review.--To the extent necessary 
 for decision and when presented, the court shall decide 
 all relevant questions of law and interpret 
 constitutional and statutory provisions. The court 
 shall set aside a dismissal under section 10(c), a 
 final decision under section 10(g), or an order under 
 section 10(h) if it is determined that the dismissal, 
 decision, or order was--
 (i) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
 discretion, or otherwise not consistent with 
 law;
 (ii) not made consistent with required 
 procedures; or
 (iii) unsupported by substantial evidence.
 (C) Record.--In making determinations under 
 subparagraph (B), the court shall review the whole 
 record, or those parts of it cited by a party, and due 
 account shall be taken of the rule of prejudicial 
 error. The record on review shall include the record 
 before the hearing board, the decision of the hearing 
 board, and the order of the hearing board.
 (b) Attorney's Fees.--If a congressional employee is the prevailing 
party in a proceeding under this section, attorney's fees for the 
judicial proceeding may be allowed by the court in accordance with the 
standards prescribed under section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k)).

SEC. 12. CIVIL ACTION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Civil action.--An employee may within 30 days after 
 receipt of notice from the Office of the end of the mediation 
 period under section 9 for a violation of a law made applicable 
 to the legislative branch of the Federal Government bring a 
 civil action in a district court of the United States seeking 
 relief from the alleged violation of law if such a civil action 
 is available under such law. In any such civil action, any 
 party may demand a jury trial.
 (2) Exhaustion requirement.--No civil action may be filed 
 under paragraph (1) unless the employee has made a timely 
 request for counseling and has completed the procedures set 
 forth in sections 8 and 9.
 (3) Court order.--If a court determines that a violation of 
 law occurred, the court may only enter an order described in 
 section 10(h).
 (b) Attorney's Fees.--If a congressional employee is the prevailing 
party in a proceeding under this section, attorney's fees may be 
allowed by the court in accordance with any standards prescribed under 
Federal law for the award of such fees in the event of a violation of 
such provision.

SEC. 13. RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINT.

 If, after a formal complaint is filed under section 10, the 
employee and the head of the employing office resolve the issues 
involved, the employee may withdraw the complaint or the parties may 
enter into a written agreement, subject to the approval of the 
executive director.

SEC. 14. PROHIBITION OF INTIMIDATION.

 Any intimidation of, or reprisal against, any employee by any 
Member of the House of Representatives, Senator, or officer or employee 
of the House of Representatives or Senate, by the Architect of the 
Capitol or anyone employed by the Architect of the Capitol, or by an 
instrumentality of the legislative branch of the Federal Government 
because of the exercise of a right under this Act constitutes an 
unlawful employment practice, which may be remedied in the same manner 
under this Act as is a violation of a law made applicable to the 
legislative branch of the Federal Government under section 5.

SEC. 15. CONFIDENTIALITY.

 (a) Counseling.--All counseling shall be strictly confidential 
except that the Office and the employee may agree to notify the head of 
the employing office of the allegations.
 (b) Mediation.--All mediation shall be strictly confidential.
 (c) Hearings.--Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e), the 
hearings and deliberations of the hearing board shall be confidential.
 (d) Release of Records for Judicial Action.--The records of hearing 
boards may be made public if required for the purpose of judicial 
action under section 9.
 (e) Access by Committees of Congress.--At the discretion of the 
executive director, the executive director may provide to the Committee 
on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives and 
the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate access to the records of 
the hearings and decisions of the hearing boards, including all written 
and oral testimony in the possession of the hearing boards, concerning 
a decision under section 10(g). The executive director shall not 
provide such access until the executive director has consulted with the 
individual filing the complaint at issue in the hearing, and until the 
hearing board has issued the decision.
 (f) Coordination.--The executive director shall coordinate the 
proceedings with the Committee on Standards and Official Conduct of the 
House of Representatives and the Select Committee on Ethics of the 
Senate to ensure effectiveness, to avoid duplication, and to prevent 
penalizing cooperation by respondents in the respective proceedings.

SEC. 16. POLITICAL AFFILIATION AND PLACE OF RESIDENCE.

 (a) In General.--It shall not be a violation of a law made 
applicable to the legislative branch of the Federal Government under 
section 5 to consider the--
 (1) party affiliation,
 (2) domicile, or
 (3) political compatibility with the employing office,
of a congressional employee with respect to employment decisions.
 (b) Definition.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term 
``employee'' means--
 (1) an employee on the staff of the House of 
 Representatives or Senate leadership,
 (2) an employee on the staff of a committee or 
 subcommittee,
 (3) an employee on the staff of a Member of the House of 
 Representatives or Senate,
 (4) an officer or employee of the House of Representatives 
 or Senate elected by the House of Representatives or Senate or 
 appointed by a Member of the House of Representatives or 
 Senate, other than those described in paragraphs (1) through 
 (3), or
 (5) an applicant for a position that is to be occupied by 
 an individual described in paragraphs (1) through (4).

SEC. 17. OTHER REVIEW PROHIBITED.

 No congressional employee may commence a judicial proceeding to 
redress practices prohibited under section 5, except as provided in 
this Act.

SEC. 18. STUDY.

 (a) Study.--The Office shall conduct a study--
 (1) of the ways that access by the public to information 
 held by the Congress may be improved, streamlined, and made 
 consistent between the House of Representatives and the Senate 
 and of the application of section 552 of title 5, United States 
 Code to the legislative branch of the Federal Government; and
 (2) of the application of the requirement of section 552a 
 of title 5, United States Code, to the legislative branch of 
 the Federal Government.
 (b) Study Content.--The study conducted under subsection (a) shall 
examine--
 (1) information that is currently made available under such 
 section 552 by Federal agencies and not by the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government;
 (2) information held by the non-legislative offices of the 
 legislative branch of the Federal Government, including--
 (A) the instrumentalities,
 (B) the Architect of the Capitol,
 (C) the Director of Non-Legislative and Financial 
 Services of the House of Representatives,
 (D) the Clerk of the House of Representatives,
 (E) the Secretary of the Senate,
 (F) the Inspector General of the House of 
 Representatives,
 (G) the Sergeant at Arms of the House of 
 Representatives,
 (H) the Doorkeeper of the House of Representatives,
 (I) the United States Capitol Police, and
 (J) the House Commission on Congressional Mailing 
 Standards;
 (3) financial expenditure information of the legislative 
 branch of the Federal Government; and
 (4) provisions for judicial review of denial of access to 
 information held by the legislative branch of the Federal 
 Government.
 (c) Time.--The Office shall conduct the study prescribed by 
subsection (a) and report the results of the study to the Congress not 
later than one year after the date of the initial appointment of the 
Board of Directors.
 <all>
HR 4892 IH----2
HR 4892 IH----3
HR 4892 IH----4