HR 821 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 821
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to improve protections of
individuals against inappropriate transfers from medicare participating
hospitals.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 2, 1989
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to improve protections of
individuals against inappropriate transfers from medicare participating
hospitals.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENTS IN ACT.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Medicare Hospital Patient
 Protection Amendments of 1989'.
 (b) REFERENCE TO SECTION 1867 OF SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- Except as otherwise
 specifically provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed as
 an amendment to a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to
 that provision in section 1867 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd).
SEC. 2. SCOPE OF HOSPITAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SCREENING.
 Subsection (a) is amended by striking `within the capability of the
 hospital's emergency department' and inserting `within the hospital's
 capability'.
SEC. 3. INFORMED CONSENT FOR REFUSALS OF TREATMENT OR TRANSFERS.
 Subsection (b) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by inserting `and informs the individual of the risks and benefits to
 the person of such examination and treatment,' after `in that paragraph', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new sentence: `The hospital shall
 take all reasonable steps to secure the person's written informed consent
 to refuse such treatment.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by inserting `and informs the individual of the risks and benefits to
 the person of such transfer,' after `with subsection (c)', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new sentence: `The hospital shall
 take all reasonable steps to secure the person's written informed consent
 to refuse such transfer.'.
SEC. 4. AUTHORIZATION FOR TRANSFERS.
 (a) INFORMED CONSENT FOR TRANSFERS AT PATIENT CONSENT- Subsection
 (c)(1)(A)(i) is amended by striking `requests that the transfer be effected'
 and inserting `gives written informed consent to the transfer, or the
 hospital offers to treat the individual, but the individual (or someone
 acting on the individual's behalf) refuses to consent to treatment'.
 (b) CLARIFYING PHYSICIAN AUTHORIZATION FOR TRANSFERS- Subsection (c)(1)(A)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of clause (i),
 (2) in clause (ii)--
 (A) by striking `, or other qualified medical personnel when a physician
 is not readily available in the emergency department,', and
 (B) by inserting `of transfer' after `information available at the time';
 (3) by striking `and' at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `or', and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) if a physician is not physically present in the emergency department
 at the time an individual is transferred, (I) a qualified medical person (as
 defined by the Secretary in regulations) has signed a certification described
 in clause (ii) after a physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(1)),
 in consultation with the person, has made the determination described in
 clause (ii), and subsequently countersigns the certification; and'.
 (c) STANDARD FOR AUTHORIZING TRANSFER- Subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii) is amended--
 (1) by striking `, based upon the reasonable risks and benefits to the
 patient, and', and
 (2) by striking `individual's medical condition' and inserting `individual
 and, in the case of active labor, to the unborn child'.
 (d) INCLUSION OF SUMMARY OF RISKS AND BENEFITS IN CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER-
 Subsection (c)(1) is amended by adding at the end the following: `The
 certification described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall include a summary
 of the risks and benefits upon which the certification is based.'.
 (e) PROVISION OF SERVICES PENDING TRANSFER- Subsection (c)(2) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) as subparagraphs (B)
 through (E), respectively, and
 (2) by inserting before subparagraph (B), as so redesignated, the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(A) in which the transferring hospital provides the medical treatment
 within its capacity which minimizes the risks to the individual's health and,
 in the case of a woman in active labor, the health of the unborn child;'.
 (f) CLARIFICATION REGARDING STABILIZATION OF INDIVIDUALS- Subsection (e)(4)
 is amended by inserting `or occur during' after `result from' both places
 it appears.
SEC. 5. NOTICE AND RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) REQUIRING MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS OF TRANSFERS- Subsection (c)
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(C), as redesignated by section 4(e)(1) of this Act--
 (A) by striking `provides' and inserting `sends', and
 (B) by striking `appropriate medical records' and all that follows through
 `transferring hospital' and inserting `all medical records (or copies
 thereof) available at the time of the transfer, including records related
 to the individual's emergency medical condition or labor, observations of
 signs or symptoms, preliminary diagnosis, treatment provided, and results
 of any tests and the informed written consent or certification (or copy
 thereof) provided under paragraph (1)(A)'.
 (b) REQUIRING POSTING OF OBLIGATIONS- Section 1866(a)(1)(N) of the Social
 Security Act is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (i),
 (2) by striking `and' at the end of clause (ii), and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(iii) to post conspicuously in any emergency department a sign (in a
 form specified by the Secretary) specifying rights of individuals under
 section 1867 with respect to examination and treatment for emergency
 medical conditions and women in active labor, and'.
SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) HOSPITAL LIABILITY-
 (1) Subsection (d) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `knowingly and willfully, or negligently,
 fails to meet' and inserting `violates',
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `knowingly', and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4) AGENCY LIABILITY- A hospital shall be liable under this section for
 the acts and omissions of its agents, and the physicians through whom it
 carries out its duties under this section.'.
 (2) Subparagraph (I) of section 1866(a)(1) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(I) in the case of a hospital, to adopt and enforce a policy to ensure
 compliance with the requirements of section 1867 and to maintain memoranda
 of transfer for patients transferred to or from the hospital for a period
 of five years from the date of the transfer;'.
 (b) PHYSICIAN LIABILITY- Subsection (d)(2) is amended--
 (1) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 `(B) Any physician who is responsible for the examination, treatment,
 or transfer of an individual in a participating hospital, including a
 physician on-call for the care of such an individual, and who--
 `(i) refuses to provide a medically appropriate examination of an individual
 requested under subsection (a);
 `(ii) falsifies the results of any examination, test, or other procedure
 in order to misrepresent an individual medical condition under this section;
 `(iii) makes a false certification under subsection (c)(1)(A);
 `(iv) authorizes the transfer of a individual who is not stabilized without
 making a certification under subsection (c)(1)(A); and
 `(v) misrepresents an individual's condition or other information,
 including a hospital's obligations under this section, in order to induce
 an individual to consent to transfer or to refuse treatment or to induce
 another medical facility to accept the transfer of an individual;
is subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $50,000 for each such
violation and exclusion from participation in the medicare and State health
care programs. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first and
second sentences of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil
money penalty and exclusion under this subparagraph in the same manner as
such provisions apply with respect to a penalty, exclusion, or proceeding
under section 1128A(a).'; and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (C).
 (c) CIVIL ENFORCEMENT- Subsection (d)(3)(A) is amended to read as follows:
 `(A) INDIVIDUAL DAMAGES- Any individual who is the subject of a responsible
 physician's or a participating hospital's violation of a requirement of
 this section may, in a civil action against that physician or hospital,
 be awarded damages (of not less than $25,000 for each violation), such
 equitable relief as is appropriate, and reasonable attorney's fees.'.
SEC. 7. ADDITIONAL OBLIGATIONS.
 Such section is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(g) NONDISCRIMINATION- A participating hospital that has specialized
 capabilities or facilities (such as burn units, shock-trauma units,
 neonatal intensive care units, (with respect to rural areas) regional
 referral centers as identified by the Secretary in regulation) shall not
 refuse to accept an appropriate transfer of an individual who requires
 such specialized capabilities or facilities the hospital has the capacity
 to treat the individual.
 `(h) NO DELAY IN EXAMINATION OR TREATMENT- A participating hospital subject
 to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) may not delay provision of an
 appropriate medical screening examination under subsection (a) or further
 medical examination and treatment required under subsection (b) in order
 to inquire about the individual's method of payment or insurance status.'.
SEC. 8. CHANGE IN `PATIENT' TERMINOLOGY.
 (a) Subsection (c) is amended--
 (1) by striking `PATIENT' and inserting `INDIVIDUAL'; and
 (2) by striking `a patient' `the patient', `patient's', and `patients'
 each place each appears and inserting `an individual', `the individual',
 `individual's', and `individuals', respectively.
 (b) Subsection (e)(2)(C) is amended by striking `patient' and inserting
 `woman'.
 (c) Subsection (e)(5) is amended by striking `a patient' each place it
 appears and inserting `an individual'.
SEC. 9. DEFINITION OF `ACTIVE LABOR'.
 Subsection (e)(2) is amended--
 (1) by striking `labor at a time at which',
 (2) in subparagraphs (A) and (B), by inserting `labor at a time at which'
 after `(A)' and after `(B)', and
 (3) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows:
 `(C)(i) labor at a time at which a transfer may pose a threat to the health
 and safety of the woman, or (ii) with respect to a woman during pregnancy,
 a time at which a transfer may pose a threat to the health and safety of
 the unborn child.'.
SEC. 10. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the first day of the
 first month that begins more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, without regard to whether regulations to carry out such amendments
 have been promulgated by such date; except that the amendment made by section
 6(a)(2) shall not apply to transfers effected before such effective date.