HR 612 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 612
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 23, 1991
Mr. GLICKMAN (for himself and Mr. HOAGLAND) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Motor Vehicle Fuel Conservation Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS.
 (a) Section 502(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(1)) is amended by striking:
`1985 and thereafter
27.5.'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`1985 through 1995
27.5.
`1996 and thereafter
As provided in accordance with section 514 of this Act.'.
 (b) Section 502(a)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(4)) is amended by striking `The Secretary' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `Except in the case of standards established by section 514,
 the Secretary'.
SEC. 3. LIGHT TRUCKS.
 Section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `and which ends before model year
 1996' immediately after `after the date of enactment of this title'.
SEC. 4. EXEMPTIONS FOR LIMITED PRODUCTION.
 Section 502(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `passenger' each place it appears;
 (2) by inserting `or (b), or section 514 or 515' immediately before the
 period at the end of the first sentence; and
 (3) by inserting `or (b), or section 514 or 515,' immediately before
 `is more stringent'.
SEC. 5. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
 Section 502(g)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(g)(1)) is amended by inserting `or section 514 or 515'
 immediately before the period at the end of the first sentence.
SEC. 6. CONSULTATION.
 Section 502(i) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(i)) is amended by inserting `and sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before the period in the first sentence.
SEC. 7. NOTIFICATION.
 Section 502(j) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(j)) is amended by inserting `and sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before `or any modification'.
SEC. 8. NEW STANDARDS.
 (a) Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sections:
`PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 514. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the average fuel
 economy for passenger automobiles manufactured by any manufacturer in model
 year 1996 and each model year thereafter shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
`1996 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 25 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
27.5 miles per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 50 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988, unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
35 miles per gallon.
`AUTOMOBILES OTHER THAN PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 515. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, commencing
 with model year 1996 and each model year thereafter, the average fuel
 economy for automobiles other than passenger automobiles manufactured by
 any manufacturer in any such model year shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
`1996 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for light trucks in model year 1988, plus an
amount equal to 25 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average
fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is modified
under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than 20 miles
per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer in model year 1988, plus an amount equal to
50 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average fuel economy
achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is modified under section
516; except that such standard shall not be less than 25 miles per gallon.
`MODIFICATIONS OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 516. (a)(1) The Secretary may modify any average fuel economy standard
 established under this Act for model year 1996 and thereafter in accordance
 with this section. In response to a petition from any person that is filed
 at least 12 months in advance of the model year to which it is applicable,
 the Secretary shall conduct a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether
 to increase or decrease such standard to the level which the Secretary
 determines is the maximum feasible average fuel economy for that model year
 (taking into consideration the factors listed in section 502(e) and the
 need to reduce carbon dioxide emissions). The Secretary may also conduct
 such a rulemaking proceeding on the Secretary's own initiative.
 `(2)(A) Under such proceeding, the Secretary shall not reduce any such
 standard below a level equal to the average fuel economy achieved by the
 manufacturer involved for the applicable type (or class) of vehicles for
 model year 1988, as multiplied by the applicable percentage set forth in
 subparagraph (B).
 `(B) The applicable percentage referred to in subparagraph (A) is--
 `(i) 115 percent, for model years 1996 through 2000; and
 `(ii) 130 percent, for model years 2001 and thereafter.
 `(b)(1) In determining the maximum feasible average fuel economy during
 a rulemaking proceeding under this section, the Secretary shall weigh
 equally each factor listed in section 502(e) and the need to reduce carbon
 dioxide emissions.
 `(2) In evaluating the technological feasibility of the standard, the
 Secretary shall exclude consideration of vehicles whose performance
 exceeds the average performance of the model year 1988 fleet, as defined
 and determined by the Environmental Protection Agency Administrator and
 furnished to the Secretary.
 `(3) In evaluating the economic practicability of the standard, the
 Secretary shall consider--
 `(A) the economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the
 consumers of the vehicles subject to such standard;
 `(B) the savings in operating costs throughout the estimated average life
 of the vehicle compared to any increase in the price of, or in the initial
 charges for, or maintenance expenses of, the vehicles which are likely to
 result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(C) the total projected amount of energy savings likely to result
 directly from the imposition of the standard and the economic impact of
 such energy savings;
 `(D) any lessening of the utility or the performance of the vehicles likely
 to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(E) the impact of any lessening of competition or any change in foreign
 trade that is likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(F) the total projected amount of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
 and the economic impact of such reduction; and
 `(G) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.'.
 (b)(1) Section 503(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `and section 514'
 immediately after `and (c)'.
 (2) Section 503(a)(2) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `Average fuel economy for purposes of section 515 shall be calculated in
 accordance with rules of the Environmental Protection Agency Administrator
 that are based upon the method required in paragraph (1) for calculation
 of average fuel economy of passenger automobiles.'.
SEC. 9. FUEL ECONOMY TESTING.
 (a) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall conduct--
 (1) an ongoing examination of the accuracy of fuel economy testing of
 passenger automobiles and light trucks by the Administrator performed in
 accordance with procedures in effect as of the date of enactment of this
 Act, as compared to the actual performance of such passenger automobiles
 and light trucks when driven by average drivers under average driving
 conditions in the United States; and
 (2) an assessment of the extent to which fuel economy deteriorates during
 the life of such passenger automobiles and light trucks.
Information on actual performance may be obtained through a survey of current
vehicle owners.
 (b) The Administrator shall, within 12 months after the date of enactment
 of this Act and annually thereafter, submit to the Committee on Commerce,
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and
 Commerce of the House of Representatives a report on the results of the
 study required by subsection (a) of this section. The report shall include--
 (1) a comparison between (A) fuel economy measured, for each model in the
 applicable model year, through testing procedures in effect as of the date
 of enactment of this Act, and (B) fuel economy of such passenger automobiles
 and light trucks during actual on-road performance, as determined under
 subsection (a) of this section;
 (2) a statement of the percentage difference, if any, between actual
 on-road fuel economy and fuel economy measured by test procedures of the
 Environmental Protection Agency; and
 (3) any recommendations for legislative or other action.
SEC. 10. EXPLANATORY BOOKLET DISTRIBUTED BY SECRETARY OF ENERGY.
 (a)(1) Paragraph (1) of section 506(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information
 and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2006(b)) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new sentence: `The Secretary of Energy shall distribute no
 less than 100 booklets each year to each dealer and shall distribute as
 many in addition to 100 booklets as are reasonably requested by dealers
 from time-to-time.'.
 (2) The amendment made by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall apply to
 the 12-month period beginning on the first day of the first month after the
 date of enactment of this Act and corresponding 12-month periods thereafter.
 (b) Section 506(e) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2006(e)) is amended by striking `Federal Energy Administrator'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Energy'.
SEC. 11. STUDIES.
 (a) The Secretary of Transportation shall provide for a review to be
 undertaken by the National Academy of Sciences, in consultation with
 vehicle manufacturers, representatives of environmental and consumer groups,
 appropriate State and local officials, representatives of labor, and others
 as appropriate, of the current state of research and development in light
 truck fuel economy and passenger automobile fuel economy and an assessment
 of the remaining potential for improving the fuel efficiency and reducing the
 energy consumption of passenger automobiles and light trucks. The assessment
 shall include all aspects of vehicle design, including engines, drive train,
 component parts, auto body, tires, and any other aspect contributing to
 the reduction of energy consumption. The National Academy shall, not later
 than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to
 the Congress on the results of the review and assessment and in the report
 recommend research and development priorities that could result in the
 commercialization of fuel economy technology through the early years of the
 next century. The National Academy shall update the report every 5 years,
 beginning not later than 7 years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 and shall submit each updated report to the Congress.
 (b) The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Transportation and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 shall undertake a study of future options for regulating the fuel efficiency
 of passenger automobiles and light trucks beyond the year 2001. Such study
 shall utilize the results of the review and assessment required by subsection
 (a), and shall examine alternative forms of fuel economy regulations. The
 study shall determine--
 (1) the ability of each regulatory strategy to ensure continued future
 fleet fuel economy improvements;
 (2) the economic efficiency of each such strategy; and
 (3) the impact of each such strategy on the competitiveness of the United
 States economy.
The Secretary of Energy shall, not later than 3 years after the date of
enactment of this Act, submit a report to the Congress on the results of
the study required by this subsection.
SEC. 12. JUDICIAL REVIEW.
 Section 504(a) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2004(a)) is amended by striking `or 506' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `506, 514, 515, or 516'.
SEC. 13. VIOLATIONS OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD.
 (a) Section 508(b)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2008(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(C) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection for a violation
 of section 507(a) (1) or (2) in model year 1996 or thereafter against a
 manufacturer shall be doubled if--
 `(i) the manufacturer violated section 507(a) (1) or (2) in the 2 model
 years immediately preceding the model year involved in the assessment; and
 `(ii) during each of such preceding years and the year involved in the
 assessment, the applicable average fuel economy standard exceeded the
 average fuel economy of the vehicles manufactured by such manufacturer by
 five-tenths of a mile per gallon or more.'.
 (b) Section 507(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `and sections 514'
 immediately after `section 502(b)),'.
 (c) Section 507(a)(2) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(2)) is amended by striking `section 502(b)' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `sections 502(b) and 515'.
 (d) Section 507(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15
 U.S.C. 2007(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(7)(A) The maximum penalty amounts authorized in paragraphs (1) and (2)
 shall be adjusted for inflation as provided in this paragraph.
 `(B) No less than 3 months prior to model year 1992, and no less than 3
 months prior to each model year thereafter, the Secretary shall prescribe and
 publish in the Federal Register a schedule of maximum authorized penalties
 that shall apply for violations that occur with respect to the model year
 immediately following such publication.
 `(C) The schedule of maximum authorized penalties shall be prescribed
 by increasing each of the amounts referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2)
 by the inflation adjustment for the preceding model year, as calculated
 by the Secretary on the basis of the Consumer Price Index.
 `(D) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `Consumer Price Index'
 means the Consumer Price Index for all-urban consumers published by the
 Department of Labor.'.
SEC. 14. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act, the term `passenger automobile' has the meaning
 given that term under section 501 of the Motor Vehicle Information and
 Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2001), and the term `light truck' shall have
 such meaning as the Secretary of Transportation prescribes.