S 707 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 707
To require the Federal Communications Commission to reinstate restrictions
on advertising during children's television, to enforce the obligation of
broadcasters to meet the educational and informational needs of the child
audience, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 5 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself and Mr. LAUTENBERG) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To require the Federal Communications Commission to reinstate restrictions
on advertising during children's television, to enforce the obligation of
broadcasters to meet the educational and informational needs of the child
audience, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Children's Television Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) television can assist children in learning important information,
 skills, values, and behavior, while entertaining them and exciting their
 curiosity to learn about the world around them;
 (2) as part of their obligation to serve the public interest, television
 station operators and licensees should provide programming that serves
 the special needs of children;
 (3) the financial support of advertisers assists in the provision of
 programming to children;
 (4) special safeguards are appropriate to protect children from
 overcommercialization on television;
 (5) television station operators and licensees should follow practices
 in connection with children's television programming and advertising that
 take into consideration the characteristics of this child audience; and
 (6) it is therefore necessary to require the Commission to take the actions
 required by this Act.
SEC. 3. RULEMAKING REQUIRED.
 (a) RULEMAKING ON COMMERCIAL TIME REQUIRED- The Federal Communications
 Commission shall, within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act,
 initiate a rulemaking proceeding to prescribe standards applicable to
 commercial television broadcast licensees with respect to the time devoted
 to commercial matter in conjunction with children's television programming.
 (b) REQUIREMENTS FOR STANDARDS- The standards required by subsection
 (a) shall require commercial television broadcast licensees to limit the
 duration of advertising in children's programming, on and after January
 1, 1990, to not more than 10.5 minutes per hour on weekends and not more
 than 12 minutes per hour on weekdays, except that, after January 1, 1993,
 the Commission shall have the authority--
 (1) to review and evaluate the standards prescribed under this subparagraph;
 and
 (2) after notice and public comment and a demonstration of the need for
 a modification of such standards, to modify such standards in accordance
 with the public interest.
 (c) TIME FOR COMPLETION OF RULEMAKING- The Commission shall, within 150
 days after the date of enactment of this Act, prescribe final standards
 in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b).
SEC. 4. CONSIDERATION OF CHILDREN'S TELEVISION SERVICE IN BROADCAST LICENSE
RENEWAL.
 The Federal Communications Commission shall consider, among the elements in
 its review of an application for renewal of a television broadcast license--
 (1) whether the licensee complied with the standards required to be
 prescribed under section 3 of this Act; and
 (2) whether the licensee has served the educational and informational
 needs of children in its overall programming.