HR 3027 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3027
To provide liability for damages resulting from oil pollution, to establish
a fund for the payment of compensation for such damages, to improve oil
pollution prevention and response, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 27, 1989
Mr. ANDERSON (for himself, Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT, Mr. NOWAK, and Mr. STANGELAND)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on
Public Works and Transportation, Merchant Marine and Fisheries, and Science,
Space, and Technology
A BILL
To provide liability for damages resulting from oil pollution, to establish
a fund for the payment of compensation for such damages, to improve oil
pollution prevention and response, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Oil Pollution Prevention,
 Response, Liability, and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The contents of this Act are as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Liability.
Sec. 103. Uses of the Fund.
Sec. 104. Claims procedure.
Sec. 105. Designation, notification, and advertisement.
Sec. 106. Subrogation.
Sec. 107. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 108. Litigation, jurisdiction, and venue.
Sec. 109. Relationship to other law.
Sec. 110. Regulations.
Sec. 111. Effective date.
TITLE II--PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
Sec. 201. Authority to direct responses.
Sec. 202. Response plans.
Sec. 203. Review and revision of response capability.
Sec. 204. Computer listing of emergency response resources and availability
of agency data.
Sec. 205. Vessel traffic systems.
Sec. 206. Navigational aids.
Sec. 207. Tanker personnel.
Sec. 208. Use of liners.
Sec. 209. Modifications to dredges.
Sec. 210. Tanker free zones.
Sec. 211. Research and development program.
Sec. 212. Consideration of alcohol abuse.
Sec. 213. Access to National Driver Register.
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Applicability of conventions.
Sec. 303. Recognition of International Fund.
Sec. 304. Action in United States courts.
Sec. 305. Contribution to International Fund.
Sec. 306. Recognition of foreign judgments.
Sec. 307. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 308. Regulations.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 401. Trans-Alaska Pipeline Fund.
Sec. 402. Intervention on the High Seas Act.
Sec. 403. Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Sec. 404. Deepwater Port Act.
Sec. 405. Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978.
Sec. 406. Qualified authorizing legislation.
Sec. 407. Effective date.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act--
 (1) ACT OF GOD- The term `act of God' means an unanticipated grave natural
 disaster or other natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable, and
 irresistible character the effects of which could not have been prevented
 or avoided by the exercise of due care or foresight.
 (2) CLAIM- The term `claim' means a request, made in writing for a sum
 certain, for compensation for damages or removal costs resulting from
 an incident.
 (3) CLAIMANT- The term `claimant' means any person who presents a claim
 for compensation under this Act.
 (4) DAMAGES- The term `damages' means damages for injury to, destruction
 of, or loss of natural resources and damages for economic loss specified
 in section 102(a)(2) of this Act, and includes the cost of assessment
 of damages.
 (5) DISCHARGE- The term `discharge' means any emission (other than natural
 seepage), intentional or unintentional, and includes spilling, leaking,
 pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping.
 (6) EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE- The term `exclusive economic zone' means the
 zone established by Presidential Proclamation Numbered 5030, dated March
 10, 1983.
 (7) FACILITY- The term `facility' means any structure, group of structures,
 equipment, or device (other than a vessel) which is used for one or
 more of the following purposes: exploring for, drilling for, producing,
 storing, handling, transferring, processing, or transporting oil. Such
 term includes any motor vehicle, rolling stock, or pipeline used for one
 or more such purposes.
 (8) FOREIGN OFFSHORE UNIT- The term `foreign offshore unit' means a facility
 which is located, in whole or in part, in the territorial sea or on or
 over the continental shelf of a foreign country.
 (9) FUND- The term `Fund' means the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund
 established by section 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (10) GROSS TON- The term `gross ton' means tonnage measured in accordance
 with the provisions of the International Convention on Tonnage Measurement
 of Ships, 1969.
 (11) GUARANTOR- The term `guarantor' means any person, other than the
 responsible party, who provides evidence of financial responsibility for
 a responsible party under this Act.
 (12) INCIDENT- The term `incident' means any occurrence or series of
 occurrences having the same origin, involving one or more vessels,
 facilities, or any combination thereof, resulting in the discharge or
 substantial threat of discharge of oil.
 (13) INDIAN TRIBE- The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band,
 nation, or other organized group or community, but not including any Alaska
 Native regional or village corporation, which is recognized as eligible
 for the special programs and services provided by the United States to
 Indians because of their status as Indians.
 (14) LESSEE- The term `lessee' means a person holding a leasehold interest
 in an oil or gas lease on lands beneath navigable waters (as such term is
 defined in section 2(a) of the Submerged Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301(a)) or
 on submerged lands of the Outer Continental Shelf, granted or maintained
 under applicable State law or the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act.
 (15) NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN- The term `national contingency plan'
 means the national contingency plan published under section 311(c) of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act and revised pursuant to section 105
 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act.
 (16) NATURAL RESOURCES- The term `natural resources' includes land, fish,
 wildlife, biota, air, water, ground water, drinking water supplies,
 and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held in trust by,
 appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by the United States (including
 the resources of the exclusive economic zone), any State or local government
 or Indian tribe, or any foreign government.
 (17) NAVIGABLE WATERS- The term `navigable waters' means the waters of
 the United States, including the territorial sea.
 (18) OFFSHORE FACILITY- The term `offshore facility' means--
 (A) a facility which is located, in whole or in part, on lands beneath
 navigable waters (as such term is defined in section 2(a) of the Submerged
 Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301(a))) or on the Outer Continental Shelf (as
 defined in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act); and
 (B) a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974.
 (19) OIL- The term `oil' means petroleum, including crude oil or any
 fraction or residue therefrom.
 (20) ONSHORE FACILITY- The term `onshore facility' means any facility
 (excluding any offshore facility) any portion of which is located in, on,
 or under any land within the United States.
 (21) OWNER- The term `owner' means any person holding title to, or in
 the absence of title any other indicia of ownership of (whether by lease,
 permit, contract, license, or other form of agreement), a vessel or facility;
 except that such term does not include a person who, without participating
 in the management or operation of a vessel or facility, holds indicia of
 ownership primarily to protect a security interest therein.
 (22) PERSON- The term `person' means an individual, corporation, partnership,
 association, Federal agency, State, municipality, commission, or political
 subdivision of a State, or any interstate body.
 (23) PERMITTEE- The term `permittee' means a person holding an authorization,
 license, or permit for geological exploration issued under section 11 of
 the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act or applicable State law.
 (24) PUBLIC VESSEL- The term `public vessel' means a vessel owned or
 bareboat chartered and operated by the United States, or by a State or
 political subdivision thereof, or by a foreign nation, except when such
 vessel is engaged in commerce.
 (25) REMOVE; REMOVAL- The term `remove' or `removal' refers to removal of
 the oil from the water and shorelines or the taking of such other actions
 as may be necessary to minimize or mitigate damage to the public health
 or welfare, including damage to fish, shellfish, wildlife, and public and
 private property, shorelines, and beaches.
 (26) REMOVAL COSTS- The term `removal costs' means the costs of removal
 taken after a discharge of oil has occurred, including all costs of
 completing removal and the costs to prevent, minimize, or mitigate oil
 pollution where there was a substantial threat of a discharge of oil
 including costs incurred under subsection (c), (d), (e), or (l) of section
 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Intervention on the
 High Seas Act, or section 18 of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974.
 (27) RESPONSIBLE PARTY- The term `responsible party' means the following:
 (A) VESSELS- In the case of a vessel, any person owning, operating, or
 chartering by demise the vessel.
 (B) FACILITIES- In the case of a facility (including a pipeline but not
 including any other offshore facility), any person owning or operating
 the facility; except that such term does not include a Federal agency,
 State, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a State, or
 any interstate body, that, as the owner of an onshore facility, transfers
 possession and right to use the property to another person by lease,
 assignment, or permit.
 (C) OFFSHORE FACILITIES- In the case of an offshore facility (other than a
 pipeline or a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974),
 the lessee or permittee of the area in which the facility is located or the
 holder of a right of use and easement granted under applicable State law or
 the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for the area in which the facility is
 located (if the holder is a different person than the lessee or permittee).
 (D) DEEPWATER PORTS- In the case of a deepwater port licensed under the
 Deepwater Port Act of 1974, the licensee.
 (E) ABANDONMENT- In the case of an abandoned vessel, onshore facility, or
 offshore facility, the persons who were, or would have been, responsible
 parties immediately prior to the abandonment of the vessel or facility.
 (28) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
 (29) TANKER- The term `tanker' means a vessel constructed or adapted for
 the carriage of oil in bulk or in commercial quantities as cargo; except
 that the term does not include a non-self-propelled vessel of less than
 3,000 gross tons carrying oil in bulk as cargo or in residue from cargo and
 operating on waters of the United States lying inside the baseline from
 which the territorial sea is measured or on waters outside such baseline
 which are part of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway.
 (30) UNITED STATES; STATE- The term `United States' and `State' mean
 the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin
 Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, and any other territory
 or possession over which the United States has jurisdiction.
 (31) VESSEL- The term `vessel' means every description of watercraft or
 other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means
 of transportation on water other than a public vessel.
SEC. 102. LIABILITY.
 (a) ELEMENTS OF LIABILITY-
 (1) JOINT, SEVERAL, AND STRICT LIABILITY- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law and subject to the provisions of this section, the responsible
 party for a vessel or a facility from which oil is discharged, or which
 poses the substantial threat of a discharge of oil, into or upon the
 navigable waters or adjoining shorelines or the waters of the exclusive
 economic zone is jointly, severally, and strictly liable for the removal
 costs specified in paragraph (2) which arise out of or directly result
 from such incident and for the damages specified in paragraph (2) which
 are proximately caused by such incident.
 (2) COVERED REMOVAL COSTS AND DAMAGES-
 (A) REMOVAL COSTS- The removal costs referred to in paragraph (1)--
 (i) are removal costs for removal actions taken by the United States,
 a State, or an Indian tribe which are not inconsistent with the national
 contingency plans; and
 (ii) are removal costs for removal actions taken by any other person which
 are consistent with the national contingency plan.
Such costs shall be recoverable by any claimant.
 (B) DAMAGES- The damages referred to in paragraph (1) are the following:
 (i) NATURAL RESOURCES- Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury,
 destruction, or loss. Such damages shall be recoverable by the following:
 a United States trustee, a State trustee, and an Indian tribe trustee.
 (ii) REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY- Damages for injury to, or economic losses
 resulting from destruction of, real or personal property. Such damages
 shall be recoverable by a claimant who owns or leases such property.
 (iii) SUBSISTENCE USE- Damages for loss of subsistence use of natural
 resources. Such damages shall be recoverable by any claimant who so uses
 natural resources which have been injured, destroyed, or lost.
 (iv) REVENUES- Damages equal to the net loss of taxes, royalties, rents,
 fees, or net profits shares, for a period not to exceed 2 years, due to
 the injury, destruction, or loss of real property, personal property, or
 natural resources. Such damages shall be recoverable by the Government of
 the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof.
 (v) PROFITS AND EARNING CAPACITY- Damages equal to the loss of profits or
 impairment of earning capacity (based on prior profits and earnings) due
 to the injury, destruction, or loss of real property, personal property,
 or natural resources. Such damages shall be recoverable by any claimant
 who derives at least 25 percent of his or her earnings from the activities
 which utilize such property or natural resources, or, if such activities
 are seasonal in nature, 25 percent of his or her earnings during the
 applicable season.
 (3) EXCLUDED DISCHARGES- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any discharge
 authorized by a permit issued under Federal, State, or local law.
 (4) LIABILITY OF THIRD PARTIES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In any case in which the responsible party for a vessel
 or facility establishes that a discharge and the resulting removal costs
 and damages were caused solely by an act or omission of 1 or more third
 parties described in subsection (b)(1)(B) (or solely by such an act or
 omission in combination with an act of God or an act of war), such third
 party or parties shall be treated as the responsible party or parties for
 purposes of determining liability under this Act.
 (B) LIMITATION APPLIED-
 (i) OWNER OR OPERATOR OF VESSEL OR FACILITY- If such third party or
 parties are the owner or operator of a vessel or facility which caused the
 incident, the liability of such third party or parties shall be subject
 to the limits provided in subsection (c), as applied with respect to such
 vessel or facility.
 (ii) OTHER CASES- In any other case, the liability of such third party or
 parties shall not exceed the limitation which would have been applicable
 to the responsible party of the vessel or facility from which the discharge
 actually occurred if such responsible party were liable.
 (b) DEFENSES TO LIABILITY-
 (1) COMPLETE DEFENSES- Except when the responsible party has failed or
 refused to report the incident where required by law and the responsible
 party knows or has reason to know of the incident, there is no liability
 under subsection (a) for the responsibility if the responsible party
 establishes that the incident--
 (A) resulted from an act of God, an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
 or insurrection; or
 (B) was solely caused by an act or omission of 1 or more persons other than--
 (i) a responsible party;
 (ii) an employee or agent of a responsible party; or
 (iii) one whose act or omission occurs in connection with a contractual
 relationship with a responsible party.
 (2) DEFENSES AS TO PARTICULAR CLAIMANTS- There is no liability under
 subsection (a)--
 (A) as to a particular claimant, where the incident is caused, in whole or
 in part, by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of that claimant; or
 (B) as to a particular claimant, to the extent that the incident is caused
 by the negligence of that claimant.
 (c) LIMITS ON LIABILITY-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- The total of the liability of a responsible party under
 subsection (a) and any removal costs incurred by, or on behalf of, the
 responsible party with respect to each incident shall not exceed--
 (A) $500 per gross ton or $5,000,000, whichever is greater (but not to
 exceed $150,000,000), for any tanker;
 (B) $300 per gross ton or $500,000, whichever is greater, for any other
 vessel; or
 (C) $75,000,000 for any facility.
 (2) EXCEPTIONS-
 (A) PROXIMATE CAUSE- Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the incident was
 proximately caused by--
 (i) willful misconduct or gross negligence within the privity or knowledge
 of the responsible party; or
 (ii) a violation, within the privity or knowledge of the responsible party,
 of applicable Federal safety, construction, or operating regulations.
 (B) FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY- Paragraph (1) shall not apply
 if the responsible party fails or refuses--
 (i) to report the incident where required by law and the responsible party
 knows or has reason to know of the incident;
 (ii) to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested by a
 responsible official in connection with removal activities; or
 (iii) without sufficient cause, to comply with an order issued under
 section 311(e) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 (3) ADJUSTING LIMITS OF LIABILITY-
 (A) FACILITIES-
 (i) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary is authorized to establish, by regulation,
 with respect to any class or category of facility (other than an offshore
 facility which is not a deepwater port, as defined in section 3 of the
 Deepwater Port Act of 1974) a maximum limit of liability under this section
 of less than $75,000,000, but not less than $8,000,000, taking into account
 the size, storage capacity, oil throughput, proximity to sensitive areas,
 type of oil handled, history of discharges, and other factors relevant to
 risks posed by the class or category of facility.
 (ii) PERIODIC REPORTS- The Secretary shall, within 6 months after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, and from time to time thereafter, report to
 Congress on the desirability of adjusting the limits of liability specified
 in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 (B) VESSELS-
 (i) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study of the relative operational
 and environmental risks posed by the transportation of oil by vessel
 to deepwater ports (as defined in section 3 of the Deepwater Port Act
 of 1974) versus the transportation of oil by vessel to other ports. Such
 study shall include a review and analysis of offshore lightering practices
 used in connection with such transportation, an analysis of the volume
 of oil transported by vessel using such practices, and an analysis of the
 frequency and volume of oil discharges which occur in connection with the
 use of such practices.
 (ii) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results
 of the study conducted under this subparagraph.
 (iii) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- If the Secretary determines, based on the
 results of the study conducted under this subparagraph, that the use of
 deepwater ports in connection with the transportation of oil by vessel
 results in a lower operational or environmental risk than the use of
 other ports in connection with such transportation, the Secretary shall
 initiate, not later than the 180th day following the date of submission of
 the report to Congress under this subparagraph, a rulemaking proceeding to
 lower the limits of liability under this section with respect to vessels
 transporting oil to deepwater ports and with respect to such ports and
 may lower such limits of liability as the Secretary determines appropriate
 but with respect to such ports only in accordance with subparagraph (A).
 (d) LIABILITY FOR INTEREST-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- The responsible party or his or her guarantor shall be
 liable to the claimant for interest on the amount paid in satisfaction of
 a claim under this section for the period described in paragraph (2).
 (2) PERIOD-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the period for
 which interest shall be paid under paragraph (1) is the period beginning
 on the 30th day following the date on which the claim is presented to
 the responsible party, or guarantor, and ending on the date on which the
 claimant is paid, inclusive.
 (B) EXCLUSION OF PERIOD DUE TO OFFER BY GUARANTOR- If the guarantor offers
 to the claimant an amount equal to or greater than that finally paid
 in satisfaction of the claim, the period described in subparagraph (A)
 shall not include the period beginning on the date such offer is made and
 ending on the date such offer is accepted. If such offer is made within
 sixty days after the date upon which the claim is presented pursuant to
 section 104(a), the period described in subparagraph (A) shall not include
 any period before such offer is accepted.
 (C) EXCLUSION OF PERIODS IN INTEREST OF JUSTICE- If, in any period, a
 claimant is not paid due to reasons beyond the control of the responsible
 party or because it would not serve the interest of justice, no interest
 shall accrue under this subsection during such period.
 (D) CALCULATION OF INTEREST- The interest paid under this subsection shall
 be calculated at the average of the highest rate for commercial and finance
 company paper of maturities of 180 days or less obtaining on each of the
 days included within the period for which interest must be paid to the
 claimant, as published in the Federal Reserve bulletin.
 (E) INTEREST NOT SUBJECT TO LIABILITY LIMITS- Interest under this paragraph
 shall be in addition to damages for which claims may be asserted under
 section 102 and shall be paid without regard to any limitation of liability
 under subsection (c)(1) of this section. The payment of interest under
 this subsection by a guarantor shall be subject to section 107(e).
 (e) NATURAL RESOURCES-
 (1) LIABILITY- In the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources under this section, liability shall be--
 (A) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States,
 (B) to any State for natural resources within the State or belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to such State,
 (C) to any Indian tribe for natural resources belonging to, managed by,
 controlled by, or appertaining to such Indian tribe, and
 (D) where subsection (f) of this section applies, to the government of a
 foreign country for natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled
 by, or appertaining to such country.
 (2) DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The President, or the authorized representative of any
 State or of the Indian tribe or of the foreign government, shall act on
 behalf of the public or Indian tribe as trustee of such natural resources
 to recover for such damages.
 (B) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The President shall designate the Federal officials
 who shall act on behalf of the public as trustees for natural resources
 under this Act.
 (C) STATE TRUSTEES- The Governor of each State shall designate State and
 local officials who may act on behalf of the public as trustee for natural
 resources under this Act and shall notify the President of such designation.
 (D) INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The governing body of any Indian tribe shall
 designate tribal officials who may act on behalf of the tribe or its
 members as trustee for natural resources under this Act and shall notify
 the President of such designation.
 (3) FUNCTIONS OF TRUSTEES-
 (A) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The officials designated under paragraph (2)(B)--
 (i) shall assess damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural
 resources for purposes of this Act for the natural resources under their
 trusteeship;
 (ii) may, upon request of and reimbursement from a State or Indian tribe
 and at the Federal officials' discretion, assess damages for the natural
 resources under the State's or tribe's trusteeship; and
 (iii) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 or replacement or acquisition of the equivalent of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (B) STATE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under paragraph (2)(C)--
 (i) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 (ii) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 or replacement or acquisition of the equivalent of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (C) INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under paragraph (2)(D)--
 (i) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 (ii) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 or replacement or acquisition of the equivalent of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (D) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD- Plans shall be developed and
 implemented under subparagraphs (A)(iii), (B)(ii), and (C)(ii) only after
 adequate public notice and opportunity for hearing and consideration of
 all public comment.
 (4) MEASURE OF DAMAGES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The measure of damages in any action under this section
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources shall be--
 (i) the costs of restoring, rehabilitating, replacing, or acquiring the
 equivalent of the damaged natural resources; and
 (ii) the value of the lost public uses of such resources in the period
 beginning on the date the damage occurs and ending on (I) the date such
 resources are restored, rehabilitated, or replaced or the equivalent is
 acquired, or (II) the date on which it is determined that such resources
 cannot be restored, rehabilitated, or replaced or no equivalent can be
 acquired.
 (B) DETERMINE COSTS WITH RESPECT TO PLANS- Costs shall be determined under
 subparagraph (A) with respect to plans adopted under paragraph (3) (A),
 (B), and (C).
 (C) NO DOUBLE RECOVERY- There shall be no double recovery under this Act
 for natural resource damages, including the costs of damage assessment
 or restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition for the same
 incident and natural resource.
 (5) DAMAGE ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS AND STUDY-
 (A) REGULATIONS- Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the President shall issue regulations, consistent with paragraph
 (4)(A), for the assessment of damages to natural resources arising out of
 an incident.
 (B) REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION- Any determination or assessment of damages to
 natural resources for the purposes of this Act made pursuant to paragraph
 (4)(A)(i) by a Federal, State, or Indian tribe trustee in accordance
 with the regulations issued under subparagraph (A) shall have the force
 and effect of a rebuttable presumption on behalf of the trustee in any
 administrative or judicial proceeding under this Act.
 (C) STUDY- The President shall conduct a study of techniques and methods
 of valuing natural resource damages and shall transmit to Congress, not
 later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, a report
 on the results of such study.
 (6) USE OF RECOVERED SUMS- Sums recovered under this Act by a Federal,
 State, or Indian tribe trustee for damages to natural resources shall be
 retained by the trustee for use only to reimburse or pay costs incurred
 by the trustee under paragraph (3) with respect to the damaged natural
 resources. Any amounts in excess of those required for these reimbursements
 and costs shall be deposited in the Fund.
 (7) CIVIL PENALTY-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Any responsible party liable under this section for
 damages resulting from a discharge of oil shall be subject to a civil
 penalty not to exceed the greater of $1,000,000 or 1/2 of the responsible
 party's liability under this section if the discharge results in damages
 to natural resources that cannot be restored, rehabilitated or replaced,
 and for which no equivalent can be acquired.
 (B) ASSESSMENT, SETTLEMENT, AND COLLECTION- The President or authorized
 representative of a State or Indian tribe, acting under this section as
 trustee, may request the Attorney General to bring an action in court to
 recover from the responsible party a civil penalty under this paragraph. In
 determining the amount of a civil penalty under this paragraph, the court
 shall consider the nature and extent of the damages to natural resources, the
 value of the natural resources, the degree of culpability of the person held
 liable for the discharge, and the nature and extent of efforts taken by that
 person to prevent, mitigate, and restore the damages to natural resources.
 (C) SEPARATE LIABILITY- Except as provided in section 302, any liability
 for a civil penalty under this paragraph shall be separate from and in
 addition to any liability for a discharge of oil under this section.
 (D) DEPOSIT INTO FUND- Sums received under this paragraph shall be deposited
 in the Fund.
 (f) RECOVERY BY FOREIGN CLAIMANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A foreign claimant may recover removal costs and damages
 under this Act only in accordance with this subsection.
 (2) COVERED DISCHARGES- A foreign claimant may recover only if the discharge
 of oil was from--
 (A) a facility,
 (B) a vessel in the navigable waters of the United States, or
 (C) a tanker carrying oil originally received at the terminal of the
 pipeline constructed under the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act
 for transportation to a port in the United States, the incident having
 occurred prior to delivery to that port,
and resulted in the presence of oil in or on the territorial sea, internal
waters, or adjacent shoreline of a foreign country.
 (3) REQUIREMENTS- A foreign claimant may recover only if--
 (A) the claimant first seeks compensation under title III;
 (B) the claimant has not been otherwise compensated for the removal costs
 or damages; and
 (C) recovery is authorized by a treaty or executive agreement between the
 United States and the claimant's country, or the Secretary of State, in
 consultation with the Attorney General and other appropriate officials,
 has certified that the claimant's country provides a comparable remedy
 for United States claimants.
 (4) EXCEPTION FOR CANADIAN CLAIMANTS RESPECTING TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE OIL-
 Paragraph (3)(C) shall not apply with respect to recovery by a resident
 of Canada in the case of an incident described in paragraph (2)(C).
 (5) FOREIGN CLAIMANT DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `foreign claimant' means any person residing in a foreign country, the
 government of a foreign country, or any agency or political subdivision
 thereof.
 (g) RECOVERY OF REMOVAL COSTS AND DAMAGES BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The responsible party for a vessel or facility from which
 oil is discharged, or which poses the substantial threat of a discharge
 of oil, may assert a claim for removal costs and damages under subsection
 (a) only if the responsible party establishes that--
 (A) he or she is entitled to a defense to liability under subsection (b), or
 (B) he or she is entitled to a limitation of liability under subsection (c).
 (2) EXTENT OF RECOVERY- A responsible party who is entitled to a limitation
 of liability, may assert a claim under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) only
 to the extent that the sum of the removal costs and damages incurred by
 the responsible party plus the amounts paid by the responsible party or by
 the guarantor on behalf of the responsible party for claims asserted under
 subsection (a) exceeds the amount to which the total of the liability under
 subsection (a) and removal costs and damages incurred by, or on behalf of,
 the responsible party is limited under subsection (c).
 (h) CONTRIBUTION- A person may bring an action for contribution against any
 other person who is liable or potentially liable under this section. Such
 an action shall be brought in accordance with section 108.
 (i) INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- No indemnification, hold harmless, or similar agreement or
 conveyance shall be effective to transfer any liability imposed under this
 section from any responsible party for any vessel or facility or from any
 person who may be liable for an incident under this section to any other
 person. Nothing in this subsection shall bar any agreement to insure,
 hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such agreement for any liability
 under this section.
 (2) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION- Nothing in this Act, including
 the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall bar a cause of
 action that a responsible party subject to liability under this section,
 or a guarantor, has or would have, by reason of subrogation or otherwise
 against any person.
 (j) CONSULTATION ON REMOVAL ACTIONS- The Secretary shall consult
 with the affected trustees designated under section 102(e)(2) on the
 appropriate removal action to be taken in connection with any discharge of
 oil. Removal with respect to any discharge shall be considered completed
 when so determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Governor
 or Governors of the affected State or States and in accordance with the
 national contingency plan.
SEC. 103. USES OF THE FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) USES- The Fund shall be available to the Secretary for--
 (A) the payment of removal costs, and the costs of monitoring removal
 actions, incurred by Federal authorities;
 (B) the costs incurred by Federal, State or Indian tribe trustees in carrying
 out their functions under section 102(e) for assessing damages to natural
 resources and for developing and implementing plans for the restoration,
 rehabilitation, or replacement of damaged resources;
 (C) the payment of obligations under subsection (e) of this section;
 (D) the payment of removal costs and damages resulting from the discharge,
 or substantial threat of discharge, of oil from a foreign offshore unit;
 (E) the payment of personnel, equipment, and training costs associated
 with the maintenance of the strike forces authorized under section 311(c)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act;
 (F) the payment of administrative and personnel costs and expenses reasonably
 necessary for and incidental to the implementation and administration of
 this Act; and
 (G) the payment of contributions to the International Fund under title
 III of this Act.
 (2) SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS- The Fund shall also be available to the Secretary
 for the payment of otherwise uncompensated claims for removal costs and
 damages in accordance with section 104.
 (b) DEFENSES TO LIABILITY FOR THE FUND- The Fund shall not be available
 to pay any claim for removal costs or damages--
 (1) as to a particular claimant, where the incident or economic loss is
 caused, in whole or in part, by the gross negligence or willful misconduct
 of the claimant; or
 (2) as to a particular claimant, to the extent that the incident or economic
 loss is caused by the negligence of the claimant.
 (c) MAXIMUM AMOUNT PAYABLE FROM FUND- The maximum amount which may be paid
 from the Fund with respect to any incident in combination with payment,
 if any, under the International Convention on the Establishment of an
 International Fund for Compensation of Oil Pollution Damage, 1984, shall
 not exceed $1,000,000,000. The President may increase the maximum amount
 with respect to the incident if the President determines that such increase
 is necessary and in the best interests of the United States. The authority
 granted the President under this subsection may not be delegated.
 (d) FEDERAL AND STATE OFFICIALS WHO MAY OBLIGATE FROM THE FUND- The
 Secretary is authorized to issue regulations designating 1 or more Federal
 officials who may obligate money in the Fund in accordance with subsection
 (a) of this section or portions thereof. The Secretary shall designate the
 Commandant of the Coast Guard to be a Federal official who may obligate
 money in the Fund in accordance with subsection (a). The Secretary is
 also authorized to delegate authority to obligate money in the Fund or to
 settle claims to officials of a State with an adequate program operating
 under a cooperative agreement with the Federal Government.
 (e) OBLIGATION OF THE FUND BY STATE OFFICIALS-
 (1) AUTHORITY- In accordance with regulations issued under this subsection,
 the Governor of each State, or any appropriate State official designated
 by the Governor, is authorized to obligate the Fund for payment in an
 amount not to exceed $250,000 for removal costs not inconsistent with the
 national contingency plan required for the immediate response to an incident.
 (2) NOTIFICATION- A Governor or designee exercising the authority granted
 by this subsection shall notify the Secretary within 24 hours after any
 obligation of a payment from the Fund.
 (3) REGULATIONS- Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall publish proposed regulations detailing
 the manner in which the authority to obligate the Fund and to enter into
 agreements under this subsection is to be exercised, and, not later than 3
 months after the close of the comment period on such proposed regulations,
 the Secretary shall issue the regulations.
 (f) RIGHTS OF SUBROGATION- Payment of any claim by the Fund under this Act
 shall be subject to the United States Government acquiring by subrogation
 of all rights of the claimant to recover from the responsible party.
 (g) AUDIT- The Comptroller General shall provide an audit review team to
 audit all payments, obligations, reimbursements, or other uses of the Fund,
 to assure that the Fund is being properly administered and that claims
 are being appropriately and expeditiously considered. The Comptroller
 General shall submit to Congress an interim report 1 year after the date
 of the establishment of the Fund. The Comptroller General shall thereafter
 provide such auditing of the Fund as is appropriate. Each Federal agency
 shall cooperate with the Comptroller General in carrying out this subsection.
 (h) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS FOR CLAIMS-
 (1) REMOVAL COSTS- No claim may be presented under this section for recovery
 of removal costs unless the claim is presented within three years after
 the date of completion of all removal action.
 (2) DAMAGES- No claim may be presented under this section for recovery of
 damages unless the claim is presented within three years after the date
 on which the loss and its connection with the discharge in question were
 reasonably discoverable with the exercise of due care, or in the case of
 damages to natural resources under section 102(a)(2), if later, the date
 on which final regulations are issued under section 102(e)(5).
 (i) LIMITATION ON PAYMENT FOR SAME COSTS- Where the Secretary has paid an
 amount out of the Fund for any costs or damages specified under subsection
 (a), no other claim may be paid out of the Fund for the same costs or
 damages.
 (j) OBLIGATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH PLAN-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), amounts may be obligated
 from the Fund for the restoration, rehabilitation, or replacement, or
 acquisition of natural resources only in accordance with a plan adopted
 under section 102(e)(3).
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply in a situation requiring action
 to avoid irreversible loss of natural resources or to prevent or reduce any
 continuing danger to natural resources or similar need for emergency action.
SEC. 104. CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
 (a) PRESENTATION TO RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR GUARANTOR- Except as provided in
 subsection (b), all claims for removal costs or damages shall be presented
 first to the responsible party or guarantor of the source designated under
 section 105(a).
 (b) PRESENTATION TO FUND- Claims for removal costs or damages may be
 presented first to the Fund--
 (1) where the Secretary has advertised or otherwise notified claimants in
 accordance with section 105(c);
 (2) by a responsible party who may assert a claim under section 102(g);
 (3) by the Governor of a State for removal costs incurred by that State; or
 (4) by a United States claimant in a case where a foreign offshore unit
 has discharged oil causing damage for which the Fund is liable under
 section 103(a)(1)(D).
 (c) ELECTION- If a claim is presented in accordance with subsection (a) and--
 (1) each person to whom the claim is presented denies all liability for
 the claim, or
 (2) the claim is not settled by any person by payment within 180 days
 after the date upon which (A) the claim was presented, or (B) advertising
 was begun pursuant to section 105(b), whichever is later,
the claimant may elect to commence an action in court against the responsible
party or guarantor or to present the claim to the Fund.
 (d) UNCOMPENSATED DAMAGES- If a claim is presented in accordance with
 subsection (a) and full and adequate compensation is unavailable, either
 because the claim exceeds a limit of liability invoked under section 102 or
 because the responsible party and his guarantor are financially incapable
 of meeting or unwilling to meet their obligations in full, a claim for
 the uncompensated damages may be presented to the Fund.
 (e) PROCEDURE FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE FUND- The Secretary shall issue,
 and may from time to time amend, regulations for the presentation, filing,
 processing, settlement, and adjudication of claims under this Act against
 the Fund.
SEC. 105. DESIGNATION, NOTIFICATION, AND ADVERTISEMENT.
 (a) DESIGNATION OF SOURCE AND NOTIFICATION- After receiving information
 of an incident, the Secretary shall, where possible and appropriate,
 designate the source or sources of the discharge. If a designated source
 is a vessel or a facility, the Secretary shall immediately notify the
 responsible party and the guarantor, if known, of such designation.
 (b) ADVERTISEMENT BY THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR GUARANTOR- If a responsible
 party or guarantor fails to inform the Secretary, within 5 days after
 receiving notification of a designation under subsection (a), of his or
 her denial of the designation, such party or guarantor shall advertise
 the designation and the procedures by which claims may be presented
 to such party or guarantor, in accordance with regulations issued by
 the Secretary. Advertisement under the preceding sentence shall begin
 no later than fifteen days after the date of the designation made under
 subsection (a). If advertisement is not otherwise made in accordance with
 this subsection, the Secretary shall promptly and at the expense of the
 responsible party or the guarantor involved, advertise the designation
 and the procedures by which claims may be presented to the responsible
 party or guarantor. Advertisement under this subsection shall continue
 for a period of no less than thirty days.
 (c) ADVERTISEMENT BY THE SECRETARY- If--
 (1) the responsible party and the guarantor both deny a designation within
 5 days after receiving notification of a designation under subsection (a),
 (2) the source of the oil pollution was a public vessel, or
 (3) the Secretary is unable to designate the source or sources of the oil
 pollution under subsection (a),
the Secretary shall advertise or otherwise notify potential claimants of
the procedures by which claims may be presented to the Fund.
SEC. 106. SUBROGATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any person, including the Fund, who pays compensation
 pursuant to this Act to any claimant for costs or damages shall be subrogated
 to all rights, claims, and causes of action that the claimant has under
 this Act.
 (b) ACTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE FUND- Upon request of the Secretary, the
 Attorney General shall commence an action on behalf of the Fund to recover
 any compensation paid by the Fund to any claimant pursuant to this Act, and
 all costs incurred by the Fund allocable to the claim, including interest
 (including prejudgment interest), administrative and adjudicative costs,
 and attorney's fees. Such an action may be commenced against any responsible
 party or (subject to section 107(e)) guarantor, or against any other person
 who is liable, pursuant to any law, to the compensated claimant or to the
 Fund, for the cost or damages for which the compensation was paid. Such
 an action shall be commenced against the responsible foreign government
 or other responsible party to recover any removal costs or damages paid
 from the Fund as the result of the discharge, or substantial threat of
 discharge, of oil from a foreign offshore unit.
SEC. 107. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) VESSELS-
 (1) REQUIREMENT- The responsible party for--
 (A) any vessel over 300 gross tons (except a non-self-propelled vessel
 that does not carry oil as cargo or fuel) using any port or place in the
 United States or the navigable waters, or
 (B) any vessel using the waters of the exclusive economic zone to transship
 or lighter oil destined for a port or place subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States,
shall establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations issued by the
Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility sufficient to meet the maximum
amount of liability to which, in the case of a tanker, the responsible party
could be subjected under section 102(c)(1)(A) of this Act, or to which, in
the case of any other vessel, the responsible party could be subjected under
section 102(c)(1)(B) of this Act, in a case where the responsible party would
be entitled to limit liability under such section. If the responsible party
owns or operates more than one vessel, evidence of financial responsibility
need be established only to meet the maximum liability applicable to the
largest of such vessels.
 (2) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold
 or revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes
 of the United States of any vessel subject to this subsection that does
 not have the certification required under this subsection.
 (3) DENYING ENTRY AND DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary may (A) deny entry
 to any offshore facility or any port or place in the United States, or to
 the navigable waters, or (B) detain at such a facility or port or place,
 any vessel that, upon request, does not produce the certification required
 under this subsection or the regulations issued under this subsection.
 (b) OFFSHORE FACILITIES- Each responsible party with respect to an offshore
 facility shall establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility
 sufficient to meet the maximum amount of liability to which the responsible
 party could be subjected under section 102 in a case where the responsible
 party would be entitled to limit liability under section 102. In cases where
 a person is the responsible party for more than one facility subject to
 this subsection, evidence of financial responsibility need be established
 only to meet the maximum liability applicable to one such facility.
 (c) METHODS OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Financial responsibility under
 this section may be established by any one or any combination of the
 following methods which the Secretary determines to be acceptable: evidence
 of insurance, surety bond, guarantee, letter of credit, qualification as
 a self-insurer, or other evidence of financial responsibility. Any bond
 filed shall be issued by a bonding company authorized to do business
 in the United States. In promulgating requirements under this section,
 the Secretary is authorized to specify policy or other contractual terms,
 conditions, or defenses which are necessary, or which are unacceptable,
 in establishing such evidence of financial responsibility in order to
 effectuate the purposes of this Act.
 (d) CLAIMS AGAINST GUARANTOR- Any claim for which liability may
 be established under section 102 may be asserted directly against any
 guarantor providing evidence of financial responsibility for a responsible
 party liable under that section for costs and damages to which the claim
 pertains. In defending against such a claim, the guarantor may invoke all
 rights and defenses which would be available to the responsible party
 under section 102. The guarantor may also invoke the defense that the
 incident was caused by the willful misconduct of the responsible party but
 the guarantor may not invoke any other defense that might be available in
 proceedings brought by the responsible party against the guarantor.
 (e) LIMITATION ON GUARANTOR'S LIABILITY- Nothing in this Act shall impose
 liability with respect to an incident on any guarantor for damages or
 removal costs which exceeds, in the aggregate, the amount of financial
 responsibility required under this Act which that guarantor has provided
 for the responsible party for any vessel or facility that was a source or
 cause of oil pollution in that incident.
 (f) CIVIL PENALTY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a
 hearing, is found to have failed to comply with the requirements of this
 section or the regulations issued under this section, or with a denial
 or detention order issued under subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall
 be liable to the United States for a civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000
 per day of violation. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed by
 the Secretary by written notice. In determining the amount of the penalty,
 the Secretary shall take into account the nature, circumstances, extent,
 and gravity of the violation, the degree of culpability, any history of
 prior violation, ability to pay, and such other matters as justice may
 require. The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or without
 conditions, any civil penalty which is subject to imposition or which has
 been imposed under this paragraph. If any person fails to pay an assessed
 civil penalty after it has become final, the Secretary may refer the matter
 to the Attorney General for collection.
 (2) JUDICIAL RELIEF- In addition to, or in lieu of, assessing a penalty
 under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary may request the
 Attorney General to secure such relief as necessary to compel compliance
 with this section, including a judicial order terminating operations. The
 district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to grant such
 relief as the public interest and the equities of the case may require.
 (g) CONTINUATION OF REGULATIONS- Any regulation respecting financial
 responsibility which has been issued pursuant to any provision of law
 repealed or superseded by this Act and which is in effect on the date
 immediately preceding the effective date of this Act shall be deemed
 and construed to be a regulation issued pursuant to this section. Such a
 regulation shall remain in full force and effect unless and until superseded
 by new regulations issued under this section.
 (h) UNIFIED CERTIFICATE- The Secretary may issue to a responsible party
 one certificate of financial responsibility for purposes of meeting the
 financial responsibility requirements of this Act and any other law.
SEC. 108. LITIGATION, JURISDICTION, AND VENUE.
 (a) REVIEW OF REGULATIONS- Review of any regulation issued under this Act
 may be had upon application by any interested person only in the Circuit
 Court of Appeals of the United States for the District of Columbia. Any
 such application shall be made within 90 days from the date of promulgation
 of such regulations.
 (b) JURISDICTION- Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section,
 the United States district courts shall have original jurisdiction over
 all causes of action arising under this Act (which shall be deemed to
 include actions under the International Convention on Civil Liability
 for Oil Pollution Damages, 1984, and the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984), without regard to the citizenship of the parties or the
 amount in controversy.
 (c) VENUE- Venue shall lie in any district in which the incident, injury,
 or damages occurred, or in which the defendant resides, may be found, has its
 principal office, or has appointed an agent for service of process. For the
 purposes of this section, the Fund, and the International Fund established
 under article 2 of the International Convention on the Establishment of
 an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984,
 shall reside in the District of Columbia.
 (d) SAVINGS PROVISION- Nothing in this Act shall affect any action commenced
 before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS-
 (1) DAMAGES- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action
 may not be commenced for damages under this Act, unless such action is
 commenced within 3 years after--
 (A) the date on which the loss and the connection of the loss with the
 discharge in question were reasonably discoverable with the exercise of
 due care, or
 (B) in the case of damages described in section 102(a)(2)(B)(i), the date
 on which regulations are issued under section 102(e)(5) if later than the
 date referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (2) REMOVAL COSTS- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action
 may not be commenced for recovery of removal costs under this Act, unless
 such action is commenced within 3 years after completion of the removal
 action. An action may be commenced under section 102 for recovery of
 removal costs at any time after such costs have been incurred.
 (3) ACTIONS FOR CONTRIBUTION- An action may not be commenced for contribution
 for any removal costs or damages, unless such action is commenced within
 3 years after--
 (A) the date of judgment in any action under this Act for recovery of such
 costs or damages, or
 (B) the date of entry of a judicially approved settlement with respect to
 such costs or damages.
 (4) SUBROGATION- An action based on rights subrogated pursuant to this
 Act by reason of payment of a claim may not be commenced under this Act,
 unless such action is commenced within 3 years after the date of payment
 of such claim.
SEC. 109. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW.
 (a) PREEMPTION-
 (1) ACTIONS PREEMPTED- Except as provided in this Act, no action arising
 out of a discharge of oil, or a substantial threat of a discharge of oil,
 from a vessel or facility into or upon the navigable waters or adjoining
 shorelines or the waters of the exclusive economic zone (other than an
 action for personal injury or wrongful death), may be brought in any court
 of the United States or of any State or political subdivision thereof.
 (2) STATE FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS- Nothing in this Act or in sections 4611 and
 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall affect the authority of any
 State (A) to establish or continue in effect an oil spill fund or account; or
 (B) to require any person to contribute to that fund or account. However,
 if the State fund or account is supported by contributions levied upon
 persons who contribute to the Fund established by this Act, the State fund or
 account may not be used to compensate any person for damages under this Act.
 (b) NO PREEMPTION OF PENALTIES- Nothing in this Act or section 9509
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall affect the authority of the
 United States or any State or political subdivision thereof to impose,
 or to determine the amount of, any fine or penalty for any violation of
 law relating to an incident.
 (c) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Except as provided in this Act, a responsible
 party for a vessel or facility who establishes and maintains evidence
 of financial responsibility in accordance with this title shall not be
 required under any State or local law, rule, or regulation to establish or
 maintain any other evidence of financial responsibility in connection with
 liability for the discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil
 from such vessel or facility. Evidence of compliance with the financial
 responsibility requirements of this title shall be accepted by a State
 in lieu of any other requirement of financial responsibility imposed by
 such State in connection with liability for the discharge of oil from such
 vessel or facility. A State may enforce, on the navigable waters of the
 State, the requirements for evidence of financial responsibility imposed
 under section 107 of this Act.
 (d) LIMITATION OF LIABILITY ACT- The Act of March 3, 1851, shall not apply
 to removal costs which arise out of or directly result from, and damages
 which are proximately caused by, an incident involving the discharge or
 substantial threat or discharge of oil.
SEC. 110. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out this title.
SEC. 111. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), this title shall apply
 with respect to an incident occurring after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (b) PAYMENTS FROM FUND- Payments under section 103(a) may not be made
 before the commencement date (as such term is defined in section 4611(f)(2)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
TITLE II--PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
SEC. 201. AUTHORITY TO DIRECT RESPONSES.
 In the event of a discharge of oil or the substantial threat of discharge
 of oil into or upon navigable waters or adjoining shorelines or the waters
 of the exclusive economic zone, the Secretary is authorized to assume
 the direction of all Federal, State, and private activities regarding
 the containment, cleanup, removal, and other responses to the discharge
 or threat of discharge. The authority granted to the Secretary by this
 section shall not affect the assessment of liability under this Act with
 respect to the discharge or threat of discharge.
SEC. 202. RESPONSE PLANS.
 (a) DESIGNATION-
 (1) DEADLINE- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall designate those areas for which plans for
 responding to discharges and threatened discharges of oil are required to
 be prepared under this section, the persons (including Federal, State,
 and local officials) who are required to prepare such plans, and the
 persons who are required to pay for the preparation of such plans.
 (2) CONSULTATION- In designating areas for which plans are required to be
 prepared under this section and the persons to be required to prepare such
 plans, the Secretary shall consult concerned State officials.
 (b) CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF AREAS- In determining those areas for which
 plans for responding to discharges and threatened discharges of oil are
 required to be prepared under this section, the Secretary shall consider
 the following:
 (1) The likelihood of a discharge or threatened discharge of oil in the area.
 (2) The likelihood of significant adverse effects resulting from discharges
 or threatened discharges of oil in the area.
 (3) The amount and type of oil handled, stored, or processed in the area.
 (4) The presence of natural resources in the area which are likely to be
 damaged by a discharge of oil and the value, uniqueness, and susceptibility
 of such resources to damage by such discharge.
 (5) The geographic, topographic, weather, and other conditions which
 might influence the frequency, severity, and effects of oil discharges
 and responses thereto.
 (c) PREPARATION OF PLANS-
 (1) DEADLINE- Not later than 180 days after the date of designation of
 an area under subsection (a), the persons designated under subsection
 (a) shall prepare and submit, in writing, to the Secretary for approval a
 plan for responding to discharges and threatened discharges of oil in the
 area. Plans approved by the Secretary under this section must be reviewed
 on a periodic basis.
 (2) CONTENTS- Each response plan prepared under this section shall include
 the following:
 (A) A description of the general area in which response actions will be
 required to be taken pursuant to the plan.
 (B) The responsibilities of responsible parties, State and local governments,
 and others in responding to discharges and threatened discharges of oil.
 (C) Such other matters as the Secretary may require.
 (3) CONSULTATION REQUIREMENT- Concerned States and local governments shall
 be consulted in the preparation of each plan under this subsection.
 (4) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide technical assistance
 in the preparation of response plans under this subsection.
 (d) FUNDING- All expenses incurred by the Secretary in carrying out this
 section shall be paid for out of the Fund.
SEC. 203. REVIEW AND REVISION OF RESPONSE CAPABILITY.
 (a) EVALUATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the status and
 effectiveness of personnel and equipment for responding to discharges of
 oil or threats of discharges of oil into or upon the navigable waters and
 adjoining shorelines and the waters of the exclusive economic zone. The
 evaluation shall determine, on a regional basis, whether or not existing
 personnel and equipment are sufficient for responding to such discharges or
 threats in an effective and timely manner and the need for teams (including
 necessary equipment, personnel, and vessels) to respond to and minimize
 damage from those discharges or threats of discharges occurring in the
 general regions of Alaska, the Pacific Northwest, California, the Gulf of
 Mexico, the Great Lakes, the North Atlantic, the South Atlantic, Hawaii,
 and inland waters of the United States.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress based on the
 findings of the evaluation conducted under this subsection, together with
 recommendations.
 (b) TRAINING- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall revise the national contingency plan issued
 under section 311(c)(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and
 shall issue such regulations as may be necessary, to require oil response
 personnel to be subjected to--
 (1) training approved by the Secretary of Transportation; and
 (2) periodic drills, without prior notice, to demonstrate the continued
 effectiveness and readiness of oil response teams.
 (c) CERTIFICATION- Not later than 6 months after the date of the submission
 of the report under subsection (a), the Secretary shall issue regulations
 requiring inspection of equipment for responding to discharges of oil
 and threats of discharges of oil into the navigable waters and adjoining
 shorelines and the waters of the exclusive economic zone. Such equipment
 includes containment booms, skimmers, response vessels, and buoys. The
 regulations shall require the submission to the Secretary of such information
 as the Secretary may require for obtaining certification by the Secretary
 not less than once every 3 years to ensure the equipment is maintained
 in working condition. The Secretary shall take such actions as may be
 necessary to make such certifications and to enforce this subsection and
 the regulations issued to carry out this subsection.
 (d) UPGRADING OF PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT-
 (1) BY OWNERS AND OPERATORS- Not later than 6 months after the date of the
 submission of the report under subsection (a), the Secretary shall issue
 regulations which require owners and operators of vessels and facilities to
 take (within 6 months after the date of the issuance of such regulations)
 such action as may be necessary to ensure that sufficient personnel and
 equipment are available, on a regional and collective basis, for responding
 to discharges of oil and threats of discharges of oil described in the
 first sentence of subsection (a) in an effective and timely manner.
 (2) BY THE SECRETARY- If owners and operators of vessels and facilities have
 not taken all actions required by the Secretary under paragraph (1) within
 6 months after the date of the issuance of regulations under paragraph (1),
 the Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that
 sufficient personnel and equipment for responding to discharges of oil and
 threats of discharges of oil described in the first sentence of subsection
 (a) in an effective and timely manner are available on a regional and
 collective basis.
 (e) FUNDING- All expenses incurred by the Secretary in carrying out this
 section shall be paid for out of the Fund.
SEC. 204. COMPUTER LISTING OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE RESOURCES AND AVAILABILITY
OF AGENCY DATA.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF COMPUTER LISTING- Not later than 1 year after the
 date of the enactment of this section, the National Response Center shall
 (in consultation with State officials responsible for removal of oil from
 navigable waters and adjoining shorelines and the waters of the exclusive
 economic zone) establish, maintain, and annually revise a comprehensive
 nationwide computer listing of emergency response resources which are
 available to and appropriate for use in responding to discharges and
 substantial threats of discharges of oil.
 (b) CONTENTS OF COMPUTER LISTING- The computer listing established under
 this section shall include--
 (1) a continually updated description of all Federal, State, local, and
 private emergency response resources which are available for use, including--
 (A) the locations and capabilities of the resources;
 (B) specification of the suitability of each resource for use in rivers,
 harbors, open ocean, and calm waters; and
 (C) specification of the suitability of each resource for use in fresh
 water and in salt water;
 (2) a nationwide listing of persons having emergency response resources
 available for sale or lease, including--
 (A) each such person's address, telephone number, and hours of business; and
 (B) a description of the types and capabilities of their resources;
 (3) a listing of the names, telephone numbers, and areas of expertise
 of persons residing in the vicinity of areas covered by the National
 Contingency Plan who are experts in--
 (A) responding to discharges or the threats of discharges of oil; or
 (B) the effects of such discharges or threats.
 (c) INFORMATION ACCESS- The National Response Center shall provide
 continuous access to information contained in the listing established
 under this section to--
 (1) each regional response team;
 (2) each regional response center;
 (3) each on-scene coordinator; and
 (4) all State and local government officials responsible for directing
 State or local governmental response to discharges and substantial threats
 of discharges of oil.
 (d) READY ACCESSIBILITY- The head of each Federal agency having a
 representative on the National Response Team shall ensure that, during
 all periods of activation of the National Contingency Plan, all persons
 described in subsection (c) with respect to the activation have ready
 accessibility to all relevant data in the possession of such agency
 (other than classified data) regarding the geographic, oceanographic,
 hydrologic, natural resource, and meteorological characteristics of the
 navigable waters or adjoining shorelines and the waters of the exclusive
 economic zone for which the National Contingency Plan is activated.
 (e) INTERNATIONAL INVENTORY- The President shall take such actions as
 may be necessary to encourage appropriate international organizations to
 establish an international inventory of emergency response resources.
 (f) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 (1) EMERGENCY RESPONSE RESOURCE- The term `emergency response resource'
 means all equipment, supplies (including chemical and biological agents),
 and personnel having special knowledge or expertise, that are particularly
 useful for responding to a discharge or threat of a discharge of oil.
 (2) NATIONAL RESPONSE CENTER, NATIONAL RESPONSE TEAM, REGIONAL RESPONSE
 CENTER, REGIONAL RESPONSE TEAM, AND ON-SCENE COORDINATOR- The terms `National
 Response Center', `National Response Team', `Regional Response Center',
 `Regional Response Team', and `On-Scene Coordinator' have the meaning such
 terms have in the National Contingency Plan.
SEC. 205. VESSEL TRAFFIC SYSTEMS.
 (a) NEEDS SURVEY- The Secretary shall make a survey of areas of navigable
 waters to determine the needs for new, expanded, or improved vessel
 traffic systems.
 (b) PRIORITY LIST-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- Based on the results of the needs survey conducted under
 subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish, in order of priority, those
 areas of navigable waters which are in need of new, expanded, or improved
 vessel traffic systems.
 (2) FACTORS TO CONSIDER- In determining the order of priority for the
 list under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider such factors as
 the Secretary determines appropriate, including the nature, volume, and
 frequency of vessel traffic in the area and the risks of collisions, spills,
 and damages associated with such traffic which could be reduced or eliminated
 by installation, expansion, or improvement of a vessel traffic system.
 (c) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing the priority
 list established under this subsection and such other information as the
 Secretary considers appropriate.
 (d) ACQUISITION, INSTALLATION, AND OPERATION- The Secretary may acquire,
 install, and operate such equipment and vessel traffic systems as are
 necessary for making the improvements and expansions contained on the
 priority list established under this subsection.
 (e) MANDATORY PARTICIPATION- The Secretary shall make participation in
 vessel traffic systems operated by the Secretary mandatory for such vessels
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (f) VESSEL FEES-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish and collect from users of
 vessel traffic systems operated by the Secretary such fees as the Secretary
 determines are necessary to pay the cost of acquisition, installation, and
 operation of vessel traffic systems by the Secretary. Such fees shall be
 established in accordance with section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
 (2) USE OF FEES- Fees collected by the Secretary under this subsection
 shall be credited and available to the Secretary, without fiscal year
 limitation, to pay the cost of acquisition, installation, and operation
 of vessel traffic systems by the Secretary.
 (3) LIMITATIONS ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed as altering or expanding the duties and liabilities of the
 United States for the performance of functions or services for which fees
 are collected under this subsection. The collection of such fees shall
 not constitute an express or implied undertaking by the United States
 to perform any service or activity in a certain manner or to provide any
 service at a particular time or place.
 (g) DIRECTION OF VESSEL MOVEMENT-
 (1) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study of whether or not the
 Secretary should be given additional authority to direct the movement of
 vessels upon navigable waters and should exercise such authority.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of
 the study conducted under paragraph (1) together with recommendations for
 implementing the results of such study.
SEC. 206. NAVIGATIONAL AIDS.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study to determine the areas in
 which navigation risks are sufficient to require tug escorts of tankers
 or other navigation aids to improve the safe movement of tankers.
 (c) IMPLEMENTATION- The Secretary shall issue such regulations and take
 such actions as may be necessary to implement the recommendations contained
 in the report submitted to Congress under this section.
SEC. 207. TANKER PERSONNEL.
 (a) STUDY- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall conduct a study for the purpose of determining
 appropriate crew sizes for tankers and qualifications of personnel on
 such tankers.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of
 the study conducted under subsection (a) together with recommendations
 for implementing the results of such study.
SEC. 208. USE OF LINERS.
 (a) STUDY- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall
 conduct a study to determine whether or not liners should be used as a
 secondary means of containment at onshore facilities used for the bulk
 storage of oil and located near navigable waters to prevent leaching of
 oil into the ground and to aid in leak detection.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall submit
 to Congress a report on the results of the study conducted under subsection
 (a) together with recommendations for implementing the results of such study.
 (c) IMPLEMENTATION- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall issue such regulations and take such actions as may be necessary to
 implement the recommendations contained in the report submitted to Congress
 under this section.
SEC. 209. MODIFICATIONS TO DREDGES.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary of the Army shall conduct a study for the purpose
 of determining the feasibility of modifying dredges for the purpose of
 making such dredges usable in responding to a discharge of oil or the
 threat of a discharge of oil.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report
 on the results of the study conducted under subsection (a) together with
 recommendations for implementing the results of such study.
SEC. 210. TANKER FREE ZONES.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary, in consultation with other appropriate Federal
 and State officials, shall conduct a study of whether or not to designate
 areas of the navigable waters and exclusive economic zone as zones where
 the movement of tankers should be prohibited or limited. If the Secretary,
 as a result of such study, determines that such zones should be designated,
 the Secretary shall also study which areas to designate as such zones, and
 what limitations to impose on tanker traffic in any zones so designated,
 taking into consideration the following: existing navigational risks based on
 geography, weather, and volume of traffic; potential for danger to natural
 resources; and availability of alternative methods for transporting oil
 (such as deepwater port facilities).
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of
 the study conducted under subsection (a) together with recommendations
 for implementing the results of such study.
SEC. 211. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The President shall establish a program for conducting
 oil pollution research and development under this section and designate
 appropriate Federal agencies to participate in such program.
 (b) GENERAL PURPOSES- The purposes of the research and development program
 under this section includes the following:
 (1) Development of new or improved methods to contain discharges of oil
 from vessels and facilities. Such methods must minimize health risks to
 persons who will have responsibility for containing such discharges.
 (2) Development of new or improved methods (including the use of dispersants
 and bioremediation) for oil recovery, cleanup, and disposal which are
 effective and protect the environment.
 (3) Development of effective models to predict the effects of discharges
 of oil and the fate of such oil, including the development of baseline
 data necessary for determining such effects.
 (4) Development of technologies and methods to protect public health and
 safety from discharges of oil (including the population directly exposed
 to an oil discharge and response personnel performing cleanup activities).
 (5) Development of new or improved methods to ensure the health and safety
 of response personnel performing cleanup activities.
 (6) Development of adequate worker training standards for oil discharge
 response personnel.
 (7) Development of new or improved methods to restore and rehabilitate
 natural resources damaged by discharges of oil.
 (8) Determination of long-term effects of discharges of oil on fish and
 wildlife.
 (c) SPECIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS-
 (1) VESSEL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION CRITERIA- Under the program established
 under this section, the President shall direct the Secretary to conduct
 research on changes in vessel design and construction criteria (such as
 tank size, vessel size, double hulls, and ballast sides) for the purpose
 of reducing the likelihood of discharges of oil.
 (2) TECHNOLOGY- Under the program established under this section,
 the President shall direct the Secretary and the Administrator of the
 Environmental Protection Agency to conduct a joint research and development
 program for improving technology to prevent discharges of oil and minimize
 the size of such discharges.
 (d) ANNUAL REPORTS- The President shall submit to Congress an annual
 report on the activities carried out under this section in the preceding
 fiscal year and on activities the President proposes to carry out under
 this section in the current fiscal year.
 (e) FUNDING- For carrying out the purposes of this section, there is
 authorized to be appropriated from the Fund $10,000,000 for fiscal year
 1991, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, $7,500,000 for fiscal year 1993,
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
SEC. 212. CONSIDERATION OF ALCOHOL ABUSE.
 (a) ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES, CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY, AND MERCHANT
 MARINER DOCUMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 71 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by
 adding at the end the following:
`Sec. 7115. Consideration of alcohol abuse in issuing and renewing licenses
and certificates of registry
 `(a) LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES- The Secretary
 may not issue or renew a license or certificate of registry under this
 chapter for any individual who--
 `(1) the Secretary determines is a current or chronic abuser of alcohol; or
 `(2) fails to make available to the Secretary the information referred to
 in subsection (b).
 `(b) DRIVING RECORD INFORMATION- The Secretary shall require each individual
 applying for issuance or renewal of a license or certificate of registry
 under this chapter to make available to the Secretary, in accordance with
 section 206(b)(4) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401
 note), all information contained in the National Driver Register regarding
 the motor vehicle driving record of such individual.
 `(c) INVESTIGATIONS- Upon receiving reliable information that an individual
 applying for issuance or renewal of a license or certificate of registry
 under this chapter has been found guilty of an alcohol-related infraction
 resulting in suspension or revocation of a motor vehicle operator license
 issued to the individual, the Secretary may conduct such investigations
 as are necessary to determine if the individual is a current or chronic
 abuser of alcohol.'.
 (2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 71 of title 46,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
`7115. Consideration of alcohol abuse in issuing and renewing licenses and
certificates of registry.'.
 (b) CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY- Section 7107 of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the following:
 `The Secretary shall determine the term of validity of a certificate of
 registry. Such a certificate may be renewed under regulations issued by
 the Secretary.'.
 (c) MERCHANT MARINER'S DOCUMENTS- Section 7302 of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(c) LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF DOCUMENTS- The Secretary may not issue or
 renew a merchant mariner's document under this chapter for any individual
 who--
 `(1) the Secretary determines is a current or chronic abuser of alcohol; or
 `(2) fails to make available to the Secretary the information referred to
 in subsection (d).
 `(d) DRIVING RECORD INFORMATION- The Secretary may require each individual
 applying for issuance or renewal of a merchant mariner's document under
 this chapter to make available to the Secretary, in accordance with section
 206(b)(4) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note),
 all information contained in the National Driver Register regarding the
 motor vehicle driving record of such individual.
 `(e) INVESTIGATIONS- Upon receiving reliable information that an individual
 applying for issuance or renewal of a merchant mariner's document under this
 chapter has been found guilty of an alcohol-related infraction resulting in
 suspension or revocation of a motor vehicle operator license issued to the
 individual, the Secretary may conduct such investigations as are necessary
 to determine if the individual is a current or chronic abuser of alcohol.
 `(f) PERIOD OF VALIDITY- The Secretary shall determine the term of validity
 of a merchant mariner's document. Such documents may be renewed under
 regulations issued by the Secretary.'.
 (d) SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES, CERTIFICATES, AND DOCUMENTS-
 Section 7703 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before the first sentence; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(b) SUSPENSIONS FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may suspend or revoke a license, certificate
 of registry, or merchant mariner's document issued by the Secretary to an
 individual if--
 `(A) the Secretary determines the individual is a current or chronic abuser
 of alcohol; or
 `(B) the individual fails to make available to the Secretary the information
 referred to in paragraph (3).
Any determination of the Secretary to suspend or revoke the license,
certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document of an individual
under this paragraph shall be based on the severity of abuse of alcohol by
the individual and the length of time necessary to control that abuse.
 `(2) INVESTIGATIONS- The Secretary may conduct such investigations as are
 necessary to determine if an individual who holds a license, certificate of
 registry, or merchant mariner's document issued by the Secretary is a current
 or chronic abuser of alcohol if the Secretary receives reliable information--
 `(A) regarding any alcohol-related misconduct of the individual; or
 `(B) pursuant to paragraph (3) that the individual has been found guilty
 of an alcohol-related infraction resulting in suspension or revocation of
 a motor vehicle operator license issued to the individual.
 `(3) DRIVING RECORD INFORMATION- The Secretary may request an individual who
 holds a license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document
 issued by the Secretary to make available to the Secretary, in accordance
 with section 206(b)(4) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23
 U.S.C. 401 note), all information contained in the National Driver Register
 regarding the motor vehicle driving record of such individual.
 `(4) LIMITATION ON SUSPENSION TERMINATIONS- The Secretary may not terminate
 a suspension of a license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's
 document of an individual under paragraph (1)(A) until the individual
 provides sufficient proof that the individual is no longer a current or
 chronic abuser of alcohol.'.
 (e) RELIEF OF MASTER- Section 8101 of title 46, United States Code, is
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) RELIEF OF MASTER- If the chief mate or equivalent and the next
 senior crewmember on board a vessel determine that reasonable cause
 exists to believe that the master or individual in command is intoxicated
 as a result of the use of dangerous drugs (as defined in section 7704)
 or alcohol and is therefore incapable of commanding the vessel, the chief
 mate shall temporarily relieve the master and temporarily assume command
 of the vessel and shall immediately enter the details in the vessel log
 and report such details to the Secretary by the most expeditious means
 available. The chief mate shall also report the circumstances in writing to
 the Secretary within 12 hours after the vessel arrives at its destination.'.
 (f) REGULATIONS- The Secretary is authorized to issue such regulations as
 may be necessary to implement the amendments made by this section.
SEC. 213. ACCESS TO NATIONAL DRIVER REGISTER.
 Section 206(b) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401
 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5), and any reference thereto,
 as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) SEAMAN CERTIFICATES- Any individual who has applied for or received a
 license or certificate of registry in accordance with section 7101 of title
 46, United States Code, or a merchant mariner's document in accordance with
 section 7302 of title 46, United States Code, or has applied for a renewal of
 such license, certificate of registry, or document, may request the chief
 driver licensing official of a State to transmit information regarding
 the individual under subsection (a) to the Secretary. The Secretary may
 receive such information and shall, prior to using such information in any
 adverse action regarding the individual's license, certificate of registry,
 or document, make such information available to the individual for review
 and written comment. The Secretary may not otherwise divulge or use such
 information, except in accordance with section 7115, 7302, or 7703 of
 title 46, United States Code. There shall be no access to information in
 the Register under this paragraph if such information was entered in the
 Register more than 5 years before the date of such request, unless such
 information relates to revocations or suspensions which are still in effect
 on the date of the request. Information submitted to the Register by States
 under the Act of July 14, 1960 (74 Stat. 526), or under this Act shall be
 subject to access for the purpose of this paragraph during the transition
 to the Register established under section 203(a) of this Act.'.
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this title--
 (1) SHIP, OWNER, OIL, POLLUTION DAMAGE, AND INCIDENT- The terms `ship',
 `owner', `oil', `pollution damage', and `incident' shall have the meanings
 provided in article I of the Civil Liability Convention.
 (2) CIVIL LIABILITY CONVENTION- The term `Civil Liability Convention'
 means the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984.
 (3) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- The term `financial responsibility' has the
 same meaning as `financial security' under the Civil Liability Convention.
 (4) FUND CONVENTION- The term `Fund Convention' means the International
 Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation
 for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984.
 (5) INTERNATIONAL FUND- The term `International Fund' means the International
 Oil Pollution Compensation Fund established under article 2 of the Fund
 Convention.
SEC. 302. APPLICABILITY OF CONVENTIONS.
 During any period in which the Civil Liability Convention and the Fund
 Convention are in force with respect to the United States, liability
 relating to pollution damage arising from an incident involving a ship
 shall be determined in accordance with the Civil Liability Convention and
 Fund Convention. Nothing in this title shall constitute a ratification of
 either the Civil Liability Convention or the Fund Convention.
SEC. 303. RECOGNITION OF INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 The International Fund is recognized under the laws of the United States
 as a legal person, and shall have the capacity to acquire and dispose
 of real and personal property, and to institute and be party to legal
 proceedings. The Director of the International Fund is recognized as the
 legal representative of the International Fund. The Director shall be deemed
 to have appointed irrevocably the Secretary of State as the International
 Fund's agent for the service of process in any legal proceedings involving
 the International Fund within the United States. The International Fund
 and its assets shall be exempt from all direct taxation and payment of
 any customs duties in the United States.
SEC. 304. ACTION IN UNITED STATES COURTS.
 (a) SERVICE OF PROCESS ON FUND- In any action brought in a court in the
 United States against the owner of a ship or its guarantor under the Civil
 Liability Convention, the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be,
 shall serve a copy of the complaint and any subsequent pleading therein
 upon the International Fund at the same time the complaint or other pleading
 is served upon the opposing parties.
 (b) INTERVENTION- The International Fund may intervene as a party as a
 matter of right in any action brought in a court in the United States against
 the owner of a ship or its guarantor under the Civil Liability Convention.
SEC. 305. CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 (a) PAYMENTS TO BE MADE FROM OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND- The amount
 of any contribution to the International Fund which is required to be made
 under article 10 of the Fund Convention by any person with respect to oil
 received in any port, terminal installation, or other installation located
 in the United States shall be paid to the International Fund from the Oil
 Spill Liability Trust Fund established by section 9509 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (b) INFORMATION- The Secretary may, by regulation, require persons who are
 required to make contributions with respect to oil received in any port,
 terminal, installation, or other installations in the United States under
 article 10 of the Fund Convention to provide all information relating to
 that oil as may be necessary to carry out subsection (a) of this section,
 articles 10, 12, 13, 14, and 15 of the Fund Conventions, and Article
 29 of the Protocol of 1984 to Amend the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1971.
SEC. 306. RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS.
 Any final judgment of a court of any country which is a party to the
 Civil Liability Convention or to the Fund Convention in an action for
 compensation under either convention shall be recognized by any court of
 the United States having jurisdiction under this Act, when that judgment
 has become enforceable in that country and is no longer subject to ordinary
 form of review, except where--
 (1) the judgment was obtained by fraud, or
 (2) the defendant was not given reasonable notice and a fair opportunity
 to present its case.
SEC. 307. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) UNITED STATES DOCUMENTED SHIPS- The owner of each ship which is
 documented under the laws of the United States which is subject to the
 Civil Liability Convention shall establish and maintain, in accordance with
 regulations issued by the Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility
 as required in Article VII of the Civil Liability Convention.
 (b) OTHER SHIPS- The owner of each ship (other than a ship to which
 subsection (a) applies or a ship which is a public vessel), which is subject
 to the Civil Liability Convention and which enters or leaves a port or
 terminal in the United States or uses an Outer Continental Shelf facility
 or an offshore facility that is or was licensed under the Deepwater Port
 Act of 1974, shall establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility as required
 in article VII of the Civil Liability Convention. Any ship which has on
 board a valid certificate issued in accordance with article VII of the Civil
 Liability Convention shall be considered as having met the requirements of
 this subsection. Any ship carrying only oil as cargo, fuel, or residue,
 which has on board a valid certificate issued in accordance with article
 VII of the Civil Liability Convention shall be considered as having met
 the requirements of section 107 of this Act.
 (c) AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY TO ISSUE- The Secretary is authorized to issue
 any certificate of financial responsibility which the United States may
 issue under the Civil Liability Convention.
 (d) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold or
 revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes of the
 United States of any ship which does not have a certificate demonstrating
 compliance with this section.
 (e) DENYING ENTRY AND DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary may (1) deny entry
 to any facility or to any port or place in the United States, or (2) detain
 at the facility or port or place in the United States, any ship subject
 to this section which, upon request, does not produce the certificate
 demonstrating compliance with this section or regulations issued hereunder.
 (f) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a
 hearing, is found to have violated this section, any regulation issued
 under this section, section 305(b), or section 308, or any denial or
 detention order issued under subsection (e) of this section shall be liable
 to the United States for a civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000 per day of
 violation. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed by the Secretary
 in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 107 of this Act.
 (g) WAIVER OF SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY- The United States waives all defenses
 based on its status as a sovereign State with respect to any controversy
 arising under the Civil Liability Convention or the Fund Convention relating
 to any ship owned by the United States and used for commercial purposes.
SEC. 308. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out
 this title and all obligations of the United States under the International
 Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984, and the
 Fund Convention.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 401. TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE FUND.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 204(b)- Section 204(b) of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(b)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence by inserting after `any area' the following:
 `in the State of Alaska';
 (2) in the first sentence by inserting after `any activities' the following:
 `related to the trans-Alaska oil pipeline'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new sentence: `This subsection
 shall not apply to removal costs covered by the Oil Pollution Prevention,
 Response, Liability, and Compensation Act of 1989.'.
 (b) REPEAL OF SECTION 204(c)- Section 204(c) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act is repealed. The repeal made by the preceding sentence
 shall not affect the applicability of such section to claims arising before
 the date of the enactment of this Act. The repeal of paragraphs (4), (6),
 and (8) of such section shall only become effective upon the payment by
 the Board of Trustees of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund of all
 claims certified under subsection (c) of this section.
 (c) CERTIFICATION OF OUTSTANDING CLAIMS- Not later than 210 days after the
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Board of Trustees of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Liability Fund shall certify to the Secretary the total amount
 of claims outstanding against such Fund as of the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
SEC. 402. INTERVENTION ON THE HIGH SEAS ACT.
 Section 17 of the Intervention on the High Seas Act (33 U.S.C. 1486)
 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 17. AVAILABILITY OF OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND.
 `The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund shall be available to the Secretary
 for actions taken under sections 5 and 7 of this Act.'.
SEC. 403. FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
 (a) NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN- Section 311(c)(2) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C) by striking `establishment or designation of a
 strike force consisting' and inserting `designation, establishment, and
 maintenance of a strike force consisting of at least 4 teams';
 (2) in subparagraph (D) by inserting `safeguard against as well as' after
 `surveillance and notice designed to';
 (3) in subparagraph (F) by inserting `as well as research and development
 into methods and techniques to improve existing technology' after `removing
 oil and hazardous substances'; and
 (4) in subparagraph (H) by striking `reimbursed from the fund established
 under subsection (k) of this section for the reasonable costs incurred in
 such removal' and inserting `reimbursed, in the case of any discharges of
 oil from a vessel or facility, for the reasonable costs incurred for such
 removal, from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (b) CLEANUP EXPENSES- Section 311(d) of such Act is amended by striking
 the last sentence.
 (c) ABATEMENT ACTIONS- Section 311(e) of such Act is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(e) ABATEMENT ACTIONS-
 `(1) PRESIDENT'S AUTHORITY- In addition to any action taken by a State or
 local government, when the President determines that there may be an imminent
 and substantial threat to the public health or welfare of the United States,
 including fish, shellfish, and wildlife and public and private property,
 shorelines, and beaches under the jurisdiction or control of the United
 States, because of an actual or threatened discharge of oil or a hazardous
 substance from a vessel or facility in violation of subsection (b) of this
 section, the President may--
 `(A) require the Attorney General to secure such relief as may be necessary
 to abate such threat; or
 `(B) after notice to the affected State, take such other action under this
 section, including issuing such administrative orders, as may be necessary
 to protect the public health and welfare.
 `(2) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If any person fails without sufficient cause
 to comply with an order under paragraph (1)(B), the President may request
 the Attorney General to bring an action in the appropriate district court
 of the United States to enforce such an order, to assess civil penalties
 of not more than $25,000 a day for each violation, and to assess 3 times
 the removal costs or damages incurred by the Oil Spill Liability Trust
 Fund as a result of the failure to comply.
 `(3) DISTRICT COURT JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States
 shall have jurisdiction to grant such relief under this subsection as the
 public interest and the equities of the case may require.'.
 (d) LIMITATION ON APPLICABILITY TO PREVENT OVERLAPPING COVERAGE- Subsections
 (f), (g), (h), and (i) of section 311 of such Act shall not apply with
 respect to any incident with respect to which section 102 of this Act
 applies.
 (e) RECOVERY FROM 3RD PARTIES- Section 311(i) of such Act is amended by
 striking `(1)' and striking paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (f) OIL SPILL REVOLVING FUND-
 (1) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 311(k) of such Act is repealed.
 (2) TREATMENT OF REMAINING FUNDS- Any amounts remaining in the revolving
 fund established under section 311(k) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.
 (3) TREATMENT OF LIABILITIES- The Fund shall assume all liability incurred
 by the revolving fund established under section 311(k) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act.
 (g) FUNDING OF DELEGATED AUTHORITY- Section 311(l) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act is amended by striking the second sentence.
 (h) EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Section 311(p) of such Act
 is repealed.
 (i) AVAILABILITY OF FUND- Section 311 of such Act is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(s) AVAILABILITY OF OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND- The Oil Spill Liability
 Trust Fund shall be available to carry out subsections (c), (d), (i), and
 (l). Any amounts received by the United States under this section shall
 be deposited in the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.'.
 (j) NOTICE TO STATE; INCREASED PENALTIES- Section 311(b)(5) of such Act
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the first sentence the following: `The Federal
 agency shall immediately notify the appropriate State agency of any State
 which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, affected by the discharge
 of oil or a hazardous substance.'; and
 (2) by striking `fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned for not more than
 one year, or both' and inserting `fined in accordance with the applicable
 provisions of title 18 of the United States Code, or imprisoned for not
 more than 3 years (or not more than 5 years in the case of a second or
 subsequent conviction), or both'.
SEC. 404. DEEPWATER PORT ACT.
 (a) SECTION 4(c)- Section 4(c)(1) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33
 U.S.C. 1503(c)(1)) is amended by striking `section 18(l) of this Act;'
 and inserting `section 107 of the Oil Pollution Prevention, Response,
 Liability, and Compensation Act of 1989;'.
 (b) SECTION 18-
 (1) REPEALS- Subsections (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n),
 and paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (m) of section 18 of such Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1517) are repealed.
 (2) SUBSECTION (c)(3)- Subsection (c)(3) of such section is amended by
 striking `Deepwater Port Liability Fund established pursuant to subsection
 (f) of this section', and inserting `Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (3) REDESIGNATIONS- Subsections (c), (k), and (m) of such section (and
 any references thereto) are redesignated as subsections (b), (c), and (d)
 respectively, and paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (m) of such section
 (and any references thereto) are redesignated as paragraphs (1) and (2),
 respectively.
 (c) SECTION 19- Section 19(a)(1) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1518(a)(1))
 is amended by striking the period at the end of the second sentence and
 inserting `; except that discharges from a deepwater port or from a vessel
 within a deepwater port safety zone which are subject to the civil penalty
 provisions of section 18(a)(2) of this Act shall not be subject to the
 penalty provisions of any other Federal law.'.
 (d) DEEPWATER PORT LIABILITY FUND- Any amounts remaining in the Deepwater
 Port Liability Fund established under section 18(f) of the Deepwater Port
 Act of 1974 shall be deposited into the Fund. The Fund shall assume all
 liability incurred by the Deepwater Port Liability Fund.
SEC. 405. OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1978.
 Title III of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978
 (43 U.S.C. 1811-1824) is hereby repealed. Any amounts remaining in the
 Offshore Oil Pollution Compensation Fund established under section 302
 of such title shall be deposited in the Fund. The Fund shall assume all
 liability incurred by the Offshore Oil Pollution Compensation Fund.
SEC. 406. QUALIFIED AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION.
 This Act shall be considered to be qualified authorizing legislation for
 purposes of section 4611(f)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
SEC. 407. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Sections 401, 402, 403 (other than subsection (j)), 404, and 405 shall
 be effective on the commencement date (as such term is defined in section
 4611(f)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).