B37 5-15-89 [update]
S 986 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 986
To require Federal review and approval of oil discharge contingency plans,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 12 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. LAUTENBERG introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To require Federal review and approval of oil discharge contingency plans,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
APPROVAL OF OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLANS
 SECTION 1. Section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(3)(A) Within 12 months following the date of the enactment into law
 of this paragraph, the President shall issue such regulations as may be
 necessary to enable him to determine each area for which a local oil and
 hazardous substance discharge contingency plan is necessary, and to require
 the preparation thereof by terminal operators, vessel operators, and other
 parties directly involved in the transport of oil or hazardous substances
 within the area covered by such plan. Pursuant to such regulations, plans
 thereunder shall be prepared by each terminal operator, vessel operator,
 or other party directly involved in the transport of oil or hazardous
 substances within the area covered by such plan, but may, at the discretion
 of the concerned parties, be prepared jointly. The President, by regulation,
 is authorized to impose on any such operator or party submitting a plan
 under this subsection a fee in an amount determined by the President to
 be sufficient to defray the costs involved in the review and approval of
 such plan.
 `(B) Each plan under subparagraph (A) shall include--
 `(i) proof of financial capability to implement the provisions of such plan;
 `(ii) requirements for the periodic testing of such plan;
 `(iii) procedures and techniques which will be employed in identifying,
 containing, dispersing, and removing oil and hazardous substances under
 the plan;
 `(iv) identification, procurement, maintenance, and storage of equipment
 and supplies necessary to such plan;
 `(v) means of obtaining additional equipment and supplies, as may be
 necessary; and
 `(vi) any other factors the President considers appropriate.
 `(C) Pursuant to regulation, each vessel operator, terminal operator,
 or other party directly involved in the transport of oil or hazardous
 substance shall be required to submit each local discharge contingency
 plan to the President for his approval on a periodic, regular basis, or as
 otherwise required by the President. In reviewing such plan, the President,
 for each area covered by the plan, shall consider--
 `(i) the nature and volume of vessel traffic within the area covered by
 the plan;
 `(ii) the volume and type of oil or hazardous substances being transported
 within the area covered by the plan;
 `(iii) the availability of rescue, containment, and cleanup equipment,
 and manpower;
 `(iv) navigational hazards, such as marine geography and weather;
 `(v) any history of prior discharges of oil or hazardous substances;
 `(vi) the value and sensitivity of natural resources and wildlife within
 the area covered by the plan;
 `(vii) the comments of potentially affected third parties; and
 `(viii) any other factors the President considers appropriate.
 `(D) Such regulation shall require each terminal operator, vessel
 operator, or other party directly involved in the transport of oil or
 hazardous substance to immediately notify the President, in writing, of
 any significant change in any factor set forth under subparagraph (B),
 in order for the President to require changes, if needed, in the plan
 submitted by such operator or party.
 `(E) Such regulations shall further provide that in the event of a discharge
 of oil or hazardous substance into an area within the purview of paragraph
 (1) of this subsection, the President shall be responsible for seeing that
 the removal plan covering such discharge is properly implemented and for
 immediately requiring any changes or other modifications to such plan as
 he may determine necessary. In overseeing the implementation of such plan,
 the President shall take into consideration comments made, in accordance
 with such regulations, by affected third parties, and shall insure, to
 the maximum extent possible, that the removal of the discharge under the
 plan will protect existing natural resources, and restore, to the extent
 possible, natural resources adversely affected by the discharge, and will
 protect human life and health.
 `(F) Regulations issued pursuant to this paragraph (3) shall be published
 in the Federal Register.
 `(G) Within 6 months following the date of the enactment of this
 paragraph into law, the President shall report to the Congress on the
 state of the technology, procedures, and research which are available
 on means of preventing, containing, and removing discharges of oil and
 hazardous substances into an area within the purview of paragraph (1)
 of this subsection. In making such report, the President shall include
 his recommendations as to actions which could be taken to expedite the
 development and implementation of such technologies, procedures, and
 research, together with ways and means of encouraging cooperative efforts
 between public and private sector parties.
 `(H)(i) The President is authorized to deny entry into any port of the
 United States of any vessel involved in the transport of oil or hazardous
 substances, or deny movement of oil or hazardous substance through any
 terminal facility, if the vessel operator or terminal operator, as the case
 may be, does not have in effect a current local contingency plan approved
 pursuant to this subsection.
 `(ii) The provisions of clause (i) of this subparagraph shall take effect
 upon the expiration of the 90-day period following the date on which
 the President issues his regulation pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this
 paragraph (3).'.