HR 5927 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5927
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow accelerated depreciation
for equipment used to manufacture advanced materials or to develop advanced
technologies, to reduce capital gains taxes, and to impose a minimum tax on
foreign and foreign-owned corporations operating in the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 10, 1992
Mr. HUNTER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow accelerated depreciation
for equipment used to manufacture advanced materials or to develop advanced
technologies, to reduce capital gains taxes, and to impose a minimum tax on
foreign and foreign-owned corporations operating in the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. 3-YEAR DEPRECIABLE LIFE FOR SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING EQUIPMENT
AND EQUIPMENT USED TO MANUFACTURE ADVANCED MATERIALS OR TO DEVELOP ADVANCED
TECHNOLOGIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subparagraph (A) of section 168(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to classification of property) is amended by striking
 `and' at the end of clause (i), by striking the period at the end of clause
 (ii) and inserting a comma, and by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(iii) any semiconductor manufacturing equipment, and
 `(iv) any equipment used to manufacture advanced materials or to develop
 advanced technologies.
Clause (iv) shall not apply if the taxpayer elects not to apply such
clause. Such an election shall apply to the taxable year for which made and
all subsequent taxable years and, once made, shall be irrevocable.'
 (b) ADVANCED MATERIALS AND TECHNOLOGIES- Subsection (e) of section 168 of
 such Code (relating to classification of property) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(5) ADVANCED MATERIALS AND TECHNOLOGIES- For purposes of paragraph
 (3)(A)(iv)--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The determination of whether any material is an advanced
 material or whether any technology is an advanced technology shall be made as
 of the date the equipment referred to in such paragraph is placed in service.
 `(B) INITIAL LIST OF ADVANCED MATERIALS AND TECHNOLOGIES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `advanced material' and `advanced technology'
 mean any material or technology listed in clause (ii) and determined by
 the Secretary to be an advanced material or technology.
 `(ii) INITIAL LIST-
Advanced structural materials
Electronic and photonic materials
Biotechnologies
Materials processing
Environmental technologies
Design and engineering tools
Commercialization and production systems
Advanced process equipment
Networks and communications
Powertrain
Propulsion
 `(C) MODIFICATIONS TO LIST- Materials and technologies may be added to or
 deleted from the list in subparagraph (B)(ii) based on recommendations of
 experts selected by the Secretary. Any deletion from such list shall not
 take effect before the date which is 5 years after the date the decision
 to make such deletion is published in the Federal Register.'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Subparagraph (B) of section 168(e)(3) of such Code is amended by
 striking clause (ii) and by redesignating the succeeding clauses accordingly.
 (2) Subparagraph (B) of section 168(g)(3) of such Code is amended by
 striking the following:
 `(B)(ii) ....................... 5'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(A)(iii) ........................3
 `(A)(iv) .........................3.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 equipment placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 2. REDUCTION IN INDIVIDUAL CAPITAL GAINS RATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subsection (h) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended to read as follows:
 `(h) MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for any taxable year,
 then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed the sum of--
 `(A) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this
 subsection had not been enacted on the taxable income reduced by the net
 capital gain, plus
 `(B) a tax equal to the sum of--
 `(i) 7.5 percent of so much of the net capital gain as does not exceed--
 `(I) the maximum amount of taxable income to which the 15-percent rate
 applies under the table applicable to the taxpayer, reduced by
 `(II) the taxable income to which subparagraph (A) applies, plus
 `(ii) 15 percent of the net capital gain in excess of the net capital gain
 to which clause (i) applies.
 `(2) TRANSITIONAL RULE- In the case of a taxable year which includes the
 date of the enactment of this paragraph, the amount of the net capital
 gain for purposes of paragraph (1) shall not exceed the net capital gain
 determined by only taking into account gains and losses properly taken
 into account for the portion of the taxable year after such date.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Paragraph (1) of section 170(e) of such Code is amended by striking
 `the amount of gain' in the material following subparagraph (B)(ii) and
 inserting `13/28 (19/34 in the case of a corporation) of the amount of gain'.
 (2)(A) The second sentence of section 7518(g)(6)(A) of such Code is amended
 by striking `28 percent (34 percent in the case of a corporation)' and
 inserting `15 percent'.
 (B) The second sentence of section 607(h)(6)(A) of the Merchant Marine
 Act, 1936, is amended by striking `28 percent (34 percent in the case of
 a corporation)' and inserting `15 percent'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 sales and exchanges occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act
 in taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 3. REDUCTION IN CORPORATE CAPITAL GAINS RATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Section 1201 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to alternative tax for corporations) is amended by redesignating subsection
 (b) as subsection (c), and by striking subsection (a) and inserting the
 following:
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- If for any taxable year a corporation has a net capital
 gain, then, in lieu of the tax imposed by section 11, 511, or 831(a)
 (whichever applies), there is hereby imposed a tax (if such tax is less
 than the tax imposed by such section) which shall consist of the sum of--
 `(1) a tax computed on the taxable income reduced by the net capital gain,
 at the same rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not
 been enacted, plus
 `(2) a tax of 15 percent of the net capital gain.
 `(b) TRANSITIONAL RULE- In the case of a taxable year which includes the
 date of the enactment of this paragraph, the amount of the net capital
 gain for purposes of subsection (a) shall not exceed the net capital gain
 determined by only taking into account gains and losses properly taken
 into account for the portion of the taxable year after such date.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Clause (iii) of section 852(b)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by striking
 `66 percent' and inserting `85 percent'.
 (2) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e) of such Code are each amended
 by striking `34 percent' and inserting `15 percent'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 sales and exchanges occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act
 in taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 4. REDUCTION OF MINIMUM TAX RATE ON CAPITAL GAINS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subparagraph (A) of section 55(b)(1) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tentative minimum tax) is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(A) the sum of--
 `(i) 15 percent of the lesser of--
 `(I) the net capital gain (determined with the adjustments provided in this
 part and (to the extent applicable) the limitations of sections 1(h)(2)
 and 1201(b)), or
 `(II) so much of the alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable
 year as exceeds the exemption amount, plus
 `(ii) 20 percent (24 percent in the case of a taxpayer other than a
 corporation) of the amount (if any) by which the excess referred to in
 clause (i)(II) exceeds the net capital gain (as so determined), reduced by'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 sales and exchanges occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act
 in taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 5. MINIMUM TAX ON FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--MINIMUM TAX ON CERTAIN FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS
`Sec. 59B. Minimum tax on certain foreign and foreign-owned corporations.
`SEC. 59B. MINIMUM TAX ON CERTAIN FOREIGN AND FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In the case of a corporation to which this section
 applies, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by
 this subtitle) a tax equal to the excess (if any) of--
 `(1) 34 percent of the product of--
 `(A) 5 percent, and
 `(B) the gross receipts of the taxpayer from the sale or leasing of property
 manufactured by the taxpayer or by any foreign person that is a related
 party of the taxpayer, over
 `(2) the aggregate tax imposed under sections 11, 55, and 1201 for such year.
 `(b) TAXPAYERS TO WHICH SECTION APPLIES- This section shall apply to a
 corporation for the taxable year if such corporation is--
 `(1) a domestic corporation which is 25-percent foreign-owned, or
 `(2) a foreign corporation engaged in a trade or business within the
 United States.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the term `25-percent
 foreign-owned', `foreign person', and `related party' have the respective
 meanings given such terms by section 6038A(c).'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for such subchapter A is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII. Minimum tax on certain foreign and foreign-owned corporations.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.