S 713 IS/HR 1505 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
H.R. 1505
To reform the Federal deposit insurance system, to improve the supervision
and regulation of federally insured depository institutions, to reform the
financial services industry as to the activities in which that industry may
engage, to consolidate the regulatory structure for depository institutions,
to recapitalize the Bank Insurance Fund and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 20, 1991
Mr. GONZALEZ (for himself and Mr. WYLIE) (both by request) introduced the
following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Banking,
Finance and Urban Affairs, Energy and Commerce, and Ways and Means
A BILL
To reform the Federal deposit insurance system, to improve the supervision
and regulation of federally insured depository institutions, to reform the
financial services industry as to the activities in which that industry may
engage, to consolidate the regulatory structure for depository institutions,
to recapitalize the Bank Insurance Fund and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Financial Institutions
 Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
TITLE I--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE REFORM
Subtitle A--Federal Deposit Insurance Reform
Sec. 101. Deposit and pass-through insurance.
Sec. 102. Deposit solicitation restricted.
Sec. 103. Least-cost resolution.
Sec. 104. Risk-based assessments.
Sec. 105. Restrictions on federally insured State bank activities.
Sec. 106. Examinations.
Sec. 107. Market value and other disclosure.
Sec. 108. Capital standards and interest rate risk.
Sec. 109. Requirements to expense deposit with National Credit Union Share
Insurance Fund.
Subtitle B--Reinsurance Demonstration Project
Sec. 116. Reinsurance demonstration project.
TITLE II--FINANCIAL SERVICES MODERNIZATION
Subtitle A--Financial Services Holding Companies
Sec. 201. Financial services holding companies.
Sec. 202. Acquisition of banks.
Sec. 203. Interests in nonbanking organizations.
Sec. 204. Diversified holding companies.
Sec. 205. Administration.
Sec. 206. Reservation of rights to States; pre-emption of anti-affiliation
provisions.
Sec. 207. Penalties.
Sec. 208. Conforming amendments to judicial review provision.
Sec. 209. Antitrust review.
Sec. 210. Technical amendment.
Sec. 211. Effective date.
Sec. 212. Application of the limitations on tying arrangements and insider
lending to financial services holding and diversified holding companies.
Sec. 213. Provisions exempting financial services holding companies from
the savings and loan holding company act.
Subtitle B--Financial Activities of National Banks
Sec. 221. Amendments to the Banking Act of 1933.
Sec. 222. Insurance activities of national banks.
Sec. 223. Amendments to sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act.
Sec. 224. Customer disclosure.
Sec. 225. Bankers' banks.
Subtitle C--Non-banking Activities of Foreign Banks in the United States
Sec. 231. Amendments to the International Banking Act of 1987.
Subtitle D--Amendments to the Securities Acts
Sec. 241. Amendments to the Securities Act of 1933.
Sec. 242. Amendments to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Sec. 243. Amendments to the Investment Company Act of 1940.
Sec. 244. Removal of the exclusion from the definition of investment adviser
for banks that advise investment companies.
Sec. 245. Treatment of bank common trust funds.
Sec. 246. Securities and Exchange Commission study of bank insurance pooled
investment vehicles.
Sec. 247. Effective date.
Subtitle E--Prompt Corrective Action
Sec. 251. Prompt corrective action.
Subtitle F--Nationwide Banking and Branching
Sec. 261. Nationwide banking.
Sec. 262. Interstate branching by national banks.
Sec. 263. Interstate consolidation or merger of national banks or State
banks with national banks.
Sec. 264. Interstate branching by State banks.
Sec. 265. Interstate branching and banking by foreign banks.
Sec. 266. Interstate acquisitions by savings and loan holding companies.
Sec. 267. Effective dates.
TITLE III--REGULATORY RESTRUCTURING
Subtitle A--Office of Depository Institutions Supervision
Sec. 301. Establishment of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision.
Sec. 302. Definitions.
Sec. 303. Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision.
Sec. 304. Authority of the Director.
Sec. 305. Personnel.
Sec. 306. Regulations and orders.
Sec. 307. Funding.
Subtitle B--Interim Provisions; Transfer of Functions, Personnel, and Property
Sec. 311. Interim provisions for the Office of Depository Institutions
Supervision.
Sec. 312. Office of Thrift Supervision abolished.
Sec. 313. Office of Comptroller of the Currency abolished.
Subtitle C--Regulatory and Supervisory Responsibility
Sec. 321. Transfer of powers and duties.
Sec. 322. Appropriate Federal banking agency.
Sec. 323. Examinations.
Sec. 324. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 325. Appointment of a receiver.
Subtitle D--Transfer of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Authority
Sec. 331. Amendments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Sec. 332. Amendments to the Federal Reserve Act.
Sec. 333. Savings provisions.
Sec. 334. Transfer of personnel and property.
Subtitle E--Litigation Authority
Sec. 341. Litigation authority.
Subtitle F--Reorganization of Boards of Directors
Sec. 351. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Board of Directors.
Sec. 352. National Credit Union Administration Board of Directors.
Subtitle G--Savings Provisions for the Transfer of Authority From the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to the Director
Sec. 361. Savings Provisions.
TITLE IV--BANK INSURANCE FUND RECAPITALIZATION
Subtitle A--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Borrowing
Sec. 401. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation borrowing.
Sec. 402. Amendments to the Federal Reserve Act.
Subtitle B--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Assessments
Sec. 411. Maximum aggregate assessment.
Sec. 412. Bank insurance fund borrowing assessment.
TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subtitle A--Payment System Risk Reduction
Sec. 501. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 502. Definitions.
Sec. 503. Bilateral netting.
Sec. 504. Clearing organization netting.
Sec. 505. Preemption.
Subtitle B--Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978
Sec. 511. Amendments to the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978.
Subtitle C--Reduction in Regulatory Burden
Sec. 521. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.
Sec. 522. Regulatory burden study.
Sec. 523. Fair housing reporting.
Subtitle D--Expedited Funds Availability
Sec. 531. Amendment to the Expedited Funds Availability Act.
Subtitle E--Final Settlement Payment Procedure
Sec. 541. Final Settlement Payment Procedure.
TITLE VI--TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Subtitle A--Severability; Transition References
Sec. 601. Severability.
Sec. 602. Transition references.
Subtitle B--Technical and Conforming Amendments
Sec. 611. Amendment to Acts codified in title 2, United States Code.
Sec. 612. Amendments to title 5, United States Code.
Sec. 613. Amendment to Act codified in title 7, United States Code.
Sec. 614. Amendments to title 11, United States Code.
Sec. 615. Amendments to Acts codified in title 12, United States Code.
Sec. 616. Amendments to Acts codified in title 15, United States Code.
Sec. 617. Amendment to Act codified in title 16, United States Code.
Sec. 618. Amendments to title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 619. Amendment to Act codified in title 22, United States Code.
Sec. 620. Amendment to Act codified in title 25, United States Code.
Sec. 621. Amendments to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Sec. 622. Amendments to title 28, United States Code.
Sec. 623. Amendments to title 31, United States Code.
Sec. 624. Amendments to Acts codified in title 42, United States Code.
Sec. 625. Amendments to title 44, United States Code.
Sec. 626. Amendment to title 46, United States Code.
Sec. 627. Amendments to Public Law 101-647.
Subtitle C--Repeal of Obsolete Provisions of Law
Sec. 631. Repeal of obsolete provisions of law.
Subtitle D--Effective Date
Sec. 641. Effective date.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act are:
 (1) To return deposit insurance coverage to its original purposes of
 protecting small depositors and promoting financial stability.
 (2) To strengthen the role of capital in insured depository institutions.
 (3) To enhance the supervision of insured depository institutions.
 (4) To restrict risky activities of insured depository institutions.
 (5) To permit nationwide banking and branching.
 (6) To authorize the establishment of financial services holding companies
 to permit companies owning depository institutions to engage in other
 financial activities with appropriate safeguards.
 (7) To promote consumer convenience by permitting banking organizations
 a broader range of financial products.
 (8) To simplify the regulatory structure for depository institutions by
 establishing a consolidated regulatory agency, the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision.
 (9) To recapitalize the Bank Insurance Fund.
TITLE I--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE REFORM
Subtitle A--Federal Deposit Insurance Reform
SEC. 101. DEPOSIT AND PASS-THROUGH INSURANCE.
 (a) Definitions Relating to Insured Deposits-
 (1) Section 3(m) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(m))
 is amended--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection,
 the term `insured deposit' means the net amount due to any depositor for
 deposits in an insured depository institution less any part thereof which
 is in excess of $100,000 as such net amount is determined in accordance
 with section 11(a) of this Act.'; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) The term `insured deposit' shall not include--
 `(A) funds obtained or accepted, directly or indirectly, by or through
 any deposit broker, as defined in subsection (y) of this section, for
 deposit into one or more deposit accounts; provided, however, that this
 subparagraph shall not apply to any insured depository institution for
 which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Resolution Trust
 Corporation has been appointed as conservator or the appropriate Federal
 banking agency has appointed a conservator and such conservator has
 determined that the acceptance of such funds--
 `(i) is not an unsafe or unsound practice; and
 `(ii) either--
 `(I) is necessary to enable the institution to meet the demands of its
 depositors or pay its obligations in the ordinary course of business; or
 `(II) is consistent with the conservator's fiduciary duty to minimize the
 losses of the institution; and
 `(B) A depository institution investment contract or similar contract
 entered into between an insured depository institution and an employee
 benefit plan as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1002), including a plan described in section 401(d)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 401(d)), which contract
 is nontransferable and provides for the deposit of funds over an extended
 period of time at a specified rate of interest whether or not the funds
 can be withdrawn without penalty prior to maturity.'.
 (2) Section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813) is
 amended by inserting after subsection (x) the following new subsection:
 `(y)(1) DEPOSIT BROKER- The term `deposit broker' means--
 `(A) any person engaged in the business of placing deposits, or facilitating
 the placement of deposits, of third parties with insured depository
 institutions or the business of placing deposits with insured depository
 institutions for the purpose of selling interests in those deposits to
 third parties; or
 `(B) an agent or trustee who establishes a deposit account to facilitate
 a business arrangement with an insured depository institution to use the
 proceeds of the account to fund a prearranged loan.
 `(2) EXCLUSIONS- The term `deposit broker' does not include--
 `(A) an insured depository institution with respect to funds placed with
 that depository institution or any other insured depository institution;
 `(B) an employee, as defined in section 29(b), of an insured depository
 institution, with respect to funds placed with the employing depository
 institution;
 `(C) a trust department of an insured depository institution, if the trust
 in question has not been established for the primary purpose of placing
 funds with insured depository institutions;
 `(D) the trustee of a pension or other employee benefit plan with respect
 to funds of the plan;
 `(E) a person acting as a plan administrator or an investment adviser in
 connection with a pension plan or other employee benefit plan provided
 that such person is performing managerial functions with respect to the plan;
 `(F) the trustee of a testamentary account;
 `(G) the trustee of an irrevocable trust (other than one described
 in paragraph (1)(B)), as long as the trust in question has not been
 established for the primary purpose of placing funds with insured depository
 institutions;
 `(H) a trustee or custodian of a pension or profit sharing plan qualified
 under section 401(d) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or
 `(I) an agent or nominee whose primary purpose is not the placement of
 funds with depository institutions.'
 (b) INSURANCE OF DEPOSITS-
 (1) INSURED AMOUNTS PAYABLE- Section 11(a)(1) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1)(A) The Corporation shall insure the deposits of all insured
 depository institutions as provided in this Act. The maximum amount of the
 insured deposit of any depositor shall be $100,000 per insured depository
 institution as determined in accordance with this Act.
 `(B) All deposits shall be registered under the taxpayer identification
 number or employer identification number of each depositor. For the purpose
 of aggregating and attributing deposits the Corporation may consider
 additional information contained in the records of the insured depository
 institution or made available by the depositor.
 `(C) For the purpose of determining the amount due to any depositor under
 subparagraph (A), the Corporation shall aggregate the amounts of all deposits
 in the insured depository institution which are maintained by a depositor or
 by others for the benefit of the depositor. The amount due to a depositor
 is the lesser of the amount calculated hereunder, or $100,000. For the
 purpose of aggregating amounts due to a depositor, the following shall apply:
 `(i) Deposits registered under the same taxpayer identification number
 or employer identification number of one depositor shall be attributed to
 that depositor.
 `(ii) Deposits registered under the taxpayer identification number
 or employer identification number of more than one depositor shall be
 attributed equally, unless otherwise specified in the deposit account
 records, among those depositors.
 `(iii) Deposits consisting of a revocable trust or similar account shall
 be attributed to the settlor or grantor of the deposit account.
 `(iv) Deposits maintained by an individual or entity (including an insured
 depository institution) acting as an agent, custodian, nominee, conservator
 or in a similar capacity on behalf of a principal (other than an insured
 depository institution) shall be attributed to such principal.
 `(v) Such other attribution to a depositor as the Board of Directors
 determines by regulation not to be unduly burdensome and costly to calculate;
 provided that the depositor has control over the deposit account and that
 such attribution would be consistent with the insurance purposes of this Act.
 `(D) For the purpose of determining the amount of insurance due under
 subparagraph (A), the Corporation shall not provide deposit insurance
 coverage on a pro-rata or pass-through basis to a participant in or
 beneficiary of an employee benefit plan, as defined in section 3(3) of
 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1002), including a
 plan described in section 401(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26
 U.S.C. 401), other than a participant in or beneficiary of an individual
 account plan, as defined in section 3(34) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1033) or a plan described in section 401(d) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 401(d)), under which participants
 and beneficiaries have the right to direct the investment of assets held
 in individual accounts maintained on their behalf.
 `(E) Notwithstanding subparagraph (C)(iv), the Corporation shall provide
 separate deposit insurance coverage on a pro-rata or pass-through basis if--
 `(i) the deposit account is maintained for a business purpose.
 `(ii) the principal or beneficiary does not have any control over where
 the funds are deposited;
 `(iii) the deposit account is not maintained for investment purposes; and
 `(iv) the deposit account is not maintained principally for the purpose
 of increasing insurance coverage.
 `(F) The Board of Directors may adopt such regulations as may be necessary
 to implement this subsection and subsection (i)(3) and to clarify the
 insurance coverage thereunder.'.
 (2) CERTAIN RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS- Section 11(a)(3) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3)(A) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(C) relating to the amount of deposit
 insurance available for the account of any one depositor, deposits in
 an insured depository institution made in connection with an individual
 retirement account, as described in section 408 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986, and an individual account plan defined in section 3(34)
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1033), or plan
 described in section 401(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, under which
 participants and beneficiaries have the right to direct the investment of
 assets held in individual accounts maintained on their behalf by the plan,
 shall be aggregated and insured in an amount not to exceed $100,000 per
 participant per insured depository institution.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the amount aggregated for insurance
 coverage hereunder shall consist of the present vested and ascertainable
 interest of each participant under the plan, excluding any remainder
 interest created by, or as a result of, the plan.'.
 (3) CERTAIN TRUST FUNDS- Section 7(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1817(i)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(i) INSURANCE OF TRUST FUNDS- Trust funds held on deposit by an insured
 depository institution as trustee pursuant to irrevocable trusts,
 established pursuant to statute or written trust agreements, shall be
 insured in an amount not to exceed $100,000 for each trust estate. When
 such trust funds are deposited by the fiduciary depository institution in
 another insured depository institution, such trust funds shall be similarly
 insured to the fiduciary depository institution according to the trust
 estates represented. The Board of Directors may adopt such regulations as
 may be necessary to clarify the insurance coverage under this subsection
 and to prescribe the manner of reporting and depositing such trust funds.'.
 (4) REGULATIONS- For the purpose of promulgating regulations, during
 the one-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Board of Directors shall review the capacities and rights in which
 deposit accounts are maintained and for which deposit insurance coverage
 is provided by the Corporation. At the end of such period, the Board of
 Directors may promulgate regulations, to be effective not earlier than two
 years after the date of enactment of this Act, that provide for separate
 insurance coverage for the different capacities and rights in which deposit
 accounts are maintained if a determination is made by the Board of Directors
 that such separate insurance coverage is consistent with the purpose of
 protecting small depositors and limiting the undue expansion of deposit
 insurance coverage and is consistent with the insurance provisions of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall be
 effective two years after the date of enactment of this Act. Such amendments
 shall not apply to any time deposit that was entered into before the date
 of enactment of this Act and that matures more than two years after the
 date of enactment of this Act. Such amendments shall apply, however, to
 any renewal or rollover of a time deposit that occurs more than two years
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) FEASIBILITY STUDY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, in conjunction
 with such consultants and technical experts as the Corporation determines to
 be appropriate, shall conduct a study of the feasibility of implementing a
 system of deposit insurance based on systemwide limitations on coverage for
 each depositor. The study shall include detailed, technical analysis of the
 costs and benefits associated with the least expensive way to implement the
 system. As part of the study, the Corporation shall investigate, review,
 and evaluate--
 (A) the data systems that would be required to implement the system;
 (B) the reporting burdens of such a system on individual depository
 institutions;
 (C) the interface with existing data processing systems maintained by
 depository institutions; and
 (D) the use of a selective audit of depositors for compliance after the
 resolution of a failed depository institution.
 (2) SURVEY- As part of the feasibility study, the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System shall conduct, in conjunction with other
 Federal departments and agencies as necessary, a survey of the ownership of
 deposits held by individuals including the dollar amount of deposits held,
 the type of deposit accounts held, and the type of financial institutions
 in which the deposit accounts are held. The results of the survey shall be
 provided to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation not later than one
 year from the date of enactment of this Act for analysis and inclusion in
 the feasibility study.
 (3) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than 18 months after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall
 submit to the Congress a report containing a detailed statement of findings
 made and conclusions drawn from the study conducted under this section,
 including such recommendations for administrative and legislative action
 as the Corporation determines to be appropriate.
 (e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 11(a)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1821(a)(2)) is amended by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Each officer, employee, or agent of the United States, of any State
 of the United States, of the District of Columbia, of any Territory of the
 United States, of Puerto Rico, of Guam, of American Samoa, of the Trust
 Territory of the Pacific Islands, of the Virgin Islands, of the Northern
 Mariana Islands, of any county, or any municipality, or of any political
 subdivision thereof, herein called `public unit', having official custody
 of public funds and lawfully depositing the same in an insured depository
 institution shall, for the purpose of determining the amount of insured
 deposits, be deemed a depositor in such custodial capacity separate and
 distinct from any other officer, employee, or agent of the same or any
 public unit having official custody of public funds and lawfully depositing
 the same in an insured depository institution in a custodial capacity.'.
 (2) Section 12(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1822(c))
 is amended by inserting `as provided in section 1821(a)(1)(B) or' after
 `Except'.
SEC. 102. DEPOSIT SOLICITATION RESTRICTED.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 29 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1831f) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 29. DEPOSIT SOLICITATION RESTRICTED.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- No insured depository institution which does not meet
 the applicable minimum capital requirements, or employee of any such
 institution, shall engage, directly or indirectly, in the solicitation of
 deposits by offering rates of interest (with respect to such deposits)
 which are significantly higher than the prevailing rates of interest
 on deposits offered by other insured depository institutions in such
 institution's normal market areas.
 `(b) EMPLOYEE- For purposes of this subsection, the term `employee' means
 any employee--
 `(1) who is employed on a full-time or part-time basis by the insured
 depository institution;
 `(2) whose compensation is primarily in the form of a salary;
 `(3) who does not share such employee's compensation with a deposit
 broker; and
 `(4) whose office space or place of business is used exclusively for
 the benefit of the insured depository institution which employs such
 individual.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 103. LEAST-COST RESOLUTION.
 (a) Section 13(c)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1823(c)(4)) is amended--
 (1) by amending subparagraph (A) to read as follows:
 `(A)(i) With respect to any insured depository institution, the Corporation
 shall provide assistance or make payments only in such amounts as are
 necessary to satisfy the Corporation's obligations to that institution's
 insured depositors at the least cost to the affected deposit insurance
 fund whether by insured deposit payout, insured deposit transfer, or such
 other least-cost method as determined by the Corporation in accordance
 with subparagraph (B).
 `(ii) Notwithstanding clause (i), the Corporation shall provide assistance or
 make payments to satisfy, in whole or in part, the institution's liability
 to its uninsured depositors if such assistance or payments would constitute
 the least-cost method of resolving the depository institution.';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (D) and inserting
 after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraphs:
 `(B) In making determinations under subparagraph (A), the Corporation shall--
 `(i) evaluate alternatives on a present value basis, using a realistic
 discount rate; document that evaluation; retain that documentation for
 not less than five years; and treat the Federal tax revenues that the
 Government would forgo as the result of a proposed transaction, to the
 extent reasonably ascertainable, as if they were revenues forgone by the
 affected deposit insurance fund, and
 `(ii) determine and compare the costs of assistance or liquidation as
 of the date on which the Corporation makes the determination to provide
 assistance under this Act,
except that the Corporation shall not consider the impact of such a transaction
on the financial system.
 `(C) Upon a joint determination by the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System and the Secretary of the Treasury that the Corporation
 would be unable to resolve an insured depository institution in accordance
 with subparagraph (A) without causing a severe adverse impact upon the
 financial system, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 and the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Corporation
 and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall direct the
 Corporation to provide assistance or make payments to an insured depository
 institution to satisfy the institution's liability to its depositors or
 take such other action as determined to be necessary to lessen the risk
 posed by such depository institution.'.
 (b) Section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (i)(3)(A), by striking `The Corporation may' and inserting
 instead `Subject to section 13(c)(4) of this Act, the Corporation may';
 (2) in subsection (m)(1), by striking `As soon as possible' and inserting
 instead `Subject to section 13(c)(4) of this Act, as soon as possible'; and
 (3) in subsection (n)(1)(A), by striking `When 1 or more' and inserting
 instead `Subject to section 13(c)(4) of this Act, when 1 or more'.
 (c) Section 13(c) or the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1823(c))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking `The Corporation is authorized in its sole discretion
 and' and inserting instead `Subject to paragraph (4), the Corporation
 is authorized';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by inserting `or' after the semicolon;
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking `; or' and inserting instead a
 period; and
 (D) by striking subparagraph (C);
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking `In order to' and inserting instead
 `Subject to paragraph (4), in order to';
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(i), by inserting `or' after the semicolon;
 (C) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking `; or' and inserting instead a
 period; and
 (D) by striking subparagraph (B)(iii).
 (d) Section 13(i)(7) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1823(i)(7)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(7) The assistance provided to a qualified depository institution pursuant
 to this subsection must result in the least-cost to the affected deposit
 insurance fund as provided in subsection (C)(4).'.
 (e) Section 13(k)(1)(A)(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1823(k)(1)(A)(i)) is amended by striking `determining that severe'
 and all that follows through `Corporation' the second time it appears
 and inserting instead `a determination made in accordance with subsection
 (c)(4)(C)(i), the Corporation'.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall become
 effective three years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 104. RISK-BASED ASSESSMENTS.
 (a) ASSESSMENT RATES-
 (1) Section 7(b)(1)(C)(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1817(b)(1)(C)(i)) is amended by striking `the greater of 0.15
 percent or'.
 (2) Section 7(b)(1)(D)(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1817(b)(1)(D)(i)) is amended by striking `the greater of 0.15
 percent or'.
 (b) RISK-BASED ASSESSMENTS- Section 7(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1817(b)) is amended by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph
 (10), and by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new paragraph (9):
 `(9) RISK-BASED ASSESSMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (1), the Board of Directors shall,
 by regulation, establish a risk-based assessment system for insured
 depository institutions.
 `(B) RISK-BASED ASSESSMENT SYSTEM DEFINED- For purposes of this paragraph,
 the term `risk-based assessment system' means a system relating insured
 depository institutions' assessment rates to the risk those institutions
 pose to the affected deposit insurance fund.
 `(C) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM- In establishing
 an assessment system under subparagraph (A), assessment rates shall be
 established based upon categories of risk. In determining the categories
 of risk, the Board of Directors--
 `(i) shall use the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets for the insured
 depository institutions; and
 `(ii) may use the following criteria--
 `(I) the activities conducted by insured depository institutions;
 `(II) the assets and liabilities of insured depository institutions; and
 `(III) such circumstances, conditions, activities or other risk factors that
 the Board of Directors determines may appropriately be taken into account.'.
 (c) PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS- Not later than eighteen months after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation shall promulgate the regulations required by section
 7(b)(9) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Such regulations shall become
 effective not later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 105. RESTRICTIONS ON FEDERALLY INSURED STATE BANK ACTIVITIES.
 (a) The Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is amended
 by inserting after section 23 the following new section:
`SEC. 24. ACTIVITIES OF FEDERALLY INSURED STATE BANKS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Beginning one year after the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, an insured
 State bank may not engage as principal in any type of activity that is
 not permissible for a national bank unless--
 `(1) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has determined that the
 activity would pose no significant risk to the affected deposit insurance
 fund; and
 `(2) the State bank is, and continues to be, in compliance with minimum
 capital standards prescribed by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(b) EQUITY INVESTMENTS BY STATE BANKS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State bank may not directly or indirectly acquire
 or retain any equity investment of a type that is not permissible for a
 national bank.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN SUBSIDIARIES- Paragraph (1) shall not prohibit a
 State bank from acquiring or retaining an equity investment in a subsidiary
 of which the State bank is a majority owner.
 `(3) TRANSITION RULE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall require
 any State bank to divest any equity investment the retention of which is
 not permissible under this subsection as quickly as can be prudently done,
 and in any event not later than five years from the date of enactment of
 the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF NONCOMPLIANCE DURING DIVESTMENT- With respect to any
 equity investment held by any State bank on the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, the bank shall
 be deemed not to be in violation of the prohibition in this subsection on
 retaining such investment so long as the bank complies with the applicable
 requirements established by the Corporation for divesting such investments.
 `(c) SUBSIDIARIES OF FEDERALLY INSURED STATE BANKS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Beginning one year after the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, a subsidiary
 of an insured State bank may not engage as principal in any type of activity
 that is not permissible for a subsidiary of a national bank unless--
 `(A) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has determined that the
 activity would pose no significant risk to the affected deposit insurance
 fund; and
 `(B) the bank is, and continues to be, in compliance with minimum capital
 standards prescribed by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), no subsidiary of an insured State bank
 may engage in securities or insurance underwriting except to the extent
 such activities are permissible for national banks.
 `(d) DETERMINATIONS- The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall make
 determinations under this section by regulation and order.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) ACTIVITY DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term `activity'
 includes acquiring or retaining any investment.
 `(2) STATE BANK DEFINED- The term `State bank' has the same meaning as
 provided in section 3(a)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1813(a)(2)).
 `(f) OTHER AUTHORITY NOT AFFECTED- This section shall not be construed as
 limiting the authority of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System, the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision, or any State
 authority to impose more stringent restrictions.'.
 (b) Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 330) is amended by
 inserting `the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is authorized
 to restrict the activities of State banks and their subsidiaries consistent
 with section 24 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act: Provided further,'
 after `Provided, however,'.
SEC. 106. EXAMINATIONS.
 (a) FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM-
 (1) Section 11(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 248(a)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and by inserting
 after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 `(2) To conduct annual on-site examinations of each bank, and each branch
 of a foreign bank for which the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System is the appropriate Federal banking agency, except that banks and
 branches that have total assets of less than $1,000,000,000 as of December
 31 of the year preceding an examination and that are in compliance with
 required capital standards shall be examined on-site at least once during
 the following 18-month period.'; and
 (B) in paragraph (3) (as redesignated), by striking clauses (i) through
 (iv) and inserting instead: `appropriate Federal banking agency, the
 National Credit Union Administration Board in the case of insured credit
 unions, and such State officer or agency as the Board may designate in
 the case of State banks, savings associations and credit unions that are
 not federally insured.'.
 (2) Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 338) is amended in
 the twenty-third paragraph--
 (A) by striking the first sentence and inserting instead: `In connection
 with examinations required by section 11(a)(2) of this Act, for which
 the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is the appropriate
 Federal banking agency, examiners selected or approved by the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall examine the affairs of any
 affiliate, other than those examined pursuant to the Financial Services
 Holding Company Act of 1991, in the same manner and to the same extent
 as affiliates are examined by the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision pursuant to section 323 (d) and (g)(2) of the
 Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991.';
 (B) in the second sentence by--
 (i) striking `of any State member bank'; and
 (ii) striking `such bank' the first time it appears and inserting instead
 `the bank affiliated with such affiliate'; and
 (C) in the third sentence, by striking `State member'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 107. MARKET VALUE AND OTHER DISCLOSURE.
 (a) MARKET VALUE DISCLOSURE- Not later than one year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the appropriate Federal banking agencies and the
 Securities and Exchange Commission, jointly, shall develop a method for
 banks to provide for the supplemental disclosure of the fair market value
 of assets and liabilities, to the extent feasible and practicable, in
 financial statements and reports required to be filed with the appropriate
 Federal banking agencies and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (b) AUDIT REPORTS- Section 7(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1817(a)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (8) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(9) INDEPENDENT AUDITOR REPORTS-
 `(A) Each insured bank shall provide to the appropriate Federal banking
 agency copies of audit reports and any qualifications to such reports,
 management letters and any other reports within 15 days of receipt from
 the bank's independent auditors.
 `(B) Each insured bank shall provide written notification to the appropriate
 Federal banking agency of the resignation or dismissal of its independent
 auditor and the engagement of a new independent auditor including a
 statement of the reasons for such change within 15 calendar days of the
 occurrence of the event.'.
SEC. 108. CAPITAL STANDARDS AND INTEREST RATE RISK.
 The appropriate Federal banking agencies shall develop a system to monitor
 interest rate risk and to adjust risk-based capital standards to reflect
 interest rate risk. In order to implement this system, the appropriate
 Federal banking agencies shall promulgate regulations within one year
 after the date of enactment of this Act, to be effective no later than
 two years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 109. REQUIREMENTS TO EXPENSE DEPOSIT WITH NATIONAL CREDIT UNION SHARE
INSURANCE FUND.
 (a) Section 201(b)(8) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1781(b)(8))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(8) to make an initial capitalization payment to the Fund in an amount,
 as determined by the Board, equaling the current equity ratio of the
 Fund times the total insurable shares of the applicant credit union, and
 to pay the annual capitalization adjustment and any premiums imposed by
 the Board pursuant to this Act: Provided, That the initial capitalization
 payment shall be expensed as prescribed by the Board, over a period not to
 exceed twelve years, in an amount of not less than one-twelfth each year:
 Provided, however, That amounts expensed in excess of one-twelfth each
 year shall be credited to amounts due in future years; and'.
 (b) Section 202 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1782) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by striking all that appears after `preceding
 insurance year' and inserting instead `, the amount of its capitalization
 adjustment due to the Fund for that year, the amount of its insurance
 premium, if any, due for that year, and such other information as the
 Board shall prescribe.'; and
 (2) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 `(c)(1) CAPITALIZATION ADJUSTMENT- Each insured credit union shall pay to the
 National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, in accordance with procedures
 established by the Board, a capitalization adjustment equalling 1 percent
 of any increase in the credit union's insured shares over the course of the
 previous insurance year. Any insured credit union experiencing a decline
 in its insured shares over the course of the previous insurance year shall
 receive a refund in an amount equaling 1 percent of the decline.
 `(2) PREMIUM- In addition to the capitalization adjustment specified in
 paragraph (1), each insured credit union shall pay an annual insurance
 premium, in accordance with procedures established by the Board, in such
 amount as shall be necessary to maintain Fund equity at its minimum level
 of 1.25 percent: Provided, That the premium shall be determined as the same
 percentage of insured shares for all insured credit unions: Provided further,
 That in any year in which the Fund's equity level experiences a substantial
 decline, as determined by the Board, to a level below 1.25 percent, the
 Board shall have the discretion to allow the replenishment of the Fund to
 its minimum level of 1.25 percent over a period longer than one year.
 `(3) REBATE- In the event Fund equity exceeds its normal operating level
 and any loans to the Fund from the Federal Government and the interest
 thereon have been repaid at the end of a given insurance year, the Board
 shall provide a rebate for that insurance year to all insured credit
 unions in an amount sufficient to reduce the equity in the Fund to its
 normal operating level: Provided, That the rebate shall be determined as
 the same percentage of insured shares for all insured credit unions.';
 (3) in subsections (d), (e), and (f), by striking `deposit' each time it
 appears and inserting instead `capitalization payment or adjustment';
 (4) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by striking `deposits' and inserting instead `capitalization payment
 and adjustments';
 (B) by striking `payment of any deposit or adjustment thereof' and inserting
 instead `making of any capitalization payment or adjustment'; and
 (C) by striking `deposit' the last time it appears and inserting instead
 `capitalization payment';
 (5) in subsection (h), by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) the term `normal operating level', when applied to the Fund, means
 an amount of Fund equity, based on market value accounting, equal to 1.3
 percent of the aggregate amount of insured shares in all insured credit
 unions, or such other level, not less than 1.25 percent and not more than
 1.5 percent, as the Board shall establish; and'; and
 (6) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i) Over a twelve-year transition period beginning one year after the
 date of enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice
 Act of 1991, insured credit unions shall expense the one percent deposit
 maintained with the Board pursuant to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984
 (Public Law 98-369); Provided, That the deposit, as calculated on the date
 of enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act
 of 1991, shall be expensed, as prescribed by the Board, over a period not
 to exceed twelve years, in an amount of not less than one-twelfth each
 year: Provided, however, That amounts expensed in excess of one-twelfth
 each year shall be credited to amounts due in future years.'.
 (c) Section 203(b) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1783(b))
 is amended by striking `deposits' and inserting instead `capitalization
 payments or adjustments'.
Subtitle C--Reinsurance Demonstration Project
SEC. 116. REINSURANCE DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
 (a) DEMONSTRATION PROJECT-
 (1) PURPOSE- The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, in consultation with
 the Secretary of the Treasury, shall establish a reinsurance demonstration
 project to determine the feasibility of developing a private reinsurance
 system.
 (2) PROJECT DEFINED- The demonstration project is to consist of a sample of
 private reinsurers and insured depository institutions that would simulate
 the activities required for actual reinsurance. These activities should
 include but are not limited to: establishing the pricing structure for
 risk-based premiums, formulating insurance contracts, and identifying and
 obtaining the information necessary to evaluate and monitor the risks in
 the subject insured depository institutions. If deemed appropriate by the
 Corporation, the project may engage in actual reinsurance transactions.
 (3) COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED- There is hereby established a Reinsurance
 Demonstration Project Committee comprised of the Chairperson of the
 Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and a
 representative of each of the private reinsurers and insured depository
 institutions participating in the demonstration project. The committee
 shall analyze and review the results of the demonstration project and
 report to Congress as required by subsection (b).
 (b) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall submit to the
 Congress a report on the results of the demonstration project required
 by subsection (a). The report shall include the conclusions reached
 regarding the feasibility of a private reinsurance system; whether public
 policy goals can be satisfied by such a system; and any recommendations
 for administrative and legislative action that may be necessary for the
 establishment of such a system. The report also shall include a separate
 statement of the views of the private participants regarding whether
 private reinsurers are sufficiently interested, and have the capacity to
 participate, in such a system.
TITLE II--FINANCIAL SERVICES MODERNIZATION
Subtitle A--Financial Services Holding Companies
SEC. 201. FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) DEFINITIONS MODIFIED- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12
 U.S.C. 1841) is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a)(1) to read as follows:
 `(a)(1)(A) The term `financial services holding company' means any company
 (other than a diversified holding company) which has control over any bank.
 `(B) The term `diversified holding company' means any company (other than
 a bank or a foreign bank) which has control over a bank only through a
 financial services holding company and which engages in activities or
 controls any company engaged in activities that are not permissible for
 a financial services holding company or any subsidiary thereof under
 this Act.';
 (2) in the second sentence of subsection (a)(5)(A), by inserting a period
 after `thereto' and striking the balance of the sentence;
 (3) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
 `(f)(1) The term `appropriate Federal banking agency' shall have the same
 meaning as set forth in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)); and
 `(2) the term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System.';
 (4) by inserting after subsection (m) the following new subsections:
 `(n) SECURITIES AFFILIATE- The term `securities affiliate' means any company
 that is controlled by a financial services holding company and that is
 engaged in the United States in activities pursuant to section 4(c)(15).
 `(o) INSURANCE AFFILIATE- The term `insurance affiliate' means any company
 that is controlled by a financial services holding company and that is
 engaged in the United States in activities pursuant to section 4(c)(16).
 `(p) FOREIGN BANK- The term `foreign bank' has the same meaning as in
 section 1(b)(7) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(7)).
 `(q) INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- The term `insured depository
 institution' means any insured bank as defined in section 3(h) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(h)) and any insured institution.
 `(r) ZONE 1 AND ZONE 2- The terms `Zone 1' and `Zone 2' have the same
 meaning as in section 35 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(s) ZONE 1 FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY- The term `Zone 1 financial
 services holding company' means any financial services holding company
 that qualifies as a Zone 1 financial services holding company pursuant to
 section 35(d)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(t) FUNCTIONAL REGULATOR- The term `functional regulator' means a Federal
 or State agency that has supervisory authority concerning the activities of
 a company (other than an insured depository institution) that are of concern
 to the appropriate Federal banking agency for purposes of section 6(c)(2).'.
 `(u) NEW FINANCIAL ACTIVITY- The term `new financial activity' means any
 activity authorized pursuant to sections 4(c)(8), 4(c)(15), or 4(c)(16)
 other than any activity that, prior to the date of enactment of the Financial
 Services Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, the Board had determined,
 by any order or regulation that continued to be in effect on December 31,
 1992, to be closely related to banking and a proper incident thereto.
 `(v) QUALIFIED FINANCIAL ACTIVITY- The term `qualified financial activity'
 means any activity authorized pursuant to sections 4(c)(8), 4(c)(15),
 or 4(c)(16).
 `(w) FINANCIAL AFFILIATE- The term `financial affiliate' means any
 company that is controlled by a financial services holding company that
 is engaged in the United States in qualified financial activities and any
 other company that is controlled by a diversified holding company that
 is engaged in activities authorized to be engaged in by a subsidiary of a
 financial services holding company pursuant to sections 4(c)(8), 4(c)(15),
 or 4(c)(16).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1841), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2)(J), by striking `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation insurance to Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance'
 and inserting instead `Savings Association Insurance Fund to Bank Insurance
 Fund';
 (2) in subsection (h)(5), by striking `bank' the first time it appears
 and inserting `insured depository institution';
 (3) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears except in
 subsection (b) and inserting instead--
 (A) in subsections (a)(5)(A), (a)(5)(B), (a)(5)(C), (a)(5)(D), (d),
 and (g)(1), `financial services holding company and diversified holding
 company'; and
 (B) in all other instances, `financial services holding company'; and
 (4) by striking `Board' wherever it appears except in subsection (f)
 and inserting instead `appropriate Federal banking agency'.
SEC. 202. ACQUISITION OF BANKS.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION PROCESS- Section 3 of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows:
 `(3) for any financial services holding company to acquire ownership or
 control of any voting shares of any insured depository institution or
 financial services holding company, for any diversified holding company
 to acquire ownership or control of any voting shares of any financial
 services holding company, or for a company to acquire ownership or control
 of a diversified holding company if, after such acquisition, such company
 will own or control more than 5 per centum of the voting shares of such
 institution or company;';
 (B) by inserting before `Notwithstanding the foregoing' the following
 new sentence: `It shall be unlawful for any insured depository institution
 (other than a foreign bank operating an insured branch as defined in section
 3(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(s)) to become
 a financial services holding company or a diversified holding company.';
 (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `Notwithstanding
 paragraph (1), any company that was a bank holding company under the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956 on December 31, 1992, shall be a financial
 services holding company as of January 1, 1993 without further approval
 by the appropriate Federal banking agency.'; and
 (D)(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `or' at the end thereof;
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking the first period and inserting instead
 `; or'; and
 (iii) by inserting after `; or', as added by clause (ii), the following:
 `(C) the acquisition by a company of control of a bank in a reorganization
 in which a person or group of persons exchange their shares of the bank for
 shares of a newly formed financial services holding company and receive after
 the reorganization substantially the same proportional share interest in the
 holding company as they held in the bank except for changes in shareholders'
 interests resulting from the exercise of dissenting shareholders' rights
 under State or Federal law if--
 `(i) immediately following the acquisition, the bank meets the requirements
 for Zone 1 or Zone 2;
 `(ii) the holding company does not engage in any activities other than those
 of managing and controlling banks as a result of the reorganization; and
 `(iii) the company provides 30 days prior notification to the appropriate
 Federal banking agency.';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by amending the first sentence to read as follows: `Upon receiving
 from a company any application for approval under this section to acquire
 any interest in an insured depository institution, the appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall give notice to the other appropriate Federal banking
 agency, if any, for such bank and, if the institution is State-chartered,
 to the appropriate supervisory authority of the interested State in order
 to provide for the submission of the views and recommendations of the other
 appropriate Federal banking agency and the State supervisory authority,
 as appropriate.';
 (B) by striking the term `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears
 and inserting instead `the other appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (C) in the third sentence, by striking `disapproves' and inserting instead
 `recommends disapproval of';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking `, or' at the end of paragraph (1) and inserting instead
 a semicolon;
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting instead
 `; or'; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) any acquisition or merger or consolidation if the appropriate Federal
 banking agency determines that the insured depository institution to be
 acquired or any other insured depository institution controlled by the
 company involved in the proposal is engaging in any unsafe and unsound
 practice or, following the transaction, will be in an unsafe and unsound
 condition.';
 (4)(A) by redesignating subsections (d) through (g) as subsections (f)
 through (i), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsections:
 `(d) EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL BANKS BY ZONE 1
 `FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES-
 `(1) PROCEDURES-
 `(A) Upon receiving from a Zone 1 financial services holding company
 a complete application for approval under this section to acquire an
 insured depository institution, the appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall notify the other appropriate Federal banking agency, if any, and
 the appropriate supervisory authority of an interested State as provided
 for in subsection (b). Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), the views and
 recommendations of the other appropriate Federal banking agency and the
 appropriate supervisory authority of an interested State, as appropriate,
 shall be submitted within 21 days of the date on which notice is given to
 them by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(B) The appropriate Federal banking agency must approve or disapprove
 the application within 45 days after the date of receipt of such application.
 `(C) In the event of the failure of the appropriate Federal banking agency
 to act on any such application within 45 days after it has been received,
 the application shall be deemed to have been approved.
 `(D) If the appropriate Federal banking agency has found that an emergency
 exists requiring expeditious action, or that it must act immediately to
 prevent probable failure, or if the appropriate Federal banking agency
 receives a certification described in section 13(f)(8)(D) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1823(f)(8)(D)) from the other appropriate
 Federal banking agency or State chartering authority that a bank is in
 danger of closing, the appropriate Federal banking agency may waive or
 shorten the 45-day notice period with respect to any application for an
 acquisition received pursuant to this subsection.
 `(2) EXTENSION OF TIME FOR NOTICE AND HEARING- The 45-day period may be
 extended if the other appropriate Federal banking agency or the State
 supervisory authority recommends disapproval of an application subject
 to subparagraph (1) in writing based on its consideration of the factors
 listed in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (c). In the event
 that the other appropriate Federal banking agency or the State Supervisory
 authority recommends disapproval, the appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall follow the review period and procedures for notice and hearing
 contained in subsection (b)(1).
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR DISAPPROVAL- An application under this subsection shall
 be disapproved only--
 `(A) pursuant to subsections (c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(3);
 `(B) if the financial services holding company does not qualify as, or
 would not continue to qualify as, a Zone 1 financial services holding
 company after consummation of the transaction; or
 `(C) if the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the
 transaction would not be consistent with the convenience and needs of the
 community to be served.
 `(e) ACQUISITION INVOLVING DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- The appropriate
 Federal banking agency shall not permit any acquisition or merger or
 consolidation of a financial services holding company involving a diversified
 holding company or a company that seeks to become a diversified holding
 company unless any financial services holding company controlled by the
 diversified holding company is and remains in Zone 1, and any financial
 services holding company to be acquired, will be, upon consummation of the
 transaction, a Zone 1 financial services holding company. An application
 involving a proposal that meets the requirement of this subsection shall be
 reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards under subsection
 (d).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1842), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended--
 (1) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears (except in the
 last sentence of subsection (a) as added by this section or as it appears
 in the reference to the `Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970')
 and inserting instead--
 (A) in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(5), and (d), and in
 provision (a)(A), `financial services holding company or diversified
 holding company'; and
 (B) in all other instances, `financial services holding company';
 (2)(A) by striking `Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (B) in subsection (a), by striking `Board's judgment' and inserting instead
 `judgment of the appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (3)(A) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `causes a bank' and inserting
 instead `causes an insured depository institution';
 (B) in subsection (a)(4)--
 (i) by striking `other than a bank' and inserting instead `other than an
 insured depository institution'; and
 (ii) by striking `assets of a bank' and inserting instead `assets of an
 insured depository institution';
 (C) in provision (a)(A), by striking `acquired by a bank' and inserting
 instead `acquired by an insured depository institution'; and
 (D) in provision (a)(B), by striking `in a bank' and inserting instead
 `in an insured depository institution'.
SEC. 203. INTERESTS IN NONBANKING ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) INTERESTS IN NONBANKING ORGANIZATIONS- Section 4 of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by deleting the last two sentences;
 (2) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (A) by striking `, or in the case of a company which has been' and all that
 follows through `December 31, 1980' and inserting instead `or in the case
 of a company that becomes a financial services holding company as a result
 of enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act
 of 1991, on January 1, 1993';
 (B) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking `of banking or'; and
 (ii) by inserting at the end thereof the following: `, in the case of a
 foreign bank, the business of banking, where otherwise permitted through
 a branch or agency, as those terms are defined in section 1(b) of the
 International Banking Act of 1987 (12 U.S.C. 3101);';
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking `those permitted under' and all that
 follows through `under such paragraph' and inserting instead the following:
 `those permitted under subsection (c)(8)(A)(i) subject to all the conditions
 specified in such subsection or in any order or regulation issued by the
 appropriate Federal banking agency under such subsection; and
 `(C) those permitted under subsection (c)(16) provided that the financial
 services holding company is a company exclusively owned in a mutual form by
 holders of contracts of insurance issued by such financial services holding
 company, or is a company organized as a reciprocal inter-insurance exchange';
 (D) in the second sentence, by inserting a period after `practices' and
 striking the remainder of the sentence; and
 (E) by deleting the last sentence.
(3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (8)--
 (i) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) in each of subparagraphs (C),
 (D), and (E) as subclauses (I) and (II); respectively;
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) through (G) as clauses (ii) through
 (vii), respectively;
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraph (A) as subparagraph (B)(i);
 (iv) in subparagraph (B)(vii) (as redesignated), by striking `subparagraph
 (A), (B), or (C)' and inserting instead `clauses (i), (ii), or (iii)';
 (v) by striking `shares of any company' and all that follows through
 `'provide' and inserting instead the following:
 `(A) shares of any company the activities of which the appropriate Federal
 banking agency, after due notice and opportunity for comment, has determined
 (by order or regulation) with the concurrence of the other appropriate
 Federal banking agency to be of a financial nature.
 `(i) Any activity that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 has determined (by order or regulation that is effective on December 31,
 1992) to be closely related to banking and a proper incident thereto shall
 be deemed to be of a financial nature for purposes of this paragraph.
 `(ii) Any company that was a bank holding company on December 31,
 1992 and that, on January 1, 1993, becomes a financial services holding
 company as a result of the enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety
 and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, may without further approval under this
 paragraph retain shares of any company engaged in any activity described in
 clause (i) and continue to engage in any activity described in clause (i),
 provided that such company lawfully acquired the company or commenced the
 activity pursuant to approval that was granted by the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System prior to January 1, 1993, and was still in
 effect on December 31, 1992.
 `(iii) Notwithstanding clause (ii), no financial services holding company
 may pursuant to this paragraph engage in, or acquire or retain the shares
 of any company engaged in, underwriting and dealing in securities that a
 national bank may not underwrite or deal in under section 5136 of the Revised
 Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24 (Seventh)), except that a financial services holding
 company that received approval of the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System to underwrite and deal in such securities may continue
 to do so pursuant to this section subject to all the same conditions and
 limitations as required by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System on the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and
 Consumer Choice Act of 1991 for a period of time not to exceed three years
 from the date of enactment of that Act.
 `(iv) Real estate investment, management, or development and the purchase
 and sale of real estate as principal or broker shall not be deemed to be
 of a financial nature except to the extent authorized pursuant to clause (i).
 `(v) Activities described in paragraph (16) shall not be deemed to be of
 a financial nature, except providing';
 (vi) by striking `except' as it appears immediately before subparagraph (B)
 (as redesignated); and
 (vii) by striking the last five sentences;
 (B) in paragraph (13), by striking `or' at the end thereof;
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (14) the following new paragraphs:
 `(15)(A) shares of any company engaged in any of the following activities
 subject to the provisions of subsection (1):
 `(i) underwriting, distributing, or dealing in securities;
 `(ii) organizing, sponsoring, controlling, or distributing the shares of
 any registered investment company pursuant to the Investment Company Act
 of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.);
 `(iii) securities brokerage, private placement, or investment advisory
 activities; or
 `(iv) other securities activities permitted for brokers or dealers registered
 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.) or for
 investment advisers registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940
 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.).
 `(B) ACTIVITIES PERMITTED FOR BANK AFFILIATES- A financial services holding
 company that acquires control of a securities affiliate under this paragraph
 shall not, after one year from the date of that acquisition, permit a bank
 or an insured depository institution that it controls to engage, directly
 or indirectly, in the United States in activities described in subparagraph
 (A) except to the extent that these activities are specifically authorized
 by statute for a national bank (other than underwriting and dealing in
 obligations issued by a State or political subdivision as permitted by law)
 or by a regulation or order promulgated by the Office of the Comptroller of
 the Currency pursuant to that statute before the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutional Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991: Provided,
 however, That a financial services holding company acquiring control of a
 securities affiliate under this paragraph shall not permit, after one year
 from the date of that acquisition, an insured depository institution it
 controls to underwrite or deal in obligations issued by a State of political
 subdivision and shall permit these activities to be conducted only by a
 securities affiliate and not by an affiliate pursuant to subsection (c)(15).
 `(C) For purposes of this paragraph, a branch or agency of a foreign
 bank or a commercial lending company controlled by a foreign bank (as
 the terms `agency', `branch', `commercial lending company', and `foreign
 bank' are defined in section 1 of the International Banking Act of 1978
 (12 U.S.C. 3101)), shall be considered a bank.
 `(16)(A) Shares of any company that provides insurance as principal, agent,
 or broker subject to the provisions of subsection (l).
 `(B) A financial services holding company that acquires control of an
 insurance affiliate may not permit an insured depository institution it
 controls or a subsidiary thereof to provide insurance--
 `(i) as principal; or
 `(ii) as agent or broker, including insurance in which an affiliate acts
 as principal, agent or broker, unless the laws of the State in which the
 bank is located permit banks chartered by the State to provide insurance
 as agent or broker in that State and is permitted for national banks.
 `(C) Nothing in subparagraph (B) shall be construed to limit the ability
 of a financial services holding company to sell insurance pursuant to
 subsection (8).
 `(D) For purposes of this paragraph, a branch or agency of a foreign bank
 (as the terms `branch' and `agency' are defined in section 1(b) of the
 International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101)) shall be considered
 an insured depository institution.'; and
 (D) in subsection (c), by striking the last two sentences; and
 (4) by striking subsection (i) and inserting instead the following new
 subsections:
 `(i) NOTICE PROCEDURES FOR NONBANKING ACTIVITIES-
 `(1) GENERAL NOTICE PROCEDURE-
 `(A) NOTICE REQUIREMENT- No financial services holding company may engage
 in activities or acquire or retain ownership or control of the shares of
 a company engaged in qualified financial activities without providing the
 appropriate Federal banking agency with at least 45 days prior written
 notice of the proposed transaction or expansion.
 `(B) CONTENTS OF NOTICE- The notice submitted to the appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall contain such information as the appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall prescribe by regulation or by specific request in
 connection with a particular notice. The appropriate Federal banking agency
 may only require such information as may be relevant to the nature and scope
 of the proposed transaction and to the appropriate Federal banking agency's
 evaluation of the criteria provided for in paragraph (2) and subsection
 (j), as appropriate.
 `(C) PROCEDURE FOR AGENCY ACTION- A notice filed under this subsection shall
 be deemed to be approved by the appropriate Federal banking agency unless,
 prior to the expiration of 45 days from the receipt of a complete notice,
 the appropriate Federal banking agency issues an order setting forth the
 reasons for disapproval. The appropriate Federal banking agency may extend
 the 45-day period for an additional 30 days.
 `(D) EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR ZONE 1 FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES-
 `(i) COMMENCEMENT OF PERMISSIBLE NONBANKING ACTIVITIES- Notwithstanding
 subparagraph (A), any Zone 1 financial services holding company may commence
 through a subsidiary (other than a depository institution), any activity
 authorized by subsections (c)(15) and (c)(16) of section 4 of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843) or that has been
 determined by regulation by the appropriate Federal banking agency under
 section 4(c)(8) of such Act to be permissible for such a financial services
 holding company or subsidiary. The financial services holding company shall
 provide the appropriate Federal banking agency with written notice of the
 commencement of such activity not later than 30 days following such action.
 `(ii) ACQUISITIONS- Notwithstanding subparagraphs (B) and (C), a notice
 filed under this subsection by a Zone 1 financial services holding company
 that will qualify as a Zone 1 financial services holding company both before
 and after the proposed transaction shall be deemed to be approved unless
 prior to the expiration of 30 days after the receipt of a complete notice,
 the appropriate Federal banking agency issues an order setting forth the
 reasons for disapproval.
 `(E) Any proposal may proceed prior to the expiration of the disapproval
 period if the appropriate Federal banking agency issues a written notice
 of approval. The appropriate Federal banking agency may provide for no
 notice under this paragraph or notice for a shorter period of time with
 respect to particular activities or transactions.
 `(F) In the case of any proposal to engage in, or acquire or retain
 ownership or control of shares of any company engaged in, any activity
 pursuant to subsection (c)(8) that has not been previously approved by
 order or regulation, the appropriate Federal banking agency may extend
 the notice period under this subsection for an additional 90 days.
 `(2)(A) GENERAL STANDARDS FOR REVIEW- In connection with a notice under
 this subsection, the appropriate Federal banking agency may consider the
 following criteria--
 `(i) the managerial resources of the companies involved;
 `(ii) the adequacy of their financial resources, including their capital,
 giving consideration to the financial resources and capital of others
 engaged in similar activities;
 `(iii) any material adverse effect on the safety and soundness or financial
 condition of an affiliated depository institution; and
 `(iv) whether, in the case of notice for approval involving activities
 under subsection (c)(8), performance of the activity by a financial services
 holding company or a subsidiary of such company can reasonably be expected
 to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased
 competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects,
 such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition,
 conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices.
 `(B) REQUIREMENTS FOR DISAPPROVAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall not approve any proposed transaction under this subsection if the
 appropriate Federal banking agency determines that any insured depository
 institution controlled by the financial services holding company is engaging
 in any unsafe and unsound practice or is in an unsafe and unsound condition.
 `(C) STANDARDS FOR ZONE 1 FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY- A notice
 filed under this section by a Zone 1 financial services holding company
 or any subsidiary (other than an insured depository institution of such
 company) may be disapproved only pursuant to subparagraph (B) or if the
 appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the financial services
 holding company is not a Zone 1 financial services holding company.
 `(j) ADDITIONAL CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency shall disapprove a notice to engage in,
 or acquire or retain the shares of a company engaged in, a new financial
 activity unless the company filing the notice is a Zone 1 financial services
 holding company, or the appropriate Federal banking agency finds that--
 `(1) the capital of each insured bank controlled by the company is above
 the mean capital level of the range for insured banks in Zone 2; and,
 `(2) the financial services holding company is making substantial progress
 toward qualifying as a Zone 1 financial services holding company.
 `(k) MAINTENANCE OF HIGHER CAPITAL- Any financial services holding company
 that--
 `(1) engages, directly or indirectly, in any new financial activity,
 or controls any company engaged in any such activity, and
 `(2) fails to qualify as a Zone 1 financial services holding company within
 the time period specified by the appropriate Federal banking agency,
shall be subject to the provisions of section 35(d)(6) of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Act.
 `(l) LIMITATIONS ON ACTIVITIES OF FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES-
 `(1) DISCLOSURE- A securities affiliate, an insurance affiliate, or an
 affiliate engaged in securities or insurance activities authorized pursuant
 to subsection (c)(8) shall each--
 `(A) prominently disclose in writing to its customers that such affiliates
 are not insured depository institutions and are separate from any affiliated
 depository insured institution;
 `(B) prominently disclose in writing to its customers that securities or
 insurance products sold, offered, or recommended by such affiliates are not
 deposits, are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 are not guaranteed by any affiliated insured depository institutions,
 and are not otherwise obligations of such insured depository institutions
 unless such is the case; and
 `(C) obtain in acknowledgement of receipt of the disclosures including
 the date of receipt and the customer's name, address, and account number.
 `(2) REGULATIONS-
 `(A) The Securities and Exchange Commission is authorized to adopt
 regulations in consultation with the appropriate Federal banking agencies
 pursuant to this subsection regarding disclosures by securities affiliates
 and affiliates engaged in securities activities pursuant to subsection
 (c)(8);
 `(B) The appropriate Federal banking agencies are authorized to adopt
 regulations pursuant to this subsection regarding disclosures by insurance
 affiliates or by any affiliates engaged in activities pursuant to subsection
 (c)(8) (other than securities activities).
 `(3) DISCLOSURE OF CUSTOMER INFORMATION- The appropriate Federal banking
 agency is authorized to issue regulations limiting disclosures of
 nonpublic customer information between an insured depository institution
 and affiliates thereof, including an evaluation of the creditworthiness
 of an issuer or other customer of that insured depository institution or
 subsidiary thereof or financial, securities, or insurance affiliate.
 `(4) AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency may by regulation or order adopt limitations or restrictions
 on the extension of credit or other similar financial support, the
 purchase or sale of assets, or the issuance of guarantees, letters of
 credit, or other credit facilities to or for the benefit of an affiliate
 engaged in any new financial activity or to customers of such affiliate
 by an affiliate that is an insured depository institution controlled by
 the financial services holding company. Such restrictions and limitations
 shall be adopted as the agency deems appropriate to address potential
 adverse effects, including unfair competition, conflicts of interest, and
 unsafe banking practices. Transactions or similar arrangements between an
 insured depository institution and the customers of an affiliate engaged
 in such activities that are both controlled by the same financial services
 holding company shall not be used to evade any restrictions or limitations
 imposed under this paragraph.
 `(m) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN NONBANKING INVESTMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding subsection (a), a financial services
 holding company may own or control shares of any company engaged in
 activities not authorized pursuant to this section if--
 `(A) the shares were acquired before January 1, 1993, and the aggregate
 investment in all such shares does not exceed 5 per centum of the financial
 services holding company's capital and surplus on a consolidated basis; or
 `(B) the shares are acquired and held by a securities affiliate as part of a
 bona fide underwriting or investment banking activity if such shares are held
 only for such period of time as will permit the sale thereof on a reasonable
 basis consistent with the nature of such investment banking activity.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS- The limitations in section 5(c) shall apply to the
 companies described in paragraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B).
 `(3) DIVESTITURE IN CASE OF LOSS OF EXEMPTION-
 `(A) If any financial services holding company loses the exemption provided
 in paragraph (1)(A), such company shall divest ownership and control of
 all of the shares of such company within 180 days after the loss of such
 exemption.
 `(B) If any financial services holding company loses the exemption provided
 in paragraph (1)(B) the financial services holding company shall divest
 ownership and control of such shares within 15 days of the loss of the
 exemption'.'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1843), as amended by this section, is further amended--
 (1) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears except in
 subsections (c)(1), (c)(8)(A)(ii), and (c)(8)(B)(vii) and inserting instead
 `financial services holding company';
 (2) by striking `Board' wherever it appears except in subsections
 (c)(8)(A)(ii), (c)(8)(B)(iv), (c)(8)(B)(vii) and (c)(13) and inserting
 instead `appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (3) in subsection (c)(1)(A), by striking `banking subsidiary' and inserting
 instead `insured depository institution';
 (4) in subsections (c)(1)(C) and (c)(1)(D), by striking `banking
 subsidiaries' wherever it appears and inserting instead `insured depository
 institution'; and
 (5) in subsection (c)(4), by striking `acquired by a bank' and inserting
 instead `acquired by an insured depository institution'.
SEC. 204. DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES.
 Section 5 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1844) is
 amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 5. DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES.
 `(a) CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ACQUISITION OF FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING
 COMPANIES- No diversified holding company may acquire control of a financial
 services holding company unless, after the acquisition, such company is
 a Zone 1 financial services holding company.
 `(b) NOTICE PROVISION FOR DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- A diversified
 holding company that acquires the shares of a financial affiliate, shall
 file notice with the appropriate Federal banking agency 30 days after the
 commencement of such activity or the acquisition of such shares.
 `(c) LIMITATIONS ON DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES AND THEIR AFFILIATES-
 `(1) Except in the case of a foreign bank, no financial services holding
 company or any of its subsidiaries shall--
 `(A) extend credit in any manner to an affiliated diversified holding
 company or any of its affiliates not otherwise under the control of a
 financial services holding company;
 `(B) purchase for its own account financial assets or any securities of
 an affiliated diversified holding company or any of its affiliates not
 otherwise under the control of a financial services holding company;
 `(C) issue a guarantee, acceptance or letter of credit, including an
 endorsement or standby letter of credit, to an affiliated diversified
 holding company or any of its affiliates not otherwise under the control
 of a financial services holding company; or
 `(D) extend credit to any customer of the diversified holding company or
 any of its affiliates except on an arms-length basis in compliance with
 section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c-1).
 `(2) To the extent that activities are not prohibited under paragraph
 (1), the restrictions and limitations issued by the appropriate Federal
 banking agencies pursuant to section 4(1) shall apply to diversified holding
 companies and their financial affiliates that are not otherwise controlled
 by an affiliated financial services holding company in the same manner and
 to the same extent as if the diversified holding company were a financial
 services holding company.
 `(3) A diversified holding company and any of its affiliates that are engaged
 in the purchase and sale of real property, as principal, agent or broker,
 may not market such service jointly with any affiliated insured depository
 institution unless such insured depository institution is permitted under
 State law to engage in such purchase or sale of property.
 `(4) A diversified holding company that either directly or through an
 affiliate (not otherwise under the control of an affiliated financial
 services holding company) provides insurance as principal, agent or
 broker, may not permit an affiliated insured depository institution or
 a subsidiary thereof to provide insurance as agent or broker, including
 insurance in which the diversified holding company or such affiliate acts
 as principal, agent or broker, unless the laws of the State in which the
 insured depository institution is located permit depository institutions
 chartered by such State to provide insurance as agent or broker in that
 State and as permitted for national banks.
 `(5) In the case of a foreign bank that is a financial services holding
 company, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall apply the restrictions
 in paragraph (1) to the United States affiliates of such foreign bank and
 the foreign bank in the same manner and to the same extent as they apply
 to domestic financial services holding companies and their affiliates.'.
SEC. 205. ADMINISTRATION.
 The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, is amended by inserting after section
 5 the following new section:
`SEC. 6. ADMINISTRATION.
 `(a) REGISTRATION OF FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY- Within 180
 days after becoming a financial services holding company, each financial
 services holding company shall register with the appropriate Federal banking
 agency on forms prescribed by the appropriate Federal banking agency, which
 shall include such information with respect to the financial condition and
 operations, management, and inter-company relationships of the financial
 services holding company and its subsidiaries, and related matters, as
 the appropriate Federal banking agency may deem necessary or appropriate
 to carry out the purposes of this Act. The appropriate Federal banking
 agency may, in its discretion, extend the time within which a financial
 services holding company shall register and file the requisite information.
 `(b) REGULATIONS AND ORDERS-
 `(1)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the appropriate Federal
 banking agency is authorized to issue such regulations and orders as may
 be necessary to enable it to administer and carry out the purposes of
 this Act and prevent evasions thereof: Provided, however, That any capital
 requirements for diversified holding companies or financial services holding
 companies shall only be imposed pursuant to subsection (e) of this section
 or section 35 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(B) Any capital requirements for diversified holding companies or financial
 services holding companies shall be imposed only pursuant to subsection
 (c) or section 35 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(2) NOTICE AND OBJECTION-
 `(A) The appropriate Federal banking agencies shall jointly propose and
 issue regulations for the purpose of implementing this Act. Such regulations
 shall be adopted and published as final before January 1, 1993.
 `(B) Following issuance of the regulations described in subparagraph (A),
 the appropriate Federal banking agencies shall provide at least 60 days
 notice to each other with respect to the proposed adoption, modification,
 or rescission of any rule, interpretation, or policy statement relating
 to diversified or financial services holding companies and their nonbank
 affiliates.
 `(C)(i) The reviewing appropriate Federal banking agency may, within 60
 days, submit comments or written objection to the proposing appropriate
 Federal banking agency.
 `(ii) The proposing appropriate Federal banking agency may not proceed to
 adopt, modify, or rescind any such rule, interpretation, or policy statement
 if such agency receives written objection from the reviewing appropriate
 Federal banking agency within 60 days after providing notice to such agency
 and such objection is not subsequently withdrawn by the reviewing agency.
 `(c) RECORDS, REPORTS AND EXAMINATIONS-
 `(1) RECORDS AND REPORTS-
 `(A) RECORDS RELATING TO DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- A financial services
 holding company shall obtain such information and make and keep such
 records as the appropriate Federal banking agency may prescribe concerning
 the financial services holding company's policies and procedures for
 monitoring and controlling financial and operational risks to its insured
 depository institution subsidiaries from the activities of the diversified
 holding company or its financial affiliates that are not controlled by
 the financial services holding company. Such records shall describe the
 activities conducted by the diversified holding company and such financial
 affiliates that are likely to have a material impact on the financial or
 operational condition of the insured depository institution subsidiaries
 of the financial services holding company, and the customary sources of
 capital and funding of such activities.
 `(B) REPORTS OF FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY AND DEPOSITORY
 INSTITUTIONS- The appropriate Federal banking agency from time to time may
 require the financial services holding company and its insured depository
 institution subsidiaries to file reports under oath to keep it informed as to
 whether the provisions of this Act and such regulations and orders issued
 thereunder have been complied with. With regard to insured depository
 institutions controlled by a financial services holding company, the
 appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with and, to the extent
 possible, use reports obtained by, the other appropriate Federal banking
 agency for such institutions.
 `(C) REPORTS OF FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES AND AFFILIATES- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency may require a financial services holding
 company, and any affiliate it controls, to file reports if such agency
 reasonably believes that the activities or financial condition of such
 holding company or affiliate is likely to have a material impact on the
 financial or operational condition of any insured depository institution
 subsidiary (and a subsidiary thereof) of the financial services holding
 company. The appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with and,
 to the extent possible, use reports obtained by, the functional regulator
 of the financial services holding company or affiliate to obtain the
 necessary information.
 `(D) REPORTS OF DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES AND FINANCIAL AFFILIATES-
 The appropriate Federal banking agency may require a diversified holding
 company and any financial affiliate not controlled by a financial services
 holding company to file reports if such agency reasonably believes
 that the activities or financial condition of such diversified holding
 company or financial affiliate is likely to have a material impact on the
 financial or operational condition of the insured depository institution
 subsidiaries (and subsidiaries thereof) of the financial services holding
 company. The appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with and,
 to the extent possible, use reports obtained by, the functional regulator
 of the diversified holding company or financial affiliate to obtain the
 necessary information.
 `(E) RECIPROCAL ACCESS- The functional regulator of a diversified holding
 company or a financial affiliate may have access on a reciprocal basis
 to reports, other than examination reports, obtained by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency under this subsection with respect to an affiliated
 insured depository institution or financial services holding company, if the
 functional regulator reasonably believes that the activities or financial
 condition of such institution or financial services holding company is
 likely to have a material impact on the financial or operational condition
 of the financial affiliate. The other appropriate Federal banking agency of
 an insured depository institution may have access on a reciprocal basis to
 reports, other than examination reports, obtained by the appropriate Federal
 banking agency under this subsection with respect to any affiliate of the
 insured depository institution, if the other appropriate Federal banking
 agency reasonably believes that the activities or financial condition
 of such affiliate or company is likely to have a material impact on the
 insured depository institution.
 `(F) RESTRICTION ON DISCLOSURE- Any reports obtained from another agency
 or regulator under this subsection shall not be disclosed to the public by
 the recipient agency or regulator and shall not be disclosed to any other
 governmental agency or to the Congress except as otherwise permitted
 by law. Reports obtained from another agency or regulator under this
 subsection may be used only to carry out the purposes of this subsection
 or as otherwise permitted by law.
 `(2) EXAMINATIONS-
 `(A) FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES AND DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency may make on-site examinations of each
 financial services holding company, its insured depository institution
 subsidiaries (and subsidiaries thereof) and, subject to subparagraphs
 (B) through (E), any of its other affiliates. Where appropriate, the
 appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with, and to the extent
 possible, use the report of examination made by the other appropriate
 Federal banking agency or the appropriate State bank supervisory authority.
 `(B) FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES AND AFFILIATES- The appropriate
 Federal banking agency may examine the financial services holding company
 and any affiliate it controls--
 `(i) to determine whether such holding company or affiliate is engaged
 in a particular transaction that would violate, directly or indirectly,
 the restrictions prescribed in sections 4(1) and 5(c);
 `(ii) to determine compliance with sections 35(f) and 35(g) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act, as applicable; or
 `(iii) if the agency reasonably believes that such holding company or
 affiliate is engaged in a particular transaction or course of conduct
 that directly or indirectly may constitute a material risk to any insured
 depository institution subsidiary (or a subsidiary thereof).
The appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with and, to the extent
possible, use the report of examinations made by the functional regulator,
if any, of an affiliate to obtain the necessary information. If such reports
do not contain the necessary information, the appropriate Federal banking
agency shall request the functional regulator to conduct an examination
to obtain such information. In the event the functional regulator does not
conduct an examination within a reasonable period of time, the appropriate
Federal banking agency may conduct the examination, but shall notify the
functional regulator before doing so.
 `(C) DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES AND FINANCIAL AFFILIATES- The appropriate
 Federal banking agency may examine the diversified holding company and any
 financial affiliate not controlled by a financial services holding company--
 `(i) to determine whether such holding company or affiliate is engaged
 in a particular transaction that would violate, directly or indirectly,
 the restrictions prescribed in sections 4(l) and 5(c);
 `(ii) to determine compliance with sections 35(f) and 35(g) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act, as applicable; or
 `(iii) if the agency reasonably believes that such holding company or
 affiliate is engaged in a particular transaction or course of conduct
 that directly or indirectly may constitute a material risk to any insured
 depository institution subsidiary (or a subsidiary thereof).
The appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with and, to the extent
possible, use the report of examinations made by the functional regulator,
if any, of the diversified holding company or financial affiliate to obtain
the necessary information. If such reports do not contain the necessary
information, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall request the
functional regulator to conduct an examination to obtain such information. In
the event the functional regulator does not conduct an examination within a
reasonable period of time, the appropriate Federal banking agency may conduct
the examination, but shall notify the functional regulator before doing so.
 `(D) RECIPROCAL EXAMINATION OF INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION AFFILIATES
 CONTROLLED BY FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES- The functional
 regulator for a financial affiliate may examine an insured depository
 institution affiliate if the regulator reasonably believes that such
 institution is engaged in a particular transaction or course of conduct
 that directly or indirectly may constitute a material risk to the financial
 affiliate. The functional regulator shall consult with, and, to the extent
 possible, use the report of examinations made by, the appropriate Federal
 banking agency to obtain the necessary information. If such report does
 not contain the necessary information, the functional regulator shall
 request the appropriate Federal banking agency to conduct an examination
 to obtain such information. In the event the appropriate Federal banking
 agency does not conduct an examination within a reasonable period of time,
 the functional regulator may conduct the examination and shall notify the
 appropriate Federal banking agency before doing so.
 `(E) NONFINANCIAL AFFILIATES OF A DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANY- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency may examine any of the nonfinancial
 affiliates of a diversified holding company in order to determine whether
 such affiliate is engaged in a particular transaction that would violate,
 directly or indirectly, the restrictions prescribed in section 5(c).
 `(F) COST OF EXAMINATIONS- The cost of examinations of a diversified holding
 company and any affiliate of a diversified holding company not controlled
 by a financial services holding company shall be assessed against, and
 paid by, the diversified holding company or the affiliate, whichever is
 the subject of the examination. The cost of examinations of a financial
 services holding company and its subsidiaries shall be assessed against,
 and paid by, the financial services holding company.
 `(d) TRANSFER OF RECORDS- No agency or department transferring records
 as provided by this section shall be deemed to have waived any privilege
 applicable to those records under law.
 `(e) REPORT TO THE CONGRESS; RECOMMENDATIONS- Each appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall include in its annual report to the Congress, the
 results of the administration of this Act, stating what, if any, substantial
 difficulties have been encountered in carrying out the purposes of this Act,
 and any recommendations as to changes in the law which in the opinion of
 the appropriate Federal banking agency would be desirable.
 `(f) CEASE AND DESIST AUTHORITY; TERMINATION OF ACTIVITIES OR OWNERSHIP
 OR CONTROL OF NONBANK SUBSIDIARIES CONSTITUTING SERIOUS RISK-
 `(1) In addition to any other authority of the appropriate Federal banking
 agency, the appropriate Federal banking agency may take any action described
 in paragraph (2) if it has reasonable cause to believe that--
 `(A) any financial affiliate of an insured depository institution, or
 any other affiliate controlled by a financial services holding company,
 is engaged in activities in such a manner as to constitute a serious risk
 to the financial safety, soundness, or stability of such insured depository
 institution; or
 `(B) the diversified holding company, the financial services holding
 company controlled by the diversified holding company, or any affiliate
 is in significant danger of default and either poses a significant risk to
 the liquidity or solvency of an affiliated insured depository institution
 or is likely to cause a significant dissipation of its assets or earnings.
 `(2) Subject to paragraph (1), the appropriate Federal banking agency--
 `(A) may institute cease and desist proceedings or issue a temporary order
 requiring the diversified holding company or financial services holding
 company controlled by the diversified holding company or affiliate thereof
 engaged in qualified financial activities to cease and desist from such
 activity and take affirmative action to prevent significant dissipation
 of assets or earnings, of an insured depository institution as prescribed
 in section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818);
 `(B) may institute cease and desist proceedings or issue a temporary order
 requiring a financial services holding company described in paragraph
 (1)(B) to increase its capital; and
 `(C) in the event the diversified holding company or the financial
 services holding company controlled by the diversified holding company
 or the affiliate thereof does not comply with the order issued pursuant
 to subparagraph (A) or (B), may order the diversified holding company or
 such financial services holding company or any such affiliate, after due
 notice and opportunity for hearing and after considering the views of the
 insured depository institution's associated Federal banking agency and
 the appropriate State authority in the case of a State-insured depository
 institution, to terminate (within 120 days, or such longer period as the
 appropriate Federal banking agency may direct in unusual circumstances)
 its ownership or control of any such affiliate either by sale to any
 third party or by distribution of the shares of the affiliate to the
 shareholders of the diversified holding company or financial services
 holding company. Such distribution shall be pro rata with respect to all
 of the shareholders of the distributing diversified holding company or
 financial services holding company, and such holding company shall not
 make any charge to its shareholders arising out of such a distribution.
 `(3) The appropriate Federal banking agency may in its discretion apply
 to the United States district court within the jurisdiction of which the
 principal office of the holding company is located, for the enforcement of
 any effective and outstanding order issued under this section, and such
 court shall have jurisdiction and power to order and require compliance
 therewith, but except as provided in section 9 of this Act, no court
 shall have jurisdiction to effect by injunction or otherwise the issuance
 or enforcement of any notice or order under this section, or to review,
 modify, suspend, terminate, or set aside any such notice or order.
 `(g)(1) In the course of or in connection with an application, examination,
 investigation or other proceeding under this Act, the appropriate Federal
 banking agency, or any member or designated representative thereof, including
 any person designated to conduct any hearing under this Act, shall have the
 power to administer oaths and affirmations, to take or cause to be taken
 depositions, and to issue, revoke, quash, or modify subpoenas including
 witness subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum; and the appropriate Federal
 banking agency is empowered to make rules and regulations to effectuate
 the purposes of this subsection.
 `(2) The attendance of witnesses and the production of documents provided
 for in this subsection may be required from any place in any State or in any
 territory or other place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States at
 any designated place where such proceeding is being conducted. A subpoena
 issued under this section may be served upon any person who is not found
 within the territorial jurisdiction of any court in the United States in
 such manner as the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure prescribe for service
 of process in a foreign country, except that a subpoena to be served on a
 person who is not to be found in the United States may be issued only on
 the prior approval of the appropriate Federal banking agency. Any party to
 proceedings under this Act may apply to the United States District Court
 for the District of Columbia, or the United States district court for the
 judicial district or the United States court in any territory in which
 such proceeding is being conducted or where the witness resides or carries
 on business, for the enforcement of any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum
 issued pursuant to this subsection, and such court shall have jurisdiction
 and power to order and require compliance therewith. Witnesses subpoenaed
 under this subsection shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are
 paid witnesses in the district courts of the United States.
 `(3) Any service required under this subsection in any State or in any
 territory or other place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States may
 be made by registered mail, or in such other manner reasonably calculated
 to give actual notice as the appropriate Federal banking agency may by
 regulation or otherwise provide, and all process in any such case may be
 served in the judicial district wherein such person is an inhabitant or
 transacts business or wherever such person may be found. Any court having
 jurisdiction of any proceeding instituted under this subsection may allow
 to any such party such reasonable expenses and attorneys' fees as it deems
 just and proper.
 `(4) Any person who willfully fails or refuses to attend and testify or
 to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence,
 memoranda, contracts, agreements, or other records in obedience to the
 subpoena of the appropriate Federal banking agency shall be guilty of a
 misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than
 $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than one year or both.'.
SEC. 206. RESERVATION OF RIGHTS TO STATES; PRE-EMPTION OF ANTI-AFFILIATION
PROVISIONS.
 Section 7 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1846) is
 amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 7. RESERVATION OF RIGHTS TO STATES; ANTI-AFFILIATION PROVISIONS.
 `(a) No provision of this Act shall be construed as preventing any State from
 exercising such powers and jurisdiction which it now has or may hereafter
 have with respect to companies, banks, diversified holding companies,
 financial services holding companies, and subsidiaries thereof.
 `(b)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), no provision of law of any State,
 including, without limitation, any provision relating to the business of
 insurance, banking (including any law relating to savings associations as
 that term is defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1813), real estate, securities, finance, retail or other law
 regulating the provisions of financial or other services, shall prevent or
 impede or shall be interpreted or applied by any administrative, executive,
 or judicial authority with the purpose or effect of preventing or impeding--
 `(A) any insured depository institution, any affiliate thereof or any
 representative of any such institution or affiliate thereof from being
 acquired, owned or controlled by, or from being affiliated in any manner
 with, any company which is or becomes a financial services holding company
 or with any affiliate of such company because of the types of activities
 engaged in directly or indirectly by such insured depository institution
 or any affiliate thereof, or by any representative of any such institution
 or affiliate thereof or because of the types of activities engaged in
 directly or indirectly by any such company or affiliate thereof, or by
 any representative of any such company or affiliate thereof;
 `(B) any company which is or becomes a financial services holding company or
 affiliate thereof, or any representative of any such company or affiliate
 thereof, from acquiring, owning, or controlling or being affiliated in any
 way with any insured depository institution or affiliate thereof because of
 the types of activities engaged in directly or indirectly by any such company
 or affiliate thereof, or any representative of any such company or affiliate
 thereof, or because of the types of activities engaged in directly or
 indirectly by any such insured depository institution or affiliate thereof,
 or by any representative of such institution or affiliate thereof; or
 `(C) any insured depository institution or any affiliate thereof, or any
 representative of any such institution or affiliate thereof, from offering
 or marketing products or services of any affiliated financial services
 holding company or affiliate thereof or from having its products or services
 offered or marketed by any affiliate thereof, or by any representative of
 such company or affiliate--
 `(i) except as provided in sections 4(c)(16)(B) and 5(c)(3) and 5(c)(4); and
 `(ii) except with regard to offering and marketing insurance pursuant to
 section 4(c)(8).
Nothing in this subparagraph shall exempt any company which is or becomes
a financial services holding company or an affiliate thereof, or any
representative of any such company or affiliate, from complying with, or shall
annul, alter, or affect the application of, the laws of any State relating
to the examination, supervision, or regulation of providers of financial
services or the protection of consumers, except to the extent that the intent,
purpose or effect of those laws is inconsistent with this subsection or with
the purposes of this Act and then only to the extent of the inconsistency.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, an insured depository institution
 includes a branch, agency, or commercial lending company subsidiary of a
 foreign bank, as those terms are defined in section 1(b) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101).'.
SEC. 207. PENALTIES.
 Section 8 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1847)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `the Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `an appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (2) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company';
 (3) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `profit significantly' and inserting
 instead `obtain anything of value';
 (4) in section (a), by striking `Every officer, director, agent' and all
 that follows in the undesignated last paragraph;
 (5) in subsection (b)(1), by striking `forfeit and'; and
 (6) in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (d), by inserting `civil'
 before `penalty'.
SEC. 208. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO JUDICIAL REVIEW PROVISION.
 Section 9 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1848)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `the Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `an appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (2) by striking `Board's order' and inserting instead `order of an
 appropriate Federal banking agency'.
SEC. 209. ANTITRUST REVIEW.
 (a) ANTITRUST REVIEW- Section 11(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1849(b)(1)) is amended by inserting `, except that such period
 may be eliminated or reduced with the concurrence of the Attorney General'
 before the period at the end of the third sentence.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 11 of the Bank Holding Company Act of
 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1849) is further amended--
 (1) by striking `Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (2) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (3) in subsection (b)(1)--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) by striking `Board's approval' and inserting instead `approval of the
 appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (C) by striking `failure of a bank' and inserting instead `failure of an
 insured depository institution'.
 (c) AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- Section 18(c)(6) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(c)(6)) is amended by inserting
 `, except that such period may be eliminated or reduced with the concurrence
 of the Attorney General' before the period at the end of the third sentence.
SEC. 210. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT.
 Section 1 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 note)
 is amended by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting
 instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'.
SEC. 211. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Sections 201 through 210 shall become effective on January 1, 1993, except
 that section 4(c)(8)(A)(ii) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as
 added by section 203(a)(3) of this title, shall be effective on the date
 of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 212. APPLICATION OF THE LIMITATIONS ON TYING ARRANGEMENTS AND INSIDER
LENDING TO FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING AND DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- Section 106(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments
 of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1971) is amended by deleting `bank holding company'
 and inserting instead `financial services holding company and diversified
 holding company'.
 (b) CERTAIN TYING ARRANGEMENTS PROHIBITED- Section 106(b) of the Bank
 Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1972(b)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 `(2)(A) A financial services holding company and any subsidiary (other than
 a bank) of such holding company and a diversified holding company and any
 subsidiary (other than a bank) of such holding company shall not in any
 manner extend credit, lease, or sell property of any kind, or furnish any
 service or fix or vary the consideration for any of the foregoing, on the
 condition or requirement that the customer shall obtain credit, property
 or service from an affiliated bank except as provided in subparagraph (B).
 `(B) A financial services holding company and any subsidiary (other than
 a bank) of such holding company and a diversified holding company and
 any subsidiary (other than a bank) of such holding company may vary the
 consideration--
 `(i) for any extension of credit, lease or sale of property of any kind,
 or the furnishing of any service on the condition or requirement that the
 customer shall obtain some credit, property, or service from an affiliated
 bank provided that the products or services offered to and obtained by the
 customer are also separately available to such customer on substantially
 the same terms, including interest rate, collateral, and cost, as those
 prevailing at the time for comparable transactions that are not subject
 to such conditions or requirements; or
 `(ii) for any loan, discount, deposit, or trust service on the condition
 or requirement that the customer shall obtain a loan, discount, deposit
 or trust service from an affiliated bank provided that such products or
 services described in this subparagraph are also separately available to
 such customer.
 `(C) The Board may adopt such regulations to carry out the purposes
 of this paragraph which may include such restrictions or limitations
 regarding subparagraph (B) as it deems necessary or appropriate in the
 public interest.'.
 (c) INSIDER LOANS- Sections 22(h)(6) (C) and (D) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (12 U.S.C. 375b(6) (C) and (D)) are each amended--
 (1) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company and diversified holding
 company'; and
 (2) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' wherever it appears
 and inserting instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'.
SEC. 213. PROVISIONS EXEMPTING FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES FROM
THE SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANY ACT.
 Section 10(a) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1467a(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by amending subparagraph (D) to read as follows:
 `(D) SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANY-
 `(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), the term `savings and loan holding
 company' means any company which directly or indirectly controls a savings
 association or controls any other company which is a savings and loan
 holding company.
 `(ii) No company which is a financial services holding company or a
 diversified holding company registered under and subject to the provisions
 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991, other than a company
 described in section 4(f) of such Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(f)), and no company
 controlled by such company, shall be deemed to be a savings and loan
 holding company.'; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph:
 `(5) EXEMPTION FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES AND DIVERSIFIED
 HOLDING COMPANIES- The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
 company that is a financial services holding company or a diversified holding
 company registered under, and subject to, the provisions of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991, other than companies described in
 section 4(f) of such Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(f)), or to any company directly or
 indirectly controlled by such company (other than a savings association).'.
Subtitle B--Financial Activities of National Banks
SEC. 221. AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING ACT OF 1933.
 (a) Paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24
 (Seventh)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: `If an
 association is not an affiliate of a securities affiliate (as the terms
 `affiliate' and `securities affiliate' are defined in section 2 of the
 Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841)), the
 limitations and restrictions contained in this paragraph as to dealing in,
 underwriting, and purchasing securities for its own account shall not
 apply to the distribution of securities issued by investment companies
 (as defined in section 3 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80a-3)): Provided, That, notwithstanding any other provision of law
 (including this section), an association shall not in the United States,
 pursuant to any express or incidental power, underwrite, distribute, or sell
 interests in a pool of assets originated or purchased by the association
 or its affiliate, and an association shall not continue to engage in such
 activity pursuant to any order issued by the Comptroller of the Currency:
 Provided further, That no association shall sponsor, organize or control
 an investment company registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940:
 Provided further, That no association shall engage in the United States
 in any securities activity except to the extent that such activity is
 specifically authorized by statute, or authorized by regulation, order,
 or interpretation issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
 or its successor pursuant to that statute, on the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, provided that
 this shall not authorize the underwriting or distributing by an association
 of securities backed by or representing an interest in mortgages or other
 assets originated or purchased by the association or its affiliate.'.
 (b) Section 20 (12 U.S.C. 377) and section 32 (12 U.S.C. 78) of the Banking
 Act of 1933 are repealed.
SEC. 222. INSURANCE ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL BANKS.
 (a)(1) In addition to the powers vested by law in national banking
 associations, any such association located in a place that has a population
 not exceeding 5,000 (as shown by the preceding decennial census) may
 sell insurance so long as such insurance activities are confined to that
 place, and the insurance is sold only to residents of the State in which
 the association is located or to natural persons employed in that State:
 Provided, That no such association shall in any case assume or guarantee the
 payment of any premium on insurance policies issued through its agency by
 its principal: Provided further, That the association shall not guarantee
 the truth of any statement made in any application made for such insurance.
 (2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `residents of that State'
 includes--
 (A) companies incorporated in, or organized under the laws of, the State;
 (B) companies licensed to do business in the State; and
 (C) companies having an office in the State.
 (b) Notwithstanding the limitations in subsection (a), a national banking
 association organized under the laws of the United States may act as agent
 in soliciting and selling insurance and collecting premiums in one or
 more States in which such association or any of its branches is located
 to the extent to which such activities are permitted by such States for
 banks located in those States.
 (c) Chapter 461 of the Act of September 7, 1916 (39 Stat. 753; 12 U.S.C. 92
 note), as amended, is further amended by striking `That in addition to
 the powers now vested by law in national banking associations' and all
 that follows through `filing his application for insurance.'.
SEC. 223. AMENDMENTS TO SECTIONS 23A AND 23B OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT.
 (a) Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end thereof and inserting
 instead `: Provided, however, That notwithstanding the foregoing, a loan
 or extension of credit shall not be deemed to be made to any affiliate if--
 `(A) the member bank approves such loan or extension of credit in accordance
 with substantially the same standards, procedures, and terms that it has
 applied to similar loans or extensions of credit the proceeds of which
 are not transferred to or for the benefit of an affiliate; and
 `(B) such loan or extension of credit is not made for purposes of evading
 any of the requirements of this section.'; and
 (ii) by inserting at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(5) No financial services holding company shall permit an insured depository
 institution that it controls to engage in any covered transaction if such
 covered transaction exceeds 5 per centum of the capital stock and surplus of
 the insured depository institution unless 5 days prior notice is provided to
 the appropriate Federal banking agency for the financial services holding
 company and for the insured depository institution, if different.';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)(D), by amending clause (ii) to read as follows:
 `(ii) any investment company, commodity pool, or other company engaged in
 substantially the same activities as an investment company or commodity
 pool with respect to which a member bank or any affiliate is an investment
 advisor as defined in section 2(a)(20) of the Investment Company Act of 1940
 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(20)), commodity trading advisor as defined in section
 2(a)(1)(A) of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 2(a)(1)(A)), or performs
 substantially equivalent activities which are substantially equivalent to
 those of an investment advisor or commodity trading advisor; and';
 (3) in subsection (b)(2)(A), by inserting `and of which the member bank
 owns at least 80 per centum of the voting stock' after `member bank';
 (4) in subsection (b)(5), by inserting `principally engaged in deposit
 taking or lending activities' after `trust company';
 (5) in subsection (b)(7)--
 (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking `or' at the end thereof;
 (B) in subparagraph (E)--
 (i) by inserting `to, or' after `standby letter of credit,'; and
 (ii) by striking `or' at the end thereof; and (C) by inserting after
 subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraphs:
 `(F) the assumption by a member bank of a liability of any affiliate
 whether directly or through the transfer of such liability to the member
 bank of any affiliate;
 `(G) a loan or extension of credit to any company, or the issuance of or
 participation in a standby letter of credit, asset purchase agreement,
 indemnification, guarantee, insurance or other facility with any company,
 the purpose of which is to enhance the marketability of securities or
 other obligations or assets, other than those securities that a member
 bank may underwrite pursuant to section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12
 U.S.C. 24 (Seventh)), that are underwritten or distributed by the affiliate,
 unless there is substantial participation by other lenders in such loan,
 extension of credit, letter of credit, agreement, indemnification, guarantee,
 insurance or other facility; or
 `(H) any other financial arrangement that is determined by the Board by
 regulation to be substantially equivalent to a transaction described in
 this paragraph;';
 (6) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) by inserting `to, or' after `letter of credit issued'; and
 (B) by striking `at the time of the transaction';
 (7) in subsection (c)(4)--
 (A) by inserting `the member bank or' after `issued by'; and
 (B) by inserting `to, or' after `letter of credit'; and
 (8) in subsection (d)(5), by inserting `provided that the company provides
 services solely to affiliated member banks' before the semicolon;
 (b) Section 23B(a)(2)(E) of the Federal Reserve Act (12
 U.S.C. 371c-1(a)(2)(E)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking `, or' and inserting instead a semicolon;
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking the period and inserting instead `; or'; and
 (3) by inserting at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(iii) if the third party is a customer of an affiliate (as defined
 in section 2 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12
 U.S.C. 1841) unless--
 `(I) the member bank approves such transaction in accordance with
 substantially the same standards, procedures, and terms that it has
 applied to similar transactions with persons who are not customers of an
 affiliate; and
 `(II) such transaction or series of transactions is not made for the
 purpose of evading any of the requirements of this section.'.
 (c) Section 23B(b)(2) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c-1(b)(2))
 is amended by inserting `officers, directors, or employees of' after
 `of the bank or'.
SEC. 224. CUSTOMER DISCLOSURE.
 Section 18 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(o) CUSTOMER DISCLOSURE REGARDING SECURITIES, INSURANCE AND OTHER
 NONBANKING PRODUCTS-
 `(1) PRODUCTS OFFERED, RECOMMENDED OR SOLD BY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS-
 An insured depository institution shall prominently disclose in writing to
 its customers pursuant to regulations adopted by the appropriate Federal
 banking agencies, that securities or insurance products offered, recommended,
 or sold by the insured depository institution are not deposits, are not
 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, are not guaranteed
 by the insured depository institution or an affiliated insured depository
 institution, and are not otherwise an obligation of an insured depository
 institution unless such is the case.
 `(2) PRODUCTS OFFERED, RECOMMENDED OR SOLD ON BANK PREMISES OR THROUGH JOINT
 MARKETING ACTIVITIES- An insured depository institution shall not permit
 securities or insurance products to be offered, recommended, or sold on bank
 premises, or to bank customers as part of joint marketing activities with
 another entity; unless the entity prominently discloses in writing that it
 is not an insured institution and is separate from the insured depository
 institution in addition to the disclosures required in paragraph (1).
 `(3) CUSTOMER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF DISCLOSURES- No insured depository
 institution shall permit the sale of securities or insurance products to
 be consummated unless an acknowledgement of receipt of the disclosures
 described in paragraphs (1) and (2) including the date of receipt and the
 customer's name, address and account number is obtained from the customer.
 `(4) REGULATIONS- The appropriate Federal banking agencies may adopt
 regulations implementing this subsection and applying these provisions to
 nonbank products sold in a similar manner.'.
SEC. 225. BANKERS' BANKS.
 (a) Section 5136(Seventh) of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24(Seventh)), as
 amended by section 221(a), is further amended by inserting `or their holding
 companies' after `providing services for other depository institutions'.
 (b) Section 5169(b)(1) of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27(b)(1)) is
 amended by inserting `or their holding companies' after `other depository
 institutions' the second time it appears.
Subtitle C--Non-Banking Activities of Foreign Banks in the United States
SEC. 231. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BANKING ACT OF 1978.
 (a) Section 8 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3106)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(a)(1)(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any foreign bank--
 `(i) that maintains a branch or agency in the United States, or
 `(ii) that directly or indirectly owns or controls a commercial lending
 company organized under State law,
shall be subject to the provisions of the Financial Services Holding Company
Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.) and to sections 105 and 106 of the Bank
Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1850, 1971 et seq.) in
the same manner and to the same extent as a financial services holding company.
 `(B) Any company that directly or indirectly owns or controls a foreign
 bank described in subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the provisions
 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et
 seq.) in the same manner and to the same extent as a company that owns or
 controls a financial services holding company.
 `(C)(i) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), no foreign bank or
 company described in this subsection shall, by reason of this subsection
 alone, be deemed to be a financial services holding company or a company
 that controls a financial services holding company for purposes of section
 3 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842).
 `(ii) Notwithstanding clause (i), a foreign bank or company described in
 this subsection that seeks to acquire, directly or indirectly, more than
 five percent of the shares of an insured depository institution (as defined
 in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813)) other
 than a foreign bank, must obtain the prior approval of such acquisition by
 the appropriate Federal banking agency under section 3 of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842) as if the foreign
 bank or company were a financial services holding company or a company
 that owns or controls a financial services holding company.
 `(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), after January 1, 1993, no foreign
 bank or company referred to in paragraph (1) shall, directly or indirectly,
 maintain in the United States a branch, an agency, an insured depository
 institution, or a commercial lending company, if such foreign bank or
 company also directly or indirectly engages in the United Sates in--
 `(A) any activity authorized under section 4(c)(8) of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8)) after the date
 of enactment of that Act, other than any activity that, prior to the date
 of enactment of that Act, had been determined by the Board to be closely
 related to banking and a proper incident thereto by an order or regulation
 that was valid on the date of enactment of that Act, or
 `(B) any activity authorized under section 4(c)(15) or 4(c)(16) of such Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(15) or (c)(16)).
 `(3) A foreign bank or company subject to the prohibition in paragraph
 (2) may engage in banking in the United States indirectly through direct
 or indirect subsidiaries of a single financial services holding company
 organized under the laws of a State or the District of Columbia, provided
 that all activities of the foreign bank or company in the United States
 conducted under the authority of the Financial Services Holding Company Act
 of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.), other than those authorized by sections
 2(h) or 4(c)(9) of such Act, are carried out directly or indirectly by
 that financial services holding company.'; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) by striking the second sentence and inserting instead `Notwithstanding
 the preceding sentence, no foreign bank or other company referred to in
 this subsection may retain, pursuant to this subsection, the ownership or
 control of any company engaged in the business of underwriting, distributing
 or otherwise buying or selling stocks, bonds, and other securities in the
 United States after three years from the date of enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991.';
 (B) in the third sentence, by striking `Except in the case of affiliates
 described in the preceding sentence, nothing' and inserting instead
 `Nothing';
 (C) in the fifth sentence, by striking `the term `domestically-controlled
 affiliate covered in 1978' and all that follows in such sentence and
 inserting instead a period; and
 (D) by striking the sixth sentence.
 (b) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become effective on January
 1, 1993.
Subtitle D--Amendments to the Securities Acts
SEC. 241. AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933.
 (a) BANK-ISSUED SECURITIES- Section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933
 (15 U.S.C. 77c(a)(2)), is amended--
 (1) by striking out `or any security issued or guaranteed by any bank;' and
 (2) by striking `a security issued or guaranteed by a bank shall not include
 any interest or participation in any collective trust fund maintained by
 a bank'.
 (b) SAVINGS ASSOCIATION-ISSUED SECURITIES- Section 3(a)(5) of the Securities
 Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77c(a)(5)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) Any security issued by--
 `(A) a farmer's cooperative organization exempt from tax under section
 521 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 521);
 `(B) a corporation described in section 501(c) (16) of such Code and exempt
 from tax under section 501(a) of such Code;
 `(C) a corporation described in section 501(c)(2) of such Code and organized
 for the exclusive purpose of holding title to property, collecting income
 therefrom, and turning over the entire amount thereof, less expenses,
 to an organization or corporation described in subparagraph (A) or (C); or
 `(D) a savings and loan association of Federal savings bank issued or
 exchanged in connection with a transaction pursuant to which a savings and
 loan association or Federal savings bank converts from the mutual stock form
 of ownership under section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1464)
 or section 402 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1725(j)).'.
 (c) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN BANK AND SAVINGS ASSOCIATION INSTRUMENTS- Section
 3 of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77c) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d)(1) Except as hereinafter expressly provided, in those circumstances
 in which an interest in any of the following is otherwise deemed to be a
 `security' within the meaning of section 2, the provisions of this Act
 shall not apply to--
 `(A) a deposit account, savings account, certificate of deposit, or other
 deposit instrument issued by a bank or savings association,
 `(B) a share account issued by a savings association if such account is
 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 `(C) a banker's acceptance,
 `(D) a letter of credit issued by a bank or savings association, or
 `(E) a debit account at a bank or savings association arising from a
 credit card or other similar arrangement,
except that this paragraph shall not exempt from the provisions of this Act
any participation in such an interest, account, certificate, instrument,
acceptance, or letter of credit, other than a participation that is a direct
obligation of a bank or savings association.
 `(2) For purposes of this subsection, the term `deposit' means the unpaid
 balance of money or its equivalent received or held by a bank or savings
 association in the usual course of business--
 `(A) for which it has given or is obligated to give credit, either
 conditionally or unconditionally, to a commercial, checking, savings,
 time, or thrift account;
 `(B) which is evidenced by its certificate of deposit, a check or draft
 drawn against a deposit account and certified by a bank or savings
 association, a letter of credit or a traveler's check, or by any other
 similar instrument on which the bank is liable;
 `(C) which consists of nonpooled assets of individual trust funds received
 or held by such bank or savings association whether held in the trust
 department or deposited in any other department of such bank or savings
 association;
 `(D) which is received or held by a bank or savings association for
 a special or specific non-investment purpose, including, without being
 limited to, escrow funds, funds held in security for any obligation
 due to the bank or savings association or others (including funds held
 as dealers' reserves) or for securities loaned by the bank or savings
 association, funds deposited by a debtor to meet maturing subscriptions
 to United States Government securities, funds held to meet its acceptances
 or letters of credit, and withheld taxes; or
 `(E) which is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, is
 subject to deposit reserve requirements adopted by the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System, or is regulated by the Office of Depository
 Institution Supervision or Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System as a deposit.'.
 `(3) For purposes of this subsection, the term `savings association' shall
 have the meaning given in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
 as amended (12 U.S.C. 1813).'.
 (d) EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN HOLDING COMPANY FORMATIONS FROM REGISTRATION
 UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933- Section 4 of the Securities Act of 1933
 (15 U.S.C. 77d) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(7) transactions involving offers or sales of equity securities, in
 connection with the acquisition, under section 3(a) of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842(a)), of a bank by
 a financial services holding company, or a financial services holding
 company by a diversified holding company if--
 `(A) the acquisition occurs solely as part of a reorganization in which
 a person or group of persons--
 `(i) exchanges shares of a bank for shares of a newly formed financial
 services holding company, or shares of a financial services holding
 company for shares of a newly formed diversified holding company; and
 `(ii) receives, after such reorganization, substantially the same
 proportional share interests in the newly formed financial services holding
 company as they held in the bank or financial services holding company, as
 the case may be, except for changes in shareholders' interests resulting
 from the exercise of dissenting shareholders' rights under State or
 Federal law; and
 `(B) the newly formed company has substantially the same assets as its
 predecessor.'.
 (e) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 12(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 771(2)) is
 amended by inserting `or subsection (d)' after `subsection (a)'.
 (2) Section 304(a) (4) of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 (15 U.S.C. 77ddd
 (a)(4)) is amended by inserting `or by section 3(d)' after `section 3(a)'.
SEC. 242. AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934.
 (a) REGULATION OF BANK BROKER ACTIVITIES- Section 3 (a)(4) of the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(4)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) Broker-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `broker' means any person engaged in the business
 of effecting transactions in securities for the account of others.
 `(B) EXCLUSION OF BANKS- Such term does not include a bank unless
 the bank publicly solicits such business or is compensated for such
 business by the payment of commissions or similar remuneration based
 on effecting transactions in securities, excluding fees calculated as
 a percentage of assets under management (hereinafter referred to as
 `incentive compensation').
 `(C) BANK ACTIVITIES- A bank shall not be deemed to be a broker because
 it engages in one or more of the following activities:
 `(i) Enters into contractual or other arrangements with a broker or dealer
 registered under this Act pursuant to which the broker or dealer will
 offer brokerage services on or off the premises of the bank if--
 `(I) such broker or dealer is clearly identified as the person performing
 the brokerage services;
 `(II) bank employees perform only clerical or ministerial functions
 in connection with brokerage transactions unless such employees are
 qualified as registered representatives pursuant to the requirements of
 a self-regulatory organization;
 `(III) bank employees do not receive incentive compensation for any brokerage
 activities unless such employees are qualified as registered representatives
 pursuant to the requirements of a self-regulatory organization; and
 `(IV) such services are provided by the broker or dealer on a basis in
 which all customers are fully disclosed.
 `(ii) Engages in trust activities (including effecting transactions in
 the course of such trust activities) permissible for national banks under
 section 1 of Public Law 87-722 (12 U.S.C. 92a) or for State banks under
 relevant State trust statutes or law (excluding securities safekeeping,
 self-directed individual retirement accounts, or managed agency or other
 functionally equivalent accounts of a bank) unless the bank--
 `(I) publicly solicits brokerage business other than by advertising, in
 conjunction with advertising its other trust activities, that it effects
 transactions in securities; and
 `(II) receives incentive compensation.
 `(iii) Effects transactions in exempted securities, other than municipal
 securities, or in commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, or commercial
 bills.
 `(iv) Effects transactions in municipal securities and does not have a
 securities affiliate as provided in section 4(c)(15) of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(15)).
 `(v) Effects transactions as part of any bonus, profit-sharing, pension,
 retirement, thrift, savings, incentive, stock purchase, stock ownership,
 stock appreciation, stock option, dividend reinvestment, or similar plan
 for employees or shareholders of an issuer or its subsidiaries.
 `(vi) Effects transactions as part of a program for the investment or
 reinvestment of bank deposit funds into any no-load open-end investment
 company registered pursuant to the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.) that attempts to maintain a constant net asset value
 per share and has an investment policy calling for investment of at least
 80 percent of its assets in debt securities maturing in l3 months or less.
 `(vii) Effects transactions for the account of any affiliate of the bank,
 as the term `affiliate' is defined in section 2 of the Banking Act of
 1933 (12 U.S.C. 221a), treating all banks as member banks for purposes of
 such definition.
 `(viii) Effects sales--
 `(I) as part of a primary offering of securities by an issuer, not involving
 a public offering, pursuant to section 3(b), 4(2), or 4(6) of the Securities
 Act of 1933 and the rules and regulations thereunder; and
 `(II) exclusively to: a bank as defined in section 3(a)(2) of the Securities
 Act of 1933 whether acting in its individual or fiduciary capacity; an
 insurance company as defined in section 2(13) of the Securities Act of 1933;
 an investment company registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940
 or a business development company as defined in section 2(a)(48) of that
 Act; a Small Business Investment Company licensed by the Small Business
 Administration; an insured institution, as defined in section 401 of the
 National Housing Act; an employee benefit plan within the meaning of title 1
 of the Employee Retirement Security Act of 1974, if the investment decision
 is made by a plan fiduciary, as defined in Section 3(21) of such Act, that
 is a bank as defined in section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, or
 an insurance company as defined in section 2(17) of the Investment Company
 Act of 1940, or an investment adviser registered under the Investment
 Advisers Act of 1940, or if the employee benefit plan has total assets
 in excess of $5,000,000; an employee benefit plan as defined in section
 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, established
 and maintained by a State, its political subdivisions, or any agency or
 instrumentality of a State or its political subdivisions exclusively for
 the benefit of its employees or their beneficiaries that is governed by
 fiduciary principles comparable to those contained in such Act, if (i)
 the plan has total assets in excess of $25,000,000, and (ii) investment
 decisions for the plan are made by a plan fiduciary, as defined in Section
 3(21) of such Act, that is a bank as defined in section 3(a)(2) of the
 Securities Act of 1933, an insurance company as defined in section 2(17)
 of the Investment Company Act of l940, or an investment adviser registered
 under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940; a corporation with total assets in
 excess of $50,000,000 and net worth in excess of $5,000,000, as reflected on
 financial statements prepared in accordance with general accepted accounting
 principles; an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
 Revenue Code with total assets in excess of $5,000,000; a foreign bank,
 broker, dealer, insurance company, or government or government agency;
 or a natural person with a net worth exceeding $5,000,000. The dollar
 limitations in this clause shall be adjusted annually after December 31,
 1991, by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for
 Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers published monthly by the Bureau
 of Labor Statistics.
 `(ix) Effects fewer than 1,000 transactions per year in securities other
 than transactions described in clauses (i) through (viii), if the bank
 does not have a subsidiary or affiliate registered as a broker or dealer
 under this Act.'.
 (b) REGULATION OF BANK DEALER ACTIVITIES- Section 3(a)(5) of the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(5)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(5)(A) The term `dealer' means any person engaged in the business of buying
 and selling securities for his own account through a broker or otherwise.
 `(B) Such term does not include--
 `(i) any person insofar as that person buys or sells securities for his
 own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not
 as a part of a regular business; or
 `(ii) any bank insofar as the bank--
 `(I) buys and sells commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, or commercial
 bills, or exempted securities other than municipal securities;
 `(II) buys and sells municipal securities and does not have a securities
 affiliate as provided in section 4(c)(15) of the Financial Services Holding
 Company Act of 1991; or
 `(III) buys and sells securities for investment purposes for the bank
 or for accounts for which the bank, acting as a trustee or fiduciary,
 is authorized to determine the securities to be purchased or sold.'.
 (c) POWER TO EXEMPT FROM THE DEFINITIONS OF BROKER OR DEALER- Section
 3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c) is amended by
 inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e) The Commission, by rule, regulation, or order, upon its own motion or
 upon application, may conditionally or unconditionally exempt any person
 or class of persons from the definitions of `broker' or `dealer', if the
 Commission finds that such exemption is consistent with the public interest,
 the protection of investors, and the purposes of this Act.'.
 (d) REQUIREMENT THAT BANKS FALLING WITHIN THE DEFINITIONS OF BROKER OR
 DEALER PLACE THEIR SECURITIES ACTIVITIES IN A SEPARATE CORPORATE ENTITY-
 Section 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) It shall be unlawful for any broker or dealer that is either a
 person other than a natural person or a natural person not associated with
 a broker or dealer that is a person other than a natural person (other
 than such a broker or dealer whose business is exclusively intrastate and
 who does not make use of any facility of a national securities exchange)
 to make use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate
 commerce to effect any transactions in, or to induce or attempt to induce
 the purchase or sale of, any security (other than an exempted security or
 commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, or commercial bills) unless such
 broker or dealer is registered in accordance with subsection (b).
 `(2) It shall be unlawful for any bank to act as a broker or dealer,
 except in the course of an exclusively intrastate business. This section
 shall not preclude a subsidiary of a bank or an affiliate of a financial
 services holding company other than a bank, as those terms are defined
 in the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et
 seq.), that is registered in accordance with subsection (b) from acting
 as a broker or dealer to any extent otherwise permissible by law.
 `(3) The Commission, by rule or order, as it deems consistent with the
 public interest and the protection of investors, may conditionally or
 unconditionally exempt from paragraphs (1) and (2) any broker or dealer
 or class of brokers or dealers specified in such rule or order.'.
 (e) REGULATION OF TRANSACTIONS IN CERTAIN SECURITIES ON BANK PREMISES-
 Section 15 of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o)
 is amended by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection:
 `(f)(1) No bank may permit any evidence of indebtedness of, or ownership
 interest in, any affiliate of such bank to be sold or offered for sale to
 the general public in any part of any office (other than an office which
 is not located within any State) of such bank which is commonly accessible
 to the general public for the purpose of accepting deposits.
 `(2) No bank may permit any evidence of indebtedness of, or ownership
 interest in, such bank to be sold or offered for sale to the general public
 in any part of any office (other than an office which is not located within
 any State) of such bank which is commonly accessible to the general public
 for the purpose of accepting deposits.
 `(3) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) REGISTERED BROKERS AND DEALERS- This subsection shall not apply
 to transactions in shares of investment companies registered under the
 Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.) that are affiliated
 with the bank by or through a broker or dealer registered under this Act,
 if sales by or through such broker or dealer are subject to sales practice
 standards of a self-regulatory organization, provided the transactions--
 `(i) are consistent with the purposes of this subsection; and
 `(ii) are in the public interest.
 `(B) DEPOSITS, CERTAIN MEANS OF PAYMENT TO THIRD PARTIES AND CERTAIN OTHER
 INSTRUMENTS- This subsection shall not apply to any evidence of indebtedness
 or ownership interest which--
 `(i) is a deposit in an insured depository institution; or
 `(ii) constitutes a means of payment to a third party, such as a traveler's
 check, cashier's check, teller's check or money order.'.
 (f) SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT ADMINISTRATION TRANSFER- Section 12(i) of
 the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 781(i)) is repealed.
SEC. 243. AMENDMENTS TO THE INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940.
 (a) CUSTODY OF INVESTMENT COMPANY ASSETS BY AFFILIATE BANKS-
 (1) MANAGEMENT COMPANIES- Section 17(f) of the Investment Company Act of
 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-17(f)) is amended by striking `trusts' the first place
 it appears and inserting instead `trusts, but where any such bank or an
 affiliated person thereof is an affiliated person, promoter, sponsor, or
 organizer of, or principal underwriter for, such registered company, only
 in accordance with such rules and regulations or orders as the Commission
 may from time to time prescribe for the protection of investors, after
 consulting in writing with the appropriate Federal banking agency as defined
 in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)),'.
 (2) UNIT INVESTMENT TRUSTS- Section 26(a)(1) of the Investment Company Act of
 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-26(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `not affiliated with
 such underwriter or depositor, or where such bank is so affiliated, only in
 accordance with such rules and regulations or orders as the Commission may
 from time to time prescribe for the protection of investors after consulting
 in writing with the appropriate Federal banking agency as defined in section
 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)),' after `bank'.
 (b) INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS-
 (1) INTERESTED PERSONS- Section 2(a)(19)(A)(v) of the Investment Company
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(19)(A)(v)) is amended by striking `1934 or
 any affiliated person of such a broker or dealer' and inserting instead
 `1934 or any person that, at any time during the preceding 6 months,
 has acted as custodian or transfer agent or has executed any portfolio
 transactions for, engaged in any principal transactions with, or loaned
 money to, the investment company, or any other investment company having
 the same investment adviser, principal underwriter, sponsor, or promoter,
 or any affiliated person of such a broker, dealer, or person'.
 (2) AFFILIATION OF DIRECTORS- Section 10(c) of the Investment Company Act
 of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-10(c)) is amended by striking `bank, except' and
 inserting instead `bank and its subsidiaries or any financial services
 holding company and its affiliates and subsidiaries, as those terms
 are defined in the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12
 U.S.C. 1842 et seq.),'.
 (c) ADDITIONAL SEC RULEMAKING AUTHORITY REGARDING BANK AFFILIATED MUTUAL
 FUNDS- Section 38 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-37)
 is amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection:
 `(d) The Commission shall have the authority to promulgate such rules
 regarding loans, purchases or sales of assets, and other transactions
 involving a bank, an affiliated person, and an affiliated registered
 investment company.'.
 (d) ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURE AUTHORITY- Section 36(a) of the Investment
 Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-35(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, in issuing or selling any security
 of which a registered investment company is the issuer, to represent or
 imply in any manner whatsoever that such security or company has been
 guaranteed, sponsored, recommended, or approved by the United States or
 any agency or officer thereof or has been insured by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation or is guaranteed by or is otherwise an obligation of
 any bank or insured institution. If a financial services holding company,
 bank, or separately identifiable division or department of a bank, or any
 affiliate or subsidiary thereof, is an investment adviser, organizer,
 sponsor, promoter, principal underwriter, or an affiliated person of a
 registered investment company, or a bank or an affiliated person of a bank
 if offering or selling securities of a registered investment company, or the
 name of an investment company is that of, or similar to that of, a bank,
 pursuant to regulations adopted by the Commission, after consultation in
 writing with the appropriate federal banking agency as defined in section
 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), any person in
 issuing or selling securities of such investment company may be required
 to disclose prominently that the investment company and any security
 issued by it are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 are not guaranteed by an affiliated bank or insured institution, and are
 not otherwise an obligation of such a bank or insured institution. The
 Commission may determine by order as provided for in subsection (d),
 after consultation with the appropriate Federal banking agency (as defined
 in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)))
 that use of a name similar to that of a bank is deceptive and misleading. In
 that event, use of such name shall be unlawful as provided in subsection
 (d) and the Commission shall have the authority to take such actions as
 provided in that subsection.'.
 (e) DEFINITION OF BROKER- Section 2(a)(6) of the Investment Company Act
 of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(6)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) `Broker' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include any person solely by reason of the fact that
 such person is an underwriter for one or more investment companies.'.
 (f) DEFINITION OF DEALER- Section 2(a)(11) of the Investment Company Act
 of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(11) is amended to read as follows:
 `(11) `Dealer' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include an insurance company or investment company.'.
SEC. 244. REMOVAL OF THE EXCLUSION FROM THE DEFINITION OF INVESTMENT ADVISER
FOR BANKS THAT ADVISE INVESTMENT COMPANIES.
 (a) Section 202(a)(11) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15
 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(11)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking `investment company' and inserting
 instead `investment company, except that the term `investment adviser'
 includes any bank or financial services holding company to the extent
 such bank acts as an investment adviser to a registered investment company
 unless the bank performs such services through a separately identifiable
 department or division of the bank, in which case the department or division
 and not the bank shall be deemed to be the investment adviser'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: `For purposes of this
 paragraph, a separately identifiable department or division of a bank
 shall mean a unit that--
 `(A) is under the direct supervision of an officer or officers designated by
 appropriate Federal banking agency or directors of the bank as responsible
 for the day-to-day conduct of the bank's investment adviser activities
 for one or more investment companies, including the supervision of all
 bank employees engaged in the performance of such activities; and
 `(B) there are separately maintained in or extractable from such unit's
 own facilities or the facilities of the bank, all of the records relating
 to such investment adviser activities and such records are so maintained
 or otherwise accessible as to permit independent examination thereof and
 enforcement of the Act and rules and regulations thereunder.'.
 (b) DEFINITION OF BROKER- Section 202(a)(3) of the Investment Advisers
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) `Broker' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act
 of 1934.'.
 (c) DEFINITION OF DEALER- Section 202(a)(7) of the Investment Advisers
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(7)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(7) `Dealer' has the same meaning as in the Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, but does not include an insurance company or investment company.'.
 (d) NOTIFICATION AND CONSULTATION- The Investment Advisers Act of 1940
 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 210 the
 following new section:
`SEC. 210A. NOTIFICATION AND CONSULTATION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Commission, prior to the examination of, the entry
 of an order of investigation of, or the commencement of any disciplinary
 or law enforcement proceedings against, any financial services holding
 company, bank, or department or division of a bank that is a registered
 investment adviser shall give notice to the appropriate Federal banking
 agency as defined in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1813(q)), of the identity of such financial service holding company,
 bank, department or division and the nature of the proposed actions and
 shall consult in writing with such appropriate Federal banking agency
 concerning any such proposed action, unless the protection of investors
 requires immediate action by the Commission and prior notice or consultation
 is not practical under the circumstances, in which case notice shall be
 given and the appropriate Federal banking agency shall be notified and
 consulted as promptly as possible thereafter.
 `(b) EXAMINATION RESULTS- The Commission and the appropriate Federal banking
 agency shall exchange the results of any examination of any financial
 services holding company, bank, department or division of a bank that is
 a registered investment adviser concerning activities subject to this Act.
 `(c) EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITY- Nothing herein shall limit in any respect
 the authority of the appropriate Federal banking agency with respect to
 such financial services holding company, bank, or department or division
 under any provision of law.'.
SEC. 245. TREATMENT OF BANK COMMON TRUST FUNDS.
 (a) SECURITIES ACT OF 1933- Section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15
 U.S.C. 77c(a)(2)) is amended by striking `or any interest or participation
 in any common trust fund or similar fund maintained by a bank exclusively
 for the collective investment and reinvestment of assets contributed
 thereto by a bank in its capacity as trustee, executor, administrator,
 or guardian' and inserting instead `or any interest or participation in
 any common trust fund or similar fund excepted from the definition of the
 term `investment company' by section 3(c)(3) of the Investment Company Act
 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(c)(3))'.
 (b) SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934- Section 3(a)(12)(A)(iii) of the
 Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(l2)(A)(iii)) is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(iii) any interest or participation in any common trust fund or similar
 fund excepted from the definition of the term `investment company' by
 section 3(c)(3) of the Investment Company Act.'.
 (c) INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940- Section 3(c)(3) of the Investment
 Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(c)(3)) is amended by deleting the
 period at the end thereof and inserting the following:
`so long as--
 `(A) such fund is employed by the bank solely as an aid to the administration
 of trust, estates, and other accounts created and maintained for a
 fiduciary purpose;
 `(B) except in connection with generic advertising of the bank's fiduciary
 services, interests in such fund are not--
 `(i) advertised; or
 `(ii) offered for sale to the general public; and
 `(C) a fund is not charged any fees or expenses which, when added to any
 other compensation charged by the bank to a participant account, exceeds
 the total amount of compensation which would have been charged to such
 participant account if no assets of such participant account had been
 invested in interests in the fund, except that any reasonable and necessary
 expenses related to the prudent operation of the fund, as determined by
 the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision shall be permitted to
 be charged directly to the fund.'.
 (d) TAX EFFECT- Section 584 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26
 U.S.C. 584) is amended by inserting after subsection (g) the following
 new subsection:
 `(h) CONVERSION, MERGERS, OR REORGANIZATION OF COMMON TRUST FUNDS-
 Notwithstanding any other provision of the Internal Revenue Code, any
 transfer of all or substantially all of the assets of a common trust fund
 taxable under this section to a registered investment company taxable
 under subchapter M shall not result in a gain or loss to the participants
 in such common trust fund where the transfer is a result of a merger,
 conversion, reorganization, transfer, or other similar transaction or
 series of transactions.'.
SEC. 246. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION STUDY OF BANK AND INSURANCE
POOLED INVESTMENT VEHICLES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Securities and Exchange Commission, in consultation
 with the Secretary of Labor, shall examine--
 (1) the appropriate treatment of bank collective investment funds and
 separate accounts under the securities laws and the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.); and
 (2) the appropriate treatment of common trust funds under the securities
 laws.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Securities and Exchange Commission shall transmit to the Congress
 a final report which shall contain a detailed statement of findings
 and conclusions, including recommendations for such administrative and
 legislative action as the Commission deems advisable.
SEC. 247. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This subtitle shall become effective on January 1, 1993, except that
 section 246 shall become effective on the date of enactment of this Act.
Subtitle E--Prompt Corrective Action
SEC. 251. PROMPT CORRECTIVE ACTION.
 (a) SYSTEM OF PROMPT CORRECTIVE ACTION- The Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new section:
`SEC. 35. PROMPT CORRECTIVE ACTION.
 `(a) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) BANKING LAWS DEFINED- For the purposes of this section, the term
 `banking laws' means this Act, the National Bank Act, the Federal Reserve
 Act, the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991, the Change in
 Bank Control Act, the Bank Merger Act, the International Banking Act of
 1978, any other law codified in title 12 of the United States Code that
 is applicable to or affects insured banks or persons that own or control
 insured banks, and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
 `(2) CAPITAL DISTRIBUTION DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `capital distribution' means--
 `(A) A dividend or other distribution in cash or in kind made with respect
 to any shares or other ownership interest of any insured bank, except a
 dividend consisting only of shares of the bank or any amount paid on the
 deposits of a mutual savings bank that is determined by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency not to constitute a dividend;
 `(B) A payment made by an insured bank to repurchase, redeem, retire,
 or otherwise acquire any of its shares, including any extension of credit
 made to finance an affiliated company's acquisition of such shares; or
 `(C) A transaction that the appropriate Federal banking agency determines
 by order or regulation to be in substance the distribution of capital.
 `(3) COMPANY DEFINED- The term `company' shall have the same meaning as
 provided in section 2(b) of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of
 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841(b)).
 `(4) COMPENSATION DEFINED- The term `compensation' means any payment of
 money or provision of any other thing of current or potential value in
 connection with employment.
 `(5) DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANY DEFINED- The term `diversified holding
 company' shall have the same meaning as provided in section 2(a)(2) of
 the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841(a)(2)).
 `(6) EXECUTIVE OFFICER DEFINED- The term `executive officer' shall have
 the same meaning as provided in section 22(h) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (12 U.S.C. 375b).
 `(7) FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY DEFINED- The terms `financial
 services holding company' and `financial affiliate' shall have the same
 meaning as provided in section 2 of the Financial Services Holding Company
 Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1841).
 `(8) NEW FINANCIAL ACTIVITY DEFINED- The term `new financial activity'
 means any activity authorized pursuant to subsection (c)(8), (c)(15),
 or (c)(16) of section 4 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of
 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843) other than any activity that, prior to the date of
 enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of
 1991, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System had determined,
 by any order or regulation that continued to be in effect on December 31,
 1992, to be closely related to banking and a proper incident thereto.
 `(9) QUALIFIED FINANCIAL ACTIVITY DEFINED- The term `qualified financial
 activity' means any activity authorized pursuant to subsection (c)(8),
 (c)(15), or (c)(16) of section 4 of the Financial Services Holding Company
 Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843).
 `(b) CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO CAPITAL SUFFICIENCY-
 `(1) RELEVANT CAPITAL MEASURES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Unless otherwise provided pursuant to subparagraph (B),
 relevant capital measures for purposes of this section shall include--
 `(i) a risk-based capital ratio; and
 `(ii) a leverage limit.
 `(B) OTHER CAPITAL MEASURES- The appropriate Federal banking agency may,
 by regulation or guideline, establish any additional relevant capital
 measure or measures that are consistent with the purposes of this section,
 and may determine to eliminate any relevant capital measure established in
 subparagraph (A) upon a finding, after notice and opportunity for comment,
 that the measure is no longer an appropriate means for carrying out the
 purposes of this section.
 `(2) CONTENT OF RELEVANT CAPITAL MEASURES-
 `(A) RISK-BASED CAPITAL RATIO- The risk-based capital ratio shall be the
 risk-based capital standard adopted by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency.
 `(B) LEVERAGE LIMIT- The leverage limit shall be the leverage limit adopted
 by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(3) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO RELEVANT CAPITAL MEASURES- For purposes of
 this section `total assets' and `Tier 1 capital' shall have the meaning
 given those terms by the appropriate Federal banking agencies in the
 risk-based capital standards adopted by such agencies.
 `(4) DEFINITION OF CAPITAL ZONES- Unless otherwise reclassified pursuant
 to paragraph (7), for purposes of this section--
 `(A) ZONE 1- Zone 1 includes any insured bank that--
 `(i)(I) maintains a risk-based capital ratio that is significantly in excess
 of the required minimum ratio and Tier 1 capital that is significantly in
 excess of the required minimum for Tier 1 capital; or
 `(II) meets the required minimum risk-based capital ratio and maintains
 Tier 1 capital that is substantially in excess of the required minimum
 for Tier 1 capital; and
 `(ii) maintains capital that meets or exceeds the required minimum ratio
 for each other relevant capital measure.
 `(B) ZONE 2- Zone 2 includes any insured bank that--
 `(i) maintains capital in an amount that meets or exceeds the required
 minimum ratio for each relevant capital measure; and
 `(ii) is not within Zone 1.
 `(C) ZONE 3- Zone 3 includes any insured bank--
 `(i) that maintains capital that is below the required minimum ratio for
 any relevant capital measure; and
 `(ii) that is not within Zone 4 or Zone 5.
 `(D) ZONE 4- Zone 4 includes any insured bank--
 `(i) that maintains capital that is significantly below the required minimum
 ratio for any relevant capital measure, but that exceeds the applicable
 critical capital level; or
 `(ii) that is otherwise classified within Zone 4 under the provisions of
 this section.
 `(E) ZONE 5- Zone 5 includes any insured bank that maintains capital at
 or below the applicable critical capital level.
 `(5) REQUIRED MINIMUM RATIO- For purposes of this section, the required
 minimum ratio shall be the minimum acceptable capital level adopted by
 the appropriate Federal banking agency by regulation or guideline for each
 relevant capital measure.
 `(6) CRITICAL CAPITAL LEVEL-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The critical capital level shall be a level of capital
 that will, as a general matter, permit resolution of an insured bank's
 problems without significant financial loss to the Bank Insurance Fund. The
 critical capital level shall equal or exceed a ratio of Tier 1 capital to
 total assets of 1.5 percent.
 `(B) SEPARATE CRITICAL CAPITAL LEVELS- Consistent with subparagraph (A),
 separate critical capital levels may be established by the appropriate
 Federal banking agencies for different classes of insured banks according
 to size, activities, condition of assets, local economic conditions,
 or any other relevant factor consistent with the purposes of this section.
 `(7) RECLASSIFICATION- Notwithstanding paragraph (1), any insured bank
 that otherwise falls within Zone 1 or Zone 2 shall be deemed to be within
 Zone 3 if the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the bank
 is in an unsafe and unsound condition. Any such bank, and any other bank
 within Zone 3 which the appropriate Federal banking agency determines to
 be in an unsafe and unsound condition, may be reclassified to Zone 4 by
 the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(c) REGULATIONS AND OTHER AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each appropriate Federal banking agency, in consultation
 with the other appropriate Federal banking agency, shall promulgate
 regulations and take such other actions as are necessary to implement the
 provisions of this section. Each appropriate Federal banking agency is
 authorized to issue orders and take such other actions as are necessary
 or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(2) CAPITAL ZONES- Consistent with the purposes of this section,
 each appropriate Federal banking agency shall by regulation specify the
 applicable minimum capital ratios for each relevant capital measure in
 each capital zone established by this section.
 `(3) CRITICAL CAPITAL LEVEL- Consistent with subsection (b)(6), each
 appropriate Federal banking agency shall by regulation specify the critical
 capital level for each relevant capital measure consistent with the purposes
 and provisions of this section.
 `(4) CONSULTATION- In promulgating the regulations described in paragraphs
 (2) and (3), each appropriate Federal banking agency shall consult with
 the Corporation.
 `(d) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BANKS AND COMPANIES WITHIN ZONE 1-
 `(1) EXPANSION BY ZONE 1 BANKS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of the banking laws,
 any insured bank that qualifies under subparagraph (B) may--
 `(i) DE NOVO BRANCHES- Subject to the notice requirement of paragraph (3)(A),
 establish and maintain a new branch office at any location permitted under
 the banking laws, so long as the branch office is not the first branch
 office of the bank in a given State and the bank has an outstanding or
 satisfactory record of meeting community credit needs as determined pursuant
 to section 807 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2906);
 `(ii) COMMENCEMENT OF PERMISSIBLE ACTIVITIES DE NOVO- Subject to the notice
 requirement of paragraph (3)(A), commence, either directly or through
 a subsidiary, any activity that has been determined by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency under the banking laws to be permissible for such
 insured bank or such subsidiary; and
 `(iii) MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS BY BANKS- Subject to any applicable notice,
 application, and approval requirement of the banking laws as modified by
 paragraph (3)(B)--
 `(I) merge or consolidate with any other insured bank, acquire directly
 or indirectly the assets of any other insured bank, or assume liability
 directly or indirectly to pay any deposits made in any other insured bank; or
 `(II) acquire, directly or indirectly, the assets (other than assets acquired
 in the ordinary course of business), or all of the voting shares or control,
 of any company (other than an insured bank) that is engaged solely in
 activities that have been determined by regulation by the appropriate Federal
 banking agency under the banking laws to be permissible for an insured bank.
 `(B) QUALIFYING BANKS- An insured bank qualifies under this subparagraph
 if, both prior to and following consummation of the transaction or other
 expansion--
 `(i) the insured bank is within Zone 1; and
 `(ii) in the event the insured bank is controlled by a financial services
 holding company, the company qualifies as a Zone 1 financial services
 holding company as described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANIES WITHIN ZONE 1-
 `(A) A financial services holding company qualifies as a Zone 1 financial
 services holding company if insured depository institutions representing
 at least 80 percent of the assets of all insured depository institutions
 controlled by the company are within Zone 1, and the balance of the insured
 depository institutions controlled by the company are within Zone 2.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), an insured depository institution
 other than an insured bank shall be deemed to be within Zone 1 if, based
 upon the risk-based capital rule and leverage limit applicable to the
 institution, it meets the capital ratios adopted by the appropriate Federal
 banking agency of the financial services holding company for purposes of
 subsection (b)(4)(A).
 `(3) PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS FOR REVIEW-
 `(A) SUBSEQUENT NOTICE FOR CERTAIN ACTIONS- For actions described in
 paragraphs (1)(A)(i) and (1)(A)(ii), the insured bank shall provide the
 appropriate Federal banking agency with written notice no later than 30
 days following such action.
 `(B) LIMITATION ON REVIEW PERIOD FOR PROPOSED TRANSACTIONS- Notwithstanding
 any other provision of the banking laws, the appropriate Federal banking
 agency shall make a decision to approve or disapprove any proposed
 transaction described in paragraph (1)(A)(iii) no later than 45 days after
 the date of receipt of the completed notice or application.
 `(C) REVIEW STANDARDS- The appropriate Federal banking agency may disapprove
 any proposed transaction described in subsection (c)(1)(A)(iii) involving
 an insured bank within Zone 1 only--
 `(i) pursuant to section 18(c)(5) (A) or (B); or
 `(ii) if the appropriate Federal banking agency determines--
 `(I) that the insured bank or any other insured bank controlled by the
 same financial services holding company is engaging in an unsafe and
 unsound practice or will be in an unsafe and unsound condition following
 the transaction; or
 `(II) that the proposed transaction is inconsistent with the convenience
 and needs of the community to be served.
 `(D) FORM OF NOTICES- Each appropriate Federal banking agency shall by
 regulation establish the form and content of the notice required under
 subparagraph (A).
 `(4) EFFECT OF NOTICE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION-
 `(A) SUBSEQUENT NOTICE- Any notice required under paragraph (3)(A) shall
 supersede any other notice or application requirement under the banking
 laws imposed on the insured bank in connection with the proposed transaction
 or other expansion.
 `(B) OTHER REQUIREMENTS CONTINUE TO APPLY TO ACTIVITY- Except as provided
 in this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall relieve any insured
 bank or any subsidiary thereof from the provisions of any law or regulation
 applicable to that institution or subsidiary.
 `(5) RESTRICTIONS ON EXPANSION RESULTING IN RECLASSIFICATION BELOW ZONE 2-
 `(A) The appropriate Federal banking agency shall not approve or permit any
 investment, expansion, acquisition, or other proposal subject to review under
 any provision of the banking laws that would result in reclassification of
 an insured bank from Zone 1 to Zone 3 or 4, unless the agency finds that
 the transaction substantially improves the financial condition of an insured
 bank involved in the transaction or is consistent with a capital restoration
 plan approved by the agency and meets the other standards required to be
 reviewed by the agency in considering such proposals under the banking laws.
 `(B) The appropriate Federal banking agency shall not approve or permit
 any investment, expansion, acquisition, or other proposal subject to review
 under any provision of the banking laws that would result in reclassification
 of an insured bank to Zone 5.
 `(6) LOSS OF ZONE 1 STATUS AFTER EXPANSION-
 `(A) CAPITAL MUST BE PROMPTLY RESTORED- Any financial services holding
 company that--
 `(i) engages, directly or indirectly, in any new financial activity,
 directly or indirectly controls any company engaged in any new financial
 activity, or is controlled by a diversified holding company, and
 `(ii) does not continue to qualify under subsection (d)(2), or does not
 qualify under such subsection within such time period as is specified by
 the appropriate Federal banking agency pursuant to section 4(k) of the
 Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1843(k)),
must either restore the capital of insured banks controlled by such financial
services holding company to at least the levels required for the company to
requalify under subsection (d)(2) or take the actions required in subparagraph
(B). A financial services holding company shall be given a period of at
least 45 days within which to restore such capital.
 `(B) REQUIRED ACTIONS- Any financial services holding company that does
 not requalify under subsection (d)(2) within the applicable period under
 subparagraph (A) must--
 `(i) immediately post a bond in an amount equal to the amount necessary
 to restore the capital of the insured depository institutions controlled
 by such company to at least the level required to permit the company
 to requalify under subsection (d)(2) as of the date the bond is posted,
 which bond shall be subject to forfeiture as necessary to reimburse the
 Corporation for any funds expended for resolution of the insured depository
 institutions controlled by such company; and
 `(ii)(I) within the time period provided in subsection (i), submit to the
 appropriate Federal banking agency and, after its acceptance, implement
 a capital plan that meets the requirements of such subsection and will
 restore the relevant capital measures to the level necessary to requalify
 under subsection (d)(2); or
 `(II) within one year from the date the company originally failed to meet
 the requirements of subsection (d)(2)--
 `(aa) divest any interest in any insured depository institution; or
 `(bb) terminate all direct or indirect new financial activities and divest
 any interest in any company engaged in any such activity.
 `(C) If the financial services holding company does not complete the actions
 required by either clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B), the appropriate
 Federal banking agency may appoint a conservator for any insured depository
 institution controlled by such company that maintains capital below the
 level necessary for the company to requalify under subsection (d)(2).
 `(D) ALTERATION OF COMPLIANCE PERIOD-
 `(i) EXTENSION OF COMPLIANCE PERIOD- The appropriate Federal banking
 agency may extend the period provided in subparagraph (B)(ii)(II) for up to
 one year if the agency finds that the financial services holding company
 has taken significant steps toward restoring the capital of the insured
 depository institutions controlled by that company to at least the levels
 required for the company to requalify under subsection (d)(2).
 `(ii) SHORTENING OF COMPLIANCE PERIOD FOR FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CAPITAL
 IN ZONE 1- The appropriate Federal banking agency may, by regulation,
 establish shorter divestiture and termination periods under subparagraph
 (B)(ii)(II) applicable to any financial services holding company that
 fails to continue to qualify under subsection (d)(2) after having once
 fallen out of qualification from subsection (d)(2).
 `(E) APPLICABILITY TO DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- If a financial
 services holding company to which this paragraph applies is controlled
 by a diversified holding company, and the financial services holding
 company does not complete the actions under either subparagraph (A) or (B)
 (other than clause (ii)(II)(bb) of subparagraph (B)), then the diversified
 holding company must, within the same time period specified in subparagraph
 (B)(ii)(II), divest any interest in the financial services holding company
 or terminate all direct or indirect activities not permitted for a financial
 services holding company.
 `(e) MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS APPLICABLE TO INSURED BANKS WITHIN ZONE 2-
 `(1) RESTRICTIONS ON EXPANSION-
 `(A) EXPANSION RESULTING IN RECLASSIFICATION-
 `(i) The appropriate Federal banking agency shall not approve or permit
 any investment, expansion, acquisition, or other proposal subject to
 review under the banking laws that would result in reclassification of an
 insured bank to Zone 3 or 4, unless the agency finds that the transaction
 substantially improves the financial condition of an insured bank involved in
 the transaction or is consistent with a capital restoration plan approved
 by the agency and meets the other standards required to be reviewed by
 the agency in considering such proposals under the banking laws.
 `(ii) The appropriate Federal banking agency shall not approve or permit
 any investment, expansion, acquisition, or other proposal subject to review
 under the banking laws that would result in reclassification to Zone 5.
 `(B) UNSAFE AND UNSOUND PRACTICES OR CONDITION- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall not approve any investment, expansion, acquisition,
 or other proposal involving an insured bank within Zone 2 or a financial
 services holding company which controls an insured bank within Zone 2 if
 the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the insured bank
 involved in the investment, expansion, acquisition, or other proposal, or
 any other insured bank controlled by the same financial services holding
 company is engaging in an unsafe and unsound practice or is in an unsafe
 and unsound condition.
 `(2) CAPITAL DISTRIBUTIONS-
 `(A) LIMITATION- No insured bank within Zone 2 shall make any capital
 distribution that would cause the bank to be reclassified within Zone 4
 or Zone 5. An insured bank within Zone 2 may make a capital distribution
 that would cause the bank to be reclassified within Zone 3, if the bank
 provides the appropriate Federal banking agency with 30 days written notice
 of such distribution and the agency has not issued a notice of disapproval.
 `(B) STANDARDS FOR DISAPPROVAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall not disapprove payment of a capital distribution by an insured bank
 under this subparagraph unless the appropriate Federal banking agency
 determines that the capital distribution will not enhance the bank's
 ability to restore its capital to Zone 2 or otherwise determines that the
 distribution is not in the public interest.
 `(3) EXCEPTIONS TO MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency may modify, defer, or remove any mandatory supervisory
 action applicable under this section to an insured bank within Zone 2
 or a company that controls an insured bank within Zone 2 if the agency
 determines in writing that such action is in the public interest.
 `(f) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO INSTITUTIONS WITHIN ZONE 3-
 `(1) MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- In addition to the supervisory actions
 applicable under Zones 1 and 2, the following mandatory supervisory actions
 shall apply with respect to any insured bank within Zone 3:
 `(A) CAPITAL RESTORATION PLAN- Every insured bank within Zone 3 shall,
 within the time period provided in subsection (i), submit to the appropriate
 Federal banking agency and, after its acceptance, implement a capital
 plan that meets the requirements of subsection (i) and will restore the
 relevant capital measures of the bank to at least the levels required for
 classification within Zone 2.
 `(B) RESTRICTION ON CAPITAL DISTRIBUTIONS.
 `(i) PRIOR AGENCY APPROVAL REQUIRED- No insured bank within Zone 3 shall
 make any capital distribution, or pay any management fee to a person or
 affiliate controlling such bank, that would cause the bank to be reclassified
 within Zone 4 or Zone 5. No insured bank within Zone 3 shall make any other
 capital distribution or pay any other such management fee unless the bank
 receives the prior approval of the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(ii) STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 may approve payment of a capital distribution or management fee by an
 insured bank within Zone 3 only if the agency determines that the capital
 distribution will enhance the ability of the bank promptly to restore its
 capital to Zone 2 or is otherwise in the public interest.
 `(C) RESTRICTION ON EXPANSION- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall not approve or permit any investment, expansion, acquisition or other
 similar action subject to review under the banking laws by an insured bank
 within Zone 3, by a financial services holding company that controls an
 insured bank within Zone 3, or by any affiliate of the insured bank unless
 the agency finds that the transaction furthers achievement of the capital
 restoration plan approved by the agency for the insured bank and meets the
 other standards required to be reviewed by the agency in considering such
 proposals under the banking laws.
 `(D) EFFECT ON FINANCIAL SERVICES AND DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- Any
 financial services holding company and any diversified holding company
 that controls an insured bank within Zone 3 shall, after 45 days after
 the latest of the date on which the bank becomes a Zone 3 bank, the
 date on which the financial services holding company acquires the bank,
 or the effective date of this provision, become subject to the following
 requirements and shall remain subject to such requirements until such time
 as the capital of the bank is restored to at least Zone 2 or the company
 divests any interest in the bank:
 `(i) CONSOLIDATED CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS- The financial services holding
 company and diversified holding company shall maintain capital, for each
 relevant capital measure, on a consolidated basis, at least equal to the
 required minimum capital ratio applicable to the principal bank subsidiary
 of the financial services holding company as defined in section 3(q)(2).
 `(ii) RESTRICTION ON CAPITAL DISTRIBUTION- The diversified holding
 company may make a capital distribution only with the prior approval of
 the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(iii) OTHER PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION- The financial services holding
 company (and any affiliate it controls) and each financial affiliate
 controlled by the diversified holding company shall be subject to the
 mandatory supervisory actions of this paragraph as if the company were an
 insured bank within Zone 3.
 `(E) RECLASSIFICATION OF ZONE 3 INSTITUTIONS TO ZONE 4- Without being
 relieved of any of the requirements applicable to insured banks within
 Zone 3, an insured bank within Zone 3 shall immediately be reclassified
 as within Zone 4, and shall be subject to all of the provisions applicable
 to insured banks within Zone 4, if--
 `(i) the bank does not submit the capital restoration plan required in
 subparagraph (A) within the time required by the appropriate Federal
 banking agency; or
 `(ii) the appropriate Federal banking agency is not satisfied that the
 bank is making every effort in good faith to fulfill completely the capital
 plan within the schedule approved by the agency.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS TO MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency may modify, defer, or remove any mandatory supervisory
 action applicable under this section to an insured bank within Zone 3
 or a company that controls an insured bank within Zone 3 if the agency
 determines in writing that such action is in the public interest.
 `(3) DISCRETIONARY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- Without limiting in any way
 the existing authority of any appropriate Federal banking agency, the
 appropriate Federal banking agency may, at any time, based upon a finding
 that the insured bank is within Zone 3--
 `(A) RESTRICT GROWTH- Restrict or eliminate growth of the bank's assets,
 or require contraction of the assets of the bank.
 `(B) RESTRICT DISTRIBUTIONS- Restrict the insured bank and any company
 that controls the insured bank from making any capital distribution.
 `(C) LIMIT INCREASE IN LIABILITIES--Limit any increase in, or order the
 reduction of, any liabilities of the bank.
 `(D) REQUIRE ISSUANCE OF NEW CAPITAL- Require the bank to issue new capital
 in any form and in any amount sufficient to restore the bank to at least
 the capital levels required for Zone 2.
 `(E) RESTRICT ACTIVITIES- Require the bank to terminate, reduce or alter
 any activity, if the agency determines that the activity creates excessive
 risk to the bank.
 `(F) DISMISS DIRECTORS OR CHIEF OFFICERS-
 `(i) For cause, require the bank to dismiss from office at the bank
 any or all of the following persons if the person accepted employment,
 accepted a new position, or renewed any contract for employment in the
 same position at the insured bank following enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991 and the person has
 been employed in that position at the insured bank for at least 180 days--
 `(I) any member of the institution's board of directors;
 `(II) the chief executive officer;
 `(III) the chief financial officer; or
 `(IV) any other executive officer.
 `(ii) Dismissal under clause (i) shall not be construed as removal under
 section 8 of this Act.
 `(G) LIMIT EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION- Require the bank to reduce or eliminate
 any or all of the following for any executive officer who accepted
 employment, accepted a new position, or renewed any contract for employment
 as an executive officer at the bank following enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991--
 `(i) any bonus;
 `(ii) any compensation at a rate exceeding that officer's average rate of
 compensation during the previous 12 calendar months; and
 `(iii) any payment that is or would be due under any employment severance
 contract.
 `(H) REQUIRE NEW ELECTION OF DIRECTORS- Require a new election of the
 board of directors of the bank and designate such individuals as the agency
 deems appropriate to serve on the board of directors.
 `(I) REQUIRE DIVESTITURE, LIQUIDATION OR CLOSURE OF AFFILIATE- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency may require any insured bank in Zone
 3 or any company that controls an insured bank in Zone 3 to divest any
 affiliate (other than an insured bank) if the appropriate Federal banking
 agency determines that the affiliate is in danger of default and poses
 significant risk to the liquidity or solvency of the bank or is likely to
 cause a significant dissipation of its assets or earnings.
 `(4) NOTICE TO THE CORPORATION- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall give the Corporation prompt notice of any action under this subsection.
 `(g) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO INSTITUTIONS WITHIN ZONE 4-
 `(1) MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- In addition to the supervisory actions
 applicable under Zone 1, and the mandatory supervisory sections under
 Zones 2 and 3, the following mandatory supervisory actions shall apply
 with respect to any insured bank within Zone 4:
 `(A) CAPITAL RESTORATION PLAN- Unless an insured bank within Zone 4 has
 submitted a capital restoration plan acceptable to the appropriate Federal
 banking agency pursuant to subsection (f), it shall, within the time provided
 under subsection (i), submit to the appropriate Federal banking agency and,
 after its acceptance, implement a capital plan that meets the requirements
 of subsection (i) and will restore the relevant capital measures of the
 institution to at least the levels required for classification within Zone 2.
 `(B) PROHIBITION ON CAPITAL DISTRIBUTIONS- No insured bank within Zone 4
 shall make any capital distribution or pay any management fee to a person
 or affiliate controlling such bank.
 `(C) PROHIBITION ON EXPANSION- No insured bank within Zone 4, or financial
 services holding company controlling any insured bank within Zone 4, shall,
 directly or indirectly--
 `(i) acquire any interest in any insured depository institution or any
 company that is not an insured depository institution;
 `(ii) establish or acquire additional branch offices in any State; or
 `(iii) engage in any new activity.
 `(D) EFFECT ON FINANCIAL SERVICES AND DIVERSIFIED HOLDING COMPANIES- Any
 financial services holding company and any diversified holding company
 that controls an insured bank within Zone 4 shall, until such time as the
 relevant capital measures of the insured bank are restored to at least the
 levels required for classification within Zone 2 or the company divests any
 interest in the bank, be subject to the requirements of clauses (i) and (ii)
 of subsection (f)(1)(D) and to the mandatory supervisory actions of this
 paragraph as if the company were an insured bank within the relevant zone.
 `(E) LIMITATION ON ASSET GROWTH-
 `(i) An insured bank within Zone 4 shall not increase its total assets,
 except as permitted under clause (ii).
 `(ii) Notwithstanding clause (i), the appropriate Federal banking agency
 may permit a bank within Zone 4 to increase its total assets by an amount
 not exceeding the amount of net interest credited to the bank's deposit
 liabilities, if--
 `(I) the agency has accepted the bank's capital restoration plan;
 `(II) any increase in assets is accompanied by an increase in capital in
 an amount not less than the increase in assets multiplied by the respective
 relevant capital measures for Zone 2 banks; and
 `(III) the bank's capital levels increase at a rate sufficient to enable the
 bank to satisfy the bank's capital restoration plan within a reasonable time.
 `(F) LIMITATION ON COMPENSATION- An insured bank within Zone 4 may not pay
 to any executive officer who accepted employment, accepted a new position,
 or renewed any contract for employment as an executive officer at the
 insured bank following enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and
 Consumer Choice Act of 1991--
 `(i) any bonus; or
 `(ii) any compensation at a rate exceeding that officer's average rate of
 compensation during the previous 12 calendar months.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS TO MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency may modify, defer, or remove any mandatory supervisory action
 authorized by this section from an insured bank within Zone 4 or a company
 that controls an insured bank within Zone 4 if the agency determines in
 writing that such action is in the public interest.
 `(3) DISCRETIONARY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- Without limiting in any way the
 existing authority of any appropriate Federal banking agency, the appropriate
 Federal banking agency may, at any time, take any of the following actions
 based upon a finding that the insured bank is within Zone 4--
 `(A) DISCRETIONARY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS PERMITTED UNDER ZONE 2 OR ZONE 3-
 Take any discretionary supervisory action authorized under subsection
 (f)(3) in connection with an insured bank within Zone 4 or a company that
 controls an insured bank within Zone 4.
 `(B) RESTRICT INTERAFFILIATE TRANSACTIONS- Restrict or eliminate any
 transaction between the insured bank and any affiliate.
 `(C) REQUIRE DIVESTITURE OR LIQUIDATION OF AFFILIATE- Require the bank or
 any company that controls the bank to divest any affiliate that is not an
 insured bank, if the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that
 the affiliate is in danger of default.
 `(D) LIMIT EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION- Require the bank to reduce or eliminate
 any compensation to any executive officer who accepted employment,
 accepted a new position, or renewed any contract for employment as an
 executive officer at the insured bank following enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991 if the appropriate
 Federal banking agency determines the compensation to be excessive.
 `(E) REQUIRE DIVESTITURE OF BANK- Require any company that controls a bank
 within Zone 4 to divest the bank, if the appropriate Federal banking agency
 determines that such divestiture would improve the financial condition
 and future prospects of the bank.
 `(F) DISMISS DIRECTORS OR CHIEF OFFICERS-
 `(i) Require the insured bank to dismiss from office at the bank any or all
 of the following persons if the person accepted employment, accepted a new
 position, or renewed any contract for employment in the same position at the
 bank following enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer
 Choice Act of 1991 and the person has been employed in that position at
 the bank for at least 180 days--
 `(I) any member of the bank's board of directors;
 `(II) the chief executive officer;
 `(III) the chief financial officer; or
 `(IV) any other executive officer.
 `(ii) Dismissal under clause (i) shall not be construed as removal under
 section 8 of this Act.
 `(G) CONSERVATORSHIP- Appoint a conservator for the bank.
 `(4) NOTICE TO THE CORPORATION- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall give the Corporation prompt notice of any action under this subsection.
 `(h) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BANKS WITHIN ZONE 5-
 `(1) MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- The appropriate Federal banking agency
 shall, not later than 30 days after determining that an insured bank is
 within Zone 5--
 `(A) require the sale or merger of the insured bank; or
 `(B) appoint a conservator or receiver for the bank and any such
 conservator or receiver shall have full authority, in its sole discretion,
 to liquidate or sell the insured bank, to take any actions authorized
 under subsections (f) and (g) not inconsistent with the powers of the
 conservator or receiver, and to take any other actions authorized pursuant
 to the provisions applicable to conservators and receivers, respectively,
 under the banking laws.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS TO MANDATORY SUPERVISORY ACTIONS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency may modify, defer, or remove any mandatory supervisory
 action applicable under this section to an insured bank within Zone 5
 or a company that controls an insured bank within Zone 5 if the agency
 determines in writing, with the concurrence of the Corporation, that such
 action is in the public interest.
 `(i) CAPITAL RESTORATION PLANS-
 `(1) CONTENTS OF PLAN- A capital restoration plan submitted under this
 section shall be a feasible plan for promptly restoring the levels of capital
 for all relevant capital measures of the insured bank to at least the levels
 required by the subsection pursuant to which the capital restoration plan
 is ordered. A capital restoration plan must--
 `(A) specify the levels of capital the bank will achieve and maintain;
 `(B) describe the steps the bank will take to restore each of the relevant
 capital measures for the bank to the required levels;
 `(C) establish a schedule for promptly completing the capital restoration
 plan;
 `(D) specify the types and levels of activities in which the bank will
 engage during the pendency of the capital restoration plan;
 `(E) explain the steps that the bank will take to comply with any mandatory
 and discretionary requirements imposed under the banking laws; and
 `(F) be acceptable to the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(2) DEADLINES FOR SUBMISSION OF CAPITAL RESTORATION PLAN- Each appropriate
 Federal banking agency shall by regulation establish deadlines that provide
 insured banks a reasonable period of time to submit a capital restoration
 plan acceptable to the agency. Unless the agency shall determine that a
 greater amount of time is necessary, the time allowed by regulation should
 be no greater than 30 days.
 `(3) AGENCY REVIEW OF CAPITAL RESTORATION PLANS- The appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall review and act on a capital restoration plan not
 later than 30 days after the plan is submitted, except that such period
 may be extended by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(j) Judicial Review of Agency Action-
 `(1) JURISDICTION-
 `(A) FILING OF PETITION- A person aggrieved by an action of an appropriate
 Federal banking agency under this section may obtain review of that action
 by filing, within ten days after receiving notice of the agency action,
 a written petition requesting that the action of the agency be modified,
 terminated or set aside.
 `(B) PLACE FOR FILING- A petition filed pursuant to this subsection shall
 be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
 Circuit or the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the
 concerned bank maintains its home office. For purposes of this subparagraph,
 the `concerned bank' shall mean the bank whose classification within a
 particular zone is the basis for the agency action of which the person
 aggrieved complains.
 `(C) PERSON AGGRIEVED DEFINED- A person aggrieved by the action of an
 appropriate Federal banking agency under this section shall mean--
 `(i) the company ordered to make a divestiture or terminate activities,
 with respect to an order under this section directing a company to divest
 an insured bank or other company or to terminate activities pursuant to
 this section;
 `(ii) the insured bank or company that is the subject of a mandatory or
 discretionary supervisory action and any company that controls such a
 bank, with respect to a mandatory or discretionary supervisory action
 taken under this section for banks within Zone 3, Zone 4 or Zone 5;
 `(iii) the person dismissed, with respect to an order under this section
 for the dismissal of a director, chief executive officer, chief financial
 officer or other executive officer; and
 `(iv) the person whose compensation, bonus or severance payment has been
 reduced or eliminated, with respect to an order under this section reducing
 or eliminating such payments due an executive officer.
 `(2) SCOPE OF REVIEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), action taken by an
 appropriate Federal banking agency under this section shall be modified,
 terminated, or set aside only if the court finds on the record on which
 the agency acted that the agency's action was arbitrary, capricious,
 an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 `(B) ALTERNATE REVIEW OF CERTAIN AGENCY ACTIONS- Notwithstanding
 the provisions of this subsection, a person aggrieved by an order
 of an appropriate Federal banking agency placing an insured bank into
 conservatorship or receivership may pursue any judicial review of such an
 order that is otherwise available under the banking laws.
 `(3) UNAVAILABILITY OF INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- The commencement of proceedings
 for judicial review pursuant to this subsection shall not operate as a
 stay of any action taken by the appropriate Federal banking agency. No
 court shall have jurisdiction to stay, enjoin or otherwise delay agency
 action taken under this section pending judicial review of that action.
 `(4) EXPEDITED REVIEW- Petitions complaining of agency action under this
 section shall be given expedited review by the United States Circuit Courts
 of Appeals.
 `(5) WITHDRAWAL OF JURISDICTION- Except as provided in this subsection,
 no court shall have jurisdiction to affect by injunction or otherwise the
 issuance or effectiveness of any action of the appropriate Federal banking
 agency under this section or to review, modify, suspend, terminate, or
 set aside such agency action.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT- Revision of Enforcement Provisions. Section 8(i) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by inserting `or under section
 35' after `section'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A)(ii), by inserting `, or final order under section
 35' after `section'.
 (c) JURISDICTION-
 (1) AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 28, UNITED STATES CODE- Chapter 91 of title 28 of
 the United States Code is amended--
 (A) by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 1510. JURISDICTION FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS AGAINST APPROPRIATE FEDERAL
BANKING AGENCIES.
 `The United States Claims Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to render
 judgment upon any claim for damages against the United States by any person
 who has petitioned for judicial review of an action of an appropriate Federal
 banking agency pursuant to section 35 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
 where such action has been, at the conclusion of judicial review proceedings,
 modified, terminated or set aside by a court of competent jurisdiction. The
 claim shall be limited to actual damages caused by the agency action that
 has been modified, terminated or set aside, and shall be filed within 10
 days of the final order granting the relief sought in the petition.'; and
 (B) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item relating to
 section l509 the following new item:
`1510. Jurisdiction for certain claims against appropriate Federal banking
agencies.'.
 (2) WITHDRAWAL OF JURISDICTION- Except as provided in section 1510 of
 title 28, United States Code, no court shall have jurisdiction to hear
 a claim for damages for agency action under section 35 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act.
 (d) ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR APPOINTMENT OF FDIC AS CONSERVATOR OR RECEIVER
 FOR STATE BANK- Section 11(c)(5) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1821(c)(5)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subparagraphs:
 `(I) For appointment of the Corporation as a receiver, classification of
 the institution as a Zone 5 institution by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency pursuant to section 35 of this Act.
 `(J) For appointment of the Corporation as a conservator, classification
 of the institution as a Zone 4 or Zone 5 institution by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency pursuant to section 35 of this Act.'.
 (e) ADDITIONAL GROUND FOR APPOINTING CONSERVATOR FOR NATIONAL BANKS-
 Section 203(a) of the Bank Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 203(a)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or was' after `there is' in paragraph (5);
 (2) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (7);
 (3) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting instead
 `; or'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) the bank is classified as a Zone 4 or Zone 5 institution by the
 appropriate Federal banking agency pursuant to section 35 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 (f) APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATORS AND RECEIVERS BY THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS-
 Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 321 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new paragraph--
 `(24) APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATOR OR RECEIVER-
 `(A) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may appoint
 a receiver for an insured State bank (except a District bank chartered
 by the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision) in
 the same manner and to the same extent that the Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision may appoint a receiver for a national
 banking association pursuant to the first section of the Act of June 30,
 1876 (12 U.S.C. 191).
 `(B) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may appoint a
 conservator for an insured State bank (except a District bank chartered
 by the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision) in
 the same manner and to the same extent that the Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision may appoint a conservator for a national
 banking association pursuant to section 203 of the Bank Conservation Act
 (12 U.S.C. 203).'.
 (g) APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATORS AND RECEIVERS FOR DISTRICT BANKS-
 Section 5(d)(2)(C) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2)(C))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `a District bank chartered by the Director' after `State
 savings association';
 (2) by striking `or' at the end of clause (v);
 (3) in clause (vi)--
 (A) by inserting `or was' after `there is'; and
 (B) by striking the period and inserting instead `; or'; and
 (4) by inserting after clause (vi) the following new clause:
 `(vii) in the case of a District bank chartered by the Director--
 `(I) for appointment of a receiver, classification of the bank as a Zone 5
 institution by the Director pursuant to section 35 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act; or
 `(II) for appointment of a conservator, classification of the bank as a
 Zone 4 or a Zone 5 institution by the Director pursuant to section 35 of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 (h) APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATORS AND RECEIVERS FOR INSURED STATE BANKS-
 Section 11(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(c))
 is amended by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph:
 `(10) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the `Board')
 shall appoint the Corporation as receiver for any insured State bank (other
 than a District bank chartered by the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision) that the Board classifies as within Zone 5 and for which the
 Board determines to appoint a receiver authorized by section 35(h).'.
 (i) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall become
 effective three years after the date of enactment of this Act, except that
 such amendments shall become effective January 1, 1993, with respect to
 financial services holding companies with bank subsidiaries meeting the
 requirements of Zone 1 or 2 as described in section 35 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act that wish to engage in any new financial activity.
Subtitle F--Nationwide Banking and Branching
SEC. 261. NATIONWIDE BANKING.
 (a) Section 3(f) of the Financial Services Holding Company Act (12
 U.S.C. 1842(f)), as redesignated by section 202(a)(4), is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(f) Interstate Acquisitions-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency may approve
 an application under this section for a diversified holding company,
 financial services holding company, or foreign bank to acquire, directly
 or indirectly, any voting shares of, interest in, or all or substantially
 all of, the assets of any additional insured depository institution or
 financial services holding company located in any State.
 `(2) STATE LAWS- Any acquisition described in paragraph (1) that has been
 approved under this section may be consummated notwithstanding any State
 law that would prohibit or otherwise limit such acquisition on the basis of--
 `(A) the location or size of the acquiring diversified holding company or
 financial services holding company or foreign bank or any subsidiary of
 such company or foreign bank;
 `(B) the number of insured depository institution subsidiaries of such
 diversified holding company or financial services holding company or
 foreign bank; or
 `(C) any factor that has the effect, directly or indirectly, of prohibiting
 or limiting the acquisition of shares or control of an insured depository
 institution or financial services holding company located in that State by
 an out-of-State diversified holding company or financial services holding
 company or foreign bank without such factor having a similar effect on such
 acquisitions by financial services holding companies located in that State.'.
 (b) The amendment made by this section shall become effective three years
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 262. INTERSTATE BRANCHING BY NATIONAL BANKS.
 (a) LOCATION OF BRANCHES- Section 5155(c) of the Revised Statutes (12
 U.S.C. 36(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the first period and inserting instead
 `; and';
 (3) by inserting after `; and' as added by paragraph (2) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(3) at an initial location within any State in which a financial services
 holding company having the same home State as such association could acquire
 a bank pursuant to section 3 of the Financial Services Holding Company
 Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842) or at an initial location within any State in
 which a State bank chartered in the home State of such association could
 establish a branch, and, thereafter, at any point within those States to
 the extent permitted in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) for associations
 situated in those States.'; and
 (4) by inserting at the end thereof the following new sentence: `A State,
 other than the State in which the principal office of a national banking
 association is a host State, may require any national banking association
 establishing a branch within the host State to comply with such filing
 requirements as are otherwise imposed on a corporation that is incorporated
 in another State and seeks to engage in business in the host State.'.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- Section 5155 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 36)
 is further amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
 `(f) The term `branch' as used in this section shall mean any office,
 agency, or other place of business located in any State or Territory of
 the United States or in the District of Columbia at which deposits are
 received, checks paid, or money lent.'; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsections:
 `(i) For purposes of this section, the term `home State' shall mean--
 `(1) in the case of a national banking association, the State in which
 the principal place of business of such association is located; and
 `(2) in the case of a financial services holding company, the State in which
 the total deposits of all bank subsidiaries of such company are largest.
 `(j) For purposes of this section, the term `State' shall include the
 District of Columbia.
 `(k) For purposes of this section, the term `host State' is the State in
 which a bank establishes or maintains a branch other than the State in
 which the bank is located.'.
SEC. 263. INTERSTATE CONSOLIDATION OR MERGER OF NATIONAL BANKS OR STATE
BANKS WITH NATIONAL BANKS.
 (a) CONSOLIDATION OF NATIONAL BANKS OR STATE BANKS WITH NATIONAL BANKS-
 Section 1 of the Act of November 7, 1918 (12 U.S.C. 215) is amended by
 inserting `or in any other State' after `located in the same State'.
 (b) MERGER OF NATIONAL BANKS OR STATE BANKS WITH NATIONAL BANKS- Section 2(a)
 of the Act of November 7, 19l8 (12 U.S.C. 215a(a)) is amended by inserting
 `or in any other State' after `located within the same State'.
 (c) DEFINITIONS- Section 3(4) of the Act of November 7, 1918 (12
 U.S.C. 215b(4)) is amended by striking `, located within the same State,'.
 (d) RETENTION OF BRANCHES FOLLOWING MERGER OR CONSOLIDATION WITH NATIONAL
 BANKS- Section 5155(b)(2) of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 36(b)(2))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(2)(A) A national bank resulting from the consolidation of a national
 bank under whose charter the consolidation is effected with another bank
 or banks may retain and operate as a branch any office which, immediately
 prior to such consolidation, was in operation as a main office or branch
 of any bank participating in the consolidation if the appropriate Federal
 banking agency approves its continued operation after the consolidation.
 `(B) The appropriate Federal banking agency may not grant approval
 under subparagraph (A) for retention of a main office branch of any bank
 participating in the consolidation if a State bank (in a situation identical
 to that of the resulting national bank) resulting from the consolidation
 into a State bank of another bank or banks would be prohibited by the
 law of such State from retaining and operating as a branch an identically
 situated branch of the State bank immediately prior to the consolidation.'.
SEC. 264. INTERSTATE BRANCHING BY STATE BANKS.
 Section 18(d) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(d))
 is amended by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) STATE LAW- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no State
 may prohibit any insured bank chartered by another State, and engaged in
 a banking business in another State from establishing and maintaining one
 or more branches within the State. A host State may require any insured
 bank chartered by another State that wishes to establish a branch within
 the host State to comply with such filing requirements as are otherwise
 imposed on a corporation that is incorporated in another State and seeks
 to engage in business in the host State.
 `(4)(A) LOCATION OF BRANCHES- Any insured State bank may, if authorized by
 the law of the State in which the bank is chartered, establish and maintain:
 `(i) a branch at an initial location within any other State or States
 in which a financial services holding company, whose principal place
 of operations is the same State in which the insured bank is chartered,
 could acquire an additional bank pursuant to section 3 of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842); and
 `(ii) additional branches at locations within any State in which the bank
 has established an initial branch pursuant to clause (i) to the extent
 permitted for insured State banks located in such State as if the initial
 branch of the out-of-State insured bank were a State bank chartered in
 such State with its head office at the location of the initial branch.
 `(B) For purposes of this paragraph, `principal place of operations'
 means the State in which the total deposits of all bank subsidiaries of
 such company are largest.
 `(5) RESERVATION OF CERTAIN RIGHTS TO STATES- Nothing in this subsection
 shall limit in any way the right of a State to determine the authority of
 State banks chartered in that State to establish and maintain branches,
 or to supervise, regulate, and examine State banks chartered by that State.
 `(6) ACTIVITIES OF BRANCHES- An insured State bank that establishes a branch
 or branches pursuant to paragraph (4) may not conduct any activity at such
 branch that is not permissible for a bank chartered by the host State.
 `(7) COORDINATION OF EXAMINATION AUTHORITY-
 `(A) A host State bank supervisory or regulatory authority may examine
 branches established in the host State by banks chartered by another State
 for the purpose of determining compliance with the host State law regarding
 permissible activities and to ensure that the activities of the branch
 are conducted in a manner not inconsistent with sound banking principles
 and do not constitute a serious risk to the safety and sound operation of
 the branch.
 `(B) In the event that a host State bank authority as described above
 determines that there is a violation of host State law concerning the
 activities being conducted by the branch or that the branch is being operated
 in a manner not consistent with sound banking principles or in an unsafe
 and unsound manner, such host State bank authority may undertake such
 enforcement actions or proceedings as would be permitted under host State
 law as if the branch were deemed to be a bank chartered by that host State.
 `(C) The State bank authorities from one or more States are authorized to
 enter into cooperative agreements to facilitate State regulatory supervision
 of State-chartered banks including cooperative agreements relating to the
 coordination of examinations and joint participation in examinations as long
 as the participation in the examination of the branch of an out-of-State bank
 by a host State bank authority is limited as described in subparagraph (B).
 `(8) For purposes of this subsection a `host State' is the State in which
 a bank establishes or maintains a branch other than the State in which
 the bank is chartered and engaging in banking business.'.
SEC. 265. INTERSTATE BRANCHING AND BANKING BY FOREIGN BANKS.
 (a) Section 4(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3102(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF FEDERAL BRANCHES AND AGENCIES-
 `(1) A foreign bank which engages directly in a banking business outside
 the United States may, with the approval of the Director, establish and
 operate a Federal branch or Federal agency at an initial location in
 the United States in any State in which it is not operating a branch or
 agency pursuant to State law; provided that during the three-year period
 beginning on the date of the enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety
 and Consumer Choice Act of 1991, the Director may only authorize such
 establishment of a branch or agency by a foreign bank, as the case may be,
 if such establishment is not prohibited by the law of the relevant State.
 `(2) A foreign bank which engages directly in a banking business outside
 the United States may establish and operate additional Federal branches
 or Federal agencies in any State in accordance with the provisions of
 subsection (h).'.
 (b) Section 4(h) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3102(h))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking the phrase `in the State in which such branch or agency
 is located'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following sentence: `For purposes of section
 36(c) of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 36(c)), the home State of a
 foreign bank shall be its home State as determined under section 5.'.
 (c) Section 5 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3103)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) Limitations-
 `(1) No foreign bank may establish and operate a State branch in any State
 outside its home State unless a financial services holding company whose
 principal place of operation under section 3 of the Financial Services
 Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842) is the same as the home
 State of the foreign bank would be permitted to acquire a bank in such
 other State.
 `(2) No foreign bank may directly or indirectly establish and operate
 a State branch, State agency, or commercial lending company subsidiary
 outside of the foreign bank's home State unless its establishment and
 operation is approved by the Board and the bank regulatory authority of
 the State in which the new branch is to be located.
 `(3) No foreign bank may directly or indirectly acquire more than five
 percent of the voting shares of, or all or substantially all of the assets
 of, a financial services holding company or bank located outside of the
 foreign bank's home State without the approval of the appropriate Federal
 banking agency under section 3 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act
 of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1842) as if the foreign bank were a financial services
 holding company located in the foreign bank's home State.
 `(4) Notwithstanding paragraph (2), effective three years after the date
 of enactment of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act
 of 1991, no State shall prohibit a foreign bank having a State branch or
 State agency licensed by another State and engaged in a banking business in
 that other State, from establishing and maintaining one or more branches
 or agencies of that foreign bank within the State after approval from the
 bank regulatory authority of such other State and the Board. Establishment,
 operation and supervision of any such branches or agencies shall be in
 accordance with the provisions applicable to an interstate branch of
 a State bank under section 18(d) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1828(d)) as if the branch in such other State were an insured
 State bank located in such other State.
 `(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) and section 4(h), a foreign bank
 may, with the approval of the Director, establish and operate a Federal
 branch or Federal agency, or with the approval of the Board and the bank
 regulatory authority of the State, a State branch or State agency, in any
 State outside of its home State if--
 `(A) establishment and operation of a branch or agency is expressly
 permitted by the State in which it is to be established; and
 `(B) in the case of a Federal or State branch, the branch receives only
 such deposits as would be permissible for a corporation organized under
 section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.).'.
 (d) Section 7 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3105)
 is amended by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) It shall be unlawful for any foreign bank to establish a State
 branch or State agency, or in the case of a foreign bank that is not subject
 to the provisions of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991,
 to establish or acquire control of a commercial lending company in the
 United States, without obtaining the approval of the Board.
 `(2) In acting on any application under paragraph (1), the Board may take
 into account the effects of the proposal on competition in the domestic
 and foreign commerce of the United States, the financial prospects of the
 branch or agency and the applicant foreign bank, including whether such
 foreign bank engages directly in a banking business outside the United
 States, and the convenience and needs of the community to be served.'.
SEC. 266. INTERSTATE ACQUISITIONS BY SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES.
 Section 10(e)(3) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1467a(e)(3))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) INTERSTATE ACQUISITIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency may approve an
 application under this subsection for a savings and loan holding company or
 a foreign bank to acquire, directly or indirectly, any voting shares of,
 interest in, or all or substantially all the assets of, any additional
 savings association located in any State.
 `(B) STATE LAWS- Any acquisition described in subparagraph (A) that has
 been approved under this section may be consummated notwithstanding any
 State law that would prohibit or otherwise limit such acquisition on the
 basis of the location or size of the acquiring company or foreign bank
 or any subsidiary of such company or foreign bank, the number of insured
 depository institution subsidiaries of such company or foreign bank, or any
 other factor that has the effect directly or indirectly of prohibiting or
 limiting the acquisition of shares or control of a savings association or
 savings and loan holding company located in that State by an out-of-State
 savings and loan holding company or foreign bank without having a similar
 effect on such acquisitions by savings and loan holding companies located
 in that State.
 `(C) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this paragraph--
 `(i) the term `State' includes the District of Columbia; and
 `(ii) the term `foreign bank' has the same meaning as in section 1(b)(7)
 of the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. 3101(7)).'.
SEC. 267. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 Except as provided in section 261(b), the provisions of this subtitle
 shall be effective upon enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--REGULATORY RESTRUCTURING
Subtitle A--Office of Depository Institutions Supervision
SEC. 301. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS SUPERVISION.
 Effective January 1, 1992, there shall be established in the Department
 of the Treasury the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision which
 shall be a bureau within the Department.
SEC. 302. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title--
 (1) the term `Director' means the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision;
 (2) the term `Office' means the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision; and
 (3) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
SEC. 303. DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS SUPERVISION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Office shall have a Director who shall be the head of
 the Office.
 (b) APPOINTMENT- The Director shall be appointed by the President, by and
 with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who are
 citizens of the United States.
 (c) TERM- The Director shall be appointed for a term of five years unless
 sooner removed by the President.
 (d) VACANCY- A vacancy in the position of Director which occurs before
 expiration of the term for which a Director was appointed shall be filled
 in the manner established in subsection (b), and the Director appointed
 to fill such vacancy shall be appointed only for the remainder of said term.
 (e) SERVICE AFTER END OF TERM- An individual may serve as Director after
 the expiration of the term for which appointed until a successor Director
 has been appointed.
 (f) ACTING DIRECTOR-
 (1) Subject to subsection (d)--
 (A) the Director may designate who shall act as Director if the Director
 dies, resigns, or is sick or absent; and
 (B) in the event that the Director fails to make such a designation,
 or is unable to make such a designation due to death or disability, the
 Secretary shall designate who shall act as Director if the Director dies,
 resigns, or is sick or absent.
 (2) An Acting Director designated under paragraph (1) shall possess the
 power to perform the duties vested in the Director.
 (g) DEPUTY DIRECTORS- The Secretary shall appoint two Deputy Directors. Each
 Deputy Director shall perform such duties as the Director may require.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) Subsections (a) through (f) shall become effective January 1, 1992;
 (2) Subsection (g) shall become effective January 1, 1993.
SEC. 304. AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.
 (a) EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR- The Director shall have the
 authority, without any prior review or approval by the Secretary, to make
 such determinations and to take such actions as are deemed necessary with
 respect to a specific institution or entity for which the Director is the
 appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)(1) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)(1)), regarding--
 (1) a grant or denial of a charter or other application;
 (2) an examination;
 (3) a decision to appoint a conservator or receiver for a depository
 institution; and
 (4) a final decision in a contested administrative enforcement proceeding.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Director from
consulting with the Secretary on any matter.
 (b) AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY- All other authority vested in the Director
 shall be exercised by the Director subject to the review and approval of
 the Secretary.
 (c) DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY- The Director may delegate to any employee,
 representative or agent of the Office any authority of the Director.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) Subsection (a) shall become effective January 1, 1993.
 (2) Subsections (b) and (c) shall become effective January 1, 1992.
SEC. 305. PERSONNEL.
 (a) APPOINTMENT- The Director shall fix the number of, and appoint and
 direct, all employees of the Office except as provided in section 303(g).
 (b) COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS-
 (1) COMPENSATION- The Director shall fix the compensation of employees of
 the Office without regard to the provisions of laws (other than this title)
 applicable to officers and employees of the United States.
 (2) ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- The Director may provide additional benefits
 to employees of the Office if the same type of benefits are then being
 provided by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or, if not then being provided,
 could be provided by such an agency under applicable provisions of law,
 rule, or regulation.
 (3) COMPARABILITY- In setting and adjusting the compensation and benefits
 for employees of the Office, the Director shall consult with, and may
 seek to maintain comparability with, the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall become effective January 1, 1993.
SEC. 306. REGULATIONS AND ORDERS.
 The Director may prescribe such regulations and issue such orders as the
 Director may determine to be necessary or appropriate for carrying out
 any law within the Director's jurisdiction.
SEC. 307. FUNDING.
 (a) AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE AND COLLECT ASSESSMENTS, FEES, AND OTHER CHARGES-
 The Director shall have the authority to impose and collect assessments,
 fees, and other charges on any institution or entity (including subsidiaries
 and affiliates thereof) for which the Director is the appropriate Federal
 banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)(1) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)(1)), as necessary or appropriate to carry
 out the responsibilities of the Office. Such assessments, fees, and other
 charges shall be set to meet the full cost to the Federal Government of
 the services provided by the Office.
 (b) USE OF FUNDS- The Director is authorized to use the funds obtained
 through assessments, fees, and other charges imposed pursuant to this title
 to pay the full cost to the Federal Government of the services provided
 by the Office.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATES- This section shall become effective January 1, 1993.
Subtitle B--Interim Provisions; Transfer of Functions, Personnel, and Property
SEC. 311. INTERIM PROVISIONS FOR THE OFFICE OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS
SUPERVISION.
 (a) INTERIM AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR- Prior to the date upon which the
 functions of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office
 of Thrift Supervision are transferred to the Director pursuant to this Act,
 the Director shall--
 (1) consult and cooperate with the Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision and the Comptroller of the Currency to facilitate the orderly
 transfer of functions to the Office;
 (2) pursuant to section 6(b)(2)(A) of the Financial Services Holding Company
 Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1845(b)(2)(A)), jointly issue regulations with the
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to be effective on January
 1, 1993, to implement the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991; and
 (3) take such actions as may be necessary to provide for the establishment
 of the Office and for the orderly implementation of this title.
 (b) INTERIM STAFF- Prior to the date upon which the Office of the Comptroller
 of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision are abolished, each
 such Office shall detail to the Office such personnel as the Secretary
 deems appropriate to assist the Director in carrying out his duties.
 (c) INTERIM ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES- The Secretary is authorized to provide
 all administrative services necessary to support the Office prior to the
 date upon which the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the
 Office of Thrift Supervision are abolished, and obtain reimbursement for
 the cost of such services pursuant to subsection (d).
 (d) INTERIM FUNDING- Prior to the date upon which the Office of the
 Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision are
 abolished, each such Office shall pay to the Secretary one-half of the total
 amount determined by the Secretary to be necessary to fund all direct and
 indirect salary and administrative expenses of the Office, including the
 salary of the Director, through January 1, 1993, from the funds obtained by
 such Offices through assessments, fees, and other charges which they are
 authorized to impose by law. The Secretary may credit to an appropriation
 and spend amounts received pursuant to this subsection.
 (e) INTERIM AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY- The Secretary is authorized to
 perform the functions of the Director under this section until the Director
 is appointed.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall become effective January 1, 1992.
SEC. 312. OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION ABOLISHED.
 (a) OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION ABOLISHED- Effective January 1, 1993,
 the Office of Thrift Supervision and the position of Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision are abolished.
 (b) Disposition of Affairs-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In winding up the affairs of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision, the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision shall consult
 and cooperate with the Director of the Office and the Comptroller of the
 Currency to facilitate the orderly transfer of functions to the Office. Any
 matter not resolved pursuant to such consultation and cooperation shall
 be resolved by the Secretary.
 (2) CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION-
 Except as provided in paragraph (1) and section 311, nothing in this title
 shall affect the authority vested in the Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision before the date of enactment of this Act which is necessary
 to carry out the duties of his position until the date upon which the
 position of Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision is abolished.
 (3) CONTINUATION OF AGENCY SERVICES- Any agency, department, or other
 instrumentality of the United States, or any successor thereto, which was
 providing support services to the Office of Thrift Supervision on the day
 before the date the Office of Thrift Supervision is abolished shall--
 (A) continue to provide such services on a reimbursable basis, in accordance
 with the terms of the arrangement pursuant to which such services were
 provided until modified or terminated in accordance with such terms,
 except that effective January 1, 1993, the Office shall substitute for
 the Office of Thrift Supervision as a party to the arrangement; and
 (B) consult with the Director to coordinate and facilitate a prompt and
 reasonable transition.
 (c) Savings Provisions-
 (1) EXISTING RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED- No provision
 of this title shall affect the validity of any right, duty, or obligation
 of the United States, the Office of Thrift Supervision, or any person,
 which existed on the day before the date upon which the Office of Thrift
 Supervision is abolished.
 (2) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- No action or other proceeding commenced by or
 against the Office of Thrift Supervision shall abate by reason of enactment
 of this Act, except that, effective January 1, 1993, the Director shall
 be substituted as a party to any such action or proceeding.
 (3) Continuation of administrative rules-
 (A) All orders, resolutions, determinations, regulations, interpretative
 rules, other interpretations, guidelines, procedures and other advisory
 material which--
 (1) have been issued, made, prescribed, or permitted to become effective
 by the Office of Thrift Supervision, and
 (2) are in effect on December 31, 1992, or become effective thereafter,
shall continue in effect according to the terms of such orders, resolutions,
determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other interpretations,
guidelines, procedures or other advisory material; shall be administered by the
Director; and shall be enforceable by or against the Director until modified,
terminated, set aside, or superseded in accordance with applicable law by
the Director, by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (B) No provision of this Act or of any prior Act or agreement, other
 than agreements entered into after August 9, 1989, shall modify or limit
 any minimum level of capital established under section 5(s) of the Home
 Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1464(s)) or any capital standard prescribed
 or maintained under section 5(t) of such Act (12 U.S.C. 1464(t)).
 (4) STATUS OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES-
 (A) Any proposed regulation or rule of the Office of Thrift Supervision
 which has not been published as a final regulation by the date that the
 Office of Thrift Supervision is abolished shall be deemed to be a proposed
 regulation or rule of the Office.
 (B) Any final or interim rule published by the Office of Thrift Supervision
 prior to January 1, 1993, but which shall not become effective prior to
 such date, shall become effective according to its terms.
 (5) APPLICATION- The provisions of this subsection shall apply except as
 otherwise expressly provided in this Act.
 (d) Transfer of Employees-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All employees of the Office of Thrift Supervision on the
 day before that Office is abolished by this Act shall be transferred to
 the Office.
 (2) RIGHTS OF TRANSFERRED EMPLOYEES- All employees transferred pursuant
 to paragraph (1) shall be entitled to the following rights:
 (A) TRANSFER OF FUNCTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 section 3503 of title 5, United States Code, shall be applicable to each
 such transfer.
 (B) TRANSFERRED POSITION- Each transferred employee shall be guaranteed a
 position with the same status and tenure as that held on the day immediately
 preceding the transfer. Each such employee holding a permanent position
 shall not be involuntarily separated or reduced in grade for 1 year after
 the date of transfer, except for cause. Nothing in this section shall be
 construed to limit the right of the Director to terminate an appointment to
 a position excepted from the competitive service because of its confidential
 policy-making, policy-determining, or policy-advocating character.
 (C) COMPENSATION- Each employee transferred under this section shall be
 entitled to receive, during the one-year period immediately following
 the transfer, the same total compensation which such employee received
 immediately preceding the transfer. This paragraph shall only apply to a
 transferred employee while such employee remains with the Office.
 (D) Benefits-
 (i) Each employee transferred under this section may retain for 1 year after
 the date such transfer occurs, membership in any employee benefit program
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision, other than a retirement program but
 including insurance, to which such employee belongs on the day immediately
 preceding the transfer if--
 (I) the employee does not elect to give up the benefit or membership in
 the program; and
 (II) the benefit or program is continued by the Director.
 (ii) The difference in the costs between the benefits which would have
 been provided by the Office of Thrift Supervision and those provided by
 this section shall be paid by the Office.
 (iii) If any employee elects to give up membership in a health or life
 insurance program or the health or life insurance program is not continued by
 the Director, such employee may elect to participate in the Office's health
 or life insurance program notwithstanding health conditions pre-existing
 at the time of election or enrollment and without regard to any other
 regularly scheduled open season. Such election shall be made within 120
 days of the transfer or discontinuation of the program.
 (3) REORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS SUPERVISION-
 If the Director determines, not less than one year nor more than three
 years after the date the functions of the Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision are transferred to the Office, that a reorganization of the
 combined work force is required, that reorganization shall be deemed a
 `major reorganization' for purposes of affording affected employees
 retirement under section 8336(d)(2) or 8414(b)(1)(B) of title 5, United
 States Code. The provisions of chapter 35 of title 5, United States Code,
 shall govern any reduction in force resulting from such a reorganization.
 (4) EQUITABLE TREATMENT- The Director may take such action as is necessary
 to ensure that employees transferring under this section continue to receive
 credit such employees received, if any, under the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 for prior service with a
 Federal entity or instrumentality, or with a Federal Home Loan Bank or
 joint office of the Banks, with respect to the transferring employees'
 retirement accounts and the transferring employees' accrued leave or
 vacation time, in recognition of the transferring employees' service.
 (e) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY- Effective January 1, 1993, all property of the
 Office of Thrift Supervision shall be transferred to the Office.
SEC. 313. OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY ABOLISHED.
 (a) OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY ABOLISHED- Effective January
 1, 1993, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the position
 of the Comptroller of the Currency are abolished.
 (b) Disposition of Affairs.
 (1) IN GENERAL- In winding up the affairs of the Office of the Comptroller
 of the Currency, the Comptroller of the Currency shall consult and cooperate
 with the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision and
 the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision to facilitate the orderly
 transfer of functions to the Office. Any matter not resolved pursuant to
 such consultation and cooperation shall be resolved by the Secretary.
 (2) CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY- Except as
 provided in paragraph (1) and section 311, nothing in this Act shall affect
 the authority vested in the Comptroller of the Currency before the date
 of enactment of this Act which is necessary to carry out the duties of his
 position until the date upon which the position of Comptroller is abolished.
 (3) CONTINUATION OF AGENCY SERVICES- Any agency, department, or other
 instrumentality of the United States, or any successor thereto, which
 was providing support services to the Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency on the day before the date the Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency is abolished shall--
 (A) continue to provide such services, on a reimbursable basis, in accordance
 with the terms of the arrangement pursuant to which such services were
 provided until modified or terminated in accordance with such terms, except
 that effective January 1, 1993, the Office shall substitute for the Office
 of the Comptroller of the Currency as a party to the arrangement; and
 (B) consult with the Director to coordinate and facilitate a prompt and
 reasonable transition.
 (c) Savings Provisions-
 (1) EXISTING RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED- No provision of
 this title shall affect the validity of any right, duty, or obligation of
 the United States, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, or any
 person, which existed on the day before the date upon which the Office of
 the Comptroller of the Currency is abolished by this title.
 (2) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- No action or other proceeding commenced by or
 against the Comptroller of the Currency or the Office of the Comptroller
 of the Currency shall abate by reason of enactment of this Act, except
 that effective January 1, 1993, the Director shall be substituted as a
 party to any such action or proceeding.
 (3) CONTINUATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES- All orders, resolutions,
 determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other interpretations,
 guidelines, procedures and other advisory material which--
 (A) have been issued, made, prescribed, or permitted to become effective
 by the Comptroller of the Currency; and
 (B) are in effect on December 31, 1992, or become effective thereafter,
shall continue in effect according to the terms of such orders, resolutions,
determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, guidelines, procedures
or other advisory material; shall be administered by the Director; and
shall be enforceable by or against the Director until modified, terminated,
set aside, or superseded in accordance with applicable law by the Director,
by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (4) Status of administrative rules-
 (A) Any proposed regulation or rule of the Comptroller of the Currency
 which has not been published as a final regulation by the date that the
 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is abolished shall be deemed to
 be a proposed regulation or rule of the Office.
 (B) Any final or interim rule published by the Comptroller of the Currency
 prior to January 1, 1993, but which shall not become effective prior to
 such date, shall become effective according to its terms.
 (5) APPLICATION- The provisions of this subsection shall apply except as
 otherwise expressly provided in this Act.
 (d) Transfer of employees-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All employees of the Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency on the day before that Office is abolished by this Act shall be
 transferred to the Office.
 (2) RIGHTS OF TRANSFERRED EMPLOYEES- All employees transferred pursuant
 to paragraph (1) shall be entitled to the following rights:
 (A) TRANSFER OF FUNCTION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 section 3503 of title 5, United States Code, shall be applicable to each
 such transfer.
 (B) TRANSFERRED POSITION- Each transferred employee shall be guaranteed a
 position with the same status and tenure as that held on the day immediately
 preceding the transfer. Each such employee holding a permanent position
 shall not be involuntarily separated or reduced in grade for one year after
 the date of transfer, except for cause. Nothing in this section shall be
 construed to limit the right of the Director to terminate an appointment to
 a position excepted from the competitive service because of its confidential
 policy-making, policy-determining, or policy-advocating character.
 (C) COMPENSATION- Each employee transferred under this section shall be
 entitled to receive, during the one-year period immediately following the
 transfer, the same total compensation that employee received immediately
 preceding the transfer. This paragraph shall only apply to a transferred
 employee while such employee remains with the Office.
 (D) BENEFITS-
 (i) Each employee transferred under this section may retain for one year
 after the date such transfer occurs, membership in any employee benefit
 program of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, other than a
 retirement program but including insurance, to which such employee belongs
 on the day immediately preceding the transfer if--
 (I) the employee does not elect to give up the benefit or membership in
 the program; and
 (II) the benefit or program is continued by the Director.
 (ii) The difference in the costs between the benefits which would have
 been provided by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and those
 provided by this section shall be paid by the Office.
 (iii) If any employee elects to give up membership in a health or life
 insurance program or the health or life insurance program is not continued by
 the Director, such employee may elect to participate in the Office's health
 or life insurance programs notwithstanding health conditions pre-existing
 at the time of election or enrollment and without regard to any other
 regularly scheduled open season. Such election shall be made within 120
 days of the transfer or discontinuation of the program.
 (3) REORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS SUPERVISION-
 If the Director determines, not less than one year nor more than three
 years after the date the functions of the Comptroller of the Currency are
 transferred to the Office, that a reorganization of the combined work force
 is required, that reorganization shall be deemed a `major reorganization'
 for purposes of affording affected employees retirement under section
 8336(d)(2) or 8414(b)(1)(B) of title 5, United States Code. The provisions
 of chapter 35 of title 5, United States Code, shall govern any reduction
 in force resulting from such a reorganization.
 (e) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY- Effective January 1, 1993, all property of the
 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency shall be transferred to the Office.
Subtitle C--Regulatory and Supervisory Responsibility
SEC. 321. TRANSFER OF POWERS AND DUTIES.
 (a) DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION- Effective January 1, 1993,
 all powers and duties which were vested in the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision on December 31, 1992, are transferred to the Director,
 except as otherwise provided in this Act.
 (b) COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY- Effective January 1, 1993, all powers and
 duties which were vested in the Comptroller of the Currency on December
 31, 1992, are transferred to the Director, except as otherwise provided
 in this Act.
SEC. 322. APPROPRIATE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY.
 (a) Section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q))
 is amended to read as follows--
 `(q)(1) APPROPRIATE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY- The term `appropriate Federal
 banking agency' means--
 `(A) the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision in
 the case of --
 `(i) any national banking association and any subsidiary of a national
 banking association other than a subsidiary chartered or regulated by the
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under sections 25 or 25(a)
 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq. and 611 et seq.);
 `(ii) any District bank chartered by the Director;
 `(iii) any Federal branch or Federal agency of a foreign bank;
 `(iv) any savings association and any subsidiary of a savings association;
 `(v) any savings and loan holding company;
 `(vi) any financial services holding company, the principal bank subsidiary
 of which is a national banking association, a District bank chartered by
 the Director, or a savings association; and
 `(vii) any diversified holding company that controls any financial
 services holding company, the principal bank subsidiary of which is a
 national banking association, a District bank chartered by the Director,
 or a savings association;
 `(B) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in the case of--
 `(i) any State member or State nonmember insured bank (except a District
 bank chartered by the Director) and any subsidiary of any such State bank;
 `(ii) any State branch or State agency of a foreign bank;
 `(iii) any subsidiary or branch of a depository institution established
 or operated pursuant to section 25 or 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq. and 611 et seq.);
 `(iv) any commercial lending company;
 `(v) supervisory or regulatory proceedings arising from the authority given
 to the Board of Governors under section 7(b) (1) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3105(b) (1)), including such proceedings
 under the Depository Institutions Supervisory Act;
 `(vi) any branch or agency of a foreign bank with respect to any provision
 of the Federal Reserve Act which is made applicable under the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.);
 `(vii) any financial services holding company, the principal bank
 subsidiary of which is a State member or State nonmember insured bank
 (except a District bank chartered by the Director); and
 `(viii) any diversified holding company that controls any financial services
 holding company, the principal bank subsidiary of which is a State member
 or State nonmember insured bank (except a District bank chartered by
 the Director);
 `(C) for a foreign bank that is not a financial services holding company,
 the appropriate Federal banking agency shall be the same as the appropriate
 Federal banking agency for the branch, agency, or commercial lending
 company controlled or operated by such foreign bank that has the greatest
 dollar amount of assets on average for the last day of each quarter of
 the preceding calendar year. Any foreign bank that is not a financial
 services holding company shall be evaluated by the appropriate Federa1
 banking agency in accordance with paragraphs (3) through (6).
 `(2) PRINCIPAL BANK SUBSIDIARY- The term `principal bank subsidiary' means--
 `(A) the single subsidiary depository institution of a financial services
 holding company that has the greatest dollar amount of assets on average
 for the last day of each quarter of the preceding calendar year; and
 `(B) in the case of a foreign bank that is a financial services holding
 company, the single depository institution, branch, agency, or commercial
 lending company controlled or operated by a foreign bank in the United
 States that has the greatest dollar amount of assets on average for the last
 day of each quarter of the preceding calendar year. Paragraphs (3) through
 (6) shall apply to a foreign bank and its principal bank subsidiary in the
 same manner and to the same extent as they apply to a domestic financial
 services holding company and its principal bank subsidiary.
 `(3) MULTIPLE BANK SUBSIDIARIES- In any case in which there are two or
 more subsidiary depository institutions of a financial services holding
 company that have substantially equal dollar amounts of assets and such
 depository institutions are not regulated by the same appropriate Federal
 banking agency, then the principal bank subsidiary shall be the depository
 institution with the greatest dollar amount of deposits on average for
 the last day of each quarter of the preceding calendar year.
 `(4) CALCULATION- All determinations regarding equity capital or assets,
 as appropriate, shall be made based upon those amounts on the last day of
 each of the four quarters over the preceding calendar year.
 `(5) EVALUATION- The appropriate Federal banking agency shall evaluate
 the principal bank subsidiary as defined in paragraphs (2) and (3) every
 five years for the purpose of determining whether a transfer to the other
 appropriate Federal banking agency is necessary. The first evaluation
 shall occur by April 30, 1998.
 `(6) TRANSFER- In any case in which the appropriate Federal banking
 agency has changed after evaluation, notice shall be given to the new
 appropriate Federal banking agency within thirty days after evaluation. A
 copy of the examination reports and any other reports required to be filed
 by the financial services holding company pursuant to section 6 of the
 Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 1845) for the
 prior two years shall be provided to the new appropriate Federal banking
 agency when notice is provided to such agency. Regulation and supervision
 of the financial services holding company shall be transferred to the new
 appropriate Federal banking agency no later than ninty days after notice
 has been provided.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 323. EXAMINATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Director has the power to conduct examinations of
 the affairs of each institution or entity for which the Director is the
 appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)(1) of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)(1)), and such other
 institution or entity over which the Director has examination authority
 pursuant to the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991.
 (b) ANNUAL EXAMINATIONS REQUIRED- At least once during every twelve-month
 period, the Director shall conduct an on-site examination of each depository
 institution and branch of a foreign bank for which the Director is the
 appropriate Federal banking agency, except annual examinations shall not
 be required for--
 (1) any depository institution or foreign bank branch for which a conservator
 or receiver has been appointed; and
 (2) any depository institution or foreign bank branch that has total assets
 of less than $1,000,000,000 as of December 31 of the year preceding a
 scheduled examination, and that is in compliance with the capital standards
 prescribed by the Director. Such depository institution shall be examined
 on-site at least once during the following eighteen-month period.
 (c) SPECIAL EXAMINATIONS- In addition to the examinations authorized or
 required under subsections (a) and (b), the Director may make any special
 examination of such institution or entity which the Director determines
 to be necessary.
 (d) EXAMINATION OF AFFILIATES- The Director may examine any affiliate
 (as defined in section 2 of the Banking Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 221a)) of
 a depository institution, and any other affiliate except those examined
 pursuant to the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 (12
 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.), as may be necessary to disclose fully--
 (1) the relationship between the depository institution and its affiliate;
 and
 (2) the effect of such relationship on the depository institution.
 (e) ASSESSMENT IN CASE OF AFFILIATE'S REFUSAL TO PAY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), if any affiliate of any depository
 institution, other than an affiliate examined pursuant to the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991--
 (A) refuses to pay any assessment, or
 (B) fails to pay any assessment before the end of the sixty-day period
 beginning on the date of the assessment,
the Director may assess such cost against, and collect such cost from,
such depository institution.
 (2) AFFILIATE OF MORE THAN ONE DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- If any affiliate
 referred to in paragraph (1) is an affiliate of more than one depository
 institution, the assessment with respect to the affiliate may be assessed
 against, and collected from, any affiliated depository institution in such
 proportions as the Director may prescribe.
 (f) CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES FOR AFFILIATE'S REFUSAL TO COOPERATE-
 (1) PENALTY IMPOSED- If any affiliate of any depository institution referred
 to in subsection (e)--
 (A) refuses to permit any examiner appointed by the Director to make an
 examination, or
 (B) refuses to provide any information required to be disclosed in the
 course of examination,
the depository institution shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $5,000
for each day that such refusal continues.
 (2) ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION- Any penalty imposed under paragraph (1)
 shall be assessed and collected by the Director in the manner provided in
 section 8(i)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(i)(2)).
 (g) POWER AND DUTY OF EXAMINERS- Each examiner appointed by the Director
 shall have power to conduct--
 (1) a thorough examination and prepare a full report of condition of any
 depository institution for which the Director is the appropriate Federal
 banking agency, and
 (2) an examination pursuant to subsection (d) and prepare a full report
 of the findings.
 (h) ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS AND ACCESS TO RECORDS- In connection with
 examinations of depository institutions and their affiliates, the examiner
 shall--
 (1) have access to and power to administer oaths and examine any of the
 officers, directors, employees, or agents thereof under oath; and
 (2) be given prompt and complete access to all relevant books, records or
 documents of any type.
 (i) PUBLICATION OF REPORTS- The Director is authorized to publish the
 report of his examination of any national bank or affiliate which, within
 one hundred and twenty days after notification, fails to comply, to the
 satisfaction of the Director, with the recommendations or suggestions made
 in such examination. The national bank or affiliate shall be given ninety
 days notice prior to such publication.
 (j) LIMITATION ON VISITORIAL POWERS-
 (1) No depository institution chartered under Federal law shall be subject
 to any visitorial powers except as authorized by Federal law, vested in the
 courts of justice or such as shall be, or have been, exercised or directed
 by Congress or by either House thereof or by any committee of Congress or
 of either House duly authorized.
 (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), lawfully authorized State auditors
 and examiners may, at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to a
 depository institution chartered under Federal law, review its records
 solely to ensure compliance with applicable State unclaimed property
 or escheat laws upon reasonable cause to believe that the depository
 institution has failed to comply with such laws.
 (k) The provisions of subsections (a) through (j) shall become effective
 on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 324. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) Section 5240 of the Revised Statutes, as amended (12 U.S.C. 481 through
 485) is revised to read as follows--
 `(a) In addition to the examinations made and conducted by the Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions, every Federal reserve bank may,
 with the approval of the Federal reserve agent or the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System, provide for special examination of member
 banks within its district. The expense of such examinations may, in the
 discretion of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, be
 assessed against the banks examined, and, when so assessed, shall be paid
 by the banks examined. Such examination shall be so conducted as to inform
 the Federal reserve bank of the condition of its member banks and of the
 lines of credit which are being extended by them. Every Federal reserve
 bank shall at all times furnish to the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System such information as may be demanded concerning the condition
 of any member bank within the district of the said Federal reserve bank.
 `(b) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall, at least
 once each year, order an examination of each Federal reserve bank, and
 upon joint application of ten member banks the Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System shall order a special examination and report of
 the condition of any Federal reserve bank.'.
 (b) The Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1461 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 4(d)(1)(B) (12 U.S.C. 1463(d)(1)(B))--
 (A) by striking clauses (i) and (ii); and
 (B) by redesignating clauses (iii) through (vii) as clauses (i) through
 (v), respectively;
 (2) in section 10(b)(4) (12 U.S.C. 1467a(b)(4)), by striking the first
 two sentences; and
 (3) by repealing section 13 (12 U.S.C. 1486b).
 (c) The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall become effective
 on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 325. APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER.
 (a) Section 1 of the Act of June 30, 1876 (12 U.S.C. 191), is amended to
 read as follows:
 `(1) GENERAL GROUNDS FOR APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER- A receiver may
 be appointed by the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision for any national banking association whenever the Director of
 the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision determines that one or
 more of the following circumstances exist:
 `(A) Whenever any national banking association shall be dissolved, and
 its rights, privileges, and franchises declared forfeited, as prescribed
 in section 5239 of the Revised Statutes, or whenever any creditor of any
 national banking association shall have obtained a judgment against it in
 any court of record, and made application, accompanied by a certificate
 from the clerk of the court stating that such judgment has been rendered
 and has remained unpaid for thirty days, or whenever the Director of the
 Office of Depository Institutions Supervision shall become satisfied of
 the insolvency of a national banking association;
 `(B) the bank is not likely to be able to meet the demands of its depositors
 or pay its obligations in the normal course of business;
 `(C) the bank is in an unsafe or unsound condition to transact business,
 including having substantially insufficient capital or otherwise;
 `(D)(i) the bank has incurred or is likely to incur losses that will
 deplete all or substantially all of its capital; and
 `(ii) there is no reasonable prospect for the bank's capital to be
 replenished without Federal assistance;
 `(E) there is or was a violation of laws, rules, or regulations, or any
 unsafe or unsound practice or condition which is likely to cause insolvency
 or substantial dissipation of assets or earnings, or is likely to weaken
 the bank's condition or otherwise seriously prejudice the interests of
 its depositors;
 `(F) there is concealment of books, papers, records, or assets of the bank,
 or refusal to submit books, papers, records, or affairs of the bank for
 inspection to any examiner or to any lawful agent of the Director of the
 Office of Depository Institutions Supervision;
 `(G) there is a willful or continuing violation of an order enforceable
 against the bank under section 18(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1818(i));
 `(H) the bank's board of directors consists of fewer than 5 members; or
 `(I) the national banking association is classified as a Zone 5 institution
 by the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision
 pursuant to section 35 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1, 1993.
Subtitle D--Transfer of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Authority
SEC. 331. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT.
 (a) INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- Section 3(c)(3) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(3)) is amended by striking `any uninsured'
 and inserting instead `any insured or uninsured'.
 (b) APPLICATION FOR INSURANCE- Section 5 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1815) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) National and State Nonmember Banks; State Savings Associations and
 State Savings Banks-
 `(A) Any national nonmember bank which is engaged in the business
 of receiving deposits, other than trust funds as herein defined, upon
 application by the bank and certification by the Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision in the manner prescribed in subsection
 (b) of section 4 of this Act, any State nonmember bank, State savings
 association, and State savings bank, upon application to and examination
 by the Corporation and approval by the Board of Directors, may become an
 insured depository institution.
 `(B) Before approving the application of any such State nonmember bank,
 State savings association, and State savings bank, the Board of Directors
 shall give consideration to the factors enumerated in section 6 of this Act,
 and shall determine, upon the basis of a thorough examination of such bank or
 savings association, that its assets in excess of its capital requirements
 are adequate to enable it to meet all of its liabilities to depositors
 and other creditors as shown by the books of the bank or savings association.
 `(C) In the case of an application by a State savings association, the
 Board of Directors shall obtain the views of the Director of the Office
 of Depository Institutions Supervision. In the case of an application by
 a State nonmember bank or State savings bank, the Board of Directors shall
 obtain the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
 `(D) The Corporation shall notify the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System, as appropriate, of its determination with respect to any such
 application.
 `(E) Before approving the application of any industrial bank or similar
 financial institution, the Board of Directors shall determine that it is
 chartered and operating under laws providing for examination, supervision,
 and liquidation substantially comparable to those applicable to banks
 operating in the same State.'; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting `shall obtain the views of the
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and' before `shall give
 consideration'.
 (c) REPORTS OF CONDITION- Section 7(a)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(a)(1)) is amended by striking the terms `Corporation'
 and `Board of Directors' wherever they appear and inserting instead `Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System'.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS- Section 8(b)(3) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(b)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) This subsection and subsections (c) through (s) and subsection (u)
 of this section shall apply--
 `(A) to any financial services holding company, and to any subsidiary
 (other than a bank) of a financial services holding company, as those
 terms are defined in the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991
 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.)--
 `(i) in the same manner as they apply to a State member or State nonmember
 insured bank, in the case of a financial services holding company, the
 principal bank subsidiary of which is a State member or State nonmember
 insured bank (except a District bank chartered by the Director); or
 `(ii) in the same manner as they apply to a national banking association,
 in the case of a financial services holding company, the principal bank
 subsidiary of which is a national banking association, a District bank
 chartered by the Director or a savings association; and
 `(B) to any organization organized and operated under section 25(a) of the
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) or operating under section 25
 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), in the same manner as
 they apply to a State member insured depository institution.'.
 (e) EXAMINATIONS- Section 10(b)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1820(b)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (A); and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as subparagraphs (A) and
 (B), respectively.
 (f) AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 18 OF THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- Section
 18 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking `responsible agency' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (B) by striking `responsible agencies' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `appropriate Federal banking agencies';
 (C) by striking `the other two banking agencies referred to in this
 subsection' wherever it appears and inserting instead `the other appropriate
 Federal banking agency';
 (D) by striking `the other two banking agencies' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `the other appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (E) in paragraph (2), by striking `written approval' and all that appears
 thereafter and inserting instead `written approval of the appropriate Federal
 banking agency for the acquiring, assuming, or resulting institution.';
 (2) in subsection (d), by striking `Corporation' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System';
 (3) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by striking `Board of Directors' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the first sentence, by striking `, or by regulation of the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System';
 (ii) in the second sentence, by striking `Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System and Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (iii) in the fifth sentence, by striking ', except that the term `member
 bank', as used in such section 2(b), shall be deemed to refer to an insured
 nonmember bank';
 (4) in subsection (i)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking `(except a District bank)' and inserting instead `(except
 a District bank chartered by the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision)';
 (ii) by striking `Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `written consent' and all that appears
 thereafter in such paragraph and inserting instead `written consent of
 the appropriate Federal banking agency for the acquiring, assuming or
 resulting institution.';
 (5) by repealing subsection (j); and
 (6) in subsection (l)--
 (A) by striking the terms `Corporation' and `Board of Directors' wherever
 they appear and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System'; and
 (B) by striking `subsection (j) of this section' and inserting instead
 `sections 23A (12 U.S.C. 371c et seq.), 23B (12 U.S.C. 371c-1 et seq.),
 and 22(h) (12 U.S.C. 375b et seq.) of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended'.
 (g) PARTICIPATION BY STATE NONMEMBER INSURED BANKS IN LOTTERIES AND RELATED
 ACTIVITIES- Section 20 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829a)
 is repealed.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) through (g)
 shall become effective on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 332. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT.
 (a) The Federal Reserve Act is amended--
 (1) in section 1 (12 U.S.C. 221), by inserting at the end of the second
 undesignated paragraph the following:
 `The term `insured State bank' shall mean a bank for which the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System is the appropriate Federal banking
 agency under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. The term `insured nonmember
 bank' shall mean an insured State bank that has not become a member of
 one of the reserve banks created under this Act.';
 (2) in section 9A (12 U.S.C. 339), by striking `State member bank' wherever
 it appears and inserting instead `insured State bank';
 (3) in section 22(h) (12 U.S.C. 375b), by inserting `or insured nonmember
 bank' after `member bank' wherever it appears;
 (4) in section 23A (12 U.S.C. 371c), by inserting after subsection (e)
 the following new subsection:
 `(f) APPLICABILITY TO INSURED NONMEMBER BANKS- The provisions of this
 section shall apply to an insured nonmember bank and any subsidiary thereof
 in the same manner and to the same extent as such section applies to a
 member bank and any subsidiary thereof.';
 (5) in section 23B (12 U.S.C. 371c-1), by inserting after subsection (e)
 the following new subsection:
 `(f) APPLICABILITY TO INSURED NONMEMBER BANKS- The provisions of this
 section shall apply to an insured nonmember bank and any subsidiary thereof
 in the same manner and to the same extent as such section applies to a
 member bank and any subsidiary thereof.'; and
 (6) in section 29 (12 U.S.C. 504)--
 (A) by inserting `and any subsidiary thereof' after `member bank' wherever
 it appears; and
 (B) by inserting `and any insured nonmember bank and subsidiary thereof,
 and any institution-affiliated party with respect to such insured nonmember
 bank, which violates any provision of section 22(h), 23A, or 23B of this
 Act, or any regulation issued pursuant thereto,' before `shall forfeit'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become
 effective on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 333. SAVINGS PROVISIONS.
 (a) EXISTING RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED- No provision of
 this Act shall affect the validity of any right, duty, or obligation of the
 United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any person,
 which existed on December 31, 1992.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- No action or other proceeding commenced by or
 against the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Board of Directors
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with respect to any power or
 duty of the Corporation that is transferred by this Act to the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall abate by reason of enactment
 of this Act, except that effective January 1, 1993, the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System shall be substituted as a party to any such
 action or proceeding.
 (c) CONTINUATION OF ORDERS, RESOLUTIONS, AND REGULATIONS- All orders,
 resolutions, determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other
 interpretations, guidelines, procedures and other advisory material which--
 (1) have been issued, made, prescribed, or permitted to become effective
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with respect to any power or
 duty of the Corporation that is transferred by this Act to the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and
 (2) are in effect on December 31, 1992, or become effective thereafter,
shall continue in effect according to the terms of such orders, resolutions,
determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other interpretations,
guidelines, procedures or other advisory material; shall be administered
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; and shall be
enforceable by or against the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System until modified, terminated, set aside, or superseded in accordance
with applicable law by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (d) STATUS OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES-
 (1) Any proposed regulation or rule of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation with respect to any power or duty of the Corporation that is
 transferred to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System which
 has not been published as a final regulation by January 1, 1993, shall be
 deemed to be a proposed regulation or rule of the Board of Governors of
 the Federal Reserve System.
 (2) Any final or interim rule published by the Corporation prior to January
 1, 1993, but which shall not become effective prior to such date, shall
 become effective according to its terms.
 (e) APPLICATION- The provisions of this section shall apply except as
 otherwise expressly provided in this Act.
SEC. 334. TRANSFER OF PERSONNEL AND PROPERTY.
 (a) EMPLOYEES TRANSFERRED- The Chairman of the board of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Chairman of the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System shall jointly determine the employees of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation necessary to perform or support the
 functions or activities which are transferred from the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System by this Act, and such employees shall be transferred to the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in accordance with this section.
 (b) RIGHTS OF TRANSFERRED EMPLOYEES- All employees identified for transfer
 under subsection (a) shall be entitled to the following rights:
 (1) Each employee so identified shall be transferred to the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System for employment no later than January
 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, section 3503 of title
 5, United States Code, shall be applicable to each such transfer.
 (2) Each transferred employee shall be guaranteed a position with the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with comparable creditable
 service, and with pay no lower than the pay to which such employee was
 entitled on the day immediately preceding the transfer. Each such employee
 holding a permanent position shall not be involuntarily separated or
 reduced in grade or compensation for one year after the date of transfer,
 except for cause.
 (3) If the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System determines after
 December 31, 1993, but before December 31, 1995, that a reorganization of
 the combined work force is required, that reorganization shall be deemed
 a `major reorganization' for purposes of affording affected employees'
 retirement under section 8336(d)(2) or 8414(b)(1)(B) of title 5, United
 States Code, or under any other retirement plan for Government employees
 to which such employees may belong.
 (4) Any transferred employee accepting employment with the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System as a result of such transfer may
 retain for one year after the date such transfer occurs membership in any
 employee benefit program of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 other than a retirement program but including insurance, to which that
 employee belongs on the day immediately preceding the transfer if--
 (A) the employee does not elect to give up the benefit or membership in
 the program; and
 (B) the benefit or program is continued by the Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System. The excess of the costs of the benefits provided by
 this section over the costs of benefits which would have been provided by
 the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall be paid by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. If any transferred employee elects
 to give up membership in a health insurance program of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation or the health insurance program is not continued by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, such employee may elect to participate
 in a health insurance program offered by the Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System within one year after the date of such transfer.
 (5) Except as provided in paragraph (6), any transferred employee accepting
 employment with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall
 remain in any retirement plan established by chapter 83 of title 5, United
 States Code, or the retirement plan established by chapter 84 of title 5,
 United States Code, to which the employee belongs immediately preceding
 the transfer if--
 (A) the employee does not elect to give up membership in the program; and
 (B) the program is continued.
After their transfer, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System will
make all contributions to such program concerning such transferred employees
that would have been made by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation if the
employee had remained an employee of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 (6) Any transferred employee accepting employment with the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System who, immediately prior to such transfer,
 is an employee within the meaning of section 8401(11) of title 5, United
 States Code, may elect to remain in the Federal Employees' Retirement System
 established under chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code, in accordance
 with paragraph (5), or may elect, within one year after the date of transfer,
 to transfer to the retirement program offered by the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System generally to employees whose service with
 the Board commenced after December 31, 1983. Any transferring employee
 making such an election shall forego all benefits under the retirement
 programs established under subchapters I, II, IV, V, and VI of chapter
 84 of title 5, United States Code, but shall receive benefits under the
 program offered by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as
 though such employee had enrolled in the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System's retirement program on the same date that such employee
 enrolled in the retirement programs established under such subchapters.
 (7) All transferring employees shall be placed in positions at the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System comparable to the positions
 from which such employees were transferred.
 (8) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall take such
 action as is necessary on a case-by-case basis so that employees transferring
 under this section receive equitable treatment regarding credit for prior
 service with a Federal entity or instrumentality, with respect to the
 transferred employees' retirement accounts, and accrued leave or vacation
 time, in recognition of the transferring employees' service.
 (9) Transferring employees shall receive notice of their position assignments
 not later than one hundred and twenty days after the effective date of
 their transfer.
 (10) Except as specifically set forth herein, transferred employees shall
 have the same rights and entitlements as other similarly situated employees
 of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to sections
 10 and 11(l) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 244 and 248(l)).
 (c) TRANSFER OF PROPERTY- Not later than January 1, 1993, the Chairman of
 the Board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Chairman of
 the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall jointly determine
 the property of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation used to perform
 the functions and activities transferred from the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by
 this Act, and such property shall then be transferred promptly to the
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System may hold such property and acquire any such
 other property as is necessary to perform the transferred functions and
 activities or related functions or activities with respect to State member
 banks or financial services holding companies.
 (d) CONTINUATION OF AGENCY SERVICES- Any agency, department, or other
 instrumentality of the United States, or any successor to any such agency,
 department or instrumentality, which was providing support services to the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation immediately before the date of any
 transfer of functions to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 under this section in connection with such transferred functions shall--
 (1) continue to provide such service, on a reimbursable basis, in accordance
 with the terms of the arrangement pursuant to which such services were
 provided until modified or terminated in accordance with such terms except
 that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall substitute
 for the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 as a party to the arrangement; and
 (2) consult with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to
 coordinate and facilitate a prompt and reasonable transition.
 (e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT-
 (1) Section 10(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 243),
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `site or building in the District of Columbia' and inserting
 instead `such sites or buildings'; and
 (B) by striking the terms `any sites' and `building' wherever they appear
 and inserting instead `building or buildings'.
 (2) Section 10(9) of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 522),
 is repealed.
Subtitle E--Litigation Authority
SEC. 341. LITIGATION AUTHORITY.
 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Director, the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation, and the National Credit Union Administration may employ
 attorneys to conduct litigation brought by or against their respective
 agencies, officers, or employees, in matters affecting such agencies, but
 such litigation may be conducted only with the prior consent of the Attorney
 General, and subject to the Attorney General's direction and control.
 (b) Section 5(d)(1)(A) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(1)(A))
 is amended by striking the second sentence.
 (c) Subsections (a) and (b) shall become effective on January 1, 1993.
Subtitle F--Reorganization of Boards of Directors
SEC. 351. FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
 (a) REORGANIZATION- Section 2 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1812) is amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (2) by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' wherever
 it appears and inserting instead `Chairman of the Board of Governors of
 the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (3) in subsection (a), by striking paragraph (2).
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT- Section 11(k) of the
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 248(k)) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following: `The Chairman may delegate the authority of the
 Chairman to serve as a member of the Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation to any member or employee of the Board or
 to any officer of a Federal Reserve bank.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall become
 effective January 1, 1993.
SEC. 352. REORGANIZATION OF NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION BOARD
OF DIRECTORS.
 (a) Section 102(b) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752a(b))
 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence--
 (A) by inserting `two of whom shall be independent members' after
 `members,'; and
 (B) by inserting `, and one of whom shall be the Director of the Office
 of Depository Institutions Supervision' after `Senate';
 (2) in the second sentence, by inserting `independent' before `members'; and
 (3) by striking the third sentence.
 (b) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become effective January
 1, 1993.
Subtitle G--Savings Provisions for the Transfer of Authority from the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to the Director
SEC. 361. SAVINGS PROVISIONS.
 (a) EXISTING RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED- No provision of
 this title shall affect the validity of any right, duty, or obligation of
 the United States, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
 or any person, which existed on December 31, 1992.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- No action or other proceeding commenced by or
 against the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with respect to
 any authority transferred from the Board to the Director pursuant to this
 Act shall abate by reason of enactment of this Act, except that, effective
 January 1, 1993, the Director shall be substituted, as appropriate, as a
 party to any such action or proceeding.
 (c) CONTINUATION OF ORDERS, RESOLUTIONS, DETERMINATIONS, AND REGULATIONS- All
 orders, resolutions, determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other
 interpretations, guidelines, procedures and other advisory material which--
 (1) have been issued, made, prescribed, or permitted to become effective
 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with respect to any
 function transferred from the Board to the Director pursuant to this Act; and
 (2) are in effect on December 31, 1992, or become effective thereafter.
shall continue in effect according to the terms of such orders, resolutions,
determinations, regulations, interpretative rules, other interpretations,
guidelines, procedures or other advisory material; shall be administered by
the appropriate Federal banking agency; and shall be enforceable by or against
the appropriate Federal banking agency until modified, terminated, set aside,
or superseded in accordance with applicable law by the appropriate Federal
banking agency, by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (d) STATUS OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES-
 (1) Any proposed regulation or rule of the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System relating to any function transferred from the Board to the
 Director pursuant to this Act, which has not been published as a final
 regulation by the date that the supervisory and regulatory authority of
 the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is transferred to the
 Director pursuant to this Act, shall be deemed to be a proposed regulation
 of the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 (2) Any final or interim rule that would be transferred pursuant to paragraph
 (1) if it were effective prior to January 1, 1993, but which will become
 effective subsequent to such date, shall become effective according to
 its terms.
 (e) APPLICATION- The provisions of this section shall apply except as
 otherwise expressly provided in this Act.
TITLE IV--BANK INSURANCE FUND RECAPITALIZATION
Subtitle A--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Borrowing
SEC. 401. FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION BORROWING.
 Section 15 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1825) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e) CORPORATION BORROWINGS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- The Corporation shall have the authority to borrow funds
 from any Federal Reserve bank, provided that the Corporation shall have
 no more than $25,000,000,000 in borrowings outstanding at any one time
 from all Federal Reserve banks.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS- Any borrowing undertaken by the Corporation pursuant to
 paragraph (1) shall be undertaken only for the following purposes:
 `(A) to maintain or improve the liquidity of the Bank Insurance Fund; or
 `(B) to provide financial assistance with respect to any insured depository
 institution, or receivership or conservatorship of an insured depository
 institution, pursuant to section 11 or section 13.'; and
 (2) by amending subsection (c)(6) to read as follows:
 `(6) Exceptions-
 `(A) With the prior approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the
 Corporation may issue or incur up to $5,000,000,000 in the aggregate of
 additional liabilities in excess of the limitations of paragraph (5). The
 amount which the Corporation may borrow from the Secretary of the Treasury
 under section 14 shall be reduced by the amount of additional liabilities
 issued or incurred pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(B) Obligations issued and funds received by the Corporation pursuant
 to section 15(e) shall not be subject to, and shall not be counted in
 calculating compliance with, the limitations of paragraph (5).
 `(C) In calculating compliance with the limitations of paragraph (5), an
 amount equal to $5,000,000,000 less the amount of outstanding borrowing
 by the Corporation from the Secretary of the Treasury under section 14,
 or otherwise borrowed under subparagraph (A) included in net worth.'.
SEC. 402. AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT.
 Section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 342-347d) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following: `Subject to such restrictions,
 limitations and regulations as the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System shall prescribe, any Federal Reserve bank is authorized
 to make advances to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, upon its
 request. Such advances shall bear interest at the current market yield
 on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of comparable
 maturities, as of the date of advance.'.
Subtitle B--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Assessments
SEC. 411. MAXIMUM AGGREGATE ASSESSMENT.
 Section 7(b)(1)(C) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1817(b)(1)(C)) is amended--
 (1) by amending clause (iii) to read as follows:
 `(iii) MAXIMUM AGGREGATE ASSESSMENT- Notwithstanding clause (i), the
 maximum aggregate assessment charged to the members of the Bank Insurance
 Fund for any semiannual period, shall not exceed 0.15 percent of aggregate
 assessment base for such semiannual period.'; and
 (2) by inserting after clause (iii) the following:
 `The Corporation shall have the authority to make such estimates and
 projections as may be appropriate for the purpose of computing assessment
 rates and aggregate assessment target amounts, and such estimates and
 projections shall not be subject to review by any court, nor shall any
 court have authority to stay or enjoin the Corporation from collecting
 assessments so computed. No action seeking repayment of an assessment
 collected by the Corporation may be brought later than sixty days after
 the date on which such assessment is due.'.
SEC. 412. BANK INSURANCE FUND BORROWING ASSESSMENT.
 Section 7(b)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(b)(1))
 is further amended by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new
 subparagraph:
 `(G) DEDICATION OF BANK INSURANCE FUND ASSESSMENTS FOR THE REPAYMENT OF
 BANK INSURANCE FUND BORROWING FROM THE FEDERAL RESERVE BANK- Subject to
 the provisions of this paragraph, if the Corporation has borrowed funds
 from a Federal Reserve bank as authorized by section 15(e), and so long
 as any such borrowing remains out- standing, the Board of Directors is
 authorized and directed--
 `(i) to determine the amount of semiannual Bank Insurance Fund assessments
 received by the Corporation necessary to pay interest and principal on
 such borrowings pursuant to their terms; and
 `(ii) to take whatever actions are necessary to dedicate that portion
 of the semiannual assessments received, determined pursuant to clause
 (i), to pay interest and principal on such borrowings pursuant to their
 terms. The amounts so dedicated shall not be available for any purpose
 other than payment of interest and principal of such borrowings.'.
TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subtitle A--Payment System Risk Reduction
SEC. 501. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) many financial institutions engage daily in thousands of transactions
 with other financial institutions directly and through clearing
 organizations;
 (2) the efficient processing of such transactions is essential to a smoothly
 functioning economy;
 (3) such transactions can be processed most efficiently if, consistent
 with applicable contractual terms, obligations among financial institutions
 are netted;
 (4) such netting procedures would reduce the systemic risk within the
 banking system and financial markets; and
 (5) the effectiveness of such netting procedures can be assured only
 if they are recognized as valid and legally binding in the event of the
 closing of a financial institution participating in the netting procedures.
SEC. 502. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this subtitle--
 (1) `Broker/dealer' means a company that is registered or licensed under
 Federal or State law to engage in the business of brokering, underwriting,
 or dealing in securities in the United States.
 (2) `Clearing organization' means a clearing house, clearing association,
 clearing corporation or a similar organization that provides clearing or
 settlement services for its members and in which all members other than
 the clearing organization itself are financial institutions.
 (3) `Covered clearing obligation' means an obligation of a member of a
 clearing organization to make payment to another member of that clearing
 organization.
 (4) `Covered contractual payment entitlement' means--
 (A) an entitlement of a financial institution to receive a payment,
 subject to a netting contract from another financial institution; and
 (B) an entitlement of a member of a clearing organization to receive
 payment, subject to a netting contract, from another member of that clearing
 organization of a covered clearing obligation.
 (5) `Covered contractual payment obligation' means--
 (A) an obligation of a financial institution to make payment, subject to
 a netting contract to another financial institution; and
 (B) a covered clearing obligation.
 (6) `Depository institution' means--
 (A) a depository institution as defined in Section 19(b)(1)(A)(i)-(vi)
 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 461(b)(1)(A)(i)-(vi));
 (B) a branch or agency as defined in Section 1(b) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(b));
 (C) a corporation chartered under Section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.); or
 (D) a corporation having an agreement or undertaking with the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System under section 25 of the Federal
 Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.).
 (7) `Failed financial institution' means a financial institution that
 fails to satisfy a covered contractual payment obligation when due,
 that has commenced or had commenced against it insolvency, liquidation,
 reorganization, receivership (including the appointment of a receiver),
 conservatorship or similar proceedings, or that has generally ceased to
 meet its obligations when due.
 (8) `Failed member' means any member that fails to satisfy a covered
 clearing obligation when due, that has commenced or had commenced against
 it insolvency, liquidation, reorganization, receivership (including the
 appointment of a receiver), conservatorship or similar proceedings, or
 that has generally ceased to meet its obligations when due.
 (9) `Financial institution' means a broker/dealer, a depository institution,
 or a futures commission merchant, or any other institution as determined
 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
 (10) `Futures commission merchant' means a company that is registered or
 licensed under Federal or State law to engage in the business of selling
 futures and options in commodities.
 (11) `Members' means a member of or participant in a clearing organization
 and includes the clearing organization.
 (12) `Net entitlement' means the amount by which a financial institution's
 covered contractual payment entitlements exceeds its covered contractual
 payment obligations after netting under a netting contract.
 (13) `Net obligation' means the amount by which a financial institution's
 covered contractual payment obligations exceed its covered contractual
 payment entitlements after netting under a netting contract.
 (14) `Netting contract' means a contract or agreement, including the rules
 of a clearing organization, between two or more financial institutions
 that is governed by the laws of the United States or any subdivision
 thereof or any State thereof and provides that covered contractual payment
 obligations between and among financial institutions shall be netted and
 set off against each other.
SEC. 503. BILATERAL NETTING.
 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the covered contractual
 payment obligations and the covered contractual payment entitlements between
 any two financial institutions shall be netted in accordance with, and
 subject to the conditions of, the terms of any applicable netting contract.
 (b) The only obligation, if any, of a financial institution to make
 payment with respect to covered contractual payment obligations to another
 financial institution shall be equal to its net obligation to such other
 financial institution (and no such obligation shall exist if there is no
 net obligation).
 (c) The only right, if any, of a financial institution to receive payments
 with respect to covered contractual payment entitlements from another
 financial institution shall be equal to its net entitlement with respect
 to such other financial institution (and no such right shall exist if
 there is no net entitlement).
 (d) The net entitlement of any failed financial institution, if any,
 shall be paid to the failed financial institution in accordance with,
 and subject to the conditions of, the applicable netting contract. The
 provisions of this section shall be given effect notwithstanding that a
 financial institution is a failed financial institution.
SEC. 504. CLEARING ORGANIZATION NETTING.
 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the covered contractual
 payment obligations and covered contractual payment entitlements of a
 member of a clearing organization to and from all other members of the
 clearing organization shall be netted in accordance with and subject to
 the conditions of any applicable netting contract.
 (b) The net entitlement of any failed member, if any, shall be paid
 to the failed member in accordance with, and subject to the conditions
 of, the applicable netting contract. Such failed member shall have no
 recognizable claim against any member of such clearing organization for
 any amount based on such covered contractual payment entitlements other
 than its net entitlement.
SEC. 505. PREEMPTION.
 No stay, injunction, avoidance, moratorium, or similar proceeding or order,
 whether issued or granted by a court, administrative agency, or otherwise,
 shall limit or delay application of the netting in accordance with sections
 503 and 504.
Subtitle B--Right to Financial Privacy Act Amendments
SEC. 511. AMENDMENTS TO THE RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT OF 1978.
 The Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 is amended--
 (1) in section 1112(f)(2) (12 U.S.C. 3412(f)(2))--
 (A) by inserting `for civil actions under section 951 of the Financial
 Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1833a),
 or for forfeiture under sections 981 or 982 of title 18, United States Code'
 after `purposes'; and
 (B) by inserting at the end thereof `No agency or department so transferring
 such records shall be deemed to have waived any privilege applicable to
 those records under law.'; and
 (2) in section 1113(l) (12 U.S.C. 3413(1)), by inserting at the end thereof
 `No supervisory agency so transferring such record shall be deemed to have
 waived any privilege applicable to that record under law.'.
Subtitle C--Reduction in Regulatory Burden
SEC. 521. HOME MORTGAGE DISCLOSURE ACT.
 The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act is amended--
 (1) in section 304 (12 U.S.C. 2803), by striking subsection (i); and
 (2) in section 309 (12 U.S.C. 2808)--
 (A) by striking $10,000,000' and inserting instead `$50,000,000'; and
 (B) by inserting at the end thereof the following new sentence: `The
 amount of total assets in the preceding sentence shall be adjusted yearly
 on January 1 by the annual percentage change in the Consumer Price Index
 reported for the previous June 1.'.
SEC. 522. REGULATORY BURDEN STUDY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury, and the head of each
 appropriate Federal banking agency (as defined in section 3(q) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)) shall each conduct a review of
 all laws primarily under their respective jurisdictions and all regulations
 prescribed by them (except with respect to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
 and all regulations, rules and orders issued thereunder) with respect to
 such laws to determine whether such laws and regulations adversely affect
 the capital position and profitability of insured depository institutions.
 (b) ADDITIONAL REVIEW REQUIRED- The review required by subsection (a)
 shall include an evaluation to determine whether such laws and regulations
 impose duplicative paperwork and compliance requirements.
 (c) REPORT REQUIRED- Not later than one year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the head of each appropriate
 Federal banking agency shall each submit a report to the Congress
 containing--
 (1) a description of the laws and regulations that should be revised,
 simplified, repealed or rescinded in order to enhance the capitalization
 and profitability of insured depositary institutions without adversely
 affecting safety and soundness and consumer protection;
 (2) to the extent practicable, a cost/benefit analysis of such laws and
 regulations, including those pertaining to corporate applications and
 filings and other reporting and recordkeeping requirements;
 (3) an analysis of the cost impact and effect on safety and soundness of
 reducing the number of items to be reported on reports of condition of
 depository institutions with assets of under $50,000,000; and
 (4) an evaluation of the appropriateness of `sunsetting' recordkeeping
 and reporting requirements not directly related to safety and soundness.
SEC. 523. FAIR HOUSING REPORTING.
 Effective one year after the date of enactment of this Act, no appropriate
 Federal banking agency shall require any institution for which it is the
 appropriate Federal banking agency (as defined in section 3(q) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)) to prepare, file, or
 maintain any form for the purpose of collection, analysis, or maintenance of
 appropriate data to further the purposes of, or to fulfill the requirements
 of, the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.), other than a form for
 data collection, analysis, or maintenance prescribed pursuant to the Home
 Mortgage Disclosure Act (12 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.).
Subtitle D--Expedited Funds Availability
SEC. 531. AMENDMENT OF THE EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY ACT.
 Section 604(f)(2) of the Expedited Funds Availability Act (12
 U.S.C. 4003(f)(2)) is amended by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(D) After a depository institution has provided notice as required under
 subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C), no further notice shall be required until
 the earlier of one year after notice has been provided or such other time
 as the exception for which the notice was provided ceases to apply.'.
Subtitle E--Final Settlement Payment Procedure
SEC. 541. FINAL SETTLEMENT PAYMENT PROCEDURE.
 Section 11(d) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(d))
 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (16) as paragraphs (5)
 through (17), respectively, and inserting after paragraph (3) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(4) FINAL SETTLEMENT PAYMENT PROCEDURE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the handling of receiverships of insured institutions,
 to maintain essential liquidity and to prevent financial disruption,
 the Corporation may, after the declaration of an insured institution's
 insolvency, settle all uninsured and unsecured claims on the receivership
 with a final settlement payment which shall constitute full payment and
 disposition of the Corporation's obligations to such claimants.
 `(B) FINAL SETTLEMENT PAYMENT- A `final settlement payment' is the amount
 equal to the product of the final settlement payment rate and the amount
 of the uninsured and unsecured claim on the receivership.
 `(C) FINAL SETTLEMENT PAYMENT RATE- The `final settlement payment rate'
 shall be--
 `(i) a percentage rate reflecting an average of the Corporation's
 receivership recovery experience, determined by the Corporation in such
 a way that over such time period as the Corporation may deem appropriate,
 the Corporation in total will receive no more or less than it would have
 received in total as a general creditor standing in the place of insured
 depositors in each specific receivership; and
 `(ii) determined and announced annually by the Corporation.
 `(D) CORPORATION AUTHORITY- The Corporation may undertake such supervisory
 actions and promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to assure that
 the requirements of this section can be implemented with respect to each
 insured institution in the event of its insolvency.'.
TITLE VI--TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Subtitle A--Severability; Transition References
SEC. 601. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or application thereof to any person
 or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the Act, and the
 application of any remaining provision to other persons or circumstances,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 602. TRANSITION REFERENCES.
 Effective on the date of enactment of this Act, and until January 1,
 1993, any reference to a financial services holding company or to the
 Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 in any amendment made by,
 or provision of, this Act that becomes effective prior to such date shall
 be deemed to include a reference to a bank holding company and the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956, respectively.
Subtitle B--Technical and Conforming Amendments
SEC. 611. AMENDMENT TO ACTS CODIFIED IN TITLE 2, UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) THE FEDERAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN ACT OF 1971- The Federal Election Campaign
 Act of 1971 is amended effective on the date of enactment of this Act--
 (1) in section 301(8)(B)(vii) (2 U.S.C. 431(8)(B)(vii)), by striking',
 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,'; and
 (2) in section 302(h)(1) (2 U.S.C. 432(h)(1)), by striking `, the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,'.
 (b) THE BALANCED BUDGET AND EMERGENCY DEFICIT CONTROL ACT OF 1985- The
 Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended--
 (1) in section 255(g)(1)(A) (2 U.S.C. 905(g)(1)(A))--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Cur- rency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision'; and
 (2) in section 256(b)(4) (2 U.S.C. 906(b)(4))--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D); and
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (I) as subparagraphs (C)
 through (G), respectively.
SEC. 612. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 3132(a)(1)(D), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of
 the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 5314--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency';
 (B) by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision'; and
 (C) by inserting at the end thereof `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision.';
 (3) in section 5373(2)--
 (A) by sriking `482,'; and
 (B) by striking `2A(i) of the Home Owners' Loan Act' and inserting instead
 `305 of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991;';
 (4) in section 8438(a)(7)(B), effective on the date of enactment of this
 Act, by striking `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation' and
 inserting instead `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'; and
 (5) in section 8478(a)(2)(B)(iii), by striking `or the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation'.
SEC. 613. AMENDMENT TO ACT CODIFIED IN TITLE 7, UNITED STATES CODE.
 THE FOOD STAMP ACT OF 1977- Section 10 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977
 (7 U.S.C. 2019) is amended effective on the date of enactment of this Act--
 (1) by striking `the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or'; and
 (2) by striking `the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or'.
SEC. 614. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 11, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 365(o)--
 (A) by striking `the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the
 Comptroller of the Currency,' and inserting instead `the Director of the
 Office of Depository Institutions Supervision,'; and
 (B) by striking `its' and inserting instead `their'; and
 (2) in section 507(a)(8), by striking `the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision, the Comptroller of the Currency,' and inserting instead
 `the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision,'.
SEC. 615. AMENDMENTS TO ACTS CODIFIED IN TITLE 12, UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) THE ACT OF JANUARY 3, 1923- Chapter 22 of the Act of January 3, 1923
 (12 U.S.C. 7), is amended by striking `The Comptroller of the Currency
 may designate a national bank examiner to act as chief of the examining
 division in his office.'.
 (b) THE ACT OF MARCH 4, 1923- The Act of March 4, 1923, is amended--
 (1) in section 209(b), as amended (12 U.S.C. 9), by striking `The Comptroller
 of the Currency is hereby authorized to employ such additional examiners' and
 all that follows through `the performance of the work of that bureau.'; and
 (2) in section 209(b), as amended (12 U.S.C. 10), by striking `The salaries
 of the Deputy Comptrollers and of all national bank examiners and assistant
 examiners assigned to duty in the office of the bureau in Washington in
 connection with the supervision of national banks shall be considered part
 of the expenses of the examinations provided for by section 5240 of the
 Revised Statutes as amended.'.
 (c) THE BANK CONSERVATION ACT- The Bank Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 201
 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (d) THE ACT OF OCTOBER 28, 1974- Section 111 of the Act of October 28,
 1974, Public Law 93-495 (12 U.S.C. 250), is amended by striking `the
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision,'.
 (e) THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT- The Federal Reserve Act is amended--
 (1) in section 11, as amended (12 U.S.C. 248)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3)(A) (as redesignated by section 106(a)(1)(A)
 of this Act), by striking `member' and inserting instead `State'; and
 (B) in subsection (d)--
 (i) by striking `the bureau under the charge of the Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `the Secretary of the Treasury'; and
 (ii) by striking `the Comptroller' after `such notes may be delivered by',
 and inserting instead `the Secretary of the Treasury';
 (2) in section 6, as amended (12 U.S.C. 288), by striking `Comptroller of
 the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in the third undesignated paragraph of section 9, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 321, third paragraph), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (4) in the sixth undesignated paragraph of section 9, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 324), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (5) in the fourth and fifth undesignated paragraphs of section 4,
 as amended (12 U.S.C. 341), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (6) in section 24(a), as amended (12 U.S.C. 371(a)), by striking `Comptroller
 of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (7) in section 23A(d)(5), as amended (12 U.S.C. 371c(d)(5)), by striking
 `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead `Financial Services
 Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (8) in section 24A, as amended (12 U.S.C. 371d), by striking `Comptroller
 of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (9) in section 16--
 (A) in the eighth paragraph, as amended (12 U.S.C. 418), by striking `the
 Comptroller of the Currency shall, under the direction of the Secretary of
 the Treasury,' and inserting instead `the Secretary of the Treasury shall';
 (B) in the ninth paragraph, as amended (12 U.S.C. 419), by striking `shall
 be deposited in the Treasury, or in the subtreasury or mint of the United
 States nearest the place of business of each Federal reserve bank and shall
 be held for the use of such bank subject to the order of the Comptroller
 of the Currency' and inserting instead `shall be delivered to the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System subject to the order of the
 Secretary of the Treasury'; and
 (C) in the tenth paragraph, as amended (12 U.S.C. 420)--
 (i) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Secretary of the Treasury'; and
 (ii) striking `Federal Reserve Board' and inserting instead `Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System';
 (10) in section 19 (12 U.S.C. 461)--
 (A) in subsection (b)(1)(F)--
 (i) by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation,'; and
 (ii) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(4)(B)--
 (i) by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation,' and
 (ii) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (11) in the sixth paragraph of section 21, as amended (12 U.S.C. 486),
 by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (12) in the sixth paragraph of section 2, as amended (12 U.S.C. 501a),
 by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (13) in section 29, as amended (12 U.S.C. 504), by striking `Comptroller
 of the Currency' wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director of
 the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (14) in the fourth undesignated paragraph of section 25, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 602), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (15) in the tenth undesignated paragraph of section 25(a), as amended
 (12 U.S.C. 619), by--
 (A) striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (B) striking `bank holding companies' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding companies'; and
 (C) striking `bank holding company' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding company'; and
 (16) in the fifteenth undesignated paragraph of section 25(a) (12
 U.S.C. 624), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (f) REVISED STATUTES- Section 5208 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 501)
 is amended by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (g) THE HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT- The Home Owners' Loan Act, as amended
 (12 U.S.C. 1461 et seq.), is amended--
 (1) in section 2 (12 U.S.C. 1462)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows:
 `(3) Office--
 `The term `Office' means the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision.';
 and
 (C) in paragraph (7), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (2) by repealing section 3 (12 U.S.C. 1462a);
 (3) in section 4 (12 U.S.C. 1463)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `Office' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) in subsection (c), by striking `by the Comptroller of the Currency';
 (4) in section 5(t) (12 U.S.C. 1464(t))--
 (A) in paragraph (9)--
 (i) by striking the phrase `by the Comptroller of the Currency' wherever
 it appears; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking `Comptroller's'; and
 (II) by inserting `for national banks' after `definition of capital'; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (10) to read as follows:
 `(10) USE OF DEFINITIONS FOR NATIONAL BANKS- The standards prescribed
 under paragraph (1) shall include all relevant substantive definitions
 established for national banks.';
 (5) by repealing section 9 (12 U.S.C. 1467); and
 (6) in section 10 (12 U.S.C. 1467a)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1)(I)--
 (i) by striking `bank holding company' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding company'; and
 (ii) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (B) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in paragraph (2)(F)(i)--
 (I) by striking `bank holding company' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding company'; and
 (II) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'; and
 (ii) in paragraph (8)--
 (I) by striking `bank holding company' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding company'; and
 (II) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (C) in subsection (m)(3)(C)--
 (i) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (ii) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' wherever it appears
 and inserting instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (D) in subsection (q)(1)(A)(ii), by striking `bank holding company' and
 inserting instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (7) in section 11(c) (12 U.S.C. 1468(c))--
 (A) by striking `or 18(j)'; and
 (B) by striking `, as appropriate' after `the Federal Deposit Insurance Act'.
 (h) THE NATIONAL HOUSING ACT- The National Housing Act is amended--
 (1) in section 203(s) (12 U.S.C. 1709(s))--
 (A) in paragraph (5), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in paragraph (6), by striking `or a bank holding company, or a subsidiary
 of or affiliate of such a company,';
 (C) in paragraph (7), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation; and' and inserting instead `Board of Governors of
 the Federal Reserve System;';
 (D) in paragraph (8), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision.' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision; and'; and
 (E) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(9) if the mortgagee is a financial services holding company, or a
 subsidiary of or affiliate of such a company, the appropriate Federal
 banking agency as defined by section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)).';
 (2) in section 255(k)(3), as amended (12 U.S.C. 1715z-20(k)(3))--
 (A)(i) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision'; and
 (ii) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `the Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision,'; and
 (B) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 303(f) (12 U.S.C. 1718(f)), by striking `State member
 bank of the Federal Reserve System or any member of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `State bank'; and
 (4) in section 502 (12 U.S.C. 1701c)--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision'; and
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `The Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision, in consultation with the Comptroller of the Currency
 and' and inserting instead `The Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision, in consultation with'.
 (i) THE ACT OF OCTOBER 15, 1982- Section 341 of the Act of October 15,
 1982, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701j-3), is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(1)(B), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) in subsection (e)(1)--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision'; and
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `The Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision, in consultation with the Comptroller of the Currency
 and' and inserting instead `The Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision, in consultation with'.
 (j) THE DOMESTIC HOUSING AND INTERNATIONAL RECOVERY AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
 ACT- Section 469 of the Domestic Housing and International Recovery and
 Financial Stability Act (12 U.S.C. 1701p-1) is amended--
 (1)(A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision'; and
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision,'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (k) THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- The Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 3 (12 U.S.C. 1813)--
 (A) in subsection (1)(5), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency,
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in subsection (u), by striking `bank holding company' wherever it
 appears and inserting instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (C)(i) in subsection (w) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it
 appears and inserting instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking `bank holding company' and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company';
 (2) in section 4(b) (12 U.S.C. 1814(b)), by striking `Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 5 (12 U.S.C. 1815)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (3), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (ii) in paragraph (6), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'; and
 (iii) in paragraph (7), by striking `(excluding the Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision)'; and
 (B) in subsection (d)(3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking `bank holding company' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding company'; and
 (II) by striking `and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (E)--
 (I) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company';
 (II) by striking `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System' and
 inserting instead `appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (III) by striking `Board' and inserting instead `appropriate Federal
 banking agency';
 (4) in section 7 (12 U.S.C. 1817)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `the Comptroller of the Currency, the
 Director of the Office of the Thrift Supervision' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) by striking `the Comptroller of the Currency,'; and
 (II) by striking `, and the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision'
 and inserting instead `and the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in subsection (a)(3)--
 (i) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency,'; and
 (ii) by striking `Chairman of the Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and by inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (C) in subsection (a)(6) by striking `the Comptroller of the Currency,
 the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (D) in subsection (a)(7) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (E) in subsection (n)--
 (i) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision,'; and
 (ii) by striking `under section 1467 of this Act';
 (5) in section 8 (12 U.S.C. 1818)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking `(if the Corporation is the
 appropriate Federal banking agency)';
 (B) in subsection (a)(8)(B)(ii), by striking `Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (C) in subsection (b)(4), by striking `bank holding company' and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company';
 (D) in subsection (b)(5), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (E) in subsection (e)(4), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (F) in subsection (g)(2), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (G) in subsection (o)--
 (i) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (ii) by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (H) in subsection (t), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director of the
 Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (6) in section 11 (12 U.S.C. 1821)--
 (A) in subsection (n)(1)(A), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of
 the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (B) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (C) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (7) in section 13 (12 U.S.C. 1823)--
 (A) in subsection (i)(1)(C), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision or the Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) in subsection (k)(1)(A)(iv), by striking `Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (8) in section 18 (12 U.S.C. 1828), by striking `Director of the Office
 of Thrift Supervision' wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (9) by repealing section 26 (12 U.S.C. 1831c).
 (l) THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS REFORM, RECOVERY, AND ENFORCEMENT ACT OF
 1989- The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of
 1989 is amended--
 (1) in section 918(b) (12 U.S.C. 1833(b))--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) The Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision.';
 (B) by striking paragraph (5); and
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (5) and (6),
 respectively;
 (2) in section 1206 (12 U.S.C. 1833b), by striking `Comptroller of the
 Currency,' and `and the Office of Thrift Supervision,' and inserting `and'
 before `the Farm Credit Administration'; and
 (3) in section 1216 (12 U.S.C. 1833e)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (ii) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (iii) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as paragraphs (2) through
 (5), respectively;
 (B) in subsection (c) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency, the Director
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of
 the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (C) in subsection (d)--
 (i) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision;';
 (ii) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (iii) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (3) through
 (7), respectively.
 (m) THE BANK PROTECTION ACT OF 1968- Section 2 of the Bank Protection Act
 of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1881) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by adding `and insured nonmember banks' after
 `Federal Reserve System' the second time that it appears;
 (3) by striking paragraph (3);
 (4) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3); and
 (5) in paragraph (3) (as redesignated)--
 (A) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by inserting `associations' after `savings'.
 (n) THE FARM CREDIT ACT OF 1971- The Farm Credit Act of 1971, as amended,
 is amended--
 (1) in section 5.20 (12 U.S.C. 2255), by striking `Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'; and
 (2) in section 5.22 (12 U.S.C. 2257), by striking `Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'.
 (o) THE REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES ACT- The Real Estate Settlement
 Procedures Act is amended--
 (1) in section 4(a) (12 U.S.C. 2603(a))--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision'; and
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Director of the Office Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 8, as amended (12 U.S.C. 2607)--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Thrift Supervision'; and
 (B) effective on January 1, 1993, by striking `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision' wherever it appears and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (p) THE HOME MORTGAGE DISCLOSURE ACT OF 1975- The Home Mortgage Disclosure
 Act of 1975 is amended--
 (1) in section 304(h) (12 U.S.C. 2803(h))--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (C) in paragraph (3), by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'
 and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System';
 (2) in section 305(b) (12 U.S.C. 2804(b))--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 306(b) (12 U.S.C. 2805(b))--
 (A) by amending the second sentence to read as follows: `Notwithstanding
 any other provision of this subsection, compliance with the requirements
 imposed by this subsection shall be enforced under section 8 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818) by the Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision in the case of national banks and
 savings associations the deposits of which are insured by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation.'; and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (1) and (2); and
 (4) in section 307 (12 U.S.C. 2806)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (i) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (ii) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency,'; and
 (iii) by striking `the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation';
 (B) in subsection (a)(3), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision'
 and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (C) in subsection (b), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' wherever
 it appears and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'.
 (q) THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT OF 1977- Section 803(l) of the Community
 Reinvestment Act of 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2902(l)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking `which are members of the Federal
 Reserve System and bank holding companies';
 (3) by striking subparagraph (C);
 (4) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (C) and amending
 such subparagraph--
 (A) by striking `section 8 of this Act, by'; and
 (B) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (5) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) a new subparagraph to read
 as follows:
 `(D) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined by section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), with respect to
 a financial services holding company;'.
 (r) THE INTERNATIONAL BANKING ACT OF 1978- The International Banking Act
 of 1978 is amended--
 (1) in section 1(b) (12 U.S.C. 3101)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (4) to read as follows:
 `(4) `Director' means the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (13) and (14) as paragraphs (14) and
 (15), respectively;
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 `(13) the term `appropriate Federal banking agency' shall have the same
 meaning as in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1813(q));'; and
 (D) by amending paragraph (14) (as redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(14) the terms `bank', `financial services holding company', `company',
 `control', and `subsidiary' have the same meanings assigned to those terms in
 the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991 and the terms `controlled'
 and `controlling' shall be construed consistently with the term `control'
 as defined in section 2 the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991;';
 (2) in section 4 (12 U.S.C. 3102), by striking `Comptroller' wherever it
 appears and inserting instead `Director';
 (3) in section 6(a) (12 U.S.C. 3104(a)), by striking `Comptroller' and
 inserting instead `Director';
 (4) in section 5(c) (12 U.S.C. 3103(c)), by striking `Board' and inserting
 instead `appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (5) in section 7(c) (12 U.S.C. 3105(b)), by striking `Comptroller' and
 inserting instead `Director';
 (6) in section 8 (12 U.S.C. 3106)--
 (A) in subsection (c)--
 (i) by striking `Board' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (ii) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' wherever it appears
 and inserting instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'; and
 (iii) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (B) in subsection (d), by striking `bank holding company' wherever it
 appears and inserting instead `financial services holding company'.
 (7) in section 9(b)(2) (12 U.S.C. 3106a(2)), by striking `Comptroller'
 and inserting instead `appropriate Federal banking agency'; and
 (8) in section 13(a) (12 U.S.C. 3108(a)), by striking `Comptroller, the
 Board, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,' and inserting instead
 `appropriate Federal banking agencies'.
 (s) THE DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION MANAGEMENT INTERLOCKS ACT OF 1978- The
 Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act of 1978 is amended--
 (1) in section 202 (12 U.S.C. 3201), by striking `bank holding company'
 wherever it appears and inserting instead `financial services holding
 company';
 (2) in section 205(9) (12 U.S.C. 3204(9)), by striking `Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (3) in section 207 (12 U.S.C. 3206)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision with
 respect to national banks and banks located in the District of Columbia,';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `which are members of the Federal Reserve
 System, and bank holding companies';
 (C) by striking paragraph (3) and redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5)
 as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively;
 (D) in paragraph (3) (as redesignated) by striking `Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (E) by inserting after paragraph (4) (as redesignated) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(5) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), in the case of
 a financial services holding company;';
 (4) in section 208 (12 U.S.C. 3207)--
 (A) in paragraph (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting `and insured nonmember banks' after `Federal Reserve
 System' the second time it appears; and
 (ii) by striking `and bank holding company,';
 (C) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board with respect to institutions the accounts of which
 are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision with
 respect to institutions the accounts of which are insured by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation'; and
 (ii) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (D) by striking paragraph (3) and redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5)
 as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (E) by inserting a new paragraph (5) to read as follows:
 `(5) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), in the case of
 a financial services holding company.'.
 (t) THE FEDERAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS EXAMINATION COUNCIL ACT OF 1978- The
 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Act of 1978 is amended--
 (1) in section 1002 (12 U.S.C. 3301)--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'; and
 (B)(i) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Office of Thrift
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision'
 and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 1003(l) (12 U.S.C. 3302(l))--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by striking `the Office of Thrift Supervision';
 (3) in section 1004(a) (12 U.S.C. 3303(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by striking paragraph (4) and redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph
 (4);
 (4) in section 1005 (12 U.S.C. 3304), by striking `One-fifth' and inserting
 instead `One-fourth';
 (5) in section 1121(6) (12 U.S.C. 3350(6))--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking
 `Corporations' and inserting instead `Corporation';
 (B) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (C) by striking `the Office of Thrift Supervision,'.
 (u) THE RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT OF 1978- Section 1101 of the Right
 to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3401) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking `bank holding company' and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956'
 and inserting instead `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'; and
 (2) in paragraph (7)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) by striking subparagraph (E) and redesignating subparagraphs (F)
 through (H) as subparagraphs (E) through (G), respectively; and
 (C) in subparagraph (G) (as redesignated), by inserting `or insurance'
 after `securities'.
 (v) THE ALTERNATIVE MORTGAGE TRANSACTION PARITY ACT OF 1982- The Alternative
 Mortgage Transaction Parity Act of 1982 is amended--
 (1) in section 802(a)(3) (12 U.S.C. 3801(a)(3))--
 (A) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'; and
 (2) in section 804(a) (12 U.S.C. 3803(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions'; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (w) THE INTERNATIONAL LENDING SUPERVISION ACT OF 1983- The International
 Lending Supervision Act of 1983 is amended--
 (1) in section 903 (12 U.S.C. 3902), by striking `, except' and all that
 follows through subparagraph (C) and inserting instead `; and'; and
 (2) in section 912 (12 U.S.C. 3911)--
 (A) by striking `one of three Federal banking regulatory and supervisory
 agencies, and as'; and
 (B) by striking `Office of the Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (x) THE EXPEDITED FUNDS AVAILABILITY ACT OF 1987- The Expedited Funds
 Availability Act of 1987 is amended--
 (1) in section 609(e) (12 U.S.C. 4008(e))--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'; and
 (B)(i) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Office of Thrift
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision'
 and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 610(a)(1) (12 U.S.C. 4009(a)(1))--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 `(B) State insured banks (other than national banks), by the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System.'; and
 (C) by striking subparagraph (C); and
 (3) in section 610(a)(2) (12 U.S.C. 4009(a)(2)), by striking `Office of
 Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'.
 (y) THE NATIONAL BANK ACT- The National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 38 note)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (z) REVISED STATUTES- Sections 5155 (12 U.S.C. 36), 5138 (12 U.S.C. 51),
 5205 (12 U.S.C. 55), 5174 (12 U.S.C. 108), 5185 (12 U.S.C. 151), 5186
 (12 U.S.C. 152), and 5213 (12 U.S.C. 164) of the Revised Statutes are
 each amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (aa) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS- Section 13 of the Act of September 8, 1959
 (12 U.S.C. 21a); section 2 of the Act of May 1, 1886 (12 U.S.C. 30); section
 345 of the Act of August 23, 1935 (12 U.S.C. 51b-1); chapter 58 of the Act
 of February 25, 1930 (12 U.S.C. 67); section 1 of the Public Law 87-722
 (12 U.S.C. 92a); section 12 of the Act of March 14, 1900 (12 U.S.C. 101);
 section 3 of the Act of October 5, 1917 (12 U.S.C. 103); sections 3 and
 5 of the Act of June 20, 1874 (12 U.S.C. 121, 105); section 1 of the Act
 of June 13, 1933 (12 U.S.C. 121a); section 9 of the Act of July 12, 1882
 (12 U.S.C. 178); section 3 of the Act of June 30, 1876 (12 U.S.C. 197);
 sections 1, 2, and 3 of the Act of March 29, 1886 (12 U.S.C. 198-200);
 the Act of August 17, 1950 (12 U.S.C. 214 et seq.); the Act of November
 7, 1917 (12 U.S.C. 215-215b); and sections 731-735 of Public Law 96-221
 (12 U.S.C. 216-216d) are each amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (bb) THE EMERGENCY BANKING AND BANK CONSERVATION ACT- Sections 301 and
 302 of the Emergency Banking and Bank Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 51a,
 51b) are amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institution
 Supervision', and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institution Supervision'.
 (cc) THE BANKING ACT OF 1933- Sections 22, 29, and 31 of the Banking Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 64a, 71a, and 197a) are amended--
 (1) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) by striking `Comptroller' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
SEC. 616. AMENDMENTS TO ACTS CODIFIED IN TITLE 15, UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) THE ACT OF SEPTEMBER 26, 1914- Section 18 of the Act of September 26,
 1914, as amended (15 U.S.C. 57a), is amended--
 (1) in subsection (f)(1)--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision';
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (C) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `each such
 Board' and inserting instead `the appropriate Board or the Director';
 (D) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `any such
 Board' and inserting instead `the appropriate Board or the Director'; and
 (E) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `such Board'
 and inserting instead `the appropriate Board or the Director';
 (2) in subsection (f)(2)--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (B) by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (A);
 (C) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 `(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System and banks insured by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than banks referred to in
 subparagraph (A)), by the division of consumer affairs established by the
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.'; and
 (D) by striking subparagraph (C).
 (b) THE TRUST INDENTURE ACT OF 1939- Section 321(h) of the Trust
 Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (15 U.S.C. 77uuu), is amended by striking
 `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office
 of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (c) THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934- The Securities Exchange Act of
 1934, as amended, is amended--
 (1) in section 3(a)(6) (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(6)), by striking `Comptroller of
 the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 3(a)(34) (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(34))--
 (A) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' wherever it appears and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (C) by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (D) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by striking `, a bank holding company, a subsidiary
 of a bank holding company which is a bank other than a bank specified in
 clause (i) or (iii) of this subparagraph, or a subsidiary or a department
 or division of such subsidiary';
 (ii) in clause (iii)--
 (I) by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation' where it first
 appears and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System'; and
 (II) by striking `and' at the end thereof; and
 (iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v) and inserting after clause
 (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), in the case of
 a financial services holding company, and';
 (E) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by striking `, a bank holding company, a subsidiary
 of a bank holding company which is a bank other than a bank specified in
 clause (i) or (iii) of this subparagraph';
 (ii) in clause (iii)--
 (I) by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation' where it first
 appears and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System'; and
 (II) by striking `and' at the end thereof; and
 (iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v) and inserting after clause
 (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), in the case of
 a financial services holding company; and';
 (F) in subparagraph (C)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by striking `, a bank holding company, or a subsidiary
 of a bank holding company, or a subsidiary of a bank holding company
 which is a bank other than a bank specified in clause (i) or (iii) of
 this subparagraph when the appropriate regulatory agency for such clearing
 agency is not the Commission';
 (ii) in clause (iii)--
 (I) by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation' where it first
 appears and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System'; and
 (II) by striking `and' at the end thereof; and
 (iii) by redesignating clause (iv) as clause (v) and inserting after clause
 (iii) the following new clause:
 `(iv) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), in the case of a
 financial services holding company when the appropriate regulatory agency
 for such clearing agency is not the Commission; and';
 (G) in subparagraph (D)(iii), by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System';
 (H) in subparagraph (F)(iii), by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System';
 (I) in subparagraph (G)--
 (i) in clause (iii), by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'
 where it first appears and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System'; and
 (ii) in clause (iv), by striking `Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'; and
 (J) in the last sentence by striking `bank holding company' wherever it
 appears and inserting instead `financial services holding company';
 (3) in section 15C--
 (A) in subsection (b)(2)(C)(ii) (15 U.S.C. 78o-5(b)(2)(C)(ii)), by striking
 `section 8 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `section 8 of the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'; and
 (B) in subsection (f)(1) (15 U.S.C. 78o-5(f)(1))--
 (i) by striking `Comptroller of the Currency,' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision,';
 (ii) by striking `the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision,'; and
 (iii) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `the
 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,'; and
 (4) in section 17 (15 U.S.C. 78q)--
 (A) in subsection (f)(4)--
 (i) in clause (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (ii) in clause (C), by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'
 and inserting instead `Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in subsection (h)(3)(B), by striking `section 8 of the Bank Holding
 Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead `section 8 of the Financial
 Services Holding Company Act of 1991'.
 (d) THE INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940- The Investment Company Act of 1940,
 as amended (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.), is amended--
 (1) in section (2)(a)(5) (15 U.S.C. 80a-2(a)(5)), by striking `Comptroller
 of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'; and
 (2) in section 6(a)(3) (15 U.S.C. 80a-6(a)(3)), effective on the date of
 enactment of this Act, by inserting `or successor thereto' after `Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'.
 (e) THE INVESTMENT ADVISORS ACT OF 1940- Section 202 of the Investment
 Advisors Act of 1940, as amended (15 U.S.C. 80b-2), is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (2) in subsection (a)(11)--
 (A) by striking `bank holding company' and inserting `financial services
 holding company'; and
 (B) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991'.
 (f) THE SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT ACT OF 1958- The Small Business Investment
 Act of 1958, as amended (15 U.S.C. 661), is amended--
 (1) in section 302(b) (15 U.S.C. 682(b)), effective on the date of enactment
 of this Act, by striking `Notwithstanding the provisions of section 6(a)(1)
 of the Bank Holding Act of 1956, shares' and inserting instead `Shares'; and
 (2) in section 308(b) (15 U.S.C. 687(b)), by striking `or the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'.
 (g) THE CONSUMER CREDIT PROTECTION ACT- The Consumer Credit Protection Act,
 as amended (15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), is amended--
 (1) in section 108 (15 U.S.C. 1607)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) in subsection (a)(1)(C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting `Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System'; and
 (C) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision' and inserting `the Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 620(b) (15 U.S.C. 1681s(b))--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (B) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 704(a) (15 U.S.C. 1691c(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (4) in section 814(b) (15 U.S.C. 1692l(b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (5) in section 917(a) (15 U.S.C. 1693o(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking `Board of Directors of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting instead `Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (h) THE EXPORT TRADING COMPANY ACT OF 1982- Section 102(b) of the Export
 Trading Company Act of 1982 (15 U.S.C. 4001(b)) is amended by striking
 `bank holding companies' wherever it appears and inserting instead
 `financial services holding companies'.
SEC. 617. AMENDMENT TO ACT CODIFIED IN TITLE 16, UNITED STATES CODE.
 THE FEDERAL POWER ACT- Section 305(c)(2)(A) of the Federal Power Act
 (16 U.S.C. 825d(c)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `bank holding company'
 and inserting instead `financial services holding company'.
SEC. 618. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 212--
 (A) by striking `by the Comptroller of the Currency,';
 (B) by striking `by the Office of Thrift Supervision,'; and
 (C) by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 655, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 657, by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting
 instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (4) in section 981(a)(1)(D), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of
 the Currency or the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (5) in section 982(a)(3), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of
 the Currency or the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (6) in section 1005--
 (A) in the third paragraph, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (B) in the sixth paragraph, by inserting in the last sentence `, as amended
 by the Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991' before the period.
 (7) in section 1006, by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (8) in section 1014, by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (9) in section 1032, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency or the
 Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (10) in section 1114, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency, the
 Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead `Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision';
 (11) in section 1906, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (12) in section 1908, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
SEC 619. AMENDMENT TO ACT CODIFIED IN TITLE 22, UNITED STATES CODE.
 THE FINANCIAL REPORTS ACT OF 1988- Section 3602 of the Financial Reports
 Act of 1988 (22 U.S.C. 5352) is amended by striking `Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'.
SEC. 620. AMENDMENT TO ACT CODIFIED IN TITLE 25, UNITED STATES CODE.
 THE ACT OF JUNE 24, 1938- Subsection (a) of the first section of the Act
 of June 24, 1938 (25 U.S.C. 162a(a)) is amended by striking `in the case
 of member banks, and of the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation in the case of insured nonmember banks'.
SEC. 621. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
 The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 1 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 149(b)(4)(B), effective on the date of enactment of this Act,
 by striking `the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,';
 (2) in section 246A(c)(3)--
 (A) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (B) by amending clause (ii) to read as follows:
 `(ii) FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING COMPANY- The term `Financial Services
 Holding Company' means a financial services holding company (within the
 meaning of section 2 of the Financial Services Company Act of 1991 (12
 U.S.C. 1841)).';
 (3) in section 304(b)(3)--
 (A) by striking `bank holding companies' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding companies';
 (B) by striking `BHC' wherever it appears and inserting instead `FSHC';
 (C) by striking `BHC's' wherever it appears and inserting instead FSHC's';
 and
 (D) by amending clause (D)(ii) to read as follows:
 `(ii) FSHC- The term `FSHC' means a financial services holding company
 (within the meaning of section 2 of the Financial Services Holding Company
 Act of 1991).';
 (4) in section 581, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (5) in section 584(a)(2), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (6) in section 597(c)(1), effective on the date of enactment of this Act,
 by inserting `(or any successor thereof)' after `the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation';
 (7) in section 864(e)(5)(D)--
 (A) by striking `bank holding companies' and inserting instead `financial
 services holding companies';
 (B) by striking `bank holding company' wherever it appears and inserting
 instead `financial services holding company'; and
 (C) by striking `Bank Holding Company Act of 1956' and inserting instead
 `Financial Services Holding Company Act of 1991';
 (8) in section 3305(c), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (9) in section 7507(a), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'.
SEC. 622. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 28, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 28, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 1348, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (2) in section 1394, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (3) in section 2001(c), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (4) in section 2002, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency, and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (5) in section 2004, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency, and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
SEC. 623. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 31, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 31, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the table of sections of subchapter I of chapter 3 of subtitle I--
 (A) by amending the item relating to section 307 to read as follows:
`307. Office of Depository Institutions Supervision.';
 (B) by amending the item relating to section 309 to read as follows:
`309. Continuing in Office.'; and
 (C) by striking the item relating to section 310;
 (2) by amending section 307 to read as follows:
 `Sec. 307. Office of depository institutions supervision
 `The Office of Depository Institutions Supervision, established by section
 301 of the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of 1991,
 is a bureau of the Department of the Treasury.';
 (3) by striking section 309 and redesignating section 310 as section 309;
 (4) in section 321--
 (A) by inserting `and' at the end of subsection (c)(1);
 (B) by amending subsection (c)(2) to read as follows:
 `(2) vested by the Financial Institutions Safety and Consumer Choice Act of
 1991 in the Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (C) by striking subsection (c)(3); and
 (D) by striking subsection (e);
 (5) in section 714(a), by striking `the Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision' and inserting instead
 `and the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision';
 (6) in section 718(a), by striking `Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (7) in section 1321(b), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision';
 (8) by amending section 5115(b) to read as follows:
 `(b) The amount of United States currency notes outstanding and in
 circulation may not be more than $300,000,000.'; and
 (9) in section 5119(b)(2), by adding the following sentence at the end
 thereof: `The Secretary shall not be required to reissue United States
 currency notes upon redemption.'.
SEC. 624. AMENDMENTS TO ACTS CODIFIED IN TITLE 42, UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) THE FLOOD DISASTER PROTECTION ACT OF 1973- Section 3(a)(5) of the
 Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4003(a)(5)),
 is amended by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead
 `Director of the Office of Depository Insitutions Supervision'.
 (b) THE ENERGY CONSERVATION AND PRODUCTION ACT- Section 303(7) of the
 Energy Conservation and Production Act (42 U.S.C. 6832(7)) is amended--
 (1) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'
 and inserting instead `the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision'; and
 (2) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation, Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting instead `Director
 of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
 (c) THE NEIGHBORHOOD REINVESTMENT CORPORATION ACT- The Neighborhood
 Reinvestment Corporation Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 8101 et seq.),
 is amended--
 (1) in section 604 (42 U.S.C. 8103)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking paragraph (1);
 (ii) in paragraph (5), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and
 inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'; and
 (iii) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (6) as paragraphs (1) through
 (5), respectively; and
 (B) in subsection (f), by striking `Comptroller of the Currency, through a
 duly designated Deputy Comptroller' and inserting instead `Director of the
 Office of Depository Institutions Supervision, through a duly designated
 representative'; and
 (2) in section 606(c)(3) (42 U.S.C. 8105(c)(3))--
 (A) effective on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision';
 (B) effective January 1, 1993, by striking `the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision and'; and
 (C) effective January 1, 1993, by striking the term `Comptroller of the
 Currency' and inserting instead `Director of the Office of Depository
 Institutions Supervision'.
SEC. 625. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 44, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Title 44, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 1111, by striking `Comptroller of the Currency' and inserting
 instead `Director of the Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (2) in section 1344, by striking `Office of the Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'.
SEC. 626. AMENDMENT TO TITLE 46, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Section 10315(a)(3) of title 46, United States Code, is amended, effective
 on the date of enactment of this Act, by striking `or the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation'.
SEC. 627. AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC LAW 101-647.
 Public Law 101-647 is amended--
 (1) in section 2539(c)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (C), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision' and
 inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions Supervision'; and
 (B) by striking subparagraph (F) and redesignating subparagraphs (G) and
 (H) as subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively; and
 (2) in section 2554(b)(2), by striking `Office of Thrift Supervision'
 wherever it appears and inserting instead `Office of Depository Institutions
 Supervision'.
Subtitle C--Repeal of Obsolete Provisions of Law
SEC. 631. REPEAL OF OBSOLETE PROVISIONS OF LAW.
 The following provisions of law (as they may have been amended) are repealed:
 (1) The following sections of the Revised Statutes: 324 (12 U.S.C. 1); 325
 (12 U.S.C. 2); 326 (12 U.S.C. 3); 327 (12 U.S.C. 4); 327A (12 U.S.C. 4A); 328
 (12 U.S.C. 8); 329 (12 U.S.C. 11); 330 (12 U.S.C. 12); 331 (12 U.S.C. 13);
 and 333 (12 U.S.C. 14);
 (2) title II of the Act of October 28, 1974, Public Law 93-495 (12
 U.S.C. 2401 et seq.); and
 (3) section 14 of the Act of December 22, 1974, Public Law 93-533 (12
 U.S.C. 2612).
Subtitle D--Effective Date
SEC. 641. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Unless otherwise expressly provided, the amendments made by this title
 shall take effect January 1, 1993.