HR 631 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 631
To provide for orderly trade in nonrubber footwear, to reduce unemployment
in the domestic shoe industry, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 24, 1989
Mr. GOODLING (for himself and Mr. GILMAN) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To provide for orderly trade in nonrubber footwear, to reduce unemployment
in the domestic shoe industry, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `American Footwear Industry Self-Help Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) The domestic nonrubber footwear industry is important to the national
 economy.
 (2) The domestic nonrubber footwear industry is highly labor intensive, and
 footwear firms are vital to the economic health of small towns throughout
 the United States.
 (3) The low capital requirements for entry into footwear production make it
 a primary target for industrializing or newly industrialized countries. As
 a consequence, footwear is produced in virtually every footwear consuming
 country in the world.
 (4) Tremendous competitive pressure has been created in the world footwear
 market in the last decade as a result of rapidly growing production and
 capacity in numerous developing and developed countries. This development
 has resulted in the widespread erection of tariff and nontariff barriers
 by foreign countries designed to protect their domestic footwear industries.
 (5) The United States has historically resisted the protectionist trends of
 other producing nations and has instead maintained a market distinguished
 by its accessibility. As a result, the United States market has become a
 focal point for world trade in nonrubber footwear.
 (6) The diversion of international trade to the United States market has
 resulted in serious injury to domestic producers as manifested by--
 (A) the loss of 147,300 footwear jobs since 1968,
 (B) a decline in domestic production and production capacity, and
 (C) the permanent closure of 1,053 plants during the same period.
 (7) The serious injury to domestic producers poses a significant danger
 to the industry's supplier base as well.
 (8) The domestic nonrubber footwear producers have made a significant
 commitment to the future of the industry through substantial capital
 investment.
 (9) Since the termination of temporary import relief in 1981, capital
 investment in the domestic nonrubber footwear industry has declined as the
 industry struggled to battle the massive surge in imports which increased
 the percentage share of imported footwear in the United States market from
 51 percent in 1981 to 83 percent in 1988.
 (10) Without the restriction of import levels, capital investment in this
 domestic industry will continue to decrease.
 (11) The domestic nonrubber footwear industry has thrice been judged by
 the International Trade Commission to be seriously injured by imports.
 (12) Since the termination of the four-year orderly marketing agreements
 in 1981, the present harm to the domestic industry is even more critical
 than the serious injury which triggered the Commission's three unanimous
 findings in 1976, 1977, and 1985.
 (13) The domestic nonrubber footwear industry has not been afforded adequate
 and appropriate relief from imports; therefore, the Congress concludes that--
 (A) the administrative process under chapter 1 of title II of the Trade
 Act of 1974 has proven inadequate; and
 (B) in the absence of an effective remedy under such process, legislative
 relief is essential.
 (b)(1) It is the purpose of Congress in enacting this section to--
 (A) promote and expand the economic health of the United States nonrubber
 footwear industry,
 (B) preserve the jobs of American workers, and
 (C) prevent the further decline of this important domestic industry.
 (2) It is declared to be the policy of Congress that access to the United
 States market for foreign-produced nonrubber footwear should be on an
 equitable basis to ensure orderly trade in nonrubber footwear, reduce unfair
 trade in nonrubber footwear, and address United States balance-of-payment
 problems, of which footwear is the seventh largest component. In order
 to accomplish these objectives, it is deemed necessary and appropriate
 to limit imports of nonrubber footwear into the United States market to
 specific percentages of the domestic consumption over a 5-year period.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) The term `domestic consumption' means the number of pairs of nonrubber
 footwear produced in the United States plus the number of pairs entered
 less the number of pairs exported from the United States.
 (2) The term `entered' means entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for
 consumption, in the customs territory of the United States.
 (3) The term `quota term' means the 60-month period beginning on the day
 which is 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (4) The term `nonrubber footwear' means the following categories of nonrubber
 footwear products, identified by reference to the following item numbers
 of the Tariff Schedules of the United States (as in effect on January 1,
 1987): 700.05 through 700.45; 700.56; 700.72 through 700.83; and 700.95.
 (5) The term `Secretary' means Secretary of Commerce.
SEC. 4. ANNUAL ESTIMATES OF DOMESTIC CONSUMPTION.
 Before the commencement of each 12-month period in the quota term,
 the Secretary shall estimate and publish in the Federal Register the
 domestic consumption for that period. The Secretary shall monitor actual
 domestic consumption throughout the period and shall make such intra-annual
 adjustments to the estimated domestic consumption as may be indicated.
SEC. 5. QUANTITATIVE LIMITATION ON NONRUBBER FOOTWEAR.
 (a)(1) During each of the first and second 12-month periods of the quota
 term the number of pairs of nonrubber footwear which may be entered may
 not exceed 60 percent of the estimated domestic consumption for that period.
 (2) During the third 12-month period of the quota term the number of pairs
 of nonrubber footwear which may be entered may not exceed 63 percent of
 the estimated domestic consumption for that period.
 (3) During the fourth 12-month period of the quota term the number of pairs
 of nonrubber footwear which may be entered may not exceed 66 percent of
 the estimated domestic consumption for that period.
 (4) During the fifth 12-month period of the quota period the number of
 pairs of nonrubber footwear which may be entered may not exceed 69 percent
 of the estimated domestic consumption for that period.
 (b) The Secretary shall allocate the limitation provided in subsection
 (a) among foreign countries, group of countries, or areas taking into
 consideration--
 (A) average levels of imports for the period 1978 through 1982;
 (B) findings of unfair trade practices with respect to nonrubber footwear
 exports;
 (C) recent market trends; and
 (D) such other considerations as the Secretary deems appropriate.
 (c) In order to ensure the equitable and efficient administration of this
 section, the Secretary shall establish and administer an import licensing
 system under which each importer of nonrubber footwear will be required
 to present an import permit as a condition of entry. The Secretary shall
 charge a fee for import licenses in such amount as may be necessary to
 cover the cost of administration of the system.
 (d)(1) The Secretary and the Secretary of the Treasury shall take such
 actions within their respective jurisdiction as may be necessary or
 appropriate to enforce the provisions of this section.
 (2)(A) The Secretary and the Secretary of the Treasury shall each issue
 such implementing regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to effect
 the purposes of this section and to enforce the provisions of this section.
 (B) Before prescribing any regulation under subparagraph (A), the Secretary
 or the Secretary of the Treasury, as the case may be, shall--
 (i) consult with interested domestic parties,
 (ii) afford an opportunity for such parties to comment on the proposed
 regulations, and
 (iii) consider all such comments before prescribing final regulations.