[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 3295 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

111th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 3295

To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to prohibit foreign 
influence in Federal elections, to prohibit government contractors from 
 making expenditures with respect to such elections, and to establish 
 additional disclosure requirements with respect to spending in such 
 elections, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 April 30, 2010

 Mr. Schumer (for himself, Mr. Feingold, Mr. Wyden, Mr. Bayh, Mr. 
 Franken, Mr. Durbin, Mrs. Murray, Mr. Leahy, Mr. Bennet, Mr. Brown of 
 Ohio, Mr. Reed, Mr. Whitehouse, Mr. Specter, Mr. Merkley, Ms. 
 Klobuchar, Mr. Kaufman, Mr. Udall of Colorado, Mr. Bingaman, Mrs. 
 Gillibrand, Mr. Casey, Mr. Begich, Ms. Mikulski, Mr. Sanders, Mr. 
 Harkin, Mr. Rockefeller, Mrs. McCaskill, Mr. Menendez, Mrs. Shaheen, 
 Mr. Lautenberg, Mrs. Feinstein, Mr. Tester, Mr. Baucus, Mr. Conrad, 
 Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Akaka, Mr. Nelson of Florida, Mr. Levin, and Mr. 
 Burris) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Rules and Administration

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to prohibit foreign 
influence in Federal elections, to prohibit government contractors from 
 making expenditures with respect to such elections, and to establish 
 additional disclosure requirements with respect to spending in such 
 elections, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Democracy Is 
Strengthened by Casting Light On Spending in Elections Act'' or the 
``DISCLOSE Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
 TITLE I--REGULATION OF CERTAIN POLITICAL SPENDING

Sec. 101. Prohibiting independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications by government contractors.
Sec. 102. Application of ban on contributions and expenditures by 
 foreign nationals to foreign-controlled 
 domestic corporations.
Sec. 103. Treatment of payments for coordinated communications as 
 contributions.
Sec. 104. Treatment of political party communications made on behalf of 
 candidates.
 TITLE II--PROMOTING EFFECTIVE DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY

 Subtitle A--Treatment of Independent Expenditures and Electioneering 
 Communications Made by All Persons

Sec. 201. Independent expenditures.
Sec. 202. Electioneering communications.
 Subtitle B--Expanded Requirements for Corporations and Other 
 Organizations

Sec. 211. Additional information required to be included in reports on 
 disbursements by covered organizations.
Sec. 212. Rules regarding use of general treasury funds by covered 
 organizations for campaign-related 
 activity.
Sec. 213. Optional use of separate account by covered organizations for 
 campaign-related activity.
Sec. 214. Modification of rules relating to disclaimer statements 
 required for certain communications.
 Subtitle C--Reporting Requirements for Registered Lobbyists

Sec. 221. Requiring registered lobbyists to report information on 
 independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications.
 Subtitle D--Filing by Senate Candidates With Commission

Sec. 231. Filing by Senate candidates with Commission.
 TITLE III--DISCLOSURE BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS OF INFORMATION ON 
 CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY

Sec. 301. Requiring disclosure by covered organizations of information 
 on campaign-related activity.
 TITLE IV--TELEVISION MEDIA RATES

Sec. 401. Television media rates.
 TITLE V--OTHER PROVISIONS

Sec. 501. Judicial review.
Sec. 502. Severability.
Sec. 503. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 (a) General Findings.--Congress finds and declares as follows:
 (1) Throughout the history of the United States, the 
 American people have been rightly concerned about the power of 
 special interests to control our democratic processes. That was 
 true over 100 years ago when Congress first enacted legislation 
 intended to restrict corporate funds from being used in Federal 
 elections, legislation that Congress in 1947 reaffirmed was 
 intended to include independent expenditures. The Supreme Court 
 held such legislation to be constitutional in 1990 in Austin v. 
 Michigan Chamber of Commerce (494 U.S. 652) and again in 2003 
 in McConnell v. F.E.C. (540 U.S. 93).
 (2) The Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United v. 
 Federal Election Commission on January 21, 2010, reverses 
 established jurisprudence and sound policy to greatly increase 
 the dangers of undue special interest influence over the 
 democratic process. That decision has opened the floodgates for 
 corporations and labor unions to spend unlimited sums from 
 their general treasury accounts to influence the outcome of 
 elections.
 (3) Congress must take action to ensure that the American 
 public has all the information necessary to exercise its free 
 speech and voting rights, and must otherwise take narrowly 
 tailored steps to regulate independent expenditures and 
 electioneering communications in elections.
 (b) Findings Relating to Government Contractors.--Congress finds 
and declares as follows:
 (1) Government contracting is an activity that is 
 particularly susceptible to improper influence, and to the 
 appearance of improper influence. Government contracts must be 
 awarded based on an objective evaluation of how well bidders or 
 potential contractors meet relevant statutory criteria.
 (2) Independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications that benefit particular candidates or elected 
 officials or disfavor their opponents can lead to apparent and 
 actual ingratiation, access, influence, and quid pro quo 
 arrangements. Government contracts should be awarded based on 
 an objective application of statutory criteria, not based on 
 other forms of inappropriate or corrupting influence.
 (3) Prohibiting independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications by persons negotiating for or performing 
 government contracts will prevent government officials involved 
 in or with influence over the contracting process from 
 influencing the contracting process based, consciously or 
 otherwise, on this kind of inappropriate or corrupting 
 influence.
 (4) Prohibiting independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications by persons negotiating for or performing 
 government contracts will likewise prevent such persons from 
 feeling pressure, whether actually exerted by government 
 officials or not, to make expenditures and to fund 
 communications in order to maximize their chances of receiving 
 contracts, or to match similar expenditures and communications 
 made by their competitors.
 (5) Furthermore, because government contracts often involve 
 large amounts of public money, it is critical that the public 
 perceive that the government contracts are awarded strictly in 
 accordance with prescribed statutory standards, and not based 
 on other forms of inappropriate or corrupting influence. The 
 public's confidence in government is undermined when 
 corporations that make significant expenditures during Federal 
 election campaigns later receive government funds.
 (6) Prohibiting independent expenditures and electioneering 
 communications by persons negotiating for or performing 
 government contracts will prevent any appearance that 
 government contracts were awarded based in whole or in part on 
 such expenditures or communications, or based on the 
 inappropriate or corrupting influence such expenditures and 
 communications can create and appear to create.
 (7) In these ways, prohibiting independent expenditures and 
 electioneering communications by persons negotiating for or 
 performing government contracts will protect the actual and 
 perceived integrity of the government contracting process.
 (8) Moreover, the risks of waste, fraud and abuse, all 
 resulting in economic losses to taxpayers, are significant when 
 would-be public contractors or applicants for public funds make 
 expenditures in Federal election campaigns in order to affect 
 electoral outcomes.
 (c) Findings Relating to Foreign Corporations.--Congress finds and 
declares as follows:
 (1) The Supreme Court's decision in the Citizens United 
 case has provided the means by which United States corporations 
 controlled by foreign entities can freely spend money to 
 influence United States elections.
 (2) Foreign corporations commonly own U.S. corporations in 
 whole or in part, and U.S. corporate equity and debt are also 
 held by foreign individuals, sovereign wealth funds, and even 
 foreign nations at levels which permit effective control over 
 those U.S. entities.
 (3) As recognized in many areas of the law, foreign 
 ownership interests and influences are exerted in a perceptible 
 way even when the entity is not majority-foreign-owned.
 (4) The Federal Government has broad constitutional power 
 to protect American interests and sovereignty from foreign 
 interference and intrusion.
 (5) Congress has a clear interest in minimizing foreign 
 intervention, and the perception of foreign intervention, in 
 United States elections.
 (d) Findings Relating to Coordinated Expenditures.--Congress finds 
and declares as follows:
 (1) It has been the consistent view of Congress and the 
 courts that coordinated expenditures in campaigns for election 
 are no different in nature from contributions.
 (2) Existing rules still allow donors to evade contribution 
 limits by making campaign expenditures which, while technically 
 qualifying as independent expenditures under law, are for all 
 relevant purposes coordinated with candidates and political 
 parties and thus raise the potential for corruption or the 
 appearance of corruption.
 (3) Such arrangements have the potential to give rise to 
 the reality or appearance of corruption to the same degree that 
 direct contributions to a candidate may give rise to the 
 reality or appearance of corruption. Moreover, expenditures 
 which are in fact made in coordination with a candidate or 
 political party have the potential to lessen the public's trust 
 and faith in the rules and the integrity of the electoral 
 process.
 (4) The government therefore has a compelling interest in 
 making sure that expenditures that are de facto coordinated 
 with a candidate are treated as such to prevent corruption, the 
 appearance of corruption, or the perception that some 
 participants are circumventing the laws and regulations which 
 govern the financing of election campaigns.
 (e) Findings Relating to Disclosures and Disclaimers.--Congress 
finds and declares as follows:
 (1) The American people have a compelling interest in 
 knowing who is funding independent expenditures and 
 electioneering communications to influence Federal elections, 
 and the government has a compelling interest in providing the 
 public with that information. Effective disclaimers and prompt 
 disclosure of expenditures, and the disclosure of the funding 
 sources for these expenditures, can provide shareholders, 
 voters, and citizens with the information needed to evaluate 
 the actions by special interests seeking influence over the 
 democratic process. Transparency promotes accountability, 
 increases the fund of information available to the public 
 concerning the support given to candidates by special 
 interests, sheds the light of publicity on political spending, 
 and encourages the leaders of organizations to act only upon 
 legitimate organizational purposes.
 (2) Protecting this compelling interest has become 
 particularly important to address the anticipated increase in 
 special interest spending on election-related communications 
 which will result from the Supreme Court's decision in the 
 Citizens United case. The current disclosure and disclaimer 
 requirements were designed for a campaign finance system in 
 which such expenditures were subject to prohibitions that no 
 longer apply.
 (3) More rigorous disclosure and disclaimer requirements 
 are necessary to protect against the evasion of current rules. 
 Organizations that engage in election-related communications 
 have used a variety of methods to attempt to obscure their 
 sponsorship of communications from the general public. Robust 
 disclosure and disclaimer requirements are necessary to ensure 
 that the electorate is informed about who is paying for 
 particular election-related communications, and so that the 
 shareholders and members of these organizations are aware of 
 their organizations' election-related spending.
 (4) The current lack of accountability and transparency 
 allow special interest political spending to serve as a private 
 benefit for the officials of special interest organizations, to 
 the detriment of the organizations and their shareholders and 
 members.
 (f) Findings Relating to Campaign Spending by Lobbyists.--Congress 
finds and declares as follows:
 (1) Lobbyists and lobbying organizations, and through them, 
 their clients, influence the public decision-making process in 
 a variety of ways.
 (2) In recent years, scandals involving undue lobbyist 
 influence have lowered public trust in government and 
 jeopardized the willingness of voters to take part in 
 democratic governance.
 (3) One way in which lobbyists may unduly influence Federal 
 officials is through their or their clients making independent 
 expenditures or electioneering communications targeting elected 
 officials.
 (4) Disclosure of such independent expenditures and 
 electioneering communications will allow the public to examine 
 connections between such spending and official actions, and 
 will therefore limit the ability of lobbyists to exert an undue 
 influence on elected officials.
 (g) Findings Relating to Lowest Unit Charge.--Congress finds and 
declares as follows:
 (1) The purpose of the First Amendment is to ensure a 
 robust marketplace of ideas. The government has a compelling 
 interest in ensuring that Americans have access to this robust 
 marketplace of ideas through the variety of media supported by 
 the government.
 (2) In recent years, the cost of political communication 
 has been artificially inflated as candidates, parties, interest 
 groups, and commercial advertisers compete for a dwindling 
 supply of airtime in the periods before elections. Candidates 
 for Federal election are currently forced to pay higher 
 premiums for ``nonpreemptible'' advertisement time so as not to 
 be replaced by commercial advertisements in such periods.
 (3) The high cost of advertising for Federal candidates and 
 their political parties makes it less likely that Americans 
 will receive information necessary to engage fully in the 
 electoral process and hear directly from all participants. The 
 high cost of advertising for Federal candidates and political 
 parties also drives the demand for large, potentially 
 corrupting contributions to Federal election campaigns and 
 forces elected officials to spend more time raising money and 
 less time performing their official responsibilities.
 (4) Lower advertising costs enhance the ability of 
 candidates to present and the public to receive information 
 necessary for the effective operation of the democratic 
 process. Lower advertising costs reduce the potential for 
 corrupting contributions to Federal election campaigns. Lower 
 advertising costs allow elected officials to spend more time 
 serving the public interest instead of raising funds to pay for 
 campaign advertisements.

 TITLE I--REGULATION OF CERTAIN POLITICAL SPENDING

SEC. 101. PROHIBITING INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES AND ELECTIONEERING 
 COMMUNICATIONS BY GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS.

 (a) Prohibition Applicable to Government Contractors.--
 (1) Prohibition.--
 (A) In general.--Section 317(a)(1) of the Federal 
 Election Campaign Act (2 U.S.C. 441c(a)(1)) is amended 
 by striking ``purpose or use; or'' and inserting the 
 following: ``purpose or use, to make any independent 
 expenditure, or to disburse any funds for an 
 electioneering communication; or''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--The heading of section 
 317 of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441c) is amended by striking 
 ``contributions'' and inserting ``contributions, 
 independent expenditures, and electioneering 
 communications''.
 (2) Threshold for application of ban.--Section 317 of such 
 Act (2 U.S.C. 441c) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as 
 subsections (c) and (d); and
 (B) by inserting after subsection (a) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(b) To the extent that subsection (a)(1) prohibits a person who 
enters into a contract described in such subsection from making any 
independent expenditure or disbursing funds for an electioneering 
communication, such subsection shall apply only if the value of the 
contract is equal to or greater than $50,000.''.
 (b) Application to Recipients of Assistance Under Troubled Asset 
Program.--Section 317(a) of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441c(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) who enters into negotiations for financial assistance 
 under title I of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 
 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5211 et seq.) (relating to the purchase of 
 troubled assets by the Secretary of the Treasury), during the 
 period--
 ``(A) beginning on the later of the commencement of 
 the negotiations or the date of the enactment of the 
 Democracy Is Strengthened by Casting Light On Spending 
 in Elections Act; and
 ``(B) ending with the later of the termination of 
 such negotiations or the repayment of such financial 
 assistance;
 directly or indirectly to make any contribution of money or 
 other things of value, or to promise expressly or impliedly to 
 make any such contribution to any political party, committee, 
 or candidate for public office or to any person for any 
 political purpose or use, to make any independent expenditure, 
 or to disburse any funds for an electioneering communication; 
 or''.
 (c) Technical Amendment.--Section 317 of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441c) 
is amended by striking ``section 321'' each place it appears and 
inserting ``section 316''.

SEC. 102. APPLICATION OF BAN ON CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES BY 
 FOREIGN NATIONALS TO FOREIGN-CONTROLLED DOMESTIC 
 CORPORATIONS.

 (a) Application of Ban.--Section 319(b) of the Federal Election 
Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441e(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) any corporation which is not a foreign national 
 described in paragraph (1) and--
 ``(A) in which a foreign national described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2) directly or indirectly owns 20 
 percent or more of the voting shares;
 ``(B) with respect to which the majority of the 
 members of the board of directors are foreign nationals 
 described in paragraph (1) or (2);
 ``(C) over which one or more foreign nationals 
 described in paragraph (1) or (2) has the power to 
 direct, dictate, or control the decision-making process 
 of the corporation with respect to its interests in the 
 United States; or
 ``(D) over which one or more foreign nationals 
 described in paragraph (1) or (2) has the power to 
 direct, dictate, or control the decisionmaking process 
 of the corporation with respect to activities in 
 connection with a Federal, State, or local election, 
 including--
 ``(i) the making of a contribution, 
 donation, expenditure, independent expenditure, 
 or disbursement for an electioneering 
 communication (within the meaning of section 
 304(f)(3)); or
 ``(ii) the administration of a political 
 committee established or maintained by the 
 corporation.''.
 (b) Certification of Compliance.--Section 319 of such Act (2 U.S.C. 
441e) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Certification of Compliance Required Prior to Carrying Out 
Activity.--Prior to the making of any contribution, donation, 
expenditure, independent expenditure, or disbursement for an 
electioneering communication by a corporation during a year, the chief 
executive officer of the corporation (or, if the corporation does not 
have a chief executive officer, the highest ranking official of the 
corporation), shall file a certification with the Commission, under 
penalty of perjury, that the corporation is not prohibited from 
carrying out such activity under subsection (b)(3), unless the chief 
executive officer has previously filed such a certification during the 
year.''.

SEC. 103. TREATMENT OF PAYMENTS FOR COORDINATED COMMUNICATIONS AS 
 CONTRIBUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 301(8)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign 
Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(8)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) any payment made by any person (other than 
 a candidate, an authorized committee of a candidate, or 
 a political committee of a political party) for a 
 coordinated communication (as determined under section 
 324).''.
 (b) Coordinated Communications Described.--Section 324 of such Act 
(2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 324. COORDINATED COMMUNICATIONS.

 ``(a) Coordinated Communications Defined.--For purposes of this 
Act, the term `coordinated communication' means--
 ``(1) a covered communication which is made in cooperation, 
 consultation, or concert with, or at the request or suggestion 
 of, a candidate, an authorized committee of a candidate, or a 
 political committee of a political party; or
 ``(2) any communication that republishes, disseminates, or 
 distributes, in whole or in part, any broadcast or any written, 
 graphic, or other form of campaign material prepared by a 
 candidate, an authorized committee of a candidate, or their 
 agents.
 ``(b) Covered Communication Defined.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (4), for 
 purposes of this subsection, the term `covered communication' 
 means, for purposes of the applicable election period described 
 in paragraph (2), a publicly distributed or disseminated 
 communication that refers to a clearly identified candidate for 
 Federal office and is publicly distributed or publicly 
 disseminated during such period.
 ``(2) Applicable election period.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the `applicable election period' with respect to 
 a communication means--
 ``(A) in the case of a communication which refers 
 to a candidate for the office of President or Vice 
 President, the period--
 ``(i) beginning with the date that is 120 
 days before the date of the first primary 
 election, preference election, or nominating 
 convention for nomination for the office of 
 President which is held in any State; and
 ``(ii) ending with the date of the general 
 election for such office; or
 ``(B) in the case of a communication which refers 
 to a candidate for any other Federal office, the 
 period--
 ``(i) beginning with the date that is 90 
 days before the earliest of the primary 
 election, preference election, or nominating 
 convention with respect to the nomination for 
 the office that the candidate is seeking; and
 ``(ii) ending with the date of the general 
 election for such office.
 ``(3) Special rule for public distribution of 
 communications involving congressional candidates.--For 
 purposes of paragraph (1), in the case of a communication 
 involving a candidate for an office other than President or 
 Vice President, the communication shall be considered to be 
 publicly distributed or publicly disseminated only if the 
 dissemination or distribution occurs in the jurisdiction of the 
 office that the candidate is seeking.
 ``(4) Exception.--The term `covered communication' does not 
 include--
 ``(A) a communication appearing in a news story, 
 commentary, or editorial distributed through the 
 facilities of any broadcasting station, newspaper, 
 magazine, or other periodical publication, unless such 
 facilities are owned or controlled by any political 
 party, political committee, or candidate; or
 ``(B) a communication which constitutes a candidate 
 debate or forum conducted pursuant to the regulations 
 adopted by the Commission to carry out section 
 304(f)(3)(B)(iii), or which solely promotes such a 
 debate or forum and is made by or on behalf of the 
 person sponsoring the debate or forum.
 ``(c) Treatment of Coordination With Political Parties for 
Communications Referring to Candidates.--For purposes of this section, 
if a communication which refers to any clearly identified candidate or 
candidates of a political party or any opponent of such a candidate or 
candidates is determined to have been made in cooperation, 
consultation, or concert with or at the request or suggestion of a 
political committee of the political party but not in cooperation, 
consultation, or concert with or at the request or suggestion of such 
clearly identified candidate or candidates, the communication shall be 
treated as having been made in cooperation, consultation, or concert 
with or at the request or suggestion of the political committee of the 
political party but not with or at the request or suggestion of such 
clearly identified candidate or candidates.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--This section and the amendments made by 
 this section shall apply with respect to payments made on or 
 after the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or 
 not the Federal Election Commission has promulgated regulations 
 to carry out such amendments.
 (2) Transition rule for actions taken prior to enactment.--
 No person shall be considered to have made a payment for a 
 coordinated communication under section 324 of the Federal 
 Election Campaign Act of 1971 (as amended by subsection (b)) by 
 reason of any action taken by the person prior to the date of 
 the enactment of this Act. Nothing in the previous sentence 
 shall be construed to affect any determination under any other 
 provision of such Act which is in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act regarding whether a communication is made 
 in cooperation, consultation, or concert with, or at the 
 request or suggestion of, a candidate, an authorized committee 
 of a candidate, or a political committee of a political party.

SEC. 104. TREATMENT OF POLITICAL PARTY COMMUNICATIONS MADE ON BEHALF OF 
 CANDIDATES.

 (a) Treatment of Payment for Communication as Contribution if Made 
Under Control or Direction of Candidate.--Section 301(8)(A) of the 
Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(8)(A)), as amended 
by section 103(a), is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (ii);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) any payment by a political committee of a 
 political party for the direct costs of a communication 
 made on behalf of a candidate for Federal office who is 
 affiliated with such party, but only if the 
 communication is controlled by, or made at the 
 direction of, the candidate or an authorized committee 
 of the candidate.''.
 (b) Requiring Control or Direction by Candidate for Treatment as 
Coordinated Party Expenditure.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (4) of section 315(d) of such 
 Act (2 U.S.C. 441a(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(4) Special Rule for Direct Costs of Communications.--The direct 
costs incurred by a political committee of a political party for a 
communication made in connection with the campaign of a candidate for 
Federal office shall not be subject to the limitations contained in 
paragraphs (2) and (3) unless the communication is controlled by, or 
made at the direction of, the candidate or an authorized committee of 
the candidate.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 315(d) 
 of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441a(d)) is amended by striking 
 ``paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) 
 and (3)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall apply with respect to payments made on or after the 
expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the date of the 
enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or not the Federal 
Election Commission has promulgated regulations to carry out such 
amendments.

 TITLE II--PROMOTING EFFECTIVE DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY

 Subtitle A--Treatment of Independent Expenditures and Electioneering 
 Communications Made by All Persons

SEC. 201. INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES.

 (a) Revision of Definition.--Subparagraph (A) of section 301(17) of 
the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(17)) is amended 
to read as follows:
 ``(A) that, when taken as a whole, expressly 
 advocates the election or defeat of a clearly 
 identified candidate, or is the functional equivalent 
 of express advocacy because it can be interpreted by a 
 reasonable person only as advocating the election or 
 defeat of a candidate, taking into account whether the 
 communication involved mentions a candidacy, a 
 political party, or a challenger to a candidate, or 
 takes a position on a candidate's character, 
 qualifications, or fitness for office; and''.
 (b) Uniform 24-Hour Reporting For Persons Making Independent 
Expenditures Exceeding $10,000 at Any Time.--Section 304(g) of such Act 
(2 U.S.C. 434(g)) is amended by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(1) Independent expenditures exceeding threshold 
 amount.--
 ``(A) Initial report.--A person (including a 
 political committee) that makes or contracts to make 
 independent expenditures in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or greater than the threshold amount described in 
 paragraph (2) shall file a report describing the 
 expenditures within 24 hours.
 ``(B) Additional reports.--After a person files a 
 report under subparagraph (A), the person shall file an 
 additional report within 24 hours after each time the 
 person makes or contracts to make independent 
 expenditures in an aggregate amount equal to or greater 
 than the threshold amount with respect to the same 
 election as that to which the initial report relates.
 ``(2) Threshold amount described.--In paragraph (1), the 
 `threshold amount' means--
 ``(A) during the period up to and including the 
 20th day before the date of an election, $10,000; or
 ``(B) during the period after the 20th day, but 
 more than 24 hours, before the date of an election, 
 $1,000.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
 apply with respect to contributions and expenditures made on or 
 after the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or 
 not the Federal Election Commission has promulgated regulations 
 to carry out such amendments.
 (2) Reporting requirements.--The amendment made by 
 subsection (b) shall apply with respect to reports required to 
 be filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 202. ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) Period During Which Communications Treated as Electioneering 
Communications.--
 (1) Expansion of period.--Section 304(f)(3)(A)(i)(II) of 
 the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 
 434(f)(3)(A)(i)(II)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(II) is made during the period 
 beginning with the date that is 90 days 
 before the earliest of the primary 
 election, preference election, or 
 nominating convention with respect to 
 the nomination for the office that the 
 candidate is seeking and ending with 
 the date of the general election for 
 such office.''.
 (2) Effective date; transition for communications made 
 prior to enactment.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall 
 apply with respect to communications made on or after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or not 
 the Federal Election Commission has promulgated regulations to 
 carry out such amendments, except that no communication which 
 is made prior to the date of the enactment of this Act shall be 
 treated as an electioneering communication under section 
 304(f)(3)(A)(i)(II) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 
 1971 (as amended by paragraph (1)) unless the communication 
 would be treated as an electioneering communication under such 
 section if the amendment made by paragraph (1) did not apply.
 (b) Requiring Reports To Include Information on Intended Target of 
Communications.--Section 304(f)(2)(D) of such Act (2 U.S.C. 
434(f)(2)(D)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and the names'' and inserting ``, the 
 names''; and
 (2) by inserting ``, and (if applicable) a statement 
 regarding whether the communications are intended to support or 
 oppose such candidates'' before the period at the end.

 Subtitle B--Expanded Requirements for Corporations and Other 
 Organizations

SEC. 211. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE INCLUDED IN REPORTS ON 
 DISBURSEMENTS BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Independent Expenditure Reports.--Section 304(g) of the Federal 
Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 434(g)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Disclosure of additional information by covered 
 organizations making payments for public independent 
 expenditures.--
 ``(A) Additional information.--If a covered 
 organization makes or contracts to make public 
 independent expenditures in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or exceeding $10,000 in a calendar year, the report 
 filed by the organization under this subsection shall 
 include, in addition to the information required under 
 paragraph (3), the following information:
 ``(i) If any person made a donation or 
 payment to the covered organization during the 
 covered organization reporting period which was 
 provided for the purpose of being used for 
 campaign-related activity or in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for campaign-
 related activity--
 ``(I) subject to subparagraph (C), 
 the identification of each person who 
 made such donations or payments in an 
 aggregate amount equal to or exceeding 
 $1,000 during such period, presented in 
 the order of the aggregate amount of 
 donations or payments made by such 
 persons during such period (with the 
 identification of the person making the 
 largest donation or payment appearing 
 first); and
 ``(II) if any person identified 
 under subclause (I) designated that the 
 donation or payment be used for 
 campaign-related activity with respect 
 to a specific election or in support of 
 a specific candidate, the name of the 
 election or candidate involved, and if 
 any such person designated that the 
 donation or payment be used for a 
 specific public independent 
 expenditure, a description of the 
 expenditure.
 ``(ii) The identification of each person 
 who made unrestricted donor payments to the 
 organization during the covered organization 
 reporting period--
 ``(I) in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or exceeding $1,000 during such 
 period, if any of the disbursements 
 made by the organization for any of the 
 public independent expenditures which 
 are covered by the report were not made 
 from the organization's Campaign-
 Related Activity Account under section 
 326; or
 ``(II) in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or exceeding $10,000 during such 
 period, if the disbursements made by 
 the organization for all of the public 
 independent expenditures which are 
 covered by the report were made 
 exclusively from the organization's 
 Campaign-Related Activity Account under 
 section 326 (but only if the 
 organization has made deposits 
 described in subparagraph (D) of 
 section 326(a)(2) into that Account 
 during such period in an aggregate 
 amount equal to or greater than 
 $10,000),
 presented in the order of the aggregate amount 
 of payments made by such persons during such 
 period (with the identification of the person 
 making the largest payment appearing first).
 ``(B) Treatment of transfers made to other 
 persons.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of the 
 requirement to file reports under this 
 subsection (including the requirement under 
 subparagraph (A) to include additional 
 information in such reports), a covered 
 organization which transfers amounts to another 
 person for the purpose of making a public 
 independent expenditure by that person or by 
 any other person, or (in accordance with clause 
 (ii)) which is deemed to have transferred 
 amounts to another person for the purpose of 
 making a public independent expenditure by that 
 person or by any other person, shall be 
 considered to have made a public independent 
 expenditure.
 ``(ii) Rules for deeming transfers made for 
 purpose of making expenditures.--For purposes 
 of clause (i), in determining whether a covered 
 organization or any other person who transfers 
 amounts to another person shall be deemed to 
 have transferred the amounts for the purpose of 
 making a public independent expenditure, the 
 following rules apply:
 ``(I) The person shall be deemed to 
 have transferred the amounts for the 
 purpose of making a public independent 
 expenditure if--
 ``(aa) the person making 
 the public independent 
 expenditure or another person 
 acting on that person's behalf 
 solicited funding from the 
 person or from the person to 
 whom the amounts were 
 transferred for making any 
 public independent 
 expenditures,
 ``(bb) the person and the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred engaged in 
 substantial discussion (whether 
 written or verbal) regarding 
 the making of public 
 independent expenditures,
 ``(cc) the person or the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred knew or should have 
 known of the covered 
 organization's intent to make 
 public independent 
 expenditures, or
 ``(dd) the person or the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred made a public 
 independent expenditure during 
 the election cycle involved or 
 the previous election cycle (as 
 defined in section 301(25)).
 ``(II) The person shall not be 
 deemed to have transferred the amounts 
 for the purpose of making a public 
 independent expenditure if the transfer 
 was a commercial transaction occurring 
 in the ordinary course of business 
 between the person and the person to 
 whom the amounts were transferred.
 ``(C) Exclusion of amounts designated for other 
 campaign-related activity.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(i), in determining the amount of a 
 donation or payment made by a person which was provided 
 for the purpose of being used for campaign-related 
 activity or in response to a solicitation for funds to 
 be used for campaign-related activity, there shall be 
 excluded any amount which was designated by the person 
 to be used--
 ``(i) for campaign-related activity 
 described in clause (i) of section 325(d)(2)(A) 
 (relating to independent expenditures) with 
 respect to a different election, or with 
 respect to a candidate in a different election, 
 than an election which is the subject of any of 
 the public independent expenditures covered by 
 the report involved; or
 ``(ii) for any campaign-related activity 
 described in clause (ii) of section 
 325(d)(2)(A) (relating to electioneering 
 communications).
 ``(D) Exclusion of amounts paid from separate 
 segregated fund.--In determining the amount of public 
 independent expenditures made by a covered organization 
 for purposes of this paragraph, there shall be excluded 
 any amounts paid from a separate segregated fund 
 established and administered by the organization under 
 section 316(b)(2)(C).
 ``(E) Covered organization reporting period 
 described.--In this paragraph, the `covered 
 organization reporting period' is, with respect to a 
 report filed by a covered organization under this 
 subsection--
 ``(i) in the case of the first report filed 
 by a covered organization under this subsection 
 which includes information required under this 
 paragraph, the shorter of--
 ``(I) the period which begins on 
 the effective date of the Democracy Is 
 Strengthened by Casting Light On 
 Spending in Elections Act and ends on 
 the last day covered by the report, or
 ``(II) the 12-month period ending 
 on the last day covered by the report; 
 and
 ``(ii) in the case of any subsequent report 
 filed by a covered organization under this 
 subsection which includes information required 
 under this paragraph, the period occurring 
 since the most recent report filed by the 
 organization which includes such information.
 ``(F) Definitions.--In this paragraph--
 ``(i) the terms `covered organization', 
 `campaign-related activity', and `unrestricted 
 donor payment' have the meaning given such 
 terms in section 325; and
 ``(ii) the term `public independent 
 expenditure' means an independent expenditure 
 for a public communication (as defined in 
 section 301(22)).''.
 (b) Electioneering Communication Reports.--Section 304(f) of such 
Act (2 U.S.C. 434(f)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs 
 (7) and (8); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) Disclosure of additional information by covered 
 organizations.--
 ``(A) Additional information.--If a covered 
 organization files a statement under this subsection, 
 the statement shall include, in addition to the 
 information required under paragraph (2), the following 
 information:
 ``(i) If any person made a donation or 
 payment to the covered organization during the 
 covered organization reporting period which was 
 provided for the purpose of being used for 
 campaign-related activity or in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for campaign-
 related activity--
 ``(I) subject to subparagraph (C), 
 the identification of each person who 
 made such donations or payments in an 
 aggregate amount equal to or exceeding 
 $1,000 during such period, presented in 
 the order of the aggregate amount of 
 donations or payments made by such 
 persons during such period (with the 
 identification of the person making the 
 largest donation or payment appearing 
 first); and
 ``(II) if any person identified 
 under subclause (I) designated that the 
 donation or payment be used for 
 campaign-related activity with respect 
 to a specific election or in support of 
 a specific candidate, the name of the 
 election or candidate involved, and if 
 any such person designated that the 
 donation or payment be used for a 
 specific electioneering communication, 
 a description of the communication.
 ``(ii) The identification of each person 
 who made unrestricted donor payments to the 
 organization during the covered organization 
 reporting period--
 ``(I) in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or exceeding $1,000 during such 
 period, if any of the disbursements 
 made by the organization for any of the 
 electioneering communications which are 
 covered by the statement were not made 
 from the organization's Campaign-
 Related Activity Account under section 
 326; or
 ``(II) in an aggregate amount equal 
 to or exceeding $10,000 during such 
 period, if the disbursements made by 
 the organization for all of the 
 electioneering communications which are 
 covered by the statement were made 
 exclusively from the organization's 
 Campaign-Related Activity Account under 
 section 326 (but only if the 
 organization has made deposits 
 described in subparagraph (D) of 
 section 326(a)(2) into that Account 
 during such period in an aggregate 
 amount equal to or greater than 
 $10,000),
 presented in the order of the aggregate amount 
 of payments made by such persons during such 
 period (with the identification of the person 
 making the largest payment appearing first).
 ``(B) Treatment of transfers made to other 
 persons.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of the 
 requirement to file statements under this 
 subsection (including the requirement under 
 subparagraph (A) to include additional 
 information in such statements), a covered 
 organization which transfers amounts to another 
 person for the purpose of making an 
 electioneering communication by that person or 
 by any other person, or (in accordance with 
 clause (ii)) which is deemed to have 
 transferred amounts to another person for the 
 purpose of making an electioneering 
 communication by that person or by any other 
 person, shall be considered to have made a 
 disbursement for an electioneering 
 communication.
 ``(ii) Rules for deeming transfers made for 
 purpose of making communications.--For purposes 
 of clause (i), in determining whether a covered 
 organization or any other person who transfers 
 amounts to another person shall be deemed to 
 have transferred the amounts for the purpose of 
 making an electioneering communication, the 
 following rules apply:
 ``(I) The person shall be deemed to 
 have transferred the amounts for the 
 purpose of making an electioneering 
 communication if--
 ``(aa) the person making 
 the public independent 
 expenditure or another person 
 acting on that person's behalf 
 solicited funding from the 
 person or from the person to 
 whom the amounts were 
 transferred for making any 
 electioneering communications,
 ``(bb) the person and the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred engaged in 
 substantial discussion (whether 
 written or verbal) regarding 
 the making of electioneering 
 communications,
 ``(cc) the person or the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred knew or should have 
 known of the covered 
 organization's intent to make 
 electioneering communications, 
 or
 ``(dd) the person or the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred made an 
 electioneering communication 
 during the election cycle 
 involved or the previous 
 election cycle (as defined in 
 section 301(25)).
 ``(II) The person shall not be 
 considered to have transferred the 
 amounts for the purpose of making an 
 electioneering communication if the 
 transfer was a commercial transaction 
 occurring in the ordinary course of 
 business between the person and the 
 person to whom the amounts were 
 transferred.
 ``(C) Exclusion of amounts designated for other 
 campaign-related activity.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(i), in determining the amount of a 
 donation or payment made by a person which was provided 
 for the purpose of being used for campaign-related 
 activity or in response to a solicitation for funds to 
 be used for campaign-related activity, there shall be 
 excluded any amount which was designated by the person 
 to be used--
 ``(i) for campaign-related activity 
 described in clause (ii) of section 
 325(d)(2)(A) (relating to electioneering 
 communications) with respect to a different 
 election, or with respect to a candidate in a 
 different election, than an election which is 
 the subject of any of the electioneering 
 communications covered by the statement 
 involved; or
 ``(ii) for any campaign-related activity 
 described in clause (i) of section 325(d)(2)(A) 
 (relating to independent expenditures 
 consisting of a public communication).
 ``(D) Covered organization reporting period 
 described.--In this paragraph, the `covered 
 organization reporting period' is, with respect to a 
 statement filed by a covered organization under this 
 subsection--
 ``(i) in the case of the first statement 
 filed by a covered organization under this 
 subsection which includes information required 
 under this paragraph, the shorter of--
 ``(I) the period which begins on 
 the effective date of the Democracy Is 
 Strengthened by Casting Light On 
 Spending in Elections Act and ends on 
 the disclosure date for the statement, 
 or
 ``(II) the 12-month period ending 
 on the disclosure date for the 
 statement; and
 ``(ii) in the case of any subsequent 
 statement filed by a covered organization under 
 this subsection which includes information 
 required under this paragraph, the period 
 occurring since the most recent statement filed 
 by the organization which includes such 
 information.
 ``(E) Definitions.--In this paragraph, the terms 
 `covered organization', `campaign-related activity', 
 and `unrestricted donor payment' have the meaning given 
 such terms in section 325.''.

SEC. 212. RULES REGARDING USE OF GENERAL TREASURY FUNDS BY COVERED 
 ORGANIZATIONS FOR CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY.

 Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 
431 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 325. SPECIAL RULES FOR USE OF GENERAL TREASURY FUNDS BY COVERED 
 ORGANIZATIONS FOR CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY.

 ``(a) Use of Funds for Campaign-Related Activity.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to any applicable restrictions 
 and prohibitions under this Act, a covered organization may 
 make disbursements for campaign-related activity using--
 ``(A) amounts paid or donated to the organization 
 which are designated by the person providing the 
 amounts to be used for campaign-related activity;
 ``(B) unrestricted donor payments made to the 
 organization; and
 ``(C) other funds of the organization, including 
 amounts received pursuant to commercial activities in 
 the regular course of a covered organization's 
 business.
 ``(2) No effect on use of separate segregated fund.--
 Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the 
 authority of a covered organization to make disbursements from 
 a separate segregated fund established and administered by the 
 organization under section 316(b)(2)(C).
 ``(b) Restrictions on Use of Funds for Campaign-Related Activity.--
 ``(1) Certification after receiving notification by donor 
 to not use funds for activity.--If any person who makes a 
 donation, payment, or transfer to a covered organization (other 
 than the covered organization) notifies the organization in 
 writing (at the time of making the donation, payment, or 
 transfer) that the organization may not use the donation, 
 payment, or transfer for campaign-related activity, not later 
 than 7 days after the organization receives the donation, 
 payment, or transfer the organization shall transmit to the 
 person a written certification by the chief financial officer 
 of the covered organization (or, if the organization does not 
 have a chief financial officer, the highest ranking financial 
 official of the organization), under penalty of perjury, that--
 ``(A) the organization will not use the donation, 
 payment, or transfer for campaign-related activity; and
 ``(B) the organization will not include any 
 information on the person in any report filed by the 
 organization under section 304 with respect to 
 independent expenditures or electioneering 
 communications, so that the person will not be required 
 to appear in a significant funder statement or a Top 5 
 Funders list under section 318(e).
 ``(2) Exception for payments made pursuant to commercial 
 activities.--Paragraph (1) does not apply with respect to any 
 payment or transfer made pursuant to commercial activities in 
 the regular course of a covered organization's business.
 ``(c) Certifications Regarding Disbursements for Campaign-Related 
Activity.--
 ``(1) Certification by chief executive officer.--If, at any 
 time during a calendar quarter, a covered organization makes a 
 disbursement of funds for campaign-related activity using funds 
 described in subsection (a)(1), the chief executive officer of 
 the covered organization (or, if the organization does not have 
 a chief executive officer, the highest ranking official of the 
 organization), under penalty of perjury, shall file a statement 
 with the Commission which contains the following 
 certifications:
 ``(A) None of the campaign-related activity for 
 which the organization disbursed the funds during the 
 quarter was made in cooperation, consultation, or 
 concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, any 
 candidate or any authorized committee or agent of such 
 candidate, or political committee of a political party 
 or agent of any political party.
 ``(B) The chief executive officer or highest 
 ranking official of the covered organization (as the 
 case may be) has reviewed and approved each statement 
 and report filed by the organization under section 304 
 with respect to any such disbursement made during the 
 quarter.
 ``(C) Each statement and report filed by the 
 organization under section 304 with respect to any such 
 disbursement made during the quarter is complete and 
 accurate and does not contain an untrue statement of a 
 material fact.
 ``(D) All such disbursements made during the 
 quarter are in compliance with this Act and all other 
 applicable Federal laws.
 ``(E) No portion of the amounts used to make any 
 such disbursements during the quarter is attributable 
 to funds received by the organization that were 
 restricted by the person who provided the funds from 
 being used for campaign-related activity pursuant to 
 subsection (b).
 ``(2) Application of electronic filing rules.--Section 
 304(d)(1) shall apply with respect to a statement required 
 under this subsection in the same manner as such section 
 applies with respect to a statement under subsection (c) or (g) 
 of section 304.
 ``(3) Deadline.--The chief executive officer or highest 
 ranking official of a covered organization (as the case may be) 
 shall file the statement required under this subsection with 
 respect to a calendar quarter not later than 15 days after the 
 end of the quarter.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions apply:
 ``(1) Covered organization.--The term `covered 
 organization' means any of the following:
 ``(A) Any corporation which is subject to section 
 316(a).
 ``(B) Any labor organization (as defined in section 
 316).
 ``(C) Any organization described in paragraph (4), 
 (5), or (6) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) 
 of such Code.
 ``(D) Any political organization under section 527 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, other than a 
 political committee under this Act.
 ``(2) Campaign-related activity.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `campaign-related 
 activity' means--
 ``(i) an independent expenditure consisting 
 of a public communication (as defined in 
 section 301(22)), a transfer of funds to 
 another person for the purpose of making such 
 an independent expenditure by that person or by 
 any other person, or (in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B)) a transfer of funds to 
 another person which is deemed to have been 
 made for the purpose of making such an 
 independent expenditure by that person or by 
 any other person; or
 ``(ii) an electioneering communication, a 
 transfer of funds to another person for the 
 purpose of making an electioneering 
 communication by that person or by any other 
 person, or (in accordance with subparagraph 
 (B)) a transfer of funds to another person 
 which is deemed to have been made for the 
 purpose of making an electioneering 
 communication by that person or by any other 
 person.
 ``(B) Rule for deeming transfers made for purpose 
 of campaign-related activity.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), in determining whether a transfer of 
 funds by one person to another person shall be deemed 
 to have been made for the purpose of making an 
 independent expenditure consisting of a public 
 communication or an electioneering communication, the 
 following rules apply:
 ``(i) The transfer shall be deemed to have 
 been made for the purpose of making such an 
 independent expenditure or an electioneering 
 communication if--
 ``(I) the person making the 
 independent expenditure or 
 electioneering communication or another 
 person acting on that person's behalf 
 solicited funding from the person or 
 from the person to whom the amounts 
 were transferred for the purpose of 
 making any such independent 
 expenditures or electioneering 
 communications,
 ``(II) the person and the person to 
 whom the amounts were transferred 
 engaged in substantial discussion 
 (whether written or verbal) regarding 
 the making of such independent 
 expenditures or electioneering 
 communications,
 ``(III) the person or the person to 
 whom the amounts were transferred knew 
 or should have known of the covered 
 organization's intent to disburse funds 
 for campaign-related activity, or
 ``(IV) the person or the person to 
 whom the amounts were transferred made 
 such an independent expenditure or 
 electioneering communication during the 
 election cycle involved or the previous 
 election cycle (as defined in section 
 301(25)).
 ``(ii) The transfer shall not be deemed to 
 have been made for the purpose of making such 
 an independent expenditure or an electioneering 
 communication if the transfer was a commercial 
 transaction occurring in the ordinary course of 
 business between the person and the person to 
 whom the amounts were transferred.
 ``(3) Unrestricted donor payment.--The term `unrestricted 
 donor payment' means a payment to a covered organization which 
 consists of a donation or payment from a person other than the 
 covered organization, except that such term does not include--
 ``(A) any payment made pursuant to commercial 
 activities in the regular course of a covered 
 organization's business;
 ``(B) any donation or payment which is designated 
 by the person making the donation or payment to be used 
 for campaign-related activity or made in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for campaign-related 
 activity; or
 ``(C) any donation or payment made by a person who 
 notifies the organization in writing (at the time of 
 making the payment) that the organization may not use 
 the donation or payment for campaign-related 
 activity.''.

SEC. 213. OPTIONAL USE OF SEPARATE ACCOUNT BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS FOR 
 CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY.

 Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 
431 et seq.), as amended by section 212, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 326. OPTIONAL USE OF SEPARATE ACCOUNT BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS 
 FOR CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY.

 ``(a) Optional Use of Separate Account.--
 ``(1) Establishment of account.--
 ``(A) In general.--At its option, a covered 
 organization described in section 325 may make 
 disbursements for campaign-related activity using 
 amounts from a bank account established and controlled 
 by the organization to be known as the Campaign-Related 
 Activity Account (hereafter in this section referred to 
 as the `Account'), which shall be maintained separately 
 from all other accounts of the organization and which 
 shall consist exclusively of the deposits described in 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Mandatory use of account after 
 establishment.--If a covered organization establishes 
 an Account under this section, it may not make 
 disbursements for campaign-related activity from any 
 source other than amounts from the Account.
 ``(C) Exclusive use of account for campaign-related 
 activity.--Amounts in the Account shall be used 
 exclusively for disbursements by the covered 
 organization for campaign-related activity. After such 
 disbursements are made, information with respect to 
 deposits made to the Account shall be disclosed in 
 accordance with section 304(g)(5) or section 304(f)(6).
 ``(2) Deposits described.--The deposits described in this 
 paragraph are deposits of the following amounts:
 ``(A) Amounts donated or paid to the covered 
 organization by a person other than the organization 
 for the purpose of being used for campaign-related 
 activity, and for which the person providing the 
 amounts has designated that the amounts be used for 
 campaign-related activity with respect to a specific 
 election or specific candidate.
 ``(B) Amounts donated or paid to the covered 
 organization by a person other than the organization 
 for the purpose of being used for campaign-related 
 activity, and for which the person providing the 
 amounts has not designated that the amounts be used for 
 campaign-related activity with respect to a specific 
 election or specific candidate.
 ``(C) Amounts donated or paid to the covered 
 organization by a person other than the organization in 
 response to a solicitation for funds to be used for 
 campaign-related activity.
 ``(D) Amounts transferred to the Account by the 
 covered organization from other accounts of the 
 organization, including from the organization's general 
 treasury funds.
 ``(3) No treatment as political committee.--The 
 establishment and administration of an Account in accordance 
 with this subsection shall not by itself be treated as the 
 establishment or administration of a political committee for 
 any purpose of this Act.
 ``(b) Reduction in Amounts Otherwise Available for Account in 
Response to Demand of General Donors.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a covered organization which has 
 established an Account obtains any revenues during a year which 
 are attributable to a donation or payment from a person other 
 than the covered organization, and if any person who makes such 
 a donation or payment to the organization notifies the 
 organization in writing (at the time of making the donation or 
 payment) that the organization may not use the donation or 
 payment for campaign-related activity, the organization shall 
 reduce the amount of its revenues available for deposits to the 
 Account which are described in subsection (a)(3)(D) during the 
 year by the amount of the donation or payment.
 ``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) does not apply with respect 
 to any payment made pursuant to commercial activities in the 
 regular course of a covered organization's business.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `campaign-related 
activity' and `covered organization' have the meaning given such terms 
in section 325.''.

SEC. 214. MODIFICATION OF RULES RELATING TO DISCLAIMER STATEMENTS 
 REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) Applying Requirements to All Independent Expenditure 
Communications.--Section 318(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 
1971 (2 U.S.C. 441d(a)) is amended by striking ``for the purpose of 
financing communications expressly advocating the election or defeat of 
a clearly identified candidate'' and inserting ``for an independent 
expenditure consisting of a public communication''.
 (b) Stand by Your Ad Requirements.--
 (1) Maintenance of existing requirements for communications 
 by political parties and other political committees.--Section 
 318(d)(2) of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441d(d)(2)) is amended--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``others'' and 
 inserting ``political committees'';
 (B) by striking ``subsection (a)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (a) which is paid for by a political 
 committee (including a political committee of a 
 political party)''; and
 (C) by striking ``or other person'' each place it 
 appears.
 (2) Special disclaimer requirements for certain 
 communications.--Section 318 of such Act (2 U.S.C. 441d) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Communications by Others.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any communication described in paragraph 
 (3) of subsection (a) which is transmitted through radio or 
 television (other than a communication to which subsection 
 (d)(2) applies because the communication is paid for by a 
 political committee, including a political committee of a 
 political party) shall include, in addition to the requirements 
 of that paragraph, the following:
 ``(A) The individual disclosure statement described 
 in paragraph (2) (if the person paying for the 
 communication is an individual) or the organizational 
 disclosure statement described in paragraph (3) (if the 
 person paying for the communication is not an 
 individual).
 ``(B) If the communication is an electioneering 
 communication or an independent expenditure consisting 
 of a public communication and is paid for in whole or 
 in part with a payment which is treated as a 
 disbursement by a covered organization for campaign-
 related activity under section 325, the significant 
 funder disclosure statement described in paragraph (4) 
 (if applicable).
 ``(C) If the communication is transmitted through 
 television and is an electioneering communication or an 
 independent expenditure consisting of a public 
 communication and is paid for in whole or in part with 
 a payment which is treated as a disbursement by a 
 covered organization for campaign-related activity 
 under section 325, the Top Five Funders list described 
 in paragraph (5) (if applicable), unless, on the basis 
 of criteria established in regulations promulgated by 
 the Commission, the communication is of such short 
 duration that including the Top Five Funders list in 
 the communication would constitute a hardship to the 
 person paying for the communication by requiring a 
 disproportionate amount of the communication's content 
 to consist of the Top Five Funders list.
 ``(2) Individual disclosure statement described.--The 
 individual disclosure statement described in this paragraph is 
 the following: `I am _______, and I approve this message.', 
 with the blank filled in with the name of the applicable 
 individual.
 ``(3) Organizational disclosure statement described.--The 
 organizational disclosure statement described in this paragraph 
 is the following: `I am _______, the _______ of _______, and 
 _______ approves this message.', with--
 ``(A) the first blank to be filled in with the name 
 of the applicable individual;
 ``(B) the second blank to be filled in with the 
 title of the applicable individual; and
 ``(C) the third and fourth blank each to be filled 
 in with the name of the organization or other person 
 paying for the communication.
 ``(4) Significant funder disclosure statement described.--
 ``(A) Statement if significant funder is an 
 individual.--If the significant funder of a 
 communication paid for in whole or in part with a 
 payment which is treated as a disbursement by a covered 
 organization for campaign-related activity under 
 section 325 is an individual, the significant funder 
 disclosure statement described in this paragraph is the 
 following: `I am _______. I helped to pay for this 
 message, and I approve it.', with the blank filled in 
 with the name of the applicable individual.
 ``(B) Statement if significant funder is not an 
 individual.--If the significant funder of a 
 communication paid for in whole or in part with a 
 payment which is treated as a disbursement by a covered 
 organization for campaign-related activity under 
 section 325 is not an individual, the significant 
 funder disclosure statement described in this paragraph 
 is the following: `I am _______, the _______ of 
 _______. _______ helped to pay for this message, and 
 _______ approves it.', with--
 ``(i) the first blank to be filled in with 
 the name of the applicable individual;
 ``(ii) the second blank to be filled in 
 with the title of the applicable individual; 
 and
 ``(iii) the third, fourth, and fifth blank 
 each to be filled in with the name of the 
 significant funder of the communication.
 ``(C) Significant funder defined.--
 ``(i) Independent expenditures.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the `significant 
 funder' with respect to an independent 
 expenditure consisting of a public 
 communication paid for in whole or in part with 
 a payment which is treated as a disbursement by 
 a covered organization for campaign-related 
 activity under section 325 shall be determined 
 as follows:
 ``(I) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 independent expenditure under section 
 304 includes information on any person 
 who made a payment to the organization 
 in an amount equal to or exceeding 
 $100,000 which was designated by the 
 person to be used for campaign-related 
 activity consisting of that specific 
 independent expenditure (as required to 
 be included in the report under section 
 304(g)(5)(A)(i)), the person who is 
 identified among all such reports as 
 making the largest such payment.
 ``(II) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 independent expenditure under section 
 304 includes information on any person 
 who made a payment to the organization 
 in an amount equal to or exceeding 
 $100,000 which was designated by the 
 person to be used for campaign-related 
 activity with respect to the same 
 election or in support of the same 
 candidate (as required to be included 
 in the report under section 
 304(g)(5)(A)(i)) but subclause (I) does 
 not apply, the person who is identified 
 among all such reports as making the 
 largest such payment.
 ``(III) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 independent expenditure under section 
 304 includes information on any person 
 who made a payment to the organization 
 which was provided for the purpose of 
 being used for campaign-related 
 activity or in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for 
 campaign-related activity (as required 
 to be included in the report under 
 section 304(g)(5)(A)(i)) but subclause 
 (I) or subclause (II) does not apply, 
 the person who is identified among all 
 such reports as making the largest such 
 payment.
 ``(IV) If none of the reports filed 
 by any organization with respect to the 
 independent expenditure under section 
 304 includes information on any person 
 (other than the organization) who made 
 a payment to the organization which was 
 provided for the purpose of being used 
 for campaign-related activity or in 
 response to a solicitation for funds to 
 be used for campaign-related activity, 
 but any of such reports includes 
 information on any person who made an 
 unrestricted donor payment to the 
 organization (as required to be 
 included in the report under section 
 304(g)(5)(A)(ii)), the person who is 
 identified among all such reports as 
 making the largest such unrestricted 
 donor payment.
 ``(ii) Electioneering communications.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the `significant 
 funder' with respect to an electioneering 
 communication paid for in whole or in part with 
 a payment which is treated as a disbursement by 
 a covered organization for campaign-related 
 activity under section 325, shall be determined 
 as follows:
 ``(I) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 electioneering communication under 
 section 304 includes information on any 
 person who made a payment to the 
 organization in an amount equal to or 
 exceeding $100,000 which was designated 
 by the person to be used for campaign-
 related activity consisting of that 
 specific electioneering communication 
 (as required to be included in the 
 report under section 304(f)(6)(A)(i)), 
 the person who is identified among all 
 such reports as making the largest such 
 payment.
 ``(II) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 electioneering communication under 
 section 304 includes information on any 
 person who made a payment to the 
 organization in an amount equal to or 
 exceeding $100,000 which was designated 
 by the person to be used for campaign-
 related activity with respect to the 
 same election or in support of the same 
 candidate (as required to be included 
 in the report under section 
 304(f)(6)(A)(i)) but subclause (I) does 
 not apply, the person who is identified 
 among all such reports as making the 
 largest such payment.
 ``(III) If any report filed by any 
 organization with respect to the 
 electioneering communication under 
 section 304 includes information on any 
 person who made a payment to the 
 organization which was provided for the 
 purpose of being used for campaign-
 related activity or in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for 
 campaign-related activity (as required 
 to be included in the report under 
 section 304(f)(6)(A)(i)) but subclause 
 (I) or subclause (II) does not apply, 
 the person who is identified among all 
 such reports as making the largest such 
 payment.
 ``(IV) If none of the reports filed 
 by any organization with respect to the 
 electioneering communication under 
 section 304 includes information on any 
 person who made a payment to the 
 organization which was provided for the 
 purpose of being used for campaign-
 related activity or in response to a 
 solicitation for funds to be used for 
 campaign-related activity, but any of 
 such reports includes information on 
 any person who made an unrestricted 
 donor payment to the organization (as 
 required to be included in the report 
 under section 304(f)(6)(A)(ii)), the 
 person who is identified among all such 
 reports as making the largest such 
 unrestricted donor payment.
 ``(5) Top 5 funders list described.--With respect to a 
 communication paid for in whole or in part with a payment which 
 is treated as a disbursement by a covered organization for 
 campaign-related activity under section 325, the Top 5 Funders 
 list described in this paragraph is--
 ``(A) in the case of a disbursement for an 
 independent expenditure consisting of a public 
 communication, a list of the 5 persons who provided the 
 largest payments of any type which are required under 
 section 304(g)(5)(A) to be included in the reports 
 filed by any organization with respect to that 
 independent expenditure under section 304, together 
 with the amount of the payments each such person 
 provided; or
 ``(B) in the case of a disbursement for an 
 electioneering communication, a list of the 5 persons 
 who provided the largest payments of any type which are 
 required under section 304(f)(6)(A) to be included in 
 the reports filed by any organization with respect to 
 that electioneering communication under section 304, 
 together with the amount of the payments each such 
 person provided.
 ``(6) Method of conveyance of statement.--
 ``(A) Communications transmitted through radio.--In 
 the case of a communication to which this subsection 
 applies which is transmitted through radio, the 
 disclosure statements required under paragraph (1) 
 shall be made by audio by the applicable individual in 
 a clearly spoken manner.
 ``(B) Communications transmitted through 
 television.--In the case of a communication to which 
 this subsection applies which is transmitted through 
 television, the information required under paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(i) shall appear in writing at the end of 
 the communication in a clearly readable manner, 
 with a reasonable degree of color contrast 
 between the background and the printed 
 statement, for a period of at least 6 seconds; 
 and
 ``(ii) except in the case of a Top 5 
 Funders list described in paragraph (5), shall 
 also be conveyed by an unobscured, full-screen 
 view of the applicable individual, or by the 
 applicable individual making the statement in 
 voice-over accompanied by a clearly 
 identifiable photograph or similar image of the 
 individual.
 ``(7) Applicable individual defined.--In this subsection, 
 the term `applicable individual' means, with respect to a 
 communication to which this paragraph applies--
 ``(A) if the communication is paid for by an 
 individual or if the significant funder of the 
 communication under paragraph (4) is an individual, the 
 individual involved;
 ``(B) if the communication is paid for by a 
 corporation or if the significant funder of the 
 communication under paragraph (4) is a corporation, the 
 chief executive officer of the corporation (or, if the 
 corporation does not have a chief executive officer, 
 the highest ranking official of the corporation);
 ``(C) if the communication is paid for by a labor 
 organization or if the significant funder of the 
 communication under paragraph (4) is a labor 
 organization, the highest ranking officer of the labor 
 organization; or
 ``(D) if the communication is paid for by any other 
 person or if the significant funder of the 
 communication under paragraph (4) is any other person, 
 the highest ranking official of such person.
 ``(8) Other definitions.--In this subsection, the terms 
 `campaign-related activity', `covered organization', and 
 `unrestricted donor payment' have the meaning given such terms 
 in section 325.''.

 Subtitle C--Reporting Requirements for Registered Lobbyists

SEC. 221. REQUIRING REGISTERED LOBBYISTS TO REPORT INFORMATION ON 
 INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES AND ELECTIONEERING 
 COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 5(d)(1) of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 
1995 (2 U.S.C. 1604(d)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (F);
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (I); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(G) the amount of any independent expenditure (as 
 defined in section 301(17) of the Federal Election 
 Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431(17)) equal to or 
 greater than $1,000 made by such person or 
 organization, and for each such expenditure the name of 
 each candidate being supported or opposed and the 
 amount spent supporting or opposing each such 
 candidate;
 ``(H) the amount of any electioneering 
 communication (as defined in section 304(f)(3) of such 
 Act (2 U.S.C. 434(f)(3)) equal to or greater than 
 $1,000 made by such person or organization, and for 
 each such communication the name of the candidate 
 referred to in the communication and whether the 
 communication involved was in support of or in 
 opposition to the candidate; and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to reports for semiannual periods described in 
section 5(d)(1) of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 that begin after 
the date of the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle D--Filing by Senate Candidates With Commission

SEC. 231. FILING BY SENATE CANDIDATES WITH COMMISSION.

 Section 302(g) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 
U.S.C. 432(g)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(g) Filing With the Commission.--All designations, 
 statements, and reports required to be filed under this Act 
 shall be filed with the Commission.''.

 TITLE III--DISCLOSURE BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS OF INFORMATION ON 
 CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY

SEC. 301. REQUIRING DISCLOSURE BY COVERED ORGANIZATIONS OF INFORMATION 
 ON CAMPAIGN-RELATED ACTIVITY.

 Section 325 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as added 
by section 212, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (e) and (f); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(c) Disclosures to Shareholders, Members, and Donors of 
Information on Disbursements for Campaign-Related Activity.--
 ``(1) Including information in regular periodic reports.--A 
 covered organization which submits regular, periodic reports to 
 its shareholders, members, or donors on its finances or 
 activities shall include in each such report the information 
 described in paragraph (2) with respect to the disbursements 
 made by the organization for campaign-related activity during 
 the period covered by the report.
 ``(2) Information described.--The information described in 
 this paragraph is, for each disbursement for campaign-related 
 activity--
 ``(A) the date of the independent expenditure or 
 electioneering communication involved;
 ``(B) the amount of the independent expenditure or 
 electioneering communication involved;
 ``(C) the name of the candidate identified in the 
 independent expenditure or electioneering communication 
 involved, the office sought by the candidate, and (if 
 applicable) whether the independent expenditure or 
 electioneering communication involved was in support of 
 or in opposition to the candidate;
 ``(D) in the case of a transfer of funds to another 
 person, the information required by subparagraphs (A) 
 through (C), as well as the name of the recipient of 
 the funds and the date and amount of the funds 
 transferred;
 ``(E) the source of such funds; and
 ``(F) such other information as the Commission 
 determines is appropriate to further the purposes of 
 this subsection.
 ``(d) Public Dissemination of Certain Information.--
 ``(1) Information included in reports.--
 ``(A) Requiring dissemination.--If a covered 
 organization maintains an Internet site, the 
 organization shall post on such Internet site, in a 
 machine-readable, searchable, sortable, and 
 downloadable manner and through a direct link from the 
 homepage of the organization, the following 
 information:
 ``(i) The information the organization is 
 required to report under section 304(g)(5)(A) 
 with respect to public independent 
 expenditures.
 ``(ii) The information the organization is 
 required to include in a statement of 
 disbursements for electioneering communications 
 under section 304(f)(6).
 ``(B) Deadline; duration of posting.--The covered 
 organization shall post the information described in 
 subparagraph (A) not later than 24 hours after the 
 organization files the information with the Commission 
 under the applicable provision of this Act, and shall 
 ensure that the information remains on the website 
 until the expiration of the 1-year period which begins 
 on the date of the election with respect to which the 
 public independent expenditures or electioneering 
 communications are made.
 ``(2) Information on breakdown of disbursements among types 
 of recipients.--
 ``(A) Requiring dissemination.--If a covered 
 organization maintains an Internet site, the 
 organization shall post on such Internet site, in a 
 machine-readable, searchable, sortable, and 
 downloadable manner and through a direct link from the 
 homepage of the organization, the following information 
 with respect to the aggregate amount of disbursements 
 made by the organization for campaign-related activity 
 during a calendar year:
 ``(i) A breakdown by political party of the 
 total amount disbursed in support of and in 
 opposition to candidates of each political 
 party.
 ``(ii) The total amount disbursed in 
 support of or opposition to--
 ``(I) incumbent candidates;
 ``(II) candidates challenging 
 incumbent candidates; and
 ``(III) candidates for election to 
 an office for which no incumbent is 
 seeking re-election.
 ``(B) Deadline; duration of posting.--A covered 
 organization shall post the information described in 
 subparagraph (A) with respect to a calendar year not 
 later than the first January 31 which follows that 
 calendar year, and shall ensure that the information 
 remains on the website until the end of the calendar 
 year in which the information is posted.''.

 TITLE IV--TELEVISION MEDIA RATES

SEC. 401. TELEVISION MEDIA RATES.

 (a) Application of Equal Opportunities Requirement and Prohibition 
of Censorship to Candidate and National Committees of Political 
Parties.--
 (1) In general.--The matter preceding paragraph (1) of 
 section 315(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
 315(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) In General.--If any licensee shall permit any person who is a 
legally qualified candidate for any public office or any national 
committee of a political party in connection with a campaign of a 
legally qualified candidate for Federal office to use a broadcasting 
station, the licensee shall afford equal opportunities in the use of 
such broadcasting station to all other such candidates for that office 
or national committees of political parties in connection with such 
campaign for such office: Provided, That such licensee shall have no 
power of censorship over the material broadcast under the provisions of 
this section. No obligation is imposed under this subsection upon any 
licensee to allow the use of its station by any such candidate or 
national committee. Appearance by a legally qualified candidate or a 
representative of a national committee of a political party on behalf 
of any legally qualified candidate for Federal office on any--''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 315(a)(3) of such Act 
 (47 U.S.C. 315(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``candidate'' and 
 inserting ``candidate or representative''.
 (b) Reasonable Access To Purchase Broadcasting Time.--
 (1) Reasonable access by political parties.--Section 
 312(a)(7) of such Act (47 U.S.C. 312(a)(7)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``reasonable amounts of time'' and 
 inserting ``reasonable amounts of time, including 
 reasonable amounts of time purchased at the lowest unit 
 charge under section 315(b),'';
 (B) by striking ``elective''; and
 (C) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
 the following: ``or by a national committee of a 
 political party (including a national congressional 
 campaign committee of a political party) in connection 
 with the campaign of such candidate.''.
 (2) Determination.--Section 312(c) of such Act (47 U.S.C. 
 312(c)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the 
 following: ``In determining whether reasonable amounts of time, 
 including reasonable amounts of time purchased at the lowest 
 unit charge under section 315(b), have been provided under 
 subsection (a)(7), the Commission shall examine and consider 
 the time provided by the licensee, permittee, or person to 
 purchase time, including nonpreemptible time, by purchasers 
 other than a legally qualified candidate for Federal office on 
 behalf of his candidacy or by a national committee of a 
 political party (including a national congressional campaign 
 committee of a political party) in connection with such 
 campaign.''
 (c) Lowest Unit Charge.--
 (1) Charges for candidates for federal office.--Section 
 315(b) of such Act (47 U.S.C. 315(b)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``paragraph 
 (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (3); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Charges for candidates for federal office.--
 ``(A) Limitation on charges.--Subject to 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), the charges made for the use 
 of any broadcasting station by any person who is a 
 legally qualified candidate for any Federal office in 
 connection with the campaign of such candidate for 
 election to such office, or by a national committee of 
 a political party in connection with such campaign, 
 shall not exceed--
 ``(i) subject to paragraph (3), during the 
 45 days preceding the date of a primary or 
 primary runoff election and during the 60 days 
 preceding the date of a general or special 
 election in which such person is a candidate, 
 the lowest unit charge of the station for the 
 same amount of time that was offered at any 
 time during the 180 days preceding the date of 
 use; and
 ``(ii) at any other time, the charges made 
 for comparable use of such station by other 
 users thereof.
 ``(B) Geographic limitation.--The limitation on 
 charges under subparagraph (A) shall only apply for the 
 use of a broadcasting station in the media markets that 
 cover the State (or States) in which the candidate is 
 seeking election to Federal office.
 ``(C) Eligibility.--
 ``(i) In general.--The limitation on 
 charges under subparagraph (A) shall only apply 
 if, in an election for a Federal office, a 
 covered organization under section 325 of the 
 Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 makes 
 disbursements for electioneering communications 
 in connection with any legally qualified 
 candidate for Federal office or for independent 
 expenditures in an aggregate amount of $50,000 
 or more during a calendar year.
 ``(ii) Application.--In such circumstances, 
 the limitation on charges under subparagraph 
 (A) shall apply to all legally qualified 
 candidates for Federal office in such election 
 and national committees of political parties in 
 connection with such election.
 ``(iii) Requirement.--In an election for 
 Federal office in which no covered organization 
 has made the disbursements described in clause 
 (i), all legally qualified candidates in such 
 election shall be entitled to receive the 
 lowest unit charge described in paragraph (1) 
 for as long as no such disbursements are made 
 in such election.
 ``(D) Severability.--If the operation of 
 subparagraph (C) is enjoined by any court of competent 
 jurisdiction, or if subparagraph (C) is held to be 
 constitutionally insufficient by final judicial 
 decision, then subparagraph (A) shall take effect 
 immediately without any limitation imposed by 
 subparagraph (C).''.
 (2) National committee charges.--Section 315(b)(1) of such 
 Act (47 U.S.C. 315(b)(1)) is amended in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A) by striking ``office shall'' and inserting 
 ``office or by a national committee of a political party in 
 connection with the campaign of a legally qualified candidate 
 for Federal office shall''.
 (3) Adequate access at lowest unit charge.--Section 315(b) 
 of such Act (47 U.S.C. 315(b)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(4) Adequate access at lowest unit charge.--A licensee 
 shall take all actions necessary to ensure access to the use of 
 a broadcasting station, in accordance with the requirements 
 under paragraph (2), to meet the obligations under section 
 312(a)(7) for the use of such station by a legally qualified 
 candidate for Federal office on behalf of his candidacy and by 
 a national committee of a political party in connection with 
 the campaign of such candidate.''.
 (4) Conforming amendment.--Section 315(b)(3) of such Act 
 (as redesignated by paragraph (1)(A)) is amended by striking 
 ``under paragraph (1)(A)'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``under paragraph (1)(A) or (2)(A)(i)''.
 (5) Requiring organizations to notify commission if 
 disbursements equal or exceed threshold.--Title III of the 
 Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.), 
 as amended by section 213(a), is further amended by adding at 
 the end the following new section:

``SEC. 327. REQUIRING COVERED ORGANIZATIONS TO NOTIFY COMMISSION AND 
 FCC IF DISBURSEMENTS EQUAL OR EXCEED THRESHOLD.

 ``(a) Notification Required if Election- or Candidate-Specific 
Disbursements Equal or Exceed Threshold.--Not later than 24 hours after 
the date by which the aggregate amount of disbursements made by a 
covered organization for campaign-related activity with respect to a 
specific election or a specific candidate (together with the amount of 
any disbursements contracted to be made by the organization for such 
activity) first equals or exceeds $50,000, the organization shall file 
a report with the Commission and with the Federal Communications 
Commission which states the amount of the disbursements and identifies 
the election or candidate involved.
 ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of subsection (a), the terms 
`campaign-related activity' and `covered organization' have the meaning 
given such terms in section 325.''.
 (d) Preemption; Random Audits.--Section 315 of the Communications 
Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 315) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (g);
 (2) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (f); and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Preemption.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a 
 licensee shall not preempt the use of a broadcasting station by 
 a legally qualified candidate for Federal office or a national 
 committee of a political party in connection with the campaign 
 of such candidate.
 ``(2) Circumstances beyond control of licensee.--If a 
 program to be broadcast by a broadcasting station is preempted 
 because of circumstances beyond the control of the station, any 
 scheduled use of a broadcasting station by such candidate or 
 committee scheduled during that program may also be preempted.
 ``(d) Random Audits.--
 ``(1) In general.--During the 45 days preceding a primary 
 election and the 60 days preceding a general election, the 
 Commission shall conduct random audits of designated market 
 areas to ensure that each broadcasting station to which this 
 section applies is allocating broadcast time for legally 
 qualified candidates for Federal office in accordance with this 
 section and section 312.
 ``(2) Markets.--Each audit conducted under paragraph (1) 
 shall cover the following markets:
 ``(A) At least 6 of the top 50 largest designated 
 market areas.
 ``(B) At least 3 of the 51-100 largest designated 
 market areas.
 ``(C) At least 3 of the 101-150 largest designated 
 market areas.
 ``(D) At least 3 of the 151-210 largest designated 
 market areas.
 ``(3) Broadcast stations.--Each random audit shall include 
 each of the 3 largest television broadcast networks, 1 
 independent television network, 1 cable network, 1 provider of 
 satellite services, and 1 radio network.''.
 (e) Political File.--Section 315(e) of such Act (47 U.S.C. 315(e)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Public access to political file.--In making a record 
 available for public inspection under paragraph (1), a licensee 
 shall make available on a timely basis on the station's Web 
 site the record of a request to purchase broadcast time that is 
 made by or on behalf of a legally qualified candidate for 
 Federal office, a national committee of a political party in 
 connection with a campaign for such office, or by a covered 
 organization under section 325(c) of the Federal Election 
 Campaign Act of 1971 for electioneering communications in 
 connection with any legally qualified candidate for Federal 
 office or for independent expenditures.''.
 (f) Definitions.--Section 315(g) of such Act (as redesignated by 
subsection (d)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``For purposes'' and inserting 
 ``Definitions.--For purposes'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), by striking ``; and'' and inserting 
 the following: ``and a provider of cable or satellite 
 television service, except that such term does not include a 
 noncommercial educational broadcast station as defined under 
 section 397;''
 (3) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) the terms `authorized committee', `election', 
 `electioneering communications', `Federal office', and 
 `independent expenditure' have the meanings given such terms by 
 section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 
 U.S.C. 431);
 ``(4) the term `designated market area' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 122(j)(2)(C) of title 17, United 
 States Code; and
 ``(5) the term `national committee of a political party' 
 includes a national congressional campaign committee of a 
 political party.''.
 (g) Stylistic Amendment.--Section 315(f) of such Act (as 
redesignated by subsection (d)(2)), is amended by striking ``The 
Commission'' and inserting ``Regulations.--The Commission''.

 TITLE V--OTHER PROVISIONS

SEC. 501. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) Special Rules for Actions Brought on Constitutional Grounds.--
If any action is brought for declaratory or injunctive relief to 
challenge the constitutionality of any provision of this Act or any 
amendment made by this Act, the following rules shall apply:
 (1) The action shall be filed in the United States District 
 Court for the District of Columbia, and an appeal from a 
 decision of the District Court may be taken to the Court of 
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
 (2) A copy of the complaint shall be delivered promptly to 
 the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of 
 the Senate.
 (3) It shall be the duty of the United States District 
 Court for the District of Columbia, the Court of Appeals for 
 the District of Columbia Circuit, and the Supreme Court of the 
 United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the 
 greatest possible extent the disposition of the action and 
 appeal.
 (b) Intervention by Members of Congress.--In any action in which 
the constitutionality of any provision of this Act or any amendment 
made by this Act is raised, any member of the House of Representatives 
(including a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to the Congress) or 
Senate shall have the right to intervene either in support of or 
opposition to the position of a party to the case regarding the 
constitutionality of the provision or amendment. To avoid duplication 
of efforts and reduce the burdens placed on the parties to the action, 
the court in any such action may make such orders as it considers 
necessary, including orders to require intervenors taking similar 
positions to file joint papers or to be represented by a single 
attorney at oral argument.
 (c) Challenge by Members of Congress.--Any Member of the House of 
Representatives (including a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to the 
Congress) or Senate may bring an action, subject to the special rules 
described in subsection (a), for declaratory or injunctive relief to 
challenge the constitutionality of any provision of this Act or any 
amendment made by this Act.

SEC. 502. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act or amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of a provision or amendment to any person or circumstance, 
is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act and 
amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions and 
amendment to any person or circumstance, shall not be affected by the 
holding.

SEC. 503. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided, this Act and the amendments made by 
this Act shall take effect upon the expiration of the 30-day period 
which begins on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall take 
effect without regard to whether or not the Federal Election Commission 
has promulgated regulations to carry out such amendments.
 <all>