HR 4005 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4005
To amend section 1867 of the Social Security Act to provide for strict
liability of hospitals and physicians in the case of improper denial of
services to individuals with an emergency medical condition, and for other
purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 7, 1990
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend section 1867 of the Social Security Act to provide for strict
liability of hospitals and physicians in the case of improper denial of
services to individuals with an emergency medical condition, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. STRICT LIABILITY IN ENFORCEMENT OF MEDICARE HOSPITAL PATIENT
PROTECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1867(d) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395dd(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `knowingly and willfully, or negligently,
 fails to meet' and inserting `violates',
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking `knowingly',
 (3) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking `knowingly', and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4) AGENCY LIABILITY- A hospital shall be liable under this section for
 the acts and omissions of its agents and the physicians through whom it
 carries out its duties under this section.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL CORRECTION IN WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS- Subsection (i)
 or section 1867 of the Social Security Act, added by section 6211(f)
 of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989, is amended to read as follows:
 `(i) WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS- A participating hospital may not penalize
 or take adverse action against a physician or qualified medical person
 described in subsection (c)(1)(A)(iii) because the physician or person
 refuses to authorize the transfer of an individual with an emergency medical
 condition that has not been stabilized or against any hospital employee
 because the employee reports a violation of a requirement of this section.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the first
 day of the first month that begins more than 180 days after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether regulations to carry
 out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.
 (2) The amendment made by subsection (b) shall be effective as if included
 in the enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989.