S 1729 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1729
To amend the Public Health Service Act to require drug manufacturers to
provide affordable prices for drugs purchased by certain entities funded
under the Public Health Service Act, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
September 19, 1991
Mr. KENNEDY (for himself, Mr. SIMON, Ms. MIKULSKI, and Mr. HOLLINGS)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to require drug manufacturers to
provide affordable prices for drugs purchased by certain entities funded
under the Public Health Service Act, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Public Health Clinic Prudent Pharmaceutical
 Purchasing Act'.
SEC. 2. REBATES FOR THE PURCHASE OF CERTAIN DRUGS.
 Title XXI of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300aa-1 et seq.) is
 amended--
 (1) in the title heading by inserting `AND CERTAIN DRUG PURCHASES'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`PART E--REBATES FOR THE PURCHASE OF CERTAIN DRUGS
`SEC. 2141. REBATES FOR THE PURCHASE OF CERTAIN DRUGS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- An entity that receives funds under this Act may not
 purchase any drug or biological described in such subsection from a
 manufacturer unless there is in effect an agreement with the Secretary
 that requires the manufacturer to provide a rebate, as determined under
 subsection (c), to a covered entity for the purchase of such a drug,
 except that such a rebate may not be required in the case of any drug
 provided to an individual for which reimbursement has been made under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 `(b) COVERED ENTITIES- A drug of the type described in subsection (a) shall
 be a drug as defined in section 1927(k)(2) of the Social Security Act,
 and any over the counter drug or birth control device, that is purchased
 and dispensed by--
 `(1) a migrant health center receiving assistance under section 329;
 `(2) a community health center receiving assistance under section 330;
 `(3) an entity receiving assistance under section 340;
 `(4) an alcohol or drug treatment entity or mental health entity receiving
 assistance under title V or title XIX;
 `(5) a family planning project described in section 1001;
 `(6) an entity receiving assistance under title XXVI;
 `(7) a black lung clinic funded under this Act; and
 `(8) a clinic that treats sexually transmitted diseases and is funded
 under section 318.
 `(c) AMOUNT- The amount of a rebate described in subsection (a) shall
 be the difference between the average price paid by the covered entity
 described in subsection (b) for the drug during the calendar quarter or
 other applicable reporting period and--
 `(1) the price negotiated with the covered entity making the purchase; or
 `(2) the Medicaid price determined after making adjustments under section
 1927(c)(1)(C) of the Social Security Act for such drug;
whichever is lowest.
 `(d) NEGOTIATION OF CONTRACTS- The Secretary shall attempt, on behalf of and
 in cooperation with covered entities receiving assistance under this Act
 as described in subsection (b), to negotiate new contracts or renegotiate
 current contracts for drugs and biologicals purchased or dispensed by such
 entities with a view toward achieving a price comparable to, or lower than,
 the price charged such entities by the manufacturer on September 1, 1990,
 increased by the fiscal year 1991 consumer price index, as determined by
 the Secretary;
 `(e) CLAIMS AND PAYMENT-
 `(1) SUBMISSION OF CLAIM-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each covered entity eligible for a rebate under this
 section shall submit to the Secretary a rebate claim for the total number
 of dosage form units of each drug purchased, and the average price paid
 for each such units, during a period which is no later than 60 days after
 the end of the calendar quarter or other applicable reporting period and
 as required by the Secretary.
 `(B) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), if an entity is of the type
 described in paragraph (4) or (8) of subsection (b), the Secretary may permit
 such entities to consolidate rebate claims on a State or project area basis.
 `(2) PAYMENTS- Not later than 30 days after the end of each applicable
 reporting period as described in paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall
 consolidate all rebate claims received for such period and notify the
 manufacturer of each drug for which such a claim is submitted of the
 amount that such manufacturer shall provide as a rebate with respect to the
 particular covered entities submitting such claims. The manufacturer shall
 promptly remit to the Secretary the amounts due under such claims and the
 Secretary shall forward such amounts to the appropriate claiming entities.
 `(3) TIME PERIOD- In the agreements described in subsection (a), the
 manufacturer shall agree to remit amounts due under any rebate determined
 under this section to the Secretary not later than 30 days after the
 receipt of the notice under paragraph (2) concerning the total number of
 dosage form units of each drug purchased during the calendar quarter or
 other applicable reporting period.
 `(f) CALCULATION- The agreements described in subsection (a) shall specify
 that the amount of a rebate under this section for a new drug approved
 for marketing by the Food and Drug Administration shall be calculated in
 accordance with the applicable formula provided in this section, except
 that the base price used in the formula described in subsection (c) shall
 be the price available to the covered entity on the first day on which
 such drug was initially available for purchase.
 `(g) NO REDUCTION IN GRANT AMOUNTS- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, grants awarded under Federal law to covered entities described in
 subsection (b) shall not be reduced as a result of such entities receiving
 rebates under this section.
 `(h) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this
 section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees
 of Congress a report that shall contain--
 `(1) a description of the drugs purchased under agreements entered into
 under this section and the amounts of such purchases;
 `(2) an assessment of the effectiveness of the rebate program under this
 section, including the savings achieved and the administrative costs
 associated with such program;
 `(3) an assessment of the feasibility of making drugs available to covered
 entities under this section through the utilization of the Federal supply
 schedule and the Federal depot system;
 `(4) recommendations for legislation that would improve such program,
 including the establishment or utilization of recommended distribution
 networks for making drugs available to clinics under this section; and
 `(5) any other information determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 `(i) PROHIBITION ON RESALE- A covered entity that receives a rebate under
 this section for the purchase of a drug or biological may not resell such
 drug or biological. A covered entity found to have sold a drug in violation
 of this subsection shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of
 $25,000 for each such violation.
 `(j) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `covered entity' means
 an entity described in any of paragraphs (1) through (8) of subsection (b).'.