S 2017 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 2017
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for medicare
coverage of long-term benefits in home- and community-based settings and
nursing facilities, to create a new long-term care trust fund, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 22 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 20), 1991
Mr. SIMON (for himself and Mr. WELLSTONE) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for medicare
coverage of long-term benefits in home- and community-based settings and
nursing facilities, to create a new long-term care trust fund, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Long-Term Care Family
 Protection Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE UNDER THE MEDICARE
PROGRAM
Sec. 101. New part C long-term care program.
Sec. 102. Conforming and miscellaneous amendments.
TITLE II--ASSURING SELF-FINANCING OF LONG-TERM CARE BENEFITS AND QUALITY
INSURANCE
Sec. 201. Assuring self-financing of benefits under this Act.
Sec. 202. Assuring quality of long-term care.
TITLE III--FINANCING OF LONG-TERM CARE
Sec. 301. Source of revenue for home and community care.
Sec. 302. Source of revenue for nursing facility care.
TITLE IV--MEDICARE BUY-IN FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
Sec. 401. Permitting individuals with disabilities to purchase medicare
coverage during the 24-month waiting period for medicare entitlement;
permitting individuals with disabilities not entitled to long-term care
benefits to buy into medicare to obtain such benefits.
TITLE I--HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE UNDER THE MEDICARE
PROGRAM
SEC. 101. NEW PART C LONG-TERM CARE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 redesignating part C as part D and by inserting after part B the following
 new part:
`Part C--Long-Term Care Program
`SCOPE OF BENEFITS
 `SEC. 1851. (a) SCOPE OF BENEFITS- The benefits provided to an individual
 by the insurance program under this part shall consist of entitlement to
 have payment made on behalf of such individual (subject to the provisions
 of this part) for--
 `(1) home and community care; and
 `(2) nursing facility care,
but only if the individual has been determined by a long-term care management
agency (or others under arrangement with such agency) to be eligible for
such care under section 1852.
 `(b) HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE DEFINED- (1) In this part the term `home and
 community care' means the items and services--
 `(A) which are home- and community-based items and services described in
 paragraph (2) furnished to an individual by a home care agency (as defined
 in section 1861(kk)) (or by others under arrangement with such agency)
 provided--
 `(i) in a place of residence used as such individual's home; or
 `(ii) subject to paragraph (3) on an outpatient basis at a--
 `(I) hospital;
 `(II) skilled nursing facility, or
 `(III) rehabilitation center;
 `(B) which are furnished under a written plan of care (for furnishing such
 items and services and other related items and services to such individual)
 which--
 `(i) is established and periodically reviewed and revised by a long-term
 care management agency (or by others under arrangement with such agency); and
 `(ii) reflects the individual's needs identified in the assessment under
 section 1852.
 `(2) The home- and community-based items and services described in this
 paragraph are as follows:
 `(A) Case management services.
 `(B) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(C) Services of a homemaker/home-health aide who has successfully completed
 a training and competency evaluation program approved by the Secretary.
 `(D) Medical social services.
 `(E) Personal care services.
 `(F) Physical, occupational, speech-language, or respiratory therapy,
 or rehabilitative services.
 `(G) Medical supplies (other than drugs and biologicals) and durable
 medical equipment, while under such a plan.
 `(H) Medical services provided by an intern or resident in training of a
 hospital affiliated with the home health agency.
 `(I) Respite services for family caregivers.
 `(J) Adult daycare services (including at least one meal a day).
 `(3) Home- and community-based services provided on an outpatient basis
 at a facility other than an individual's place of residence shall include
 the items and services described in paragraph (2) but only to the extent
 that such individual is at a facility to receive case management services
 or services including equipment not readily available in the individual's
 place of residence under arrangement with a home-health agency. But such
 items and services shall not include transportation to and from a facility.
 `(c) NURSING FACILITY CARE DEFINED- In this part, the term `nursing facility
 care' means the following items and services furnished to a resident of a
 nursing facility (as defined in subsection (d)) and (except as provided
 in paragraphs (3) and (6)) by such facility, excluding, however, any
 such item or service if it would not be included under section 1861(b)
 if furnished to an inpatient of a hospital:
 `(1) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(2) Bed and board in connection with the furnishing of such nursing care.
 `(3) Physical, occupational, or respiratory therapy, or speech-language
 therapy, furnished by the facility or by others under arrangements with
 them made by the facility.
 `(4) Medical social services.
 `(5) Such drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment, furnished
 for use in the facility as are ordinarily furnished by such facility for
 the care and treatment of residents.
 `(6) Medical services provided by an intern or resident-in-training of
 a hospital with which the facility has in effect a transfer agreement
 (meeting the requirements of section 1861(l)), under a teaching program of
 such hospital approved as provided in the last sentence of section 1861(b),
 and other diagnostic or therapeutic services provided by a hospital with
 which the facility has such an agreement in effect.
 `(7) Such other services necessary to the health of the residents as are
 generally provided by nursing facilities.
 `(d) NURSING FACILITY DEFINED- In this part, the term `nursing facility'
 means--
 `(1) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a)), or
 `(2) a facility that is a nursing facility (as defined in section 1919(a))
 which meets the requirements of section 1819(b)(4)(C) (relating to required
 nursing care), or
 `(3) an intermediate or custodial nursing facility that meets the license
 requirements of the State in which it operates and such further requirements
 as provided by the Secretary.
 `(e) LONG-TERM CARE MANAGEMENT AGENCY DEFINED- (1) For purposes of this part,
 the term `long-term care management agency' means an agency or organization,
 or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, which--
 `(A) is a government agency; except that the agency or organization may be
 a private, nonprofit agency or organization with respect to a service area
 if there is no government long-term care management agency serving the area;
 `(B) demonstrates expertise in managing health and social services for
 elderly individuals and is capable of completing the assessment and plan
 of care and arranging for services under section 1852 within a reasonable
 time period following referral to the agency or organization;
 `(C) provides only case management services under this title and makes
 arrangements with a home care agency (with which it does not have a direct
 or indirect ownership or control interest) to provide long-term home care
 the agency or organization prescribes;
 `(D) has policies, established by a group of professionals (associated
 with the agency or organization) including one or more registered nurses,
 one or more physicians, and one or more social workers, to govern the
 services described in subparagraph (B) which it provides;
 `(E) maintains a sufficient number of professional case management teams
 which--
 `(i) are trained in the process of determining eligibility for long-term
 home and community care and in assessing the needs of chronically dependent
 individuals, and
 `(ii) include--
 `(I) at least a registered professional nurse and a licensed social worker,
 `(II) in the case of an individual under the age of 19, a physician, and
 `(III) such other health professionals (including rehabilitation
 professionals) as are appropriate;
 `(F) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which State or
 applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies or organizations
 of this nature--
 `(i) is licensed pursuant to such law, or
 `(ii) is approved, by the agency of such State or locality responsible
 for licensing agencies or organizations of this nature, as meeting the
 standards established for such licensing;
 `(G) has been designated by the Secretary to perform the functions of such
 an agency with respect to residents of a State or specified subdivision
 thereof; and
 `(H) meets such other conditions of participation as the Secretary,
 in consultation with the Long-Term Care Advisory Council (established
 under section 1855(i)), may find necessary in the interest of the health
 and safety of individuals who are furnished services by such agency or
 organization and for the effective and efficient operation of the program.
 `(2) The Secretary may provide for a temporary waiver of any of the
 requirements of any subparagraph (other than subparagraph (A) or (B))
 of paragraph (1) for such period (not to exceed one year, but subject to
 renewal) as the Secretary deems appropriate in the case of an agency or
 organization serving an area that is a rural area or that is designated
 as a health manpower shortage area under section 332 of the Public Health
 Service Act if--
 `(A) failure to waive such requirements would significantly limit access
 to long-term home care services to beneficiaries residing in the area,
 `(B) the agency or organization has made and continues to make good faith
 efforts to meet such requirements, and
 `(C) waiver of such requirements does not jeopardize the health, safety,
 or well-being of beneficiaries receiving long-term home care services.
 `(f) ELIGIBILITY UNDER THIS PART FOR CERTAIN DEPENDENT CHILDREN AND
 INDIVIDUALS NOT OTHERWISE ELIGIBLE FOR BENEFITS UNDER PART A- (1) The
 provisions of section 1818 (other than subsection (d)) shall apply to
 this part in the same manner as they apply to part A, except that, with
 respect to this part, an individual need not be enrolled under part B of
 this title to be eligible to enroll under this part.
 `(2)(A) A dependent child described in subparagraph (B) shall be eligible
 to receive home and community care under this part.
 `(B) For purposes of this part, the term `dependent child' means a child
 described in section 226(h) and who is determined by the long-term care
 management agency (or by others under arrangement with such agency) to be
 eligible for home and community care as provided under this part.
`ASSESSMENTS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF ENTITLEMENT
 `SEC. 1852. (a) IN GENERAL- In order to be eligible to receive benefits
 under this part each individual entitled to benefits under this part
 must receive an assessment and in order to be eligible to receive home
 and community care such individual must be certified as a chronically
 dependent individual as described in subsection (d)(1) and in order to
 be eligible for nursing facility care such individual must be certified
 as a chronically dependent individual as described in subsection (d)(2).
 `(b) INITIAL ASSESSMENT- The long-term care management agency established
 under section 1851(e) shall conduct an initial assessment of each individual
 entitled to benefits under this part in order to determine the level of
 care to which such individual is eligible.
 `(c) CERTIFICATIONS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE AND NURSING FACILITY CARE-
 (1) After conducting an initial assessment on an individual with respect to
 home and community care as provided under subsection (b), a case management
 team shall certify whether or not the individual is a chronically dependent
 individual (as defined in subsection (d)(1). If the case management
 team determines that such an individual is eligible for care under this
 part, the team shall include in its certification a determination as to
 whether the degree of impairment of the individual is moderate or severe
 (as described in subsection (d)(3)) and shall establish a plan of care
 for such individual consistent with that individual's degree of impairment.
 `(2) After conducting an initial assessment on an individual with respect
 to nursing facility care as provided under subsection (b), a case management
 team shall certify whether or not the individual is a chronically dependent
 individual (as defined in subsection (d)(2)) and shall include in its
 certification a determination as to whether the degree of impairment of
 the individual is moderate or severe (as described in subsection (d)(3)).
 `(d) CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL DEFINED- (1) In this part, for
 purposes of determining eligibility for home and community care, the term
 `chronically dependent individual' means an individual who--
 `(A) is unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least 2 of the following activities of daily living: bathing,
 eating, dressing, toileting, transferring, and eating; or
 `(B) has a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment that
 requires substantial direction, instruction, or supervision of another
 individual in order--
 `(i) to perform 2 or more of the activities of daily living described in
 subparagraph (A); or
 `(ii) to remain in the home or community without causing harm to self or
 others because of inappropriate behavioral patterns.
 `(2) In this part, for purposes of determining eligibility for nursing
 facility care, the term `chronically dependent individual' means an
 individual who--
 `(A) is unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least 3 activities of daily living as described in paragraph
 (1)(A); and
 `(B) has a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment as
 provided in paragraph (1)(B).
 `(3)(A) For purposes of this part, an individual shall be considered
 to have a moderate level of impairment if he or she is determined to be
 unable to perform without substantial assistance from another individual
 at least 2 of the activities of daily living described in paragraph (1)(A).
 `(B) For purposes of this part, an individual shall be considered to have
 a severe level of impairment if he or she is determined to be unable to
 perform without substantial assistance from another individual at least
 4 of the activities of daily living described in paragraph (1)(A).
 `(e) APPEALS- For review of certifications made under this section, see
 section 1869.
`PAYMENTS AND COST SHARING
 `SEC. 1853. (a) PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT BASIS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE- (1)
 Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, there shall be paid
 from the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund, in the case of each individual
 who is covered under the insurance program established by this part and
 incurs expenses for services with respect to which benefits are payable
 under this part for home and community care, amounts determined under a
 fee schedule (or other prospectively determined reimbursement mechanism)
 established and annually adjusted by the Secretary under paragraph (2).
 `(2) The Secretary shall establish a fee schedule (or other prospectively
 determined reimbursement mechanism) consistent with the following:
 `(A) Except as adjusted under subparagraph (C), the schedule or mechanism
 shall provide for uniform national payment rates.
 `(B) The Secretary shall provide for an annual adjustment in the rates
 under such schedule or mechanism based on the Secretary's estimate, before
 the beginning of the year involved, of the percentage by which the cost
 of the mix of goods and services comprising long-term home care (based
 on an index of appropriately weighted indicators of changes in wages and
 prices which are representative of the mix of goods and services included
 in long-term home care) for the year will exceed the cost of such mix of
 goods and services for the preceding year.
 `(C) The Secretary shall adjust the proportion (as estimated by the Secretary
 from time to time) of payment amounts which are attributable to wages and
 wage-related costs of long-term home care for area differences in wage levels
 by a factor (established by the Secretary) reflecting the relative wage level
 for such care in the geographic area in which the care is provided compared
 to the national average wage level for such care. At least every 36 months,
 the Secretary shall update the factor under the preceding sentence on the
 basis of a survey conducted by the Secretary (and updated as appropriate)
 of the wages and wage-related costs for long-term home care in the United
 States. To the extent determined feasible by the Secretary, such survey shall
 measure the earnings and paid hours of employment by occupational category.
 `(3) The maximum amount of payment that may be made with respect to
 long-term home and community care provided--
 `(A) a chronically dependent individual (other than a dependent child
 described in section 226(h)) residing in a State in a month is an amount
 that the Secretary estimates is equal to the product of--
 `(i) 50 percent of the average per diem payment rate for nursing facility
 care in the State on a full-time basis (determined under paragraph (4)) for
 days in the month, in the case of an individual determined by a long-term
 care management agency to have a moderate impairment, or
 `(ii) 65 percent of the average per diem payment rate for nursing facility
 care in the State on a full-time basis (determined under paragraph (4)) for
 days in the month, in the case of an individual determined by a long-term
 care management agency to have a severe impairment, and
the number of days in the month over which the individual is provided such
care; or
 `(B) a dependent child described in section 226(h) residing in a State in a
 month is an amount that the Secretary estimates is equal to the product of--
 `(i) 100 percent of the per diem amount that would be payable, under the plan
 of the State approved under title XIX, during the month if the individual
 were provided appropriate care in an appropriate institutional setting
 and if no limit on amount, duration, or scope of covered institutional
 services applied other than medical necessity, and
 `(ii) the number of days in the month over which the individual is provided
 such care.
The monthly payment limitations established under the previous sentence shall
be applied on an average basis with respect to long-term home and community
care furnished over any period of 4 consecutive months.
 `(4) Before the beginning of each calendar year, the Secretary shall
 estimate, for nursing facilities located in each State, the State average
 per diem payment rates that would apply (under paragraph (1)) for nursing
 facility care in the State on a full-time basis in the year if there were
 no reduction for coinsurance under this part.
 `(b) PER DIEM PAYMENT RATE FOR NURSING FACILITY CARE- (1) Subject to the
 succeeding provisions of this section, there shall be paid from the Federal
 Long-Term Care Trust Fund, in the case of each individual who is covered
 under the insurance program established by this part and incurs expenses
 for services with respect to which benefits payable under this part for
 each day of nursing facility care, after the first 90 days of such care an
 amount equal to $63 (subject to a maximum payment amount of $1900 per month)
 after the copayment requirement described in paragraph (2) has been met.
 `(2) The copayment requirement for nursing facility care under this part
 shall be $500 for each 30 days of care in such a facility.
`FEDERAL LONG-TERM CARE TRUST FUND
 `SEC. 1854. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby created on the books
 of the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the
 `Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the
 `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as
 may be provided in section 201(i)(1) and such amounts as may be deposited
 in, or appropriated to, such Fund as provided in this part.
 `(b) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections
 (b) through (i) of section 1841 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same
 manner as such provisions apply to the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance
 Trust Fund, except that any reference to the Administrator of the Health
 Care Financing Administration shall be deemed a reference to the Secretary.
 `(c) FUNDING-
 `(1) TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS EQUIVALENT TO CERTAIN TAXES-
 `(A) CERTAIN ADDITIONAL REVENUES- There are appropriated to the Trust Fund
 amounts equivalent to the additional revenues received in the Treasury as
 the result of the amendments made by--
 `(i) section 301, and
 `(ii) section 302,
of the Long-Term Care Family Protection Act of 1991.
 `(B) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by subparagraph
 (A) shall be transferred from time to time (not less frequently than monthly)
 from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such amounts to be
 determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of
 the taxes paid to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments
 shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior
 estimates were in excess of or were less than such taxes.
 `(2) APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL SUMS- There are hereby authorized to be
 appropriated to the Trust Fund such additional sums as may be required to
 make expenditures referred to in subsection (d)(3).
 `(d) Expenditures-
 `(1) HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE- Payments in each calendar year from the
 Trust Fund as determined under section 1853(a) are hereby authorized and
 appropriated from the amounts determined under subsection (c)(1)(A)(i).
 `(2) NURSING FACILITY CARE- Payments in each calendar year from the
 Trust Fund as determined under section 1853(b) are hereby authorized and
 appropriated from the amounts determined under subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii).
 `(3) LONG-TERM CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL- Amounts in the Trust fund shall be
 available, as provided by section 1855(n), to carry out the functions of
 the Long-Term Care Advisory Council.'.
 (b) HOME CARE AGENCY DEFINED- (1) Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x)
 is amended by inserting after subsection (jj) the following new subsection:
`HOME CARE AGENCY
 `(kk) The term `home care agency' means a public agency or private
 organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, which
 is a home health agency (as defined in subsection (m)) or--
 `(1) is primarily engaged in providing services of homemaker/home health
 aides and personal care aides;
 `(2) maintains clinical records on all patients;
 `(3) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which State or
 applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies or organizations
 of this nature--
 `(A) is licensed pursuant to such law, or
 `(B) is approved, by the agency of such State or locality, responsible
 for licensing agencies or organizations of this nature, as meeting the
 standards established for such licensing;
 `(4) meets the conditions of participation described in section 1891(g) and
 such other conditions of participation as the Secretary may find necessary
 in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished
 services by such agency or organization; and
 `(5) meets such additional requirements as the Secretary finds necessary
 for the effective and efficient operation of the program.'.
 (2) Section 1861(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `nursing facility,' after `skilled nursing facility', and
 (B) by inserting `home care agency,' after `home health agency,'.
 (3) Section 1861(w)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(w)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `nursing facility,' after `skilled nursing facility', and
 (B) by inserting `home care agency,' after `home health agency,'.
 (4) Section 1863 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended by striking `and
 (dd)(2)' and inserting `(dd)(2), and (kk)'.
 (5) Section 1864(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by inserting `or home care agency' after `home
 health agency', and
 (B) in the second sentence, by inserting `home care agency,' after `home
 health agency,'.
 (6) Section 1865(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb(a)) is amended by striking
 `or 1861(dd)(2)' and inserting `1861(dd)(2), or 1861(kk)'.
 (7) Section 1891 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bbb) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(g)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the previous provisions of this section
 shall apply to home care agencies in the same manner as they apply to home
 health agencies.
 `(2) In applying paragraph (1) with respect to home care agencies:
 `(A) Any reference to a home health agency, home health aide, section
 1861(m), or section 1861(o) (or paragraph (3) thereof) is deemed a reference
 to a home care agency, a homemaker/home health aide or personal care aide,
 and section 1851(b), or section 1861(mm) (or paragraph (2) thereof),
 respectively.
 `(B) Any dates or deadlines specified in the previous provisions of this
 section shall be 1 year after the date otherwise specified.'.
 (c) TRUST FUND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 201(a) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 410(a)) is amended, in paragraphs (3) and (4), by inserting
 `and section 1854(c)(1)(A)(ii)' after `of this section'.
 (2) Section 1817(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting `, less the amounts specified in section
 1854(c)(1)(A)(i)' before the semicolon, and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting `, less the amounts specified in section
 1854(c)(1)(A)(i)' before the period.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 on January 1, 1993, but no payments shall be made under title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act for services furnished under part C of such title
 before January 1, 1994.
SEC. 102. CONFORMING AND MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS.
 (a) ENTITLEMENT TO BENEFITS OF SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFICIARIES- Section 226
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 426) is amended--
 (1) in subsections (a) and (b), by inserting `, and care benefits under
 part C,' after `entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (1),
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
 `(2) entitlement of an individual to benefits for a month shall consist of
 entitlement to have payment made under, and subject to the limitations in,
 part C of title XVIII on his behalf for home and community care and nursing
 facility care furnished him in the United States during such month; and';
 (D) in subsections (e)(1), (e)(4), and (f), by inserting `and long-term
 care benefits' after `hospital insurance benefits';
 (E) in subsection (e)(3), by inserting `and long-term care benefits' after
 `hospital insurance benefits' the first place it appears;
 (F) in subsection (e)(3), by inserting `and such long-term care benefits'
 after `hospital insurance benefits' the second place it appears; and
 (G) in subsection (g)(1), by inserting `and for long-term care benefits
 under part C of such title' after `part A of title XVIII'.
 (b) ENTITLEMENT TO BENEFITS OF DEPENDENT CHILDREN- Section 226 of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 426) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i), and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsections:
 `(h) Every individual who--
 `(1) is under 19 years of age,
 `(2) is--
 `(A) a citizen of the United States, or
 `(B) an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence who has resided
 in the United States continuously during the 5 years immediately preceding
 the month involved,
 `(3) has been certified by a trained case management team of a long-term
 care management agency in consultation with the individual's attending
 physician (or, in the absence of such a physician, any physician)--
 `(A) to be chronically dependent or disabled and to be unable to perform
 (without human assistance or supervision) due to the individual's chronic
 dependence or disability at least 2 age-appropriate activities of daily
 living (as defined in section 1852(d)(1)), or
 `(B) to require both a medical device to compensate for the loss of a
 vital body function necessary to avert death or major loss of bodily
 functional capacity and substantial and ongoing nursing care to avert
 death or further disability,
 `(4) has filed an application for benefits under this subsection, and
 `(5) is not otherwise eligible for benefits under part A of title XVIII,
shall be entitled to benefits for long-term home and community care under part
C of title XVIII for each month beginning with the first month the individual
meets the requirements of this subsection and ending with the month following
the month in which the individual no longer meets such requirements.'.
 (c) ENTITLEMENT TO BENEFITS OF RAILROAD RETIREMENT BENEFICIARIES- Section
 7(d) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231f(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking `and outpatient hospital diagnostic services' and inserting
 `outpatient hospital diagnostic services, home and community care, and
 nursing facility care', and
 (B) by striking `parts A and C' and inserting `parts A, C, and D'; and
 (2) in paragraphs (4) and (5), by striking `part A' each place it appears
 and inserting `parts A and C'.
 (d) OTHER INDIVIDUALS- The provisions of section 103 of the Social Security
 Amendments of 1965 shall apply to community care and nursing facility care
 under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (and the Long-Term
 Care Trust Fund established under such part) in the same manner as such
 provisions apply to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII
 of such Act (and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund established
 under such part).
 (e) DETERMINATIONS AND APPEALS- Section 1869 of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395ff) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking `or part B' each place it appears and
 inserting `, part B, or part C';
 (2) in subsection (a), by inserting `or part C' after `a claim for benefits
 under part A';
 (3) in subsection (b)(1)(C), by striking `or part B' and inserting `,
 part B, or part C';
 (4) in subsection (b)(1), by striking `or' at the end of subparagraph (C)
 and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) a negative certification under section 1852(b), or the determination
 of a level of impairment under section 1852(b)(1),'; and
 (5) in subsection (b)(2)(A), by inserting `or part C' after `part A'.
 (f) MISCELLANEOUS- Section 201(i)(1) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 401(i)(1)) is amended by striking `and the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund' and inserting `the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund'.
 (g) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 home and community care and nursing facility care provided on or after
 January 1, 1994.
TITLE II--ASSURING SELF-FINANCING OF LONG-TERM CARE BENEFITS AND QUALITY
ASSURANCE
SEC. 201. ASSURING SELF-FINANCING OF BENEFITS UNDER THIS ACT.
 (a) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE- The purpose of the amendment made by this section
 is to assure that all the additional costs to the Federal Government for
 home and community care resulting from the enactment of this Act do not
 exceed the additional revenues derived from the amendments made by section
 301 of this Act.
 (b) ASSURING SELF-FINANCING OF BENEFITS- Section 1854 (42 U.S.C. 1395c)
 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act as added by title I of this Act
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) Not later than 3 months before the effective date for 1994 and not
 later than October 1 of 1994 (and of each succeeding fiscal year), the
 Secretary shall, in close consultation with the Long-Term Care Advisory
 Council, estimate the amount (if any) for the transition period or for
 the succeeding fiscal year, respectively, by which--
 `(A) the amounts of revenues to be transferable into the Trust Fund under
 subsection (c)(1)(A)(i) in that period or succeeding fiscal year exceeds
 or is less than--
 `(B) the sum of--
 `(i) the amount to be expended during that period or succeeding fiscal
 year under subsection (d)(1),
 `(ii) the amount of claims expected to be received during that period or
 fiscal succeeding year under subsection (d)(1); and
 `(iii) with respect to the provision of home and community care, any
 additional administrative costs to be expended during that period or
 succeeding fiscal year under this title, or under part B of title XI, as a
 result of the enactment of the Long-Term Care Family Protection Act of 1991.
In this paragraph, the term `effective date' means January 1, 1994, and the
term `transition period' means the period beginning on the effective date and
ending with the last day of the fiscal year in which the effective date occurs.
 `(2) If the Secretary estimates under paragraph (1), with respect to a
 period or fiscal year, that a deficit exists, then--
 `(A) the amount that is payable for home and community care furnished to
 any individual on each day in the period or fiscal year shall be reduced,
 subject to the limit established in paragraph (3), by such a copayment
 amount as the Secretary estimates to be necessary to reduce by 1/2 the
 amount of such deficit, and
 `(B) the payment limits established under section 1853(a) for months in such
 period or fiscal year shall be proportionally reduced by such a percentage
 as the Secretary estimates to be necessary to achieve the same savings as
 are achieved from the application of subparagraph (A).
 `(3) Any copayment amount established under paragraph (2)(A) may not exceed
 5 percent of the Secretary's estimate of the national average daily payment
 rate for home and community care under this part for the period in which
 the copayment amount will be applied.'.
SEC. 202. ASSURING QUALITY OF LONG-TERM HOME CARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act as added
 by title I of this Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE QUALITY ASSURANCE
 `SEC. 1855. (a) LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE CONSUMERS' BILL OF
 RIGHTS- The Secretary shall promulgate, by regulation, a long-term home
 and community care consumers' bill of rights, which shall recognize the
 following as rights of long-term home and community care consumers which
 may be asserted by the home and community care consumer receiving care
 under this part or the consumer's representative or guardian:
 `(1) To be treated with courtesy, respect, and full recognition of one's
 dignity, individuality, and right to control one's own household and
 lifestyle.
 `(2) To be fully and promptly informed orally and in writing--
 `(A) of services to be provided and any limits regarding availability of
 services from the home health agency or home care provider;
 `(B) of whether services may be provided under this title or are covered
 by other sources, and whether uncompensated care may be available;
 `(C) of charges for services and billing procedures, including an itemized
 copy of each bill submitted to any payor;
 `(D) of changes in services or charges; and
 `(E) of the procedures to follow if rights are violated or services are
 not satisfactory, including the right to a hearing before an entity other
 than a home health agency or a long-term care management agency.
 `(3) To take an active part in creating and changing the plan of care.
 `(4) To take an active part in selecting and evaluating the home health
 agency and the home care provider, and in selecting and evaluating treatment,
 care, and services.
 `(5) To be served by individuals who are properly trained and competent
 to perform their duties.
 `(6) To be fully informed by a home care provider of the provider's
 assessment of the home care consumer's condition, unless contradicted by
 documentation provided by a professional practitioner in the home care
 consumer's record.
 `(7) To refuse all or part of any treatment, care, or service, and to be
 informed of the likely consequences of such refusal.
 `(8) To receive treatment, care, and services in compliance with all State
 and local laws and regulations without discrimination in the provision
 or quality of services based on race, religion, gender, age, disability,
 or creed (except as provided under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975
 (Public Law 94-135; 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.)), or because of a change in
 the source of payment.
 `(9) To be free from mental and physical abuse, neglect, and exploitation,
 and to be free from chemical and physical restraints.
 `(10) To receive respect and privacy in the home care consumer's treatment,
 care, and services in caring for personal needs, in communications, and
 in all daily activities.
 `(11) To be assured respect for the home care consumer's property rights.
 `(12) To be assured confidential treatment of personal, financial, and
 medical records and to approve or refuse their release to any individuals
 outside the agency except as otherwise required by law or third-party
 payment contract.
 `(13) To voice grievances and recommend changes in policies and services
 to staff or outside representatives of the consumer's choice and to be
 assisted in doing so when assistance is needed, free from restraint,
 interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal by the long-term care
 management agency, by the home health agency, or by the home care provider.
 `(14) To be free to fully exercise the consumer's civil rights and to be
 assisted in doing so when assistance is needed.
 `(15) To receive promptly written notice from the long-term care management
 agency if treatment, care or services are to be reduced or terminated,
 and assistance to assure a smooth transition in services consistent with
 the welfare of the home care consumer.
 `(16) To be promptly notified by the home health agency of acceptance or
 denial of services and the reasons for such denial.
 `(b) HOME HEALTH AGENCY QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS- (1) In addition
 to such other requirements as may apply, the Secretary shall promulgate
 regulations requiring that to receive funding for the provision of long-term
 home and community care services under this part, a home health agency
 must within 6 months after the date of the publication of such regulations--
 `(A)(i) comply with the home and community care consumer's bill of rights
 promulgated under subsection (a); and
 `(ii) provide a written copy of such bill of rights to each long-term home
 and community care consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 who receives long-term home and community care services from the home
 health agency or other providers under this part;
 `(B)(i) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving grievances
 of long-term home and community care consumers regarding the provision of
 long-term home and community care services; and
 `(ii) provide a written copy of such procedures to each long-term home and
 community care consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 who receives long-term home and community care services from the home
 health agency;
 `(C) ensure that each long-term home and community care provider employed
 by or under contract with the home health agency receives training--
 `(i) sufficient to meet a level of proficiency established by the Secretary
 in regulations (in consultation with representatives of the elderly,
 individuals with disabilities, and children, home health agencies, and
 experts in the fields of geriatric nursing, pediatric nursing, geriatric
 social work, pediatric social work, mental health, rehabilitation, and
 other appropriate health care professionals) to be appropriate in content
 and amount;
 `(ii) which develops separate levels of proficiency in and is reflective of
 the range of skills required of long-term home and community care providers
 providing different levels of long-term home and community care services; and
 `(iii) the extent of which shall be made available on request to each
 long-term home and community care consumer with respect to the amount of
 training or level of certification achieved by each long-term home and
 community care provider;
 `(D) supervise all long-term home and community care providers employed by
 or under contract to the home and community health agency in accordance
 with regulations promulgated by the Secretary (including regular random
 onsite supervisory visits by registered nurses or other appropriate health
 care professionals); and
 `(E) perform annual evaluations of quality of services rendered by long-term
 home and community care providers employed by or under contract to the home
 health agency which includes and documents long-term home and community
 care consumer involvement.
 `(2) In addition to such other requirements as may apply, to receive funding
 for the provision of durable medical equipment services under this title,
 a home health agency or long-term home and community care provider shall
 in each case of a long-term home and community care consumer to which such
 services are provided--
 `(A) issue written instructions for the operation of such equipment;
 `(B) provide sufficient training to the long-term home and community
 care consumer, the long-term home and community care consumer's family,
 and staff to allow correct, safe operation of all such equipment; and
 `(C) formulate an emergency plan appropriate to the services provided to
 the long-term home and community care consumer.
In the previous sentence, the term `durable medical equipment services' means
supply, maintenance, or training in the operation of durable medical equipment.
 `(c) LONG-TERM CARE MANAGEMENT AGENCY QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS-
 In addition to such other requirements as may apply, the Secretary shall
 promulgate regulations requiring that to receive payment for the provision of
 case management services under this part, a long-term care management agency
 must within 6 months after the date of the publication of such regulations--
 `(1)(A) comply with the long-term home and community care consumers'
 bill of rights promulgated under subsection (a); and
 `(B) provide a written copy of such bill of rights to each long-term home
 and community care consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 who receives long-term home and community care services from the home
 health agency under this title;
 `(2)(A) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving grievances
 of long-term home and community care consumers; and
 `(B) provide a written copy of such procedures to each long-term home and
 community care consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 who receives long-term home and community care services from the home
 health agency;
 `(3) provide to each long-term home and community care consumer (or the
 consumer's representative or guardian) a written statement of the services
 to be provided to the long-term home and community care consumer and the
 schedule for provision of such services, as agreed upon by the long-term
 home and community care consumer;
 `(4) provide to each long-term home and community care consumer a clear
 written statement as to how the consumer, or the consumer's representative
 or guardian, may appeal benefit and level decisions made by the agency;
 `(5) maintain procedures that assure prompt access to long-term home and
 community care services for eligible long-term home and community care
 consumers;
 `(6) ensure that personnel providing case management services to long-term
 home and community care consumers have received adequate training as
 prescribed in regulations by the Secretary, in consultation with the
 Long-Term Care Advisory Council; and
 `(7) establish and implement case management processes which include--
 `(A) a plan of care which states reasonable and measurable client objectives
 and long-term home and community care services to be provided to meet
 the objectives;
 `(B) a plan of care that employs outcome measures insofar as they are
 appropriate and available for each long-term home and community care
 consumer served;
 `(C) methods for periodic review of--
 `(i) a long-term home and community care consumer's needs; and
 `(ii) the plan of care for a long-term home and community care consumer;
 `(D) methods for follow-up and on-going monitoring of patient and services
 delivery; and
 `(E) a statement of criteria and procedures for discharge or transfer to
 another agency, program, or service.
 `(d) SURVEY REQUIREMENTS- (1) The Secretary shall, in consultation with the
 Long-Term Care Advisory Council, promulgate regulations which establish
 procedures for surveying long-term care management agencies regarding
 compliance with conditions of participation established by this section.
 `(2) Regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) shall include--
 `(A) survey methodologies which include--
 `(i) patient-oriented assessment techniques;
 `(ii) process and outcome criteria for measuring the compliance of
 long-term care management agencies with conditions of participation under
 this title; and
 `(iii) randomized, onsite review of a representative sample of long-term
 home and community care consumers to evaluate compliance with applicable
 conditions of participation;
 `(B) a graduated schedule of unannounced surveys that provides surveys--
 `(i) not less than every 9 months for long-term care management agencies
 that are determined by the Secretary to have a substandard record of
 compliance with applicable conditions of participation;
 `(ii) not less than every 15 months for long-term care management agencies
 that are determined by the Secretary to have consistently satisfactory
 records of compliance with the applicable conditions of participation; and
 `(iii) not less than every 12 months for other such agencies.
 `(3) The results of surveys performed under this subsection shall be
 provided to the Long-Term Care Advisory Council and community advisory
 boards established under subsection (e)(1) and shall be made available to
 others in accordance with this title.
 `(4)(A) The Secretary may enter into a contract with a State under which
 a State, which has survey and enforcement procedures which are determined
 by the Secretary to be at least equivalent to the survey and enforcement
 procedures which the Secretary would otherwise apply under this section,
 shall conduct surveys of compliance of long-term care management agencies
 (other than those owned or operated by a State) with the requirements of
 this section and provide for the annual transmittal to the Secretary of
 the results of such State surveys.
 `(B) The Secretary shall develop and implement procedures for annually
 validating a representative sample of surveys of long-term care management
 agencies performed by States under subparagraph (A).
 `(C) Procedures developed under subparagraph (B) shall provide for review
 of such surveys within 1 month after the performance of such a survey.
 `(e) QUALITY ASSURANCE SYSTEM THROUGH PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS- (1)(A)
 The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which peer review
 organizations shall monitor the provision of home health services and
 long-term home and community care.
 `(B) In awarding, administering, and evaluating contracts entered into
 with peer review organizations of the performance of monitoring under this
 subsection, the Secretary shall--
 `(i) take into consideration information contained in reports issued by
 Consumer Boards under paragraph (2)(C)(iii);
 `(ii) require that at least 3/4 of the level of effort of a peer review
 organization shall be for the purpose of monitoring the quality of home
 health services and long-term home and community care provided;
 `(iii) require that the remainder of the effort of a peer review organization
 shall be for the purpose of review, on the basis of exceptional circumstances
 and on the health and safety of the home and community care consumer,
 of the appropriateness and necessity of care denied under this title;
 `(iv) require that any review by a peer review organization of a home
 health agency or a home and community care management agency include a
 representative sample of documentary reviews and personal interviews of
 home and community care consumers and home and community care providers;
 `(v) require that if any portion of a peer review organization's
 responsibilities are provided by a third party under contract with the
 peer review organization the fulfillment of such responsibilities are
 fully integrated with other functions of such peer review organization; and
 `(vi) require that the membership of a peer review organization board
 include representatives of all types of home and community care providers
 reviewed by the peer review organization and consumers under section 9353(b)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986.
 `(C) A peer review organization performing monitoring functions under this
 subsection may not be--
 `(i) a home health agency;
 `(ii) a home and community care management agency;
 `(iii) a home and community care provider; or
 `(iv) a fiscal intermediary.
 `(D) The Secretary shall make available to a peer review organization such
 information as may be necessary for it to carry out its responsibilities
 under this paragraph.
 `(E) A peer review organization may recommend to the Secretary sanctions
 to be applied to home health agencies and to home and community care
 management agencies who have been found to have not met professionally
 recognized standards of care.
 `(2)(A) The Secretary shall establish a Consumer Board in each State within
 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section.
 `(B)(i) A Consumer Board shall be composed of at least 5 and not more
 than 7 members appointed by the Secretary based on recommendations from
 organizations in each State representing home and community care consumers
 who are entitled to benefits under this title. Members must be entitled
 to benefits under this title or be representatives of organizations
 which represent home and community care consumers who are entitled to
 such benefits.
 `(ii) Limited staff support and training shall be provided to a Consumer
 Board by the Secretary as is necessary to carry out its functions.
 `(C) A Consumer Board shall--
 `(i) monitor the review activities of peer review organizations by--
 `(I) providing input into the awarding of contracts to peer review
 organizations; and
 `(II) evaluating the contracts of peer review organizations and the
 mechanisms established to monitor home health agencies and home and
 community care management agencies;
 `(ii) have access to--
 `(I) information of peer review organizations,
 `(II) results of State surveys conducted under subsection (d)(4)(A), and
 `(III) information from toll-free hotlines (established under paragraph
 (3)), after protection of the identities of individual health care providers
 and consumers; and
 `(iii) file an annual report with the Secretary and the chief executive
 officer of the State on October 1 of each year regarding the performance
 during the previous year of peer review organizations.
 `(D) A Consumer Board shall not be involved in the day-to-day operation
 of peer review organizations.
 `(3) Peer review organizations shall establish and operate statewide
 toll-free hot-lines for receiving questions and complaints from home and
 community care consumers, home and community care providers, and other
 interested persons concerning home and community care quality issues.
 `(4) The Secretary shall require peer review organizations to assist home
 and community care consumers in the resolution of problems related to the
 quality of home and community care services and case management services.
 `(5) Consumer Boards established under paragraph (2) and peer review
 organizations shall coordinate with State and local government officials
 to educate home and community care consumers regarding quality assurance
 programs and the various forms of assistance available to home and community
 care consumers with quality assurance problems under this title.
 `(f) COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS AND ADDITIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE- (1)
 Each State shall establish and appoint (based on the recommendations of
 long-term home and community care consumers, their representatives, and
 organizations representing these individuals and pursuant to regulations
 of the Secretary) members to a community advisory board (in this subsection
 referred to as the `board') for each long-term care management agency. Each
 board shall be composed of long-term home and community care consumers and
 their families, representatives of agencies and organizations representing
 long-term home and community care consumers and professionals providing
 services to chronically ill individuals. Long-term home and community care
 consumers, their families, or their representatives shall form a majority
 of the members of each board. The Secretary shall provide limited staff
 support to each board as is necessary to carry out its functions.
 `(2) Each board shall--
 `(A) monitor the activities of the long-term care management agencies,
 `(B) provide input in the selection of long-term care management agencies,
 `(C) file a report with the Secretary on the findings of its monitoring
 not less frequently than annually, and
 `(D) have prompt access to results of surveys and of investigations of
 complaints of the long-term care management agency with respect to which
 it was established and home health agencies providing long-term home and
 community care services to individuals in the area served by the agency.
Each report under subparagraph (C) shall be reviewed and its findings
incorporated into the survey of long-term care management agencies under
subsection (d).
 `(3)(A) The Secretary shall develop and implement methods for monitoring the
 continuity of care provided to long-term home and community care consumers
 throughout episodes of illness and across care settings.
 `(B) The Secretary shall develop and implement outcome-oriented criteria
 for use in determining quality assurance in long-term home and community
 care services.
 `(g) SANCTIONS- (1) The Secretary shall develop and implement a range of
 intermediate sanctions and procedures implementing such sanctions to be
 applied to long-term care management agencies providing case management
 services under this title for failing to comply with this section.
 `(2) Sanctions and procedures established under paragraph (1) shall--
 `(A) include civil monetary penalties (under the procedures described in
 section 1128A), a ban on admissions, receivership, and emergency authority
 to decertify home health agencies and long-term care management agencies;
 `(B) include specific criteria as to when and how each sanction is to be
 applied and the amounts of any fines and penalties;
 `(C) be designed so as to minimize the time between the identification of
 violations and final imposition of the sanctions;
 `(D) provide for a plan and schedule for corrective action by home health
 agencies found to be out of compliance with conditions of participation; and
 `(E) require public disclosure of failures of home health agencies and
 long-term care management agencies to meet professionally recognized
 standards of care, and the sanctions imposed for such failures.
 `(3) The Secretary shall file an annual report with the Congress on January
 1 of each year regarding the availability, adequacy, and use of sanctions
 to correct failures of long-term care management agencies to meet the
 requirements of this title.
 `(h) DEVELOPMENT OF LICENSING POLICIES- The Secretary shall--
 `(1) encourage States to develop policies and procedures for the licensing
 of home health agencies;
 `(2) gather information relating to activities of States in implementing
 licensing policies and procedures; and
 `(3) issue a biannual report which summarizes information gathered under
 paragraph (2).
 `(i) LONG-TERM CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL- (1)(A) There shall be established,
 no later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this section,
 an independent body to be known as the Long-Term Care Advisory Council
 (in this subsection referred to as the `Council').
 `(B) The Council shall be composed of 13 individuals appointed by the
 Secretary and shall include, to the greatest extent possible, individuals
 with expertise in pediatrics, geriatrics, rehabilitation, gerontology,
 disability, case management of home and community-based services and
 payment for such services, home and community-based care providers and their
 representatives, professionals with expertise in long-term care (including
 nurses, social workers, and discharge planners and physicians), third-party
 payers, long-term care ombudsmen, peer review organizations, and State
 and local health and social service agency representatives. Appointments
 to the Council shall be for a term of not to exceed 4 years.
 `(2) The purposes of the Council are--
 `(A) to assist the Secretary in assuring the prompt and efficient
 implementation of the provisions of this part,
 `(B) to review regularly the implementation of such provisions, and
 `(C) to recommend to the Secretary and the Congress any needed changes
 or refinements to such provisions or regulations promulgated to implement
 such provisions.
The Secretary shall regularly and closely consult with the Council in the
implementation and administration of the provisions of this part, including
the issuance of regulations to carry out such provisions. The Secretary (or
the Secretary's designee) shall meet with the Council at least once every
month during the 24-month period beginning 2 months after the date of the
enactment of this part, and at least quarterly thereafter, for these purposes.
 `(j) STUDIES- (1)(A) The Secretary shall conduct studies on quality
 assurance measures for long-term home and community care services provided
 under this part.
 `(B) Studies referred to in subparagraph (A) shall include examination of--
 `(i) methodologies which develop and evaluate outcome standards in the
 provision of long-term home and community care services;
 `(ii) mechanisms for ensuring and monitoring long-term home and community
 care quality by episode of care;
 `(iii) the role of case management for ensuring quality in provision of
 long-term home and community care services;
 `(iv) the differing approaches to and responsibility for the development
 of a plan of long-term home and community care services; and
 `(v) the impact on quality of care of--
 `(I) the separate reimbursement for supply of durable medical equipment
 to long-term home and community care consumers; and
 `(II) the training of long-term home and community care consumers and
 their families in the operation of such equipment.
 `(2) The Secretary shall report to Congress, by not later than 2 years
 after the date of the enactment of this part, on the findings of studies
 funded under paragraph (1).
 `(k) REPORTS ON QUALITY ASSURANCE SYSTEM- (1) The Secretary shall prepare
 (in consultation with the Long-Term Care Advisory Council) and file an
 annual report with the Congress on January 1 of each year regarding the
 nature and performance during the preceding fiscal year of the home and
 community care quality assurance system established under subsection (e).
 `(2) Each report required by paragraph (1) shall include information
 regarding--
 `(A) the number of individuals served by long-term home and community care
 providers subject to the provisions of this section;
 `(B) the amount of Federal funds expended for long-term home and community
 care services under this title;
 `(C) examination of noncompliance with the provisions of this section by
 long-term home and community care providers who received funds under this
 title and the sanctions imposed;
 `(D) the economic impact on home health agencies of requiring them to
 comply with the requirements of this section;
 `(E) the impact of the requirements of this section on availability of
 long-term home and community care services in rural areas and to members
 of minority and ethnic groups;
 `(F) the concerns and recommendations of community advisory boards and
 Consumer Boards; and
 `(G) the status of studies undertaken under subsection (j).
 `(l) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `long-term home and community care consumer' means a
 chronically dependent individual who is provided long-term home and
 community care services.
 `(2) The term `long-term home and community care provider' means an
 individual who provides long-term home and community care services directly
 to a home and community care consumer.
 `(3) The term `long-term home and community care services' means home
 health services and long-term home and community care.
 `(4) The term `Consumer Board' means a Consumer Board established under
 subsection (e)(2).
 `(m) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 from the Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund such sums as may be necessary
 in each fiscal year to carry out the provisions of this section.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall become
 effective upon the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--FINANCING OF LONG-TERM CARE
SEC. 301. SOURCE OF REVENUE FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY CARE.
 (a) ELIMINATION OF LIMIT ON WAGES OR SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME SUBJECT TO
 HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 230 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 430)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986, this section shall not have the effect of limiting
 the total amount of any individual's net earnings from self-employment or
 remuneration for employment which is subject to the hospital insurance tax
 under section 1401(b), 3101(b), or 3111(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986; and sections 1402(b)(1) and 3121(a)(1) of such Code shall not apply
 in determining the amount of any individual's wages and self-employment
 income for purposes of that tax.'
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Section 1402(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining
 self-employment income) is amended by striking `except that such term
 shall not include' in the matter preceding paragraph (1) and inserting
 `except that (subject to section 230(e) of the Social Security Act) such
 term shall not include'.
 (B) Section 3121(a) of such Code (defining wages) is amended by striking
 `except that such term shall not include' in the matter preceding paragraph
 (1) and inserting `except that (subject to section 230(e) of the Social
 Security Act) such term shall not include'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid after December 31, 1992, and with respect
 to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning
 after such date.
SEC. 302. SOURCE OF REVENUE FOR NURSING FACILITY CARE.
 (a) INCREASE IN FICA TAXES-
 (1) TAX ON EMPLOYEES- The table in section 3101(a) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees for old-age, survivors,
 and disability insurance) is amended to read as follows:
 `In the case wages
--The rate
 received during:
--shall be:
 1992
--6.2 percent
 1993 or thereafter
--6.7 percent.'
 (2) TAX ON EMPLOYERS- The table in section 3111(a) of such Code (relating
 to rate of tax on employers for old-age survivors, and disability insurance)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `In the case wages
--The rate
 received during:
--shall be:
 1992
--6.2 percent
 1993 or thereafter
--6.7 percent.'
 (b) TAX ON SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME- The table in section 1401(a) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on self-employment
 income for old-age survivors, and disability insurance) is amended to read
 as follows:
---------------------------------------------------------
 `In the case of a taxable year
 Beginning after: And before: Percent:
---------------------------------------------------------
 December 31, 1989 January 1, 1993 12.4
 December 31, 1992 13.4.'
---------------------------------------------------------
TITLE IV--MEDICARE BUY-IN FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
SEC. 401. PERMITTING INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES TO PURCHASE MEDICARE
COVERAGE DURING THE 24-MONTH WAITING PERIOD FOR MEDICARE ENTITLEMENT;
PERMITTING INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES NOT ENTITLED TO LONG-TERM CARE
BENEFITS TO BUY INTO MEDICARE TO OBTAIN SUCH BENEFITS.
 (a) DISABILITY BUY-IN- Section 1818(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395i-2(a)) is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) has not attained the age of 65 and would be described in section
 226(b)(2) if the phrases `, and has for 24 calendar months been entitled
 to,' `, and has been for not less than 24 months,' and `including the
 requirement that he has been entitled to the specified benefits for 24
 months,' were deleted from subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C)(ii), respectively,
 of such section,';
 (2) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (2) and (3),
 respectively.
 (b) LIMITED BUY-IN FOR LONG-TERM HOME CARE BENEFITS- Section 1818(a) of
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-2(a)) as amended by subsection (a), is further
 amended by adding at the end the following: `In enrolling under this
 section, for months beginning with the first month that begins 1 year
 after the date of the enactment of this sentence, an individual has the
 option of enrolling for all benefits under this part or, for long-term
 care benefits described in part C of this title, or for both.'.
 (c) PREMIUMS- Section 1818(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-2(d)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of paragraph (2), by striking `for months
 occurring in the following calendar year' and inserting before the period
 the following: `for benefits (other than for long-term care benefits
 described in part C of this title) for months occurring in the following
 calendar year for individuals described in subsection (a)(1)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(4) The Secretary shall, during the next to last calendar quarter of each
 year, determine and promulgate the dollar amount which shall be applicable
 for premiums (other than for long-term care benefits described in part C
 of this title) for months occurring in the following year for individuals
 described in subsection (a)(1). Such amount shall be equal to the amount
 the Secretary estimates to be necessary so that the aggregate amount
 for such calendar year with respect to such individuals will equal 100
 percent of the total of the benefits and administrative costs which he
 estimates will be payable from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund
 for services performed and related administrative costs incurred in such
 calendar year with respect to such individuals (other than with respect to
 long-term care benefits). In calculating such amount the Secretary shall
 include an appropriate amount for the contingency margin. Any amount
 determined under the preceding sentence which is not a multiple of $1
 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1, or, if a multiple of 50
 cents but not a multiple of $1, to the next higher multiple of $1.
 `(5) The Secretary shall, during the first calendar quarter of 1993 and
 during the next to last calendar quarter of each year (beginning with
 1993), determine and promulgate the dollar amount which shall be applicable
 for premiums for individuals enrolled for long-term care benefits under
 this section for months occurring in 1993 or in the following year,
 respectively. Such amount shall be equal to the amount the Secretary
 estimates to be necessary so that the aggregate amount for such period or
 calendar year with respect to individuals so enrolled will equal 50 percent
 of the benefits and administrative costs which will be payable from the
 Federal Long-Term Care Trust Fund for long-term care benefits provided and
 related administrative costs incurred in the period of year with respect to
 individuals so enrolled under this section. In calculating such amount the
 Secretary shall include an appropriate amount for the contingency margin.
 Any amount determined under the preceding sentence which is not a multiple
 of $1 shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1 (or, if it is a multiple
 of 50 cents but not a multiple of $1, to the next higher multiple of $1).'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 months beginning on or after January 1, 1993.