S 869 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 869
To amend the Internal Revenue Code to restore the deduction for capital
gains of individuals, to ensure that the rate of tax on long-term capital
gains of individuals does not exceed 21 percent, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. DECONCINI introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code to restore the deduction for capital
gains of individuals, to ensure that the rate of tax on long-term capital
gains of individuals does not exceed 21 percent, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. 25 PERCENT DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL GAINS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended
 by inserting after section 1201 the following new section:
`SEC. 1202. DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL GAINS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- If for any taxable year a taxpayer other than a corporation
 has a net capital gain, there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross
 income an amount equal to 25 percent of the amount of such net capital gain.
 `(b) SPECIAL RULE FOR ESTATES AND TRUSTS- In the case of an estate or
 trust, the deduction shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any)
 of the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets
 which, under sections 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in
 gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income
 beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.'.
 (b) MINIMUM TAX- Section 56(b) of such Code (relating to adjustments
 applicable to individuals) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraph:
 `(4) CAPITAL GAINS DEDUCTION- No deduction shall be allowed under section
 1202.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 62(a) of such Code (defining adjusted gross income) is amended
 by adding after paragraph (12) the following new paragraph:
 `(13) LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAINS- The deduction allowed by section 1202.'.
 (2) Section 163(d)(4) of such Code (defining net investment income) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) NET CAPITAL GAINS EXCLUDED FROM GROSS INCOME- The net gain described
 in subparagraph (B)(ii) shall be reduced by the amount excluded from gross
 income under section 1202.'.
 (3) Section 170(e)(1) of such Code (relating to certain contributions
 of ordinary income and capital gain property) is amended by striking out
 `long-term capital gain' the second place it appears and inserting `long-term
 capital gain (reduced by the deduction allowed under section 1202)'.
 (4) Section 172(d)(2) of such Code (relating to modifications with respect
 to net operating loss deduction) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAINS AND LOSSES OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS- In
 the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation--
 `(A) the amount deductible on account of losses from sales or exchanges
 of capital assets shall not exceed the amount includible on account of
 gains from sales or exchanges of capital assets; and
 `(B) the deduction for long-term capital gains provided by section 1202
 shall not be allowed.'.
 (5) Subparagraph (B) of section 172(d)(4) of such Code is amended by
 inserting `, (2)(B),' after `paragraphs (1)'.
 (6)(A) Section 221 of such Code (relating to cross reference) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 221. CROSS REFERENCES.
 `(1) For deduction for long-term capital gains in the case of a taxpayer
 other than a corporation, see section 1202.
 `(2) For deductions in respect of a decedent, see section 691.'.
 (B) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by striking out `reference' in the item relating to
 section 221 and inserting `references'.
 (7) Paragraph (4) of section 642(c) of such Code (relating to adjustments
 for credits and deductions) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) ADJUSTMENTS- To the extent that the amount otherwise allowable as a
 deduction under this subsection consists of gain from the sale or exchange
 of capital assets held for more than 1 year, proper adjustment shall be
 made for any deduction allowable to the estate or trust under section 1202
 (relating to deduction for excess of capital gains over capital losses). In
 the case of a trust, the deduction allowed by this subsection shall be
 subject to section 681 (relating to unrelated business income).'.
 (8) Paragraph (3) of section 643(a) of such Code (relating to distribution
 of net income) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 sentence: `The deduction under section 1202 (relating to deduction for
 excess capital gains over capital losses) shall not be taken into account.'.
 (9) Paragraph (4) of section 691(c) of such Code (relating to deduction
 for estate tax) is amended by striking out `For purposes of sections 1(j),
 1201, and 1211' and inserting `For purposes of sections 1(j), 1201, 1202,
 and 1211'.
 (10) The second sentence of paragraph (2) of section 871(a) of such Code
 (relating to capital gains of aliens present in the United States 183 days
 or more) is amended by inserting `such gains and losses shall be determined
 without regard to section 1202 (relating to deduction for capital gains)
 and' after `except that'.
 (11) Section 1402(i)(1) of such Code (relating to special rules for options
 and commodities dealers) is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In determining the net earnings from self-employment of
 any options dealer or commodities dealer--
 `(A) notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(A), there shall not be excluded any
 gain or loss (in the normal course of the taxpayer's activity of dealing in
 or trading section 1256 contracts) from section 1256 contracts or property
 related to such contracts, and
 `(B) the deduction provided by section 1202 shall not apply.'.
 (12) The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1201,
 the following new item:
`Sec. 1202. Deduction for capital gains.'.
SEC. 2. MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE OF 21 PERCENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (j) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended to read as follows:
 `(j) MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE- If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for
 any taxable year, then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed
 the sum of--
 `(1) the lesser of--
 `(A) the tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this
 subsection had not been enacted on the taxable income, or
 `(B) a tax equal to the sum of--
 `(i) the tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this
 section had not been enacted on the taxable income reduced by the amount
 of net capital gain, plus
 `(ii) a tax of 21 percent of the net capital gain, plus
 `(2) the amount of the increase determined under subsection (g).'.
 (b) PHASEOUT OF 15-PERCENT RATE AND PERSONAL EXEMPTION NOT TO APPLY TO
 CAPITAL GAINS- Subparagraph (A) of section 1(g)(1) of such Code (relating to
 phaseout of 15-percent rate and personal exemption) is amended by inserting
 `, reduced by the amount of net capital gain' after `taxable income'.
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendments made by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning
 after December 31, 1988.