HR 4230 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4230
To amend the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 to require
manufacturers and importers of motor vehicles to label vehicles as to the
place of final production and the value of parts produced in the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 14, 1992
Mr. WELDON introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 to require
manufacturers and importers of motor vehicles to label vehicles as to the
place of final production and the value of parts produced in the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Automotive Buyers Right to Know Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. LABELING.
 Title I of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 is
 amended by adding at the end the following:
`Part C--Labeling
`LABELING
 `SEC. 165. No manufacturer may manufacture for sale, sell, or introduce
 or deliver for introduction in interstate commerce or import into the
 United States any motor vehicle unless the vehicle has, in accordance with
 regulations of the Secretary, prominently displayed a label indicating--
 `(1) the location of the place at which the motor vehicle was produced in
 the form made available for its sale to consumers, and
 `(2) the value (stated as a percentage of the total value of the motor
 vehicle) of the parts of the motor vehicle produced in the United States.
`ENFORCEMENT
 `SEC. 166. A violation of the requirements of section 165 shall be considered
 a violation of section 108 enforceable through sections 109 and 110.
`REGULATIONS
 `SEC. 167. The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations under section
 165 not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this
 section. The Secretary shall issue final regulations under such section
 not later than 90 days after the date of the publication of the proposed
 regulations. If the Secretary does not issue final regulations upon the
 expiration of such 90 days, the proposed regulations shall be considered
 the final regulations. There shall be published in the Federal Register
 a statement as to the new status of the proposed regulations.'.