[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 4674 Reported in House (RH)]

<DOC>

 Union Calendar No. 583
116th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 4674

 [Report No. 116-700]

 To amend and strengthen the Higher Education Act of 1965 to lower the 
cost of college for students and families, to hold colleges accountable 
 for students' success, and to give a new generation of students the 
 opportunity to graduate on-time and transition to a successful career.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 October 15, 2019

 Mr. Scott of Virginia (for himself, Mrs. Davis of California, Mr. 
 Grijalva, Mr. Courtney, Ms. Fudge, Mr. Sablan, Ms. Wilson of Florida, 
Ms. Bonamici, Mr. Takano, Ms. Adams, Mr. DeSaulnier, Mr. Norcross, Ms. 
Jayapal, Mr. Morelle, Ms. Wild, Mr. Harder of California, Ms. Schrier, 
 Mrs. Hayes, Ms. Shalala, Mr. Levin of Michigan, Ms. Omar, Mr. Trone, 
 Mrs. Lee of Nevada, Mrs. Trahan, and Mr. Castro of Texas) introduced 
 the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Education 
 and Labor

 December 28, 2020

 Additional sponsors: Mr. Quigley, Mr. Neguse, Mr. Garamendi, Mr. 
 Espaillat, Mr. McGovern, Ms. Meng, Mr. Schiff, Mr. Schrader, Mr. 
 Khanna, Ms. Bass, Mr. Thompson of California, Mr. Malinowski, Mr. San 
 Nicolas, Mr. Danny K. Davis of Illinois, Ms. Norton, Ms. Sewell of 
 Alabama, Mr. Swalwell of California, Ms. Lee of California, Mr. 
 Langevin, Mr. Carson of Indiana, Mrs. Napolitano, Mr. Cicilline, Ms. 
 Scanlon, Mr. Payne, Mrs. Beatty, Ms. Frankel, Ms. Castor of Florida, 
 Mr. Higgins of New York, Ms. Haaland, Mr. Panetta, Ms. Judy Chu of 
California, Ms. Barragan, Mr. Garcia of Illinois, Mrs. Watson Coleman, 
 Mr. Vela, Mr. Sean Patrick Maloney of New York, Mr. Lowenthal, Ms. 
Stevens, Mr. Lewis, Mr. Richmond, Mr. Huffman, Mrs. Dingell, Mr. Lujan, 
Mr. Keating, Mr. Soto, Ms. Moore, Mr. Ryan, Mr. Kennedy, Ms. Eshoo, Ms. 
Waters, Mr. Carbajal, Mr. Price of North Carolina, Mr. Blumenauer, Mr. 
Pappas, Ms. Brownley of California, Mr. Cisneros, Mr. Brendan F. Boyle 
 of Pennsylvania, Ms. Garcia of Texas, Mr. Raskin, Mr. Gallego, Mr. 
 Cleaver, Mr. Casten of Illinois, Mr. Sires, Mr. Crist, Mrs. Lawrence, 
 Ms. Clarke of New York, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, Mr. Pascrell, Ms. 
DelBene, Mr. Nadler, Mr. Serrano, Mr. Pocan, Mr. Suozzi, Mr. Engel, Mr. 
 DeFazio, Ms. Dean, Ms. Clark of Massachusetts, Ms. Johnson of Texas, 
 Ms. Slotkin, Mrs. Luria, Mr. Gomez, Mr. Kildee, Mr. Levin of 
 California, Mr. Horsford, Mr. Bishop of Georgia, Ms. Underwood, Ms. 
 Kuster of New Hampshire, Mr. Kim, Mr. Perlmutter, Ms. Schakowsky, Ms. 
Sanchez, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Smith of Washington, Ms. Jackson Lee, Mr. 
 Lawson of Florida, Mr. Rouda, Ms. Roybal-Allard, Mr. Lynch, Mr. 
Thompson of Mississippi, Mrs. Carolyn B. Maloney of New York, Mr. Crow, 
 Mr. David Scott of Georgia, Mr. Rush, Mr. Yarmuth, Mr. Veasey, Mr. 
 Cardenas, Mr. Jeffries, Ms. Craig, Mr. Cohen, Mr. Ted Lieu of 
 California, Mr. Sherman, Ms. McCollum, Ms. Wexton, Mr. Cuellar, Mrs. 
 McBath, Mr. Connolly, Mr. Johnson of Georgia, Mrs. Bustos, Ms. 
Velazquez, Ms. Kelly of Illinois, Mr. Krishnamoorthi, Ms. Lofgren, Mr. 
 Vargas, Mr. Cox of California, Mr. Moulton, Ms. DeGette, Mr. Foster, 
 Mr. Doggett, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, Mr. Neal, Ms. Davids of Kansas, Mr. 
 McEachin, Mr. Butterfield, and Ms. Sherrill

 December 28, 2020

 Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
 House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
 in italic]
[For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on October 
 15, 2019]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend and strengthen the Higher Education Act of 1965 to lower the 
cost of college for students and families, to hold colleges accountable 
 for students' success, and to give a new generation of students the 
 opportunity to graduate on-time and transition to a successful career.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``College 
Affordability Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. References.
Sec. 3. General effective date.

 TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS

 Part A--Definitions

Sec. 1001. Definition of institution of higher education for purposes 
 of title IV programs.
Sec. 1002. Additional definitions.
Sec. 1003. Gainful employment programs.

 Part B--Additional General Provisions

Sec. 1011. Antidiscrimination.
Sec. 1012. National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and 
 Integrity.
Sec. 1013. Disclosures of foreign gifts.
Sec. 1014. Alcohol and substance misuse prevention.
Sec. 1015. Exception to required registration with selective service 
 system.
Sec. 1016. Integrity of nonprofit institutions of higher education.
Sec. 1017. Support and guidance for homeless individuals and foster 
 care youth.
Sec. 1018. Calculation of percentage of enrolled students receiving or 
 eligible for Federal Pell Grants.
Sec. 1019. Certification regarding the use of certain Federal funds.
Sec. 1020. Freedom of association.

 Part C--Cost of Higher Education

Sec. 1021. Consumer information.
Sec. 1022. Postsecondary student data system.
Sec. 1023. Avoiding duplicative reporting.
Sec. 1024. Disclosure of non-instructional spending increases.
Sec. 1025. Textbook information.
Sec. 1026. Repeals.
Sec. 1027. In-state tuition rates for homeless youth and foster care 
 youth.

 Part D--Administrative Provisions for Delivery of Student Financial 
 Assistance

Sec. 1031. Improvements to the Federal Student Aid Office.

 TITLE II--TEACHER QUALITY ENHANCEMENT

 Part A--Teacher and School Leader Quality Partnership Grants

Sec. 2001. Definitions.
Sec. 2002. Purposes.
Sec. 2003. Partnership grants.
Sec. 2004. Administrative provisions.
Sec. 2005. Accountability and evaluation.
Sec. 2006. Accountability for programs that prepare teachers, 
 principals, or other school leaders.
Sec. 2007. Teacher development.
Sec. 2008. State functions.
Sec. 2009. General provisions.
Sec. 2010. Elevation of the education profession study.
Sec. 2011. Authorization of appropriations.

 Part B--Enhancing Teacher and School Leader Education

Sec. 2101. Enhancing teacher and school leader education.

 TITLE III--INSTITUTIONAL AID

Sec. 3001. Strengthening institutions.
Sec. 3002. Strengthening institutions.
Sec. 3003. Strengthening Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
Sec. 3004. Historically Black College and University Capital Financing.
Sec. 3005. Strengthening Historically Black Colleges and Universities 
 and other minority-serving institutions.
Sec. 3006. General provisions.

 TITLE IV--STUDENT ASSISTANCE

Sec. 4001. Effective date.

 Part A--Grants to Students in Attendance at Institutions of Higher 
 Education

 subpart 1--federal pell grants

Sec. 4011. Amount of grants.
Sec. 4012. Grant eligibility.
Sec. 4013. Extending Federal Pell Grant eligibility of certain short-
 term programs.
Sec. 4014. Providing Federal Pell Grants for Iraq and Afghanistan 
 veteran's dependents.
Sec. 4015. Federal Pell Grant fraud prevention.
Sec. 4016. Federal Pell Grants on behalf of incarcerated individuals.

 subpart 2--federal early outreach and student services programs

 Chapter 1--Federal Trio Programs

Sec. 4021. Program authority; authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 4022. Talent search.
Sec. 4023. Upward bound.
Sec. 4024. Student support services.
Sec. 4025. Postbaccalaureate achievement program authority.
Sec. 4026. Educational opportunity centers.
Sec. 4027. Staff developmental activities.
Sec. 4028. Reports and evaluations.

 Chapter 2--Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate 
 Programs

Sec. 4031. Gaining early awareness and readiness for undergraduate 
 programs.

 subpart 3--federal supplemental educational opportunity grants

Sec. 4041. Purpose; appropriations authorized.
Sec. 4042. Institutional eligibility.
Sec. 4043. Allocation of funds.
Sec. 4044. Emergency financial aid grant program.

subpart 4--special programs for students whose families are engaged in 
 migrant and seasonal farmwork

Sec. 4051. Special programs for students whose families are engaged in 
 migrant and seasonal farmwork.

 subpart 5--child care access means parents in school

Sec. 4061. CCAMPIS Reauthorization.

 subpart 6--jumpstart to college grant programs

Sec. 4071. Jumpstart to college grant programs.

 subpart 7--teach grants

Sec. 4081. Revised definitions of teach grants.
Sec. 4082. Revisions to establishing teach grant program.
Sec. 4083. Revisions to teach grant agreements to serve and 
 eligibility.
Sec. 4084. Revisions to teach grant data collection and reporting.

 subpart 8--northern mariana islands and american samoa college access

Sec. 4091. Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa College access.

 subpart 9--student success

Sec. 4092. Community College Student Success Grant program authorized.
Sec. 4093. Federal Pell Bonus Program.

 Part B--Federal Family Education Loan Program

Sec. 4101. Termination of certain repayment plan options and 
 opportunity to change repayment plans.
Sec. 4102. Termination of interest capitalization for subsidized loans 
 after certain periods.
Sec. 4103. Termination of interest capitalization for PLUS loans after 
 certain periods.
Sec. 4104. Consolidation loans.
Sec. 4105. Default reduction program.
Sec. 4106. Termination of interest capitalization for unsubsidized 
 loans after certain periods.
Sec. 4107. Disbursement of student loans.
Sec. 4108. Student loan contract and loan disclosures.
Sec. 4109. Borrower advocate conforming amendments.
Sec. 4110. Cohort default rates.
Sec. 4111. Automatic income monitoring procedures after a total and 
 permanent disability discharge.
Sec. 4112. Automatic closed school discharge.
Sec. 4113. Repayment of parent loans due to student disability.

 Part C--Federal Work-Study Programs

Sec. 4201. Purpose; authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 4202. Allocation formula.
Sec. 4203. Grants for Federal work-study programs.
Sec. 4204. Flexible use of funds.
Sec. 4205. Job location and development programs.
Sec. 4206. Community service.
Sec. 4207. Amendments to work colleges.
Sec. 4208. Pilot grant program.
Sec. 4209. Department activities.
Sec. 4210. Study and report.

 Part D--Federal Direct Loan Program

Sec. 4301. Program authority.
Sec. 4302. Amendments to terms and conditions of loans and repayment 
 plans.
Sec. 4303. Amendments to terms and conditions of public service loan 
 forgiveness.
Sec. 4304. Federal Direct Perkins Loans terms and conditions.
Sec. 4305. Common manual for loan servicers.
Sec. 4306. Refinancing FFEL and Federal Direct Loans.
Sec. 4307. Refinancing private student loans.

 Part E--Federal Perkins Loans

Sec. 4401. Authorization of appropriations for Perkins loan.
Sec. 4402. Allocation of funds for Perkins loan.
Sec. 4403. Federal Direct Perkins loan allocation.
Sec. 4404. Agreements with institutions of higher education for 
 purposes of the Perkins loan program.
Sec. 4405. Student loan information by eligible institutions for 
 purposes of the Perkins loan program.
Sec. 4406. Terms of loans for purposes of the Perkins loan program.
Sec. 4407. Reimbursement for cancellation of Perkins loans for certain 
 public service.
Sec. 4408. Distribution of assets from student loan funds for purposes 
 of the Perkins loan program.

 Part F--Need Analysis

Sec. 4501. Amendments to family contribution.
Sec. 4502. Amendments to data elements when determining the expected 
 family contribution.
Sec. 4503. Amendments to family contribution for dependent students.
Sec. 4504. Amendments to family contribution for independent students 
 without dependents other than a spouse.
Sec. 4505. Amendments to family contribution for independent students 
 with dependents other than a spouse.
Sec. 4506. Institutional calculations for off-campus room and board.
Sec. 4507. Updated tables and amounts to need analysis.
Sec. 4508. Zero expected family contribution.
Sec. 4509. Amendments to definitions in need analysis.

 Part G--General Provisions Relating to Student Assistance Programs

Sec. 4601. Definition of eligible program.
Sec. 4602. Definition of third party servicer.
Sec. 4603. FAFSA simplification.
Sec. 4604. Student eligibility.
Sec. 4605. Reasonable collection costs on defaulted loans.
Sec. 4606. Student eligibility information for nutrition assistance 
 programs.
Sec. 4607. Exit counseling.
Sec. 4608. Clery Act amendments.
Sec. 4609. Online survey tool for campus safety.
Sec. 4610. Transfer of credit policies.
Sec. 4611. Amendments to institutional and financial assistance.
Sec. 4612. Prevention of improper access.
Sec. 4613. Information with respect to crime statistics for programs of 
 study abroad.
Sec. 4614. Remedial education grants.
Sec. 4615. Competency-based education.
Sec. 4616. Competency-based education council.
Sec. 4617. Written arrangements to provide educational programs.
Sec. 4618. Improvements to program participation agreements.
Sec. 4619. Compliance with the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Sec. 4620. Submission of data with respect to students with 
 disabilities.
Sec. 4621. Education program on hazing.
Sec. 4622. Changes to program participation agreements to strengthen 
 consumer protections.
Sec. 4623. Misrepresentation and substantial misrepresentation defined.
Sec. 4624. Revenue requirement.
Sec. 4625. Teach-out plans.
Sec. 4626. Experimental programs.
Sec. 4627. Administrative expenses.
Sec. 4628. Criminal penalties for misuse of access devices.
Sec. 4629. Regional meetings and negotiated rulemaking.
Sec. 4630. Income-based repayment plan.
Sec. 4631. Fixed repayment plan.
Sec. 4632. Requiring a common manual for loan servicers.
Sec. 4633. Removal of record of default.
Sec. 4634. Amendments to terms and conditions of borrower defenses.
Sec. 4635. On-time repayment rates.

 Part H--Program Integrity

 subpart 1--state role

Sec. 4701. State responsibilities.

 subpart 2--accrediting agency recognition

Sec. 4711. Accrediting agency recognition of eligible job training 
 programs.
Sec. 4712. Accrediting agency recognition of institutions enrolling 
 incarcerated individuals.
Sec. 4713. Requirements for accrediting agency recognition.

 subpart 3--program review and data

Sec. 4721. Eligibility and certification procedures.
Sec. 4722. Program review and data.

 subpart 4--strengthening institutional quality

Sec. 4731. Strengthening institutional quality.

 Part I--America's College Promise Federal-State Partnership

Sec. 4801. Program authorized.
Sec. 4802. Student Success Fund.
Sec. 4803. Pathways to student success for Historically Black Colleges 
 and Universities, Tribal Colleges and 
 Universities, and Minority-Serving 
 Institutions.
Sec. 4804. Unmet need for Federal Pell Grant recipients.
Sec. 4805. Unmet need for students.
Sec. 4806. Tuition waivers.
Sec. 4807. Expansion for private institutions.

 TITLE V--DEVELOPING INSTITUTIONS

Sec. 5001. Hispanic-serving institutions.
Sec. 5002. Promoting postbaccalaureate opportunities for Hispanic 
 Americans.
Sec. 5003. General provisions.

 TITLE VI--INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS

Sec. 6001. International education.
Sec. 6002. Global business and professional education programs.
Sec. 6003. Repeal of assistance program for Institute for International 
 Public Policy.
Sec. 6004. General provisions.

 TITLE VII--GRADUATE AND POSTSECONDARY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS

Sec. 7001. Graduate assistance in areas of national need.
Sec. 7002. Graduate education programs.
Sec. 7003. Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education.
Sec. 7004. Minority-serving institutions innovation fund.
Sec. 7005. Definitions.
Sec. 7006. Supporting postsecondary faculty, staff, and administrators 
 in providing accessible education.
Sec. 7007. Office of Accessibility.
Sec. 7008. Postsecondary programs for students with intellectual 
 disabilities.
Sec. 7009. National Technical Assistance Center and National 
 Coordinating Center for Inclusion of 
 Students with Intellectual Disabilities.
Sec. 7010. Formula grants to States to improve higher education 
 opportunities for foster youth and homeless 
 youth.

 TITLE VIII--ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS

Sec. 8001. Repeals.
Sec. 8002. Ronald V. Dellums memorial STEAM scholars program.
Sec. 8003. Teach for America.
Sec. 8004. Patsy T. Mink Fellowship Program.
Sec. 8005. Improving science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
 education with a focus on American Indian, 
 Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian 
 students.
Sec. 8006. Grants for rural-serving institutions of higher education.
Sec. 8007. Training for realtime writers to provide closed captioning 
 and court reporting services.
Sec. 8008. Grant program to establish, maintain, and improve veteran 
 student centers.
Sec. 8009. University Sustainability Program amendments.
Sec. 8010. Modeling and simulation.
Sec. 8011. Path to success.
Sec. 8012. Mandatory funding for masters and postbaccalaureate 
 programs.
Sec. 8013. Funds for access to open educational resources.
Sec. 8014. Encouraging campus comprehensive mental health and suicide 
 prevention plans.

 TITLE IX--DIRECTIVES TO THE SECRETARY OF EDUCATION

Sec. 9001. Providing that the Secretary of Education may not issue or 
 enforce certain rules that weaken the 
 enforcement of the prohibition of sex 
 discrimination applicable under title IX of 
 the Education Amendments of 1972.
Sec. 9002. Study and report on single certification form.
Sec. 9003. Longitudinal study on the effectiveness of student loan 
 counseling.
Sec. 9004. Study and procedures on determining family size.
Sec. 9005. Universal unique numeric data identifier.
Sec. 9006. Questions on food and housing insecurity in national 
 postsecondary student aid study.
Sec. 9007. Disaggregation of data using racial groups.
Sec. 9008. Disaggregation of data by sexual orientation and gender 
 identity.
Sec. 9009. Accessible instructional materials and technology.
Sec. 9010. Serving and supporting students with mental health 
 disabilities in institutions of higher 
 education.
Sec. 9011. Federal student loan cancellation commission.
Sec. 9012. Distribution of resources to prevent incidents of bias on 
 campus.
Sec. 9013. GAO study on racial and socioeconomic equity gaps at public 
 4-year institutions.
Sec. 9014. GAO study on license revocations related to student loan 
 defaults.

 TITLE X--AMENDMENTS TO OTHER LAWS

 Part A--Education of the Deaf Act of 1986

Sec. 10001. Composition of Board of Trustees.
Sec. 10002. Administrative requirements of Laurent Clerc National Deaf 
 Education Center.
Sec. 10003. Federal endowment programs for Gallaudet University and the 
 National Technical Institute for the Deaf.

Part B--Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 
 1978

Sec. 10101. Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance 
 Act of 1978.

 Part C--Strengthening Program Alignment for Postsecondary Perkins 
 Career and Technical Education Programs

Sec. 10201. Strengthening program alignment for postsecondary Perkins 
 Career and Technical Education Programs.

 Part D--General Education Provisions Act

Sec. 10301. Release of education records to facilitate the award of a 
 recognized postsecondary credential.

 Part E--Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002

Sec. 10401. Inclusion of racial subgroups in IPEDS data.

 Part F--U.S. Institute of Peace

Sec. 10501. Reauthorization of the U.S. Institute of Peace.

SEC. 2. REFERENCES.

 Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal 
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to 
be made to a section or other provision of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.).

SEC. 3. GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided in this Act or the amendments made by 
this Act, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take 
effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS

 PART A--DEFINITIONS

SEC. 1001. DEFINITION OF INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION FOR PURPOSES 
 OF TITLE IV PROGRAMS.

 (a) Clarification.--Section 102(a)(4)(A) of Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002(a)(4)(A)) is amended by inserting ``or 
receivership'' after ``that files for bankruptcy''.
 (b) Proprietary Institutions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 102(b) of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002(b)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (D), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (ii) in subparagraph (E), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(F) meets the requirements of paragraph (3).''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Revenue sources.--In order to qualify as a 
 proprietary institution of higher education under this 
 subsection, an institution shall derive not less than 15 
 percent of the institution's revenues from sources other than 
 Federal education assistance funds, as calculated in accordance 
 with paragraph (4).''.
 (2) Transfer of provisions.--
 (A) First transfer.--Paragraph (1) of section 
 487(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (as amended 
 by section 4624) is--
 (i) transferred to section 102(b) of such 
 Act;
 (ii) inserted so as to appear after 
 paragraph (3) of such section 102(b) (as added 
 by paragraph (1)(B));
 (iii) redesignated as paragraph (4) of such 
 section 102(b); and
 (iv) further amended by striking 
 ``subsection (a)(24)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (3)''.
 (B) Second transfer.--Paragraph (3) of section 
 487(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (as amended 
 by 4624) is--
 (i) transferred to section 102(b) of such 
 Act;
 (ii) inserted so as to appear after 
 paragraph (4) of such section 102(b) (as added 
 by subparagraph (A));
 (iii) redesignated as paragraph (5) of such 
 section 102(b); and
 (iv) further amended by striking 
 ``subsection (a)(24)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (3)''.
 (C) Third transfer.--Paragraph (4) of section 
 487(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (as amended 
 by section 4624) is--
 (i) transferred to section 102(b) of such 
 Act;
 (ii) inserted so as to appear after 
 paragraph (5) of such section 102(b) (as added 
 by subparagraph (B));
 (iii) redesignated as paragraph (6) of such 
 section 102(b); and
 (iv) further amended by striking 
 ``subsection (a)(24)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (3)''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall take effect on July 1, 2023.

SEC. 1002. ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.

 Section 103 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1003) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6), by striking ``section 3(2)'' and 
 inserting ``section 3'';
 (2) in paragraph (13), by inserting ``controlled,'' before 
 ``owned''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(25) Public institution of higher education.--The term 
 `public institution of higher education' means an institution 
 of higher education--
 ``(A) for which all obligations of the institution 
 are valid and binding obligations of a State (or of an 
 equivalent governmental entity); and
 ``(B) for which the full faith and credit of such 
 State (or equivalent governmental entity) is pledged 
 for the timely payment of such obligations.
 ``(26) Foster care youth.--The term `foster care youth' 
 means an individual whose care and placement is the 
 responsibility of the State or tribal agency that administers a 
 State or tribal plan under part B or E of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 621 et seq.; 670 et seq.), 
 without regard to whether foster care maintenance payments are 
 made under section 472 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 672) on behalf of 
 the individual, including any such individual who was in such 
 care on or after attaining 13 years of age and without regard 
 to the reason the individual left such care.
 ``(27) Federal education assistance funds.--The term 
 `Federal education assistance funds'--
 ``(A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), means 
 any Federal funds provided, under this Act or any other 
 Federal law, through a grant, contract, subsidy, loan, 
 or guarantee, or through insurance or other means 
 (including Federal funds disbursed or delivered to an 
 institution or on behalf of a student or to a student 
 to be used to attend the institution); and
 ``(B) does not include any monthly housing stipend 
 provided under the Post-9/11 Educational Assistance 
 Program under chapter 33 of title 38, United States 
 Code.
 ``(28) Progress period status.--The term `progress period 
 status' means the status of an institution of higher education 
 that is determined by the Secretary to be in danger of failing 
 to meet title IV eligibility criteria relating to student debt 
 because the institution has an adjusted cohort default rate of 
 not less than 10 percent and not more than 15 percent.''.

SEC. 1003. GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS.

 Part A of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1001 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 104. PROGRAM OF TRAINING TO PREPARE STUDENTS FOR GAINFUL 
 EMPLOYMENT IN A RECOGNIZED OCCUPATION.

 ``(a) Gainful Employment Program Defined.--In this Act (including 
for purposes of sections 101 and 102), the term `program of training to 
prepare students for gainful employment in a recognized occupation' 
means a training program that--
 ``(1) is in compliance with the performance metrics 
 (including the eligibility thresholds for each such metric) 
 established under subsection (b)(1);
 ``(2) is in compliance with the notice requirements under 
 subsection (b)(1)(C)(i)(II);
 ``(3) is otherwise eligible to receive funds under title 
 IV; and
 ``(4) is not a training program that is substantially 
 similar to a training program which, during a period determined 
 by the Secretary, did not meet one or more of the performance 
 metrics (such as an eligibility threshold) described in 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Secretarial Requirements.--
 ``(1) Establishment of requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 18 months after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, 
 the Secretary shall establish requirements that 
 training programs shall meet to be programs of training 
 to prepare students for gainful employment in a 
 recognized occupation, which shall include--
 ``(i) establishing performance metrics 
 (including eligibility thresholds for each such 
 metric) described in subparagraph (B); and
 ``(ii) developing a disclosure template and 
 a verification process for disclosures 
 described in subparagraph (C).
 ``(B) Performance metrics.--
 ``(i) In general.--In establishing the 
 performance metrics under subparagraph (A)(i), 
 the Secretary shall, at a minimum, establish 
 the requirements for a debt-to-earnings rate 
 that serves the best interests of students and 
 taxpayers, which shall include--
 ``(I) a methodology for calculating 
 such debt-to-earnings rate for a 
 training program, including--
 ``(aa) a definition of the 
 cohort of individuals on whom 
 such rate shall be based, who 
 shall be selected from the 
 individuals who were enrolled 
 in such training program 
 (without regard to whether the 
 individuals received a loan for 
 such enrollment);
 ``(bb) a determination of 
 the debt amount for such rate 
 based on the median annual loan 
 payment for the loans made 
 under title IV and the private 
 education loans received for 
 such enrollment by such cohort;
 ``(cc) a determination of 
 the earnings amount for such 
 rate based on the mean or 
 median of the actual, student-
 level annual earnings for such 
 cohort; and
 ``(dd) establishing a 
 process (such as an appeals 
 process) to authorize training 
 programs to use alternate 
 earnings in lieu of the mean or 
 median of the actual, student-
 level annual earnings of a 
 cohort; and
 ``(II) establishing a threshold 
 rate that--
 ``(aa) each training 
 program shall meet to be 
 eligible to receive funds under 
 title IV; and
 ``(bb) is comparable to the 
 eligibility thresholds for the 
 debt-to-earning ratio 
 established in the final rule 
 on ``Program Integrity: Gainful 
 Employment'' published by the 
 Department of Education in the 
 Federal Register on October 31, 
 2014 (Fed. Reg. 64890 et seq.).
 ``(ii) Earnings data.--In determining the 
 mean or median of the actual, student-level 
 annual earnings for purposes of this 
 subparagraph, the Secretary shall obtain and 
 use the most appropriate available Federal data 
 on such earnings.
 ``(C) Disclosure template.--The Secretary shall 
 develop--
 ``(i) a disclosure template that--
 ``(I) is consumer tested; and
 ``(II) is used by each institution 
 of higher education that offers a 
 training program to provide enrolled 
 and prospective students (including 
 through publication on the website of 
 such institution of higher education 
 for such training program)--
 ``(aa) on an annual basis, 
 student outcome information for 
 such program (including the 
 debt-to-earnings rate and 
 whether the eligibility 
 threshold for any other 
 performance metric established 
 under subparagraph (A)(i) has 
 been met); and
 ``(bb) in a case in which 
 the training program receives a 
 notice of determination under 
 paragraph (2)(B) that the 
 program may be ineligible for 
 funds under title IV, or may 
 receive other sanctions, not 
 later than 30 days after 
 receipt of such notice, an 
 explanation of such notice of 
 determination; and
 ``(ii) a process to annually verify that 
 each institution of higher education that 
 offers a training program is providing the 
 disclosures required under clause (i)(II).
 ``(2) Enforcement of requirements.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the Secretary establishes requirements under paragraph 
 (1), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall, with respect 
 to each training program that seeks to meet the definition in 
 subsection (a), including each such program that met such 
 definition for most recent award year for which data are 
 available--
 ``(A) calculate the debt-to-earnings rate and 
 assess performance with respect to any other metric 
 established under paragraph (1)(A)(i) for the preceding 
 award year, and make such information publicly 
 available on the website of the Department;
 ``(B) issue a notice of determination on whether 
 the program meets the definition in subsection (a), 
 including whether the program shall be subject to 
 sanctions (such as loss of eligibility under title IV); 
 and
 ``(C) enforce the applicable sanctions.''.

 PART B--ADDITIONAL GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 1011. ANTIDISCRIMINATION.

 Section 111(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011(a)) is amended by inserting ``(including sexual orientation, 
gender identity, pregnancy, childbirth, a medical condition related to 
pregnancy or childbirth, or sex stereotype)'' after ``sex''.

SEC. 1012. NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON INSTITUTIONAL QUALITY AND 
 INTEGRITY.

 Section 114 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1011c) 
is amended by striking subsection (f).

SEC. 1013. DISCLOSURES OF FOREIGN GIFTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1011f) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the 
 following: ``In this paragraph, the term `aggregate 
 dollar amount' includes the fair market value of staff 
 members, textbooks, and other in-kind gifts.''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``In this 
 paragraph, the term `aggregate dollar amount' includes 
 the fair market value of staff members, textbooks, and 
 other in-kind gifts.'' after ``each foreign 
 government.'';
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1) by striking ``are 
 substantially'' and all that follows through ``this 
 section,'' and inserting ``includes all information 
 required by this section,''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2) by striking ``requirements 
 substantially similar to those'' and inserting ``all 
 the information'';
 (3) in subsection (e), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``Not later than 30 days after receiving a disclosure report 
 under this section, the Secretary shall make such report 
 electronically available to the public for downloading on 
 searchable database under which institutions can be 
 individually identified and compared.''; and
 (4) by amending subsection (g) to read as follows:
 ``(g) Regulations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 the enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary 
 shall issue regulations to carry out this section.
 ``(2) Procedure.--Regulations under paragraph (1) shall 
 be--
 ``(A) developed through the negotiated rulemaking 
 process under section 492;
 ``(B) developed with consultation from 
 stakeholders; and
 ``(C) published in the Federal Register in 
 accordance with section 482.'';
 (5) in subsection (h)--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or property'' 
 and inserting ``property, human resources, or payment 
 of any staff''; and
 (B) in paragraph (5)(B), by inserting ``institutes, 
 instructional programs,'' after ``centers,''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Treatment of Tuition Payment.--A tuition and related fees and 
expenses payment to an institution by a foreign source made on behalf 
of a student enrolled at such institution shall not be considered a 
gift from or contract with a foreign source under this subsection.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date on which the regulations issued under section 
117(g)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1011f(g)(1)), 
as amended by this section, take effect.

SEC. 1014. ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE MISUSE PREVENTION.

 (a) In General.--Section 120 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1011i) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``drug and alcohol 
 abuse'' and inserting ``alcohol and substance misuse'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``a program to prevent the use of illicit 
 drugs and the abuse of alcohol by students and 
 employees that,'' and inserting ``an evidence-based 
 program to prevent alcohol and substance misuse by 
 students and employees that,'';
 (B) by amending paragraph (1)(C) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(C) a description of the health-risks associated 
 with the use of illicit drugs and alcohol and substance 
 misuse;'';
 (C) by amending paragraph (1)(D) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(D) a description of any alcohol or substance 
 misuse counseling, treatment, rehabilitation, recovery, 
 re-entry, or recovery support programs provided by the 
 institution (including in partnership with a community-
 based organization) that are available to employees or 
 students;''; and
 (D) in paragraph (1)(E), by striking ``that the 
 institution will impose'' and inserting ``of the 
 policies of the institution regarding'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) compliance assistance to assist institutions 
 in complying with the requirements of this section.'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (4); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Interagency agreement.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall enter into a interagency agreement with the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to--
 ``(A) determine criteria that satisfy the 
 requirement of subsection (a) that an institution of 
 higher education has adopted and has implemented an 
 evidence-based program described in such subsection;
 ``(B) establish a process for disseminating the 
 best practices for adopting and implementing such an 
 evidence-based program; and
 ``(C) establish a process that promotes 
 coordination and collaboration between institutions of 
 higher education and the respective State agencies that 
 administer the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment 
 Block Grants pursuant to subpart II of part B of title 
 XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-
 21).
 ``(3) Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary 
 shall, in coordination with the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, issue guidance with respect to the criteria described 
 in paragraph (2)(A).''; and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Drug 
 Abuse'' in the heading and inserting ``Substance 
 Misuse'';
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``other organizations'' and 
 inserting ``community-based organizations that 
 partner with institutions of higher 
 education'';
 (ii) by striking ``programs of prevention, 
 and education (including treatment-referral) to 
 reduce and eliminate the illegal use of drugs 
 and alcohol and the violence associated with 
 such use'' and inserting ``evidence-based 
 programs of alcohol and substance misuse 
 prevention and education (including programs to 
 improve access to treatment, referral for 
 treatment services, or crisis intervention 
 services) to eliminate illegal substance use, 
 decrease substance misuse, and improve public 
 health and safety''; and
 (iii) by striking ``alcohol and drug 
 abuse'' and inserting ``substance use 
 disorder'';
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (6), respectively;
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Additional uses.--In addition to the activities 
 described in paragraph (1), a grant or contract awarded under 
 paragraph (1) may be used to carry out 1 or more of the 
 following evidence-based programs or activities:
 ``(A) Providing programs for recovery support 
 services, and peer-to-peer support services and 
 counseling for students with a substance use disorder.
 ``(B) Promoting integration and collaboration in 
 campus-based health services between primary care, 
 substance use disorder services, and mental health 
 services.
 ``(C) Promoting integrated care services for 
 students related to screening, diagnosis, prevention, 
 and treatment of mental, behavioral, and substance use 
 disorders.
 ``(D) Providing re-entry assistance for students on 
 academic probation due to their substance use disorder.
 ``(E) Preventing fatal and nonfatal overdoses.
 ``(F) Providing education to students, faculty, or 
 other personnel on--
 ``(i) recognizing the signs and symptoms of 
 substance use disorder, and how to engage and 
 support a person in a crisis situation;
 ``(ii) resources available in the 
 community, within the institution of higher 
 education, and other relevant resources for 
 individuals with a substance use disorder; and
 ``(iii) safely de-escalating crisis 
 situations involving individuals with a 
 substance use disorder.''; and
 (E) by amending paragraph (6), as redesignated by 
 subparagraph (C), to read as follows:
 ``(6) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section 
 $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding 
 fiscal years.''.
 (b) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Delayed effective dates.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (a)(2) shall apply to institutions of higher 
 education on the date that is 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1015. EXCEPTION TO REQUIRED REGISTRATION WITH SELECTIVE SERVICE 
 SYSTEM.

 Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 124. EXCEPTION TO REQUIRED REGISTRATION WITH SELECTIVE SERVICE 
 SYSTEM.

 ``Notwithstanding section 12(f) of the Military Selective Service 
Act (50 U.S.C. 3811(f)), a person shall not be ineligible for 
assistance or a benefit provided under title IV if the person is 
required under section 3 of such Act (50 U.S.C. 3802) to present 
himself for and submit to registration under such section, and fails to 
do so in accordance with any proclamation, rule, or regulation issued 
under such section.''.

SEC. 1016. INTEGRITY OF NONPROFIT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

 Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 125. INTEGRITY OF NONPROFIT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

 ``(a) Determination.--The Secretary may approve the conversion of 
an institution of higher education to a nonprofit institution of higher 
education only if the Secretary determines that such institution of 
higher education meets the requirements under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Application.--To be eligible to convert and participate as a 
nonprofit institution of higher education under this Act, an 
institution of higher education shall submit an application to the 
Secretary that demonstrates each of the following:
 ``(1) That the institution of higher education that submits 
 such application is controlled, owned, and operated by one or 
 more nonprofit corporations or associations, no part of the net 
 earnings of which inures, or may lawfully inure, to the benefit 
 of any private shareholder or individual.
 ``(2) That any assets or services acquired by the 
 institution of higher education that submits such application 
 from former owners of such institution of higher education were 
 not acquired for more than the value of such assets or 
 services.
 ``(3) That no member of the governing board of the 
 institution of higher education that submits such application 
 (other than ex officio members serving at the pleasure of the 
 remainder of the governing board and receiving a fixed salary), 
 or any person with the power to appoint or remove members of 
 such governing board or any immediate family member of such a 
 member of the board or such a person with power of appointment, 
 receives any substantial direct or indirect economic benefit 
 (including a lease, promissory note, or other contract) from 
 such institution of higher education.
 ``(4) That the institution of higher education that submits 
 such application is an organization described in section 
 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and is exempt 
 from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code.
 ``(5) Subject to subsection (c), that none of the core 
 functions of the institution of higher education that submits 
 such application are under the control of, or subject to 
 significant direction from, an entity that is not a public 
 institution of higher education or other nonprofit entity.
 ``(c) Presumption of Significant Direction.--For purposes of 
paragraph (5) of subsection (b), in the case of an institution of 
higher education that submits an application under such subsection, 
there shall be a conclusive presumption that an entity (other than such 
institution of higher education) exercises significant direction over 
such institution if one or more of the employees or owners of the 
entity serves as an officer, member of the board, or person holding 
similar authority for such institution.
 ``(d) Transition Period.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of a proprietary institution 
 of higher education approved for conversion under subsection 
 (a), for a period of at least 5 years that begins on the date 
 such institution is approved for such conversion, the 
 institution shall be--
 ``(A) subject to any provision of this Act and any 
 regulation that apply to proprietary institutions of 
 higher education; and
 ``(B) considered a proprietary institution of 
 higher education for purposes of this Act.
 ``(2) Definition.--The term `proprietary institution of 
 higher education' has the meaning given the term in section 
 102(b).
 ``(e) Value.--The term `value', with respect to an acquisition 
under subsection (b)(2)--
 ``(1) includes the value of any ongoing relationship 
 (including any contract, agreement, lease or other 
 arrangement);
 ``(2) subject to paragraph (3), may be demonstrated 
 through--
 ``(A) a third-party appraisal based on comparable 
 assets acquired by, or goods or services procured by, 
 nonprofit corporations in similar market conditions;
 ``(B) an independent financing of the acquisition 
 based upon the assets acquired; or
 ``(C) a full and open competition in the 
 acquisition of services or assets, as such term is 
 defined in section 2.101(b) of title 48, Code of 
 Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this section; and
 ``(3) shall be subject to such other demonstration process 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary in a case in which the 
 Secretary does not accept a demonstration process described in 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(f) Publication.--
 ``(1) Application.--Before the Secretary may approve the 
 conversion of an institution of higher education under 
 subsection (a), the application of such institution submitted 
 to the Secretary under subsection (b) shall be published in the 
 Federal Register with an appropriate notice and comment period.
 ``(2) Determination.--The Secretary shall publish each 
 determination under this section, and the reasons for such 
 determination, under the Federal Register.
 ``(g) Public Representation and Marketing of Nonprofit Status.--An 
institution of higher education shall not promote or market itself, in 
any manner, as a nonprofit institution of higher education unless--
 ``(1) in the case of an institution of higher education 
 that seeks to convert to a nonprofit institution of higher 
 education under this section--
 ``(A) the Secretary has given final approval of the 
 conversion of the institution to a nonprofit 
 institution of higher education under this section;
 ``(B) an accrediting agency or association 
 recognized by the Secretary pursuant to section 496 has 
 approved the nonprofit status of the institution; and
 ``(C) the State has given final approval to the 
 institution as a nonprofit institution of higher 
 education, as applicable; and
 ``(2) the Commissioner of Internal Revenue has approved the 
 institution as tax exempt for purposes of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
 ``(h) Office to Monitor Nonprofit Integrity.--Not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
Secretary shall establish an office within the Department with the 
expertise necessary to carry out this section.

``SEC. 126. REVIEW OF GOVERNANCE.

 ``The Secretary shall review the governance of an institution of 
higher education when such institution has engaged in transactions or 
arrangements determined by the Secretary as potential indicators of 
private inurement, in order to promote the highest standards of 
nonprofit integrity.''.

SEC. 1017. SUPPORT AND GUIDANCE FOR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS AND FOSTER 
 CARE YOUTH.

 Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 127. SUPPORT AND GUIDANCE FOR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS AND FOSTER 
 CARE YOUTH.

 ``(a) Guidance.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary shall issue 
revised guidance for institutions of higher education and financial aid 
administrators regarding serving homeless individuals and foster care 
youth, including the requirements of the determination process for 
financial aid administrators as specified in section 480(d).
 ``(b) Professional Development.--Beginning not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
Secretary shall conduct an annual professional development or training 
program, such as a webinar, for liaisons described under section 485(k) 
and interested faculty or staff regarding postsecondary education 
services for such homeless individuals and foster care youth.
 ``(c) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
the College Affordability Act, and not less than once every 5 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report 
containing strategies used by institutions, financial aid 
administrators, and liaisons described under section 485(k) that were 
effective in meeting the needs of such homeless individuals and foster 
care youth, including strategies relating to streamlining financial aid 
policies and procedures and postsecondary education recruitment, 
retention, and completion.
 ``(d) Homeless Individual Defined.--In this section, the term 
`homeless individual' has the meaning given the term in section 
402A.''.

SEC. 1018. CALCULATION OF PERCENTAGE OF ENROLLED STUDENTS RECEIVING OR 
 ELIGIBLE FOR FEDERAL PELL GRANTS.

 Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 128. CALCULATION OF PERCENTAGE OF ENROLLED STUDENTS RECEIVING OR 
 ELIGIBLE FOR FEDERAL PELL GRANTS.

 ``Beginning on the date of enactment of the College Affordability 
Act, for purposes of calculating under this Act the percentage of 
students enrolled at an institution of higher education or in a program 
who are receiving Federal Pell Grants under section 401 or who are 
eligible to receive such grants, the total number of students who are 
counted as enrolled in such institution or program shall not include 
students who are dually or concurrently enrolled in the institution or 
program and a secondary school.''.

SEC. 1019. CERTIFICATION REGARDING THE USE OF CERTAIN FEDERAL FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1011 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 129. CERTIFICATION REGARDING THE USE OF CERTAIN FEDERAL FUNDS.

 ``(a) Prohibition.--No Federal funds received under this Act by an 
institution of higher education or other postsecondary educational 
institution may be used to pay any person for influencing or attempting 
to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of 
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a 
Member of Congress in connection with any Federal action described in 
subsection (b).
 ``(b) Applicability.--The prohibition in subsection (a) applies 
with respect to the following Federal actions:
 ``(1) The awarding of any Federal contract.
 ``(2) The making of any Federal grant.
 ``(3) The making of any Federal loan.
 ``(4) The entering into of any Federal cooperative 
 agreement.
 ``(5) The extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or 
 modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or 
 cooperative agreement.
 ``(c) Lobbying and Earmarks.--No Federal student aid funding under 
this Act may be used to hire a registered lobbyist or pay any person or 
entity for securing an earmark.
 ``(d) Certification.--Each institution of higher education or other 
postsecondary educational institution receiving Federal funding under 
this Act, as a condition for receiving such funding, shall annually 
certify to the Secretary that the requirements of subsections (a) 
through (c) have been met.
 ``(e) Actions To Implement and Enforce.--The Secretary shall take 
such actions as are necessary to ensure that the provisions of this 
section are implemented and enforced.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--
 (1) In general.--Section 119 of the Higher Education 
 Opportunity Act (20 U.S.C. 1011m) is repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections in section 
 1(b) of the Higher Education Opportunity Act is amended by 
 striking the item relating to section 119.

SEC. 1020. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION.

 Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1011 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 130. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION.

 ``(a) Non-retaliation Against Students of Single-sex Social 
Organizations.--An institution of higher education that receives funds 
under this Act shall not--
 ``(1) take any action to require or coerce a student or 
 prospective student who is a member or prospective member of a 
 single-sex social organization to waive the requirements of 
 paragraph (2), including as a condition of enrolling in the 
 institution; or
 ``(2) take any adverse action against a student who is a 
 member or a prospective member of a single-sex social 
 organization based solely on the membership practice of such 
 organization limiting membership to only individuals of one 
 sex.
 ``(b) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall--
 ``(1) require an institution of higher education to 
 officially recognize a single-sex organization;
 ``(2) prohibit an institution of higher education from 
 taking an adverse action against a student who joins a single-
 sex social organization for a reason including academic 
 misconduct or nonacademic misconduct, or because the 
 organization's purpose poses a clear harm to the students or 
 employees, so long as that adverse action is not based solely 
 on the membership practice of the organization of limiting 
 membership to only individuals of one sex; or
 ``(3) inhibit the ability of the faculty, staff, or 
 administrators of an institution of higher education to express 
 an opinion (either individually or collectively) about 
 membership in a single-sex social organization, or otherwise 
 inhibit the academic freedom of such faculty, staff, or 
 administrators to research, write, or publish material about 
 membership in such an organization.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Adverse action.--The term `adverse action' means any 
 of the following actions taken by an institution of higher 
 education with respect to a member or prospective member of a 
 single-sex social organization:
 ``(A) Expulsion, suspension, probation, censure, 
 condemnation, formal reprimand, or any other 
 disciplinary action, coercive action, or sanction taken 
 by an institution of higher education or administrative 
 unit of such institution.
 ``(B) An oral or written warning with respect to an 
 action described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) An action to deny participation in any 
 education program or activity.
 ``(D) An action to withhold, in whole or in part, 
 any financial assistance (including scholarships and on 
 campus employment), or denying the opportunity to apply 
 for financial assistance, a scholarship, a graduate 
 fellowship, or on-campus employment.
 ``(E) An action to deny or restrict access to on-
 campus housing.
 ``(F) An act to deny any certification, 
 endorsement, or letter of recommendation that may be 
 required by a student's current or future employer, a 
 government agency, a licensing board, an institution of 
 higher education, a scholarship program, or a graduate 
 fellowship to which the student seeks to apply.
 ``(G) An action to deny participation in any sports 
 team, club, or other student organization, including a 
 denial of any leadership position in any sports team, 
 club, or other student organization.
 ``(H) An action to require any student to certify 
 that such student is not a member of a single-sex 
 social organization or to disclose the student's 
 membership in a single-sex social organization.
 ``(2) Single-sex social organization.--The term `single-sex 
 social organization' means--
 ``(A) a social fraternity or sorority described in 
 section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 which is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of 
 such Code; or
 ``(B) an organization that has been historically 
 single-sex, the active membership of which consists 
 primarily of students or alumni of an institution of 
 higher education or multiple institutions of higher 
 education.''.

 PART C--COST OF HIGHER EDUCATION

SEC. 1021. CONSUMER INFORMATION.

 (a) Net Price Calculators.--
 (1) Minimum standards.--Section 132(h) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a(h)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph 
 (6);
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting before the 
 period ``, and, not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, shall meet 
 the requirements of paragraph (4)(C)'';
 (C) in paragraph (3), by inserting after the first 
 sentence the following: ``Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, 
 such calculator shall meet the requirements of 
 paragraph (4).''; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Minimum requirements for net price calculators.--Not 
 later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, a net price calculator for an institution of 
 higher education shall, at a minimum, meet the following 
 requirements:
 ``(A) The link for the calculator--
 ``(i) is clearly labeled as a `net price 
 calculator' and prominently, clearly, and 
 conspicuously (in such size and contrast (such 
 as shade) that it is readily noticeable and 
 readable) posted in locations on the 
 institution's website where information on 
 costs and aid is provided (such as financial 
 aid, prospective students, or tuition and fees 
 web pages);
 ``(ii) matches in size and font to the 
 other prominent links on the primary menu; and
 ``(iii) may also be included on the 
 institution's compliance web page, which 
 contains information relating to compliance 
 with Federal, State, and local laws.
 ``(B) The input screen for the net price calculator 
 displays a chart of the net prices for students 
 receiving Federal student financial aid under title IV 
 (as required by subsection (i)(5)) for the most recent 
 academic year for which data are available, 
 disaggregated by income categories.
 ``(C) The results screen for the calculator 
 specifies the following information:
 ``(i) The individual net price (as 
 calculated under paragraph (2)) for the 
 individual student, which is the most visually 
 prominent figure on the results screen, 
 including a statement of--
 ``(I) the year for which the net 
 price applies; and
 ``(II) the year from which the data 
 was used to determine that net price.
 ``(ii) Cost of attendance, including--
 ``(I) the total estimated cost for 
 a student to complete the program of 
 study, based on normal time for 
 completion of, or graduation from, the 
 student's particular program of study;
 ``(II) the total annual cost of 
 attendance;
 ``(III) annual tuition and fees;
 ``(IV) average annual cost of room 
 and board for the institution for a 
 first-time, full-time undergraduate 
 student enrolled in the institution;
 ``(V) average annual cost of books 
 and supplies for a first-time, full-
 time undergraduate student enrolled in 
 the institution;
 ``(VI) estimated annual cost of 
 other expenses (including personal 
 expenses and transportation) for a 
 first-time, full-time undergraduate 
 student enrolled in the institution; 
 and
 ``(VII) a statement of--
 ``(aa) the year for which 
 each cost described in this 
 clause applies; and
 ``(bb) the year from which 
 the data was used to determine 
 each cost described in this 
 clause.
 ``(iii) Estimated total need-based grant 
 aid and merit-based grant aid, from Federal, 
 State, and institutional sources, that may be 
 available to the individual student, showing 
 the subtotal for each category and the total of 
 all sources of grant aid, and disaggregated by 
 academic year for normal time for completion 
 of, or graduation from, the student's 
 particular program of study.
 ``(iv) Percentage of the first-time, full-
 time undergraduate students enrolled in the 
 institution that received any type of grant aid 
 described in clause (iii), disaggregated by 
 their first year and subsequent years of 
 enrollment up to the number of years for normal 
 completion of, or graduation from, their 
 particular program of study.
 ``(v) The disclaimer described in paragraph 
 (6).
 ``(vi) In the case of a calculator that--
 ``(I) includes questions to 
 estimate a student's (or prospective 
 student's) eligibility for veterans' 
 education benefits (as defined in 
 section 480) or educational benefits 
 for active duty service members, such 
 benefits are displayed on the results 
 screen in a manner that clearly 
 distinguishes them from the grant aid 
 described in clause (iii); or
 ``(II) does not include questions 
 to estimate eligibility for the 
 benefits described in subclause (I), 
 the results screen indicates--
 ``(aa) that certain 
 students (or prospective 
 students) may qualify for such 
 benefits;
 ``(bb) states why the 
 institution is not including 
 questions to estimate a 
 student's eligibility for such 
 benefits; and
 ``(cc) includes a link to 
 an appropriate Federal website 
 that provides information about 
 such benefits.
 ``(D) The institution populates the calculator with 
 data from not earlier than 2 academic years prior to 
 the most recent academic year.
 ``(5) Prohibition on use of data collected by the net price 
 calculator.--A net price calculator for an institution of 
 higher education shall--
 ``(A) clearly indicate which questions are required 
 to be completed for an estimate of the net price from 
 the calculator;
 ``(B) in the case of a calculator that requests 
 contact information from users, clearly mark such 
 requests as `optional';
 ``(C) prohibit any personally identifiable 
 information provided by users from being sold or made 
 available to third parties; and
 ``(D) clearly state `Any information that you 
 provide on this site is confidential. The Net Price 
 Calculator does not store your responses or require 
 personal identifying information of any kind.'.''.
 (2) Universal net price calculator.--Section 132(h) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a(h)), as amended 
 by paragraph (1), is further amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(7) Universal net price calculator.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may develop a 
 universal net price calculator that is housed within 
 the Department of Education, with Department branding, 
 and that may be based on or utilize an existing 
 platform developed by a public or private entity, 
 that--
 ``(i) enables users to answer one set of 
 questions and receive net prices for any 
 institution that is required to have a net 
 price calculator under this subsection;
 ``(ii) provides the information required 
 under subparagraphs (C) and (D) of paragraph 
 (4) for each institution for which a net price 
 is being sought;
 ``(iii) is developed in consultation with 
 the heads of relevant Federal agencies; and
 ``(iv) before being finalized and publicly 
 released, is tested in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Consumer testing.--
 ``(i) In general.--If the Secretary 
 develops a universal net price calculator under 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the heads of relevant Federal 
 agencies, shall establish a process to submit 
 the universal net price calculator developed 
 under this paragraph for consumer testing among 
 representatives of students (including low-
 income students, first generation college 
 students, adult students, and prospective 
 students), students' families (including low-
 income families, families with first generation 
 college students, and families with prospective 
 students), institutions of higher education, 
 secondary school and postsecondary counselors, 
 and nonprofit consumer groups.
 ``(ii) Length of consumer testing.--The 
 Secretary shall ensure that the consumer 
 testing lasts no longer than 6 months after the 
 process for consumer testing is developed under 
 clause (i).
 ``(iii) Use of results.--The results of 
 consumer testing under clause (i) shall be used 
 in the final development of the universal net 
 price calculator.
 ``(iv) Reporting requirement.--Not later 
 than 3 months after the date the consumer 
 testing under clause (i) concludes, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress the final 
 universal net price calculator and a report 
 detailing the results of such testing, 
 including whether the Secretary added any 
 additional items to the calculator as a result 
 of such testing.
 ``(v) Authority to modify.--The Secretary 
 may modify the definitions, terms, formatting, 
 and design of the universal net price 
 calculator based on the results of consumer 
 testing required under this paragraph and 
 before finalizing the calculator.
 ``(8) Report from secretary.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on steps taken to 
 raise awareness of net price calculators among prospective 
 students and families, particularly among students in middle 
 school and high school and students from low-income 
 families.''.
 (b) Institutional Expenditures.--Section 132(i)(1) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a(i)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (T), by striking ``rate,'' and 
 inserting ``rate and adjusted cohort default rate,''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(AA) The institution's expenditures on each of 
 the following:
 ``(i) Instruction.
 ``(ii) Student services.
 ``(iii) Marketing.
 ``(iv) Recruitment.
 ``(v) Advertising.
 ``(vi) Lobbying.''.

SEC. 1022. POSTSECONDARY STUDENT DATA SYSTEM.

 (a) Postsecondary Student Data System.--Section 132 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (l) as subsection (m); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (k) the following:
 ``(l) Postsecondary Student Data System.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Establishment of system.--The Commissioner of 
 the National Center for Education Statistics (referred 
 to in this subsection as the `Commissioner') shall 
 develop and maintain a secure, privacy-protected 
 postsecondary student-level data system in order to--
 ``(i) accurately evaluate student 
 enrollment patterns, progression, completion, 
 and postcollegiate outcomes, and higher 
 education costs and financial aid;
 ``(ii) assist with transparency, 
 institutional improvement, and analysis of 
 Federal aid programs;
 ``(iii) provide accurate, complete, and 
 customizable information for students and 
 families making decisions about postsecondary 
 education; and
 ``(iv) reduce the reporting burden on 
 institutions of higher education, in accordance 
 with section 1022(b)(2) of the College 
 Affordability Act.
 ``(B) Avoiding duplicated reporting.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, to 
 the extent that another provision of this section 
 requires the same reporting or collection of data that 
 is required under this subsection, an institution of 
 higher education, or the Secretary or Commissioner, may 
 use the reporting or data required for the 
 postsecondary student data system under this subsection 
 to satisfy both requirements.
 ``(C) Development process.--In developing the 
 postsecondary student data system described in this 
 subsection, the Commissioner shall--
 ``(i) focus on the needs of--
 ``(I) users of the data system; and
 ``(II) entities, including 
 institutions of higher education, 
 reporting to the data system;
 ``(ii) take into consideration, to the 
 extent practicable--
 ``(I) the guidelines outlined in 
 the U.S. Web Design Standards 
 maintained by the General Services 
 Administration and the Digital Services 
 Playbook and TechFAR Handbook for 
 Procuring Digital Services Using Agile 
 Processes of the U.S. Digital Service; 
 and
 ``(II) the relevant successor 
 documents or recommendations of such 
 guidelines;
 ``(iii) use modern, relevant privacy- and 
 security-enhancing technology, and enhance and 
 update the data system as necessary to carry 
 out the purpose of this subsection;
 ``(iv) ensure data privacy and security is 
 consistent with any Federal law relating to 
 privacy or data security, including--
 ``(I) the requirements of 
 subchapter II of chapter 35 of title 
 44, United States Code, specifying 
 security categorization under the 
 Federal Information Processing 
 Standards or any relevant successor of 
 such standards;
 ``(II) security requirements that 
 are consistent with the Federal agency 
 responsibilities in section 3554 of 
 title 44, United States Code, or any 
 relevant successor of such 
 responsibilities; and
 ``(III) security requirements, 
 guidelines, and controls consistent 
 with cybersecurity standards and best 
 practices developed by the National 
 Institute of Standards and Technology, 
 including frameworks, consistent with 
 section 2(c) of the National Institute 
 of Standards and Technology Act (15 
 U.S.C. 272(c)), or any relevant 
 successor of such frameworks;
 ``(v) follow Federal data minimization 
 practices to ensure only the minimum amount of 
 data is collected to meet the system's goals, 
 in accordance with Federal data minimization 
 standards and guidelines developed by the 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology; 
 and
 ``(vi) provide notice to students outlining 
 the data included in the system and how the 
 data are used.
 ``(2) Data elements.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Commissioner, in 
 consultation with the Postsecondary Student Data System 
 Advisory Committee established under subparagraph (B), 
 shall determine--
 ``(i) the data elements to be included in 
 the postsecondary student data system, in 
 accordance with subparagraphs (C) and (D); and
 ``(ii) how to include the data elements 
 required under subparagraph (C), and any 
 additional data elements selected under 
 subparagraph (D), in the postsecondary student 
 data system.
 ``(B) Postsecondary student data system advisory 
 committee.--
 ``(i) Establishment.--The Commissioner 
 shall establish a Postsecondary Student Data 
 System Advisory Committee (referred to in this 
 subsection as the `Advisory Committee'), whose 
 members shall include--
 ``(I) the Chief Privacy Officer of 
 the Department or an official of the 
 Department delegated the duties of 
 overseeing data privacy at the 
 Department;
 ``(II) the Chief Security Officer 
 of the Department or an official of the 
 Department delegated the duties of 
 overseeing data security at the 
 Department;
 ``(III) representatives of diverse 
 institutions of higher education, which 
 shall include equal representation 
 between 2-year and 4-year institutions 
 of higher education, and from public, 
 nonprofit, and proprietary institutions 
 of higher education, including 
 minority-serving institutions;
 ``(IV) representatives from State 
 higher education agencies, entities, 
 bodies, or boards;
 ``(V) representatives of 
 postsecondary students;
 ``(VI) representatives from 
 relevant Federal agencies; and
 ``(VII) other stakeholders 
 (including individuals with expertise 
 in data privacy and security, consumer 
 protection, and postsecondary education 
 research).
 ``(ii) Requirements.--The Commissioner 
 shall ensure that the Advisory Committee--
 ``(I) adheres to all requirements 
 under the Federal Advisory Committee 
 Act (5 U.S.C. App.);
 ``(II) establishes operating and 
 meeting procedures and guidelines 
 necessary to execute its advisory 
 duties; and
 ``(III) is provided with 
 appropriate staffing and resources to 
 execute its advisory duties.
 ``(C) Required data elements.--The data elements in 
 the postsecondary student data system shall include, at 
 a minimum, the following:
 ``(i) Student-level data elements necessary 
 to calculate the information within the surveys 
 designated by the Commissioner as `student-
 related surveys' in the Integrated 
 Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), as 
 such surveys are in effect on the day before 
 the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, except that in the case that 
 collection of such elements would conflict with 
 subparagraph (F), such elements in conflict 
 with subparagraph (F) shall be included in the 
 aggregate instead of at the student level.
 ``(ii) Student-level data elements 
 necessary to allow for reporting student 
 enrollment, persistence, retention, transfer, 
 and completion measures for all credential 
 levels separately (including certificate, 
 associate, baccalaureate, and advanced degree 
 levels), within and across institutions of 
 higher education (including across all 
 categories of institution level, control, and 
 predominant degree awarded). The data elements 
 shall allow for reporting about all such data 
 disaggregated by the following categories:
 ``(I) Enrollment status as a first-
 time student, recent transfer student, 
 or other non-first-time student.
 ``(II) Attendance intensity, 
 whether full-time or part-time.
 ``(III) Credential-seeking status, 
 by credential level.
 ``(IV) Race or ethnicity (in 
 accordance with section 153(a)(3)(B) of 
 the Education Sciences Reform Act (20 
 U.S.C. 9543(a)(3)(B))).
 ``(V) Age intervals.
 ``(VI) Gender.
 ``(VII) Program of study (as 
 applicable).
 ``(VIII) Military or veteran 
 benefit status (as determined based on 
 receipt of veteran's education 
 benefits, as defined in section 
 480(c)).
 ``(IX) Status as a distance 
 education student, whether exclusively 
 or partially enrolled in distance 
 education.
 ``(X) Federal Pell Grant and 
 Federal loan recipient status, provided 
 that the collection of such information 
 complies with paragraph (1)(B).
 ``(D) Other data elements.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Commissioner may, 
 after consultation with the Advisory Committee 
 and provision of a public comment period, 
 include additional data elements in the 
 postsecondary student data system, such as 
 those described in clause (ii), if those data 
 elements--
 ``(I) are necessary to ensure that 
 the postsecondary data system fulfills 
 the purposes described in paragraph 
 (1)(A); and
 ``(II) are consistent with data 
 minimization principles, including the 
 collection of only those additional 
 elements that are necessary to ensure 
 such purposes.
 ``(ii) Data elements.--The data elements 
 described in clause (i) may include--
 ``(I) status as a first generation 
 college student (as defined in section 
 402A(h));
 ``(II) economic status;
 ``(III) participation in 
 postsecondary remedial coursework or 
 gateway course completion; or
 ``(IV) other data elements that are 
 necessary in accordance with clause 
 (i).
 ``(E) Reevaluation.--Not less than once every 3 
 years after the implementation of the postsecondary 
 student data system described in this subsection, the 
 Commissioner, in consultation with the Advisory 
 Committee described in subparagraph (B), shall review 
 the data elements included in the postsecondary student 
 data system and may revise the data elements to be 
 included in such system.
 ``(F) Prohibitions.--The Commissioner shall not 
 include individual health data (including data relating 
 to physical health or mental health), student 
 discipline records or data, elementary and secondary 
 education data, an exact address, citizenship status, 
 migrant status, or national origin status for students 
 or their families, course grades, postsecondary 
 entrance examination results, political affiliation, or 
 religion in the postsecondary student data system under 
 this subsection.
 ``(3) Periodic matching with other federal data systems.--
 ``(A) Data sharing agreements.--
 ``(i) The Commissioner shall ensure secure, 
 periodic data matches by entering into data 
 sharing agreements with each of the following 
 Federal agencies and offices:
 ``(I) The Secretary of the Treasury 
 and the Commissioner of the Internal 
 Revenue Service, in order to calculate 
 aggregate program- and institution-
 level earnings of postsecondary 
 students.
 ``(II) The Secretary of Defense, in 
 order to assess the use of 
 postsecondary educational benefits and 
 the outcomes of servicemembers.
 ``(III) The Secretary of Veterans 
 Affairs, in order to assess the use of 
 postsecondary educational benefits and 
 outcomes of veterans.
 ``(IV) The Director of the Bureau 
 of the Census, in order to assess the 
 occupational and earnings outcomes of 
 former postsecondary education 
 students.
 ``(V) The Chief Operating Officer 
 of the Office of Federal Student Aid, 
 in order to analyze the use of 
 postsecondary educational benefits 
 provided under this Act.
 ``(ii) The heads of Federal agencies and 
 offices described under clause (i) shall enter 
 into data sharing agreements with the 
 Commissioner to ensure secure, periodic data 
 matches as described in this paragraph.
 ``(B) Categories of data.--The Commissioner shall, 
 at a minimum, seek to ensure that the secure periodic 
 data system matches described in subparagraph (A) 
 permit consistent reporting of the following categories 
 of data for all postsecondary students:
 ``(i) Enrollment, retention, transfer, and 
 completion outcomes for all postsecondary 
 students.
 ``(ii) Financial indicators for 
 postsecondary students receiving Federal grants 
 and loans, including grant and loan aid by 
 source, cumulative student debt, loan repayment 
 status, and repayment plan.
 ``(iii) Post-completion outcomes for all 
 postsecondary students, including earnings, 
 employment, and further education, by program 
 of study and credential level and as measured--
 ``(I) immediately after leaving 
 postsecondary education; and
 ``(II) at time intervals 
 appropriate to the credential sought 
 and earned.
 ``(C) Periodic data match streamlining and 
 confidentiality.--
 ``(i) Streamlining.--In carrying out the 
 secure periodic data system matches under this 
 paragraph, the Commissioner shall--
 ``(I) ensure that such matches are 
 not continuous, but occur at 
 appropriate intervals, as determined by 
 the Commissioner; and
 ``(II) seek to--
 ``(aa) streamline the data 
 collection and reporting 
 requirements for institutions 
 of higher education;
 ``(bb) minimize duplicative 
 reporting across or within 
 Federal agencies or 
 departments, including 
 reporting requirements 
 applicable to institutions of 
 higher education under the 
 Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3101 
 et seq.) and the Carl D. 
 Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act of 2006;
 ``(cc) protect student 
 privacy; and
 ``(dd) streamline the 
 application process for student 
 loan benefit programs available 
 to borrowers based on data 
 available from different 
 Federal data systems.
 ``(ii) Review.--Not less often than once 
 every 3 years after the establishment of the 
 postsecondary student data system under this 
 subsection, the Commissioner, in consultation 
 with the Advisory Committee, shall review 
 methods for streamlining data collection from 
 institutions of higher education and minimizing 
 duplicative reporting within the Department and 
 across Federal agencies that provide data for 
 the postsecondary student data system.
 ``(iii) Confidentiality.--The Commissioner 
 shall ensure that any periodic matching or 
 sharing of data through periodic data system 
 matches established in accordance with this 
 paragraph--
 ``(I) complies with the security 
 and privacy protections described in 
 paragraph (1)(C)(iv) and other Federal 
 data protection protocols;
 ``(II) follows industry best 
 practices commensurate with the 
 sensitivity of specific data elements 
 or metrics;
 ``(III) does not result in the 
 creation of a single standing, linked 
 Federal database at the Department that 
 maintains the information reported 
 across other Federal agencies; and
 ``(IV) discloses to postsecondary 
 students what data are included in the 
 data system and periodically matched 
 and how the data are used.
 ``(iv) Correction.--The Commissioner, in 
 consultation with the Advisory Committee, shall 
 establish a process for students to request 
 access to only their personal information for 
 inspection and request corrections to 
 inaccuracies in a manner that protects the 
 student's personally identifiable information. 
 The Commissioner shall respond in writing to 
 every request for a correction from a student.
 ``(4) Publicly available information.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Commissioner shall make the 
 summary aggregate information described in subparagraph 
 (C), at a minimum, publicly available through a user-
 friendly consumer information website and analytic tool 
 that--
 ``(i) provides appropriate mechanisms for 
 users to customize and filter information by 
 institutional and student characteristics;
 ``(ii) allows users to build summary 
 aggregate reports of information, including 
 reports that allow comparisons across multiple 
 institutions and programs, subject to 
 subparagraph (B);
 ``(iii) uses appropriate statistical 
 disclosure limitation techniques necessary to 
 ensure that the data released to the public 
 cannot be used to identify specific 
 individuals; and
 ``(iv) provides users with appropriate 
 contextual factors to make comparisons, which 
 may include national median figures of the 
 summary aggregate information described in 
 subparagraph (C).
 ``(B) No personally identifiable information 
 available.--The summary aggregate information described 
 in this paragraph shall not include personally 
 identifiable information.
 ``(C) Summary aggregate information available.--The 
 summary aggregate information described in this 
 paragraph shall, at a minimum, include each of the 
 following for each institution of higher education:
 ``(i) Measures of student access, 
 including--
 ``(I) admissions selectivity and 
 yield; and
 ``(II) enrollment, disaggregated by 
 each category described in paragraph 
 (2)(C)(ii).
 ``(ii) Measures of student progression, 
 including retention rates and persistence 
 rates, disaggregated by each category described 
 in paragraph (2)(C)(ii).
 ``(iii) Measures of student completion, 
 including--
 ``(I) transfer rates and completion 
 rates, disaggregated by each category 
 described in paragraph (2)(C)(ii); and
 ``(II) number of completions, 
 disaggregated by each category 
 described in paragraph (2)(C)(ii).
 ``(iv) Measures of student costs, 
 including--
 ``(I) tuition, required fees, total 
 cost of attendance, and net price after 
 total grant aid, disaggregated by in-
 State tuition or in-district tuition 
 status (if applicable), program of 
 study (if applicable), and credential 
 level; and
 ``(II) typical grant amounts and 
 loan amounts received by students 
 reported separately from Federal, 
 State, local, and institutional 
 sources, and cumulative debt, 
 disaggregated by each category 
 described in paragraph (2)(C)(ii) and 
 completion status.
 ``(v) Measures of postcollegiate student 
 outcomes, including employment rates, mean and 
 median earnings, loan repayment and default 
 rates, and further education rates. These 
 measures shall--
 ``(I) be disaggregated by each 
 category described in paragraph 
 (2)(C)(ii) and completion status; and
 ``(II) be measured immediately 
 after leaving postsecondary education 
 and at time intervals appropriate to 
 the credential sought or earned.
 ``(D) Development criteria.--In developing the 
 method and format of making the information described 
 in this paragraph publicly available, the Commissioner 
 shall--
 ``(i) focus on the needs of the users of 
 the information, which will include students, 
 families of students, potential students, 
 researchers, and other consumers of education 
 data;
 ``(ii) take into consideration, to the 
 extent practicable, the guidelines described in 
 paragraph (1)(C)(ii)(I), and relevant successor 
 documents or recommendations of such 
 guidelines;
 ``(iii) use modern, relevant technology and 
 enhance and update the postsecondary student 
 data system with information, as necessary to 
 carry out the purpose of this paragraph;
 ``(iv) ensure data privacy and security in 
 accordance with standards and guidelines 
 developed by the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology, and in accordance 
 with any other Federal law relating to privacy 
 or security, including complying with the 
 requirements of subchapter II of chapter 35 of 
 title 44, United States Code, specifying 
 security categorization under the Federal 
 Information Processing Standards, and security 
 requirements, and setting of National Institute 
 of Standards and Technology security baseline 
 controls at the appropriate level; and
 ``(v) conduct consumer testing to determine 
 how to make the information as meaningful to 
 users as possible.
 ``(5) Permissible disclosures of data.--
 ``(A) Data reports and queries.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Commissioner shall 
 develop and implement a secure process for 
 making student-level, non-personally 
 identifiable information, with direct 
 identifiers removed, from the postsecondary 
 student data system available for vetted 
 research and evaluation purposes approved by 
 the Commissioner in a manner compatible with 
 practices for disclosing National Center for 
 Education Statistics restricted-use survey data 
 as in effect on the day before the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, or 
 by applying other research and disclosure 
 restrictions to ensure data privacy and 
 security. Such process shall be approved by the 
 National Center for Education Statistics' 
 Disclosure Review Board (or successor body).
 ``(ii) Providing data reports and queries 
 to institutions and states.--
 ``(I) In general.--The Commissioner 
 shall provide feedback reports, at 
 least annually, to each institution of 
 higher education, each postsecondary 
 education system that fully 
 participates in the postsecondary 
 student data system, and each State 
 higher education body as designated by 
 the governor.
 ``(II) Feedback reports.--The 
 feedback reports provided under this 
 clause shall include program-level and 
 institution-level information from the 
 postsecondary student data system 
 regarding students who are associated 
 with the institution or, for State 
 representatives, the institutions 
 within that State, on or before the 
 date of the report, on measures 
 including student mobility and 
 workforce outcomes, provided that the 
 feedback aggregate summary reports 
 protect the privacy of individuals.
 ``(III) Determination of content.--
 The content of the feedback reports 
 shall be determined by the 
 Commissioner, in consultation with the 
 Advisory Committee.
 ``(iii) Permitting state data queries.--The 
 Commissioner shall, in consultation with the 
 Advisory Committee and as soon as practicable, 
 create a process through which States may 
 submit lists of secondary school graduates 
 within the State to receive summary aggregate 
 outcomes for those students who enrolled at an 
 institution of higher education, including 
 postsecondary enrollment and college 
 completion, provided that those data protect 
 the privacy of individuals and that the State 
 data submitted to the Commissioner are not 
 stored in the postsecondary education system.
 ``(iv) Regulations.--The Commissioner shall 
 promulgate regulations to ensure fair, secure, 
 and equitable access to data reports and 
 queries under this paragraph.
 ``(B) Disclosure limitations.--In carrying out the 
 public reporting and disclosure requirements of this 
 subsection, the Commissioner shall use appropriate 
 statistical disclosure limitation techniques necessary 
 to ensure that the data released to the public cannot 
 include personally identifiable information or be used 
 to identify specific individuals.
 ``(C) Sale of data prohibited.--Data collected 
 under this subsection, including the public-use data 
 set and data comprising the summary aggregate 
 information available under paragraph (4), shall not be 
 sold to any third party by the Commissioner, including 
 any institution of higher education or any other 
 entity.
 ``(D) Limitation on use by other federal 
 agencies.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Commissioner shall 
 not allow any other Federal agency to use data 
 collected under this subsection for any purpose 
 except--
 ``(I) for vetted research and 
 evaluation conducted by the other 
 Federal agency, as described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i); or
 ``(II) for a purpose explicitly 
 authorized by this subsection.
 ``(ii) Prohibition on limitation of 
 services.--The Secretary, or the head of any 
 other Federal agency, shall not use data 
 collected under this subsection to limit 
 services to students.
 ``(E) Law enforcement.--Personally identifiable 
 information collected under this subsection shall not 
 be used for any Federal, State, or local law 
 enforcement activity or any other activity that would 
 result in adverse action against any student or a 
 student's family, including debt collection activity or 
 enforcement of immigration laws.
 ``(F) Limitation of use for federal rankings or 
 summative rating system.--The comprehensive data 
 collection and analysis necessary for the postsecondary 
 student data system under this subsection shall not be 
 used by the Secretary or any Federal entity to 
 establish any Federal ranking system of institutions of 
 higher education or a system that results in a 
 summative Federal rating of institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(G) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall be construed to prevent the use of 
 individual categories of aggregate information to be 
 used for accountability purposes.
 ``(H) Rule of construction regarding commercial use 
 of data.--Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed 
 to prohibit third-party entities from using publicly-
 available information in this data system for 
 commercial use.
 ``(6) Submission of data.--
 ``(A) Required submission.--Each institution of 
 higher education participating in a program under title 
 IV, or the assigned agent of such institution, shall, 
 in accordance with section 487(a)(17), collect, and 
 submit to the Commissioner, the data requested by the 
 Commissioner to carry out this subsection.
 ``(B) Voluntary submission.--Any postsecondary 
 institution not participating in a program under title 
 IV may voluntarily participate in the postsecondary 
 student data system under this subsection by collecting 
 and submitting data to the Commissioner, as the 
 Commissioner may request to carry out this subsection.
 ``(C) Personally identifiable information.--In 
 accordance with paragraph (2)(C)(i), if the submission 
 of an element of student-level data is prohibited under 
 paragraph (2)(F) (or otherwise prohibited by law), the 
 institution of higher education shall submit that data 
 to the Commissioner in the aggregate.
 ``(7) Unlawful willful disclosure.--
 ``(A) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 person who obtains or has access to personally 
 identifiable information in connection with the 
 postsecondary student data system described in this 
 subsection to willfully disclose to any person (except 
 as authorized by Federal law) such personally 
 identifiable information.
 ``(B) Penalty.--Any person who violates 
 subparagraph (A) shall be subject to a penalty 
 described under section 3572(f) of title 44, United 
 States Code and section 183(d)(6) of the Education 
 Sciences Reform Act of 2002 (20 U.S.C. 9573(d)(6)).
 ``(C) Employee of officer of the united states.--If 
 a violation of subparagraph (A) is committed by any 
 officer or employee of the United States, the officer 
 or employee shall be dismissed from office or 
 discharged from employment upon conviction for the 
 violation.
 ``(8) Data security.--The Commissioner shall produce and 
 update as needed guidance and regulations relating to privacy, 
 security, and access which shall govern the use and disclosure 
 of data collected in connection with the activities authorized 
 in this subsection. The guidance and regulations developed and 
 reviewed shall protect data from unauthorized access, use, and 
 disclosure, and shall include--
 ``(A) an audit capability, including mandatory and 
 regularly conducted audits;
 ``(B) access controls;
 ``(C) requirements to ensure sufficient data 
 security, quality, validity, and reliability;
 ``(D) student confidentiality protection in 
 accordance with the Confidential Information Protection 
 and Statistical Efficiency Act;
 ``(E) appropriate and applicable privacy and 
 security protection, including data retention and 
 destruction protocols and data minimization, in 
 accordance with the most recent Federal standards 
 developed by the National Institute of Standards and 
 Technology; and
 ``(F) protocols for managing a breach, including 
 breach notifications, in accordance with the standards 
 of National Center for Education Statistics.
 ``(9) Data collection.--The Commissioner shall ensure that 
 data collection, maintenance, and use under this subsection 
 complies with section 552a of title 5, United States Code.
 ``(10) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 102.
 ``(B) Personally identifiable information.--The 
 term `personally identifiable information' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 444 of the General 
 Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g).''.
 (b) Effective Date; Transition Provisions.--
 (1) Effective date.--This section, and the amendments made 
 by this section, shall take effect on the date that is 4 years 
 after the date of enactment of this section.
 (2) In general.--The Secretary of Education and the 
 Commissioner for Education Statistics shall take such steps as 
 are necessary to ensure that the transition to, and 
 implementation of, the postsecondary student data system 
 required under section 132(l) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965, as added by this section, is carried out in a manner that 
 reduces the reporting burden for entities that reported into 
 the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).

SEC. 1023. AVOIDING DUPLICATIVE REPORTING.

 Section 132 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a), 
as amended by section 1022, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(n) Avoiding Duplicative Reporting.--If the Secretary determines 
that the same reporting or collection of data that is required under 
subsection (l) is required by another reporting or collection of data 
requirement under this Act (other than under subsection (l)), the 
Secretary may--
 ``(1) use the data reported or collected under subsection 
 (l); and
 ``(2) waive the other reporting or collection of data 
 requirement.''.

SEC. 1024. DISCLOSURE OF NON-INSTRUCTIONAL SPENDING INCREASES.

 Section 132 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 9 U.S.C. 
1015a), as amended by sections 1022 and 1023, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(o) Non-instructional Spending Increases.--The Secretary shall 
ensure, as part of the data collection and reporting under this 
section, that institutions of higher education with respect to which 
the amount expended by the institution for non-instructional spending 
increases by more than 5 percent (using year-over-year data) disclose 
such increase to students and prospective students, along with an 
analysis of the expected impact on tuition.''.

SEC. 1025. TEXTBOOK INFORMATION.

 Section 133 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015b) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``, including through 
 the adoption of innovative tools,'' after ``supplemental 
 materials'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(9)--
 (A) by striking ``to accompany a'' and inserting 
 ``to accompany or support a'' in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A); and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``materials, 
 computer disks, website access'' and inserting 
 ``materials, online and digital learning platforms and 
 materials, website access'';
 (3) in subsection (c)(1)(D)(i), by striking ``paperback and 
 unbound'' and inserting ``paperback, digital, and unbound''; 
 and
 (4) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``accessing 
 lower-cost digital course materials and digital 
 textbooks,'' after ``programs for''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``, such as 
 inclusive access programs, subscription models, or 
 digital content distribution platforms'' after 
 ``delivery programs''.

SEC. 1026. REPEALS.

 Sections 134 and 136 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1015c) are repealed.

SEC. 1027. IN-STATE TUITION RATES FOR HOMELESS YOUTH AND FOSTER CARE 
 YOUTH.

 Section 135 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015d) 
is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by inserting ``, homeless 
 youth, and foster care youth'' after ``children'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``(a) Requirement.--In the case'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Requirement.--
 ``(1) Armed forces.--In the case''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Homeless youth and foster care youth.--In the case of 
 a homeless youth or a foster care youth, such State shall not 
 charge such individual tuition for attendance at a public 
 institution of higher education in the State at a rate that is 
 greater than the rate charged for residents of the State.''; 
 and
 (3) by striking subsections (c) and (d) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(c) Effective Date.--
 ``(1) Armed forces.--With respect to an individual 
 described in subsection (a)(1), this section shall remain in 
 effect as it was in effect on the day before the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act.
 ``(2) Homeless youth and foster care youth.--With respect 
 to an individual described in subsection (a)(2), this section 
 shall take effect at each public institution of higher 
 education in a State that receives assistance under this Act 
 for the first period of enrollment at such institution that 
 begins during the first full award year following the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Armed forces.--The terms `armed forces' and `active 
 duty for a period of more than 30 days' have the meanings given 
 those terms in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.
 ``(2) Homeless youth.--The term `homeless youth' has the 
 meaning given the term `homeless children and youths' in 
 section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11434a).''.

 PART D--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR DELIVERY OF STUDENT FINANCIAL 
 ASSISTANCE

SEC. 1031. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE FEDERAL STUDENT AID OFFICE.

 Section 141 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1018) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by amending paragraph (2) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) Purposes.--The purposes of the PBO are as follows:
 ``(A) To prioritize students and borrowers in the 
 decision-making processes related to all aspects of the 
 management and administration of the Federal student 
 financial assistance programs authorized under title 
 IV.
 ``(B) To improve service to students and other 
 participants in the Federal student financial 
 assistance programs authorized under title IV.
 ``(C) To make such programs more understandable to 
 students and their families.
 ``(D) To increase the efficiency and effectiveness 
 of such programs for students and their families.
 ``(E) To manage the costs of administering such 
 programs.
 ``(F) To increase the accountability of the 
 officials responsible for administering the operational 
 aspects of such programs.
 ``(G) To oversee institutions, contractors, and 
 third party servicers that participate in the Federal 
 student financial assistance programs authorized under 
 title IV.
 ``(H) To provide greater flexibility in the 
 management and administration of such programs.
 ``(I) To implement open, common, integrated systems 
 for the delivery of Federal student financial 
 assistance programs authorized under title IV.
 ``(J) To develop and maintain a student financial 
 assistance system that contains complete, accurate, and 
 timely data to ensure program integrity.
 ``(K) To increase transparency in the operations 
 and outcomes of Federal student financial assistance 
 programs authorized under title IV.'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and 
 (C) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; 
 and
 (ii) by inserting after subparagraph (A) 
 the following:
 ``(B) implement oversight and accountability 
 measures to ensure that the PBO carries out its duties 
 under this section efficiently, effectively, and in a 
 manner that accomplishes the purposes specified in 
 subsection (a)(2);'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by redesignating clauses (ii) 
 through (vi) as clauses (iii) through 
 (vii);
 (II) by inserting after clause (i) 
 the following:
 ``(ii) in accordance with paragraph (3), 
 the collection, publication, and sharing of 
 aggregate and longitudinal data that may be 
 used to evaluate Federal student financial 
 assistance programs authorized under title IV, 
 including the outcomes such programs 
 achieve;''; and
 (III) in clause (vii), as so 
 redesignated, by inserting ``, 
 including oversight of institutions, 
 contractors, and third party servicers 
 that participate in such programs'' 
 after ``title IV''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Taking action to prevent and address the 
 improper use of access devices, as described in section 
 485B(d)(7), including by--
 ``(i) detecting common patterns of improper 
 use of any system that processes payments on 
 Federal Direct Loans or other Department 
 information technology systems;
 ``(ii) maintaining a reporting system for 
 contractors involved in the processing of 
 payments on Federal Direct Loans in order to 
 allow those contractors to alert the Secretary 
 of potentially improper use of Department 
 information technology systems;
 ``(iii) proactively contacting Federal 
 student loan borrowers whose Federal student 
 loan accounts demonstrate a likelihood of 
 improper use in order to warn those borrowers 
 of suspicious activity or potential fraud 
 regarding their Federal student loan accounts; 
 and
 ``(iv) providing clear and simple 
 disclosures in communications with borrowers 
 who are applying for or requesting assistance 
 with Federal Direct Loan programs (including 
 assistance or applications regarding income-
 driven repayment, forbearance, deferment, 
 consolidation, rehabilitation, cancellation, 
 and forgiveness) to ensure that borrowers are 
 aware that the Department will never require 
 borrowers to pay for such assistance or 
 applications.'';
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as 
 paragraphs (4) through (7), respectively; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) Collection, sharing, and publication of data.--
 ``(A) Collection.--The PBO shall collect student-
 level data that shall be used to evaluate Federal 
 student financial assistance programs authorized under 
 title IV.
 ``(B) Sharing with nces.--The PBO shall make the 
 data collected under subparagraph (A) available to the 
 Commissioner of the National Center for Education 
 Statistics for purposes of research and policy 
 analysis.
 ``(C) Research.--The Commissioner of the National 
 Center for Education Statistics shall ensure the data 
 shared under subparagraph (B) is made available, with 
 direct identifiers removed and with appropriate 
 restrictions to ensure data privacy and security, for 
 vetted research and evaluation purposes in a manner 
 consistent with the process under section 
 132(l)(5)(A)(i).
 ``(D) Publication.--Not less frequently than once 
 annually, the PBO shall--
 ``(i) aggregate the data collected under 
 subparagraph (A) in a manner that excludes--
 ``(I) student-level data; or
 ``(II) any data that would reveal 
 personally identifiable information 
 about an individual student; and
 ``(ii) make available such aggregated data 
 on a publicly accessible website of the 
 Department in a format that enables members of 
 the public to easily retrieve, sort, and 
 analyze the data.''.
 (3) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 ``(c) Performance Plan, Report, and Briefing.--
 ``(1) Performance plan.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than one year after 
 the date of the enactment of the College Affordability 
 Act, and not less than once every five years 
 thereafter, the Secretary and Chief Operating Officer 
 shall agree on a performance plan for the PBO for the 
 succeeding 5 years that--
 ``(i) establishes measurable quantitative 
 and qualitative goals and objectives for the 
 organization; and
 ``(ii) aligns such goals and objectives 
 with the purposes specified in subsection 
 (a)(2).
 ``(B) Consultation.--In developing the five-year 
 performance plan and any revision to the plan, the 
 Secretary and the Chief Operating Officer shall consult 
 with students, institutions, Congress, contractors, the 
 Borrower Advocate, student aid experts, including 
 consumer advocacy and research groups, the Director of 
 the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, State 
 attorneys general, and other relevant parties.
 ``(C) Revisions.--The Secretary and Chief Operating 
 Officer may annually update the plan under paragraph 
 (1) to incorporate the recommendations made pursuant to 
 the consultation required under subparagraph (B) that 
 are accepted by the Secretary and the Chief Operating 
 Officer.
 ``(D) Areas.--The plan developed under subparagraph 
 (A) shall address the responsibilities of the PBO in 
 the following areas:
 ``(i) Improving service to students and 
 other participants in the Federal student 
 financial assistance programs authorized under 
 title IV, including making those programs more 
 understandable and accessible to students and 
 their families.
 ``(ii) Managing the costs and increasing 
 the efficiency of such programs.
 ``(iii) Improving, integrating, and 
 investing in the systems that support such 
 programs.
 ``(iv) Developing open, common, and 
 integrated systems for such programs.
 ``(v) The collection, publication, and 
 sharing of data on such programs as described 
 in subsection (b)(3).
 ``(vi) Improving performance standards and 
 outcomes with respect to institutions, 
 contractors, and third party servicers that act 
 as agents of the Department or as agents of 
 institutions that participate in such programs.
 ``(vii) Any other areas identified by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(E) Public availability.--Each plan developed 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be made available on a 
 publicly accessible website of the Department of 
 Education.
 ``(2) Annual report.--
 ``(A) Report required.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act and annually thereafter, the 
 Secretary, acting through the Chief Operating Officer, 
 shall submit to Congress an annual report on the 
 performance of the PBO.
 ``(B) Contents.--The annual report shall include 
 the following:
 ``(i) An evaluation of the extent to which 
 the PBO met the goals and objectives contained 
 in the five-year performance plan described in 
 paragraph (1) for the preceding year.
 ``(ii) A summary of the consultation 
 process under paragraph (1)(B) for the 
 preceding year, including the recommendations 
 that were accepted or denied by the Chief 
 Operating Officer during such year, and the 
 rationale for accepting or denying such 
 recommendations.
 ``(iii) An independent financial audit of 
 the expenditures of both the PBO and the 
 programs administered by the PBO.
 ``(iv) A summary of the actions taken by 
 the PBO to address--
 ``(I) the findings of the audit 
 described in clause (iii); and
 ``(II) consumer feedback.
 ``(v) Financial and performance 
 requirements applicable to the PBO under--
 ``(I) the Chief Financial Officers 
 Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-576); or
 ``(II) the Government Performance 
 and Results Act of 1993 (Public Law 
 103-62).
 ``(vi) The results achieved by the PBO 
 during the preceding year and whether such 
 results met the goals specified in the 
 performance plan under paragraph (1).
 ``(vii) With respect to the preceding year, 
 the evaluation rating of the performance of the 
 Chief Operating Officer and senior managers 
 under subsections (d)(5) and (e)(2), including 
 the amounts of bonus compensation awarded to 
 the Chief Operating Officer and senior 
 managers.
 ``(viii) Recommendations for legislative 
 and regulatory changes to improve service to 
 students and their families, and to improve the 
 efficiency and integrity of Federal student 
 financial assistance programs authorized under 
 title IV.
 ``(ix) Financial statements that provide a 
 rationale for appropriately funding the 
 activities of the PBO.
 ``(x) A summary of the management and 
 compliance of contractors managed by the PBO in 
 the preceding year, including corrective 
 actions taken by the PBO with respect to such 
 contractors.
 ``(xi) A description of how the PBO used 
 the authority under paragraph (5) of subsection 
 (b) for making personnel and procurement 
 decisions in the preceding year, including the 
 number of individuals hired through such 
 authority and the bonuses provided to staff 
 during such year.
 ``(xii) A summary of the oversight 
 activities of institutions, contractors, and 
 third party servicers that participate in the 
 Federal student financial assistance programs 
 authorized under title IV including--
 ``(I) fines levied on such 
 institutions, contractors, and third 
 party servicers, disaggregated by 
 entity;
 ``(II) instances of fraud or 
 misrepresentation by such institutions, 
 contractors, or third party servicers; 
 and
 ``(III) violations of provisions in 
 this Act by such institutions, 
 contractors, or third party servicers 
 disaggregated by entity and type of 
 violation.
 ``(xiii) A summary of any improvements made 
 with respect to transparency and any new types 
 of data made available in the preceding year.
 ``(xiv) A description of the progress made 
 in the preceding year towards the specific 
 measurable organization and individual goals 
 specified in subsection (d)(5)(A).
 ``(xv) The report submitted to the 
 Secretary under subsection (f)(7).
 ``(xvi) Other such information as the 
 Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
 shall prescribe for performance based 
 organizations.
 ``(3) Consultation with stakeholders.--The Chief Operating 
 Officer, in preparing the annual report described in paragraph 
 (2), shall establish appropriate means to consult with 
 students, borrowers, institutions, student aid experts, 
 including consumer advocacy and research groups, the Director 
 of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, and others 
 involved in the delivery and evaluation of student aid under 
 title IV--
 ``(A) regarding the degree of satisfaction with the 
 delivery system; and
 ``(B) to seek suggestions on means to improve the 
 performance of the delivery system.
 ``(4) Briefing on enforcement of program integrity.--The 
 Secretary shall, at the request of the authorizing committees, 
 provide to the authorizing committees a briefing on the steps 
 the Department of Education has taken to ensure--
 ``(A) the experiences of students and borrowers are 
 accounted for in decision making; and
 ``(B) that contractors, lenders, and guaranty 
 agencies and third party servicers are adhering to the 
 requirements of title IV, the terms of any contract 
 with the Secretary, consumer protection laws, Federal 
 regulations and guidelines, and directives of the PBO.
 ``(5) Coordination with the director of the bureau of 
 consumer financial protection.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with 
 the Private Education Loan Ombudsman in accordance with section 
 1035(c)(2) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
 Protection Act (12 U.S.C. 5535(c)(2)).''.
 (4) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``management 
 ability'' and all that follows through the period at 
 the end and inserting ``management ability, including 
 contractor management, expertise in the Federal student 
 financial assistance programs authorized under title 
 IV, experience with financial systems, and knowledge of 
 consumer financial protection laws, and without regard 
 to political affiliation or activity.'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (6);
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Restrictions.--
 ``(A) Preservice and in-service restrictions.--An 
 individual may not serve as the Chief Operating Officer 
 if such individual--
 ``(i) is employed by, or has a financial 
 interest in, an entity that contracts with the 
 PBO; or
 ``(ii) was employed by, or had a financial 
 interest in, any such entity in any of the five 
 years preceding the date of the individual's 
 appointment as the Chief Operating Officer.
 ``(B) Postservice restrictions.--An individual who 
 served as the Chief Operating Officer may not accept 
 employment with an entity that contracts with the PBO 
 until a period of five years has elapsed following the 
 date on which such individual's service as the Chief 
 Operating Officer terminated.'';
 (D) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting ``specific'' 
 before ``measurable''; and
 (II) by inserting ``and metrics 
 used to measure progress toward such 
 goals'' before the period; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``on 
 the website of the Department'' before the 
 period;
 (E) in paragraph (6), as so redesignated, by 
 amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 ``(B) Bonus authorized.--The Secretary may pay to 
 the Chief Operating Officer a bonus in an amount that 
 does not exceed 50 percent of such annual rate of basic 
 pay. The decision to pay such a bonus, and the amount 
 of the bonus, shall be based solely on the Secretary's 
 evaluation of the performance of the Chief Operating 
 Officer with respect to the goals set forth in the 
 performance agreement as described in paragraph 
 (5)(A).'';
 (5) in subsection (e)(2), by striking ``measurable 
 organization and individual goals'' and inserting ``specific, 
 measurable organization and individual goals and the metrics 
 used to measure progress toward such goals. Performance 
 agreements for senior management responsible for procurement 
 shall include metrics that measure ability to oversee 
 contractors'';
 (6) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
 ``(f) Borrower Advocate.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is established in the PBO an 
 `Office of the Borrower Advocate' (referred to in this 
 subsection as the `Office'). The function of the Office shall 
 be to provide timely assistance to borrowers of loans made, 
 insured, or guaranteed under title IV by performing the duties 
 described in paragraph (6).
 ``(2) Head of office.--There shall be an official known as 
 the `Borrower Advocate' who shall serve as the head of the 
 Office. The Borrower Advocate shall be appointed by the 
 Secretary from among individuals who have worked closely with 
 the Federal student loan programs authorized under title IV.
 ``(3) Removal.--The Borrower Advocate may be removed only 
 by the Secretary who shall communicate the reasons for any such 
 removal to the authorizing committees.
 ``(4) Restrictions.--
 ``(A) Preservice and in-service restrictions.--An 
 individual may not serve as the Borrower Advocate if 
 such individual--
 ``(i) is employed by, or has a financial 
 interest in, an entity that contracts with the 
 PBO; or
 ``(ii) was employed by, or had a financial 
 interest in, any such entity in any of the five 
 years preceding the date of the individual's 
 appointment as the Borrower Advocate.
 ``(B) Postservice restrictions.--An individual who 
 served as the Borrower Advocate may not accept 
 employment with an entity that contracts with the PBO 
 until a period of five years has elapsed following the 
 date on which such individual's service as the Borrower 
 Advocate terminated.
 ``(5) Staff.--The Office shall be staffed sufficiently to 
 carry out the responsibilities of the Office under this 
 subsection.
 ``(6) Duties of the borrower advocate.--The Office of the 
 Borrower Advocate shall--
 ``(A) assist borrowers of loans made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under title IV in resolving problems with 
 the PBO and its contractors or other agents, including 
 by--
 ``(i) receiving and reviewing complaints of 
 such problems from borrowers;
 ``(ii) working to resolve such complaints 
 in a manner that is in the best interests of 
 borrowers; and
 ``(iii) transmitting such complaints to 
 States and recognized accrediting agencies or 
 associations, as appropriate.
 ``(B) attempt to resolve complaints within the 
 Department of Education and with institutions of higher 
 education, lenders, guaranty agencies, loan servicers, 
 and other participants in the Federal student loan 
 programs authorized under title IV in a manner that 
 will improve the experience of the borrower;
 ``(C) conduct impartial reviews regarding a 
 student's independence under subparagraph (B) or (H) of 
 section 480(d)(1), in consultation with knowledgeable 
 parties, including institutions of higher education, 
 child welfare agencies, local educational agency 
 liaisons for homeless individuals designated under 
 section 722(g)(1)(J)(ii) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11432(g)(1)(J)(ii)), or State 
 Coordinators for Education of Homeless Children and 
 Youth established in accordance with section 722 of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 11432);
 ``(D) compile and analyze data on borrower 
 complaints and share such data with the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection;
 ``(E) publish, with any personally identifiable 
 information redacted, such complaints and responses of 
 the Secretary to such complaints on the website of the 
 Department; and
 ``(F) make appropriate recommendations to Congress, 
 the Chief Operating Officer, and Secretary with respect 
 to Federal student loan programs authorized under title 
 IV and the experiences of borrowers in repayment of 
 loans under such programs.
 ``(7) Public information.--The Chief Operating Officer 
 shall establish and maintain a public page on the website of 
 the Department of Education exclusively to provide members of 
 the public with information about the role of the PBO with 
 respect to the oversight of institutions of higher education, 
 lenders, guaranty agencies, contractors that contract with the 
 PBO, subcontractors of such contractors, and third party 
 servicers.
 ``(8) Report.--On an annual basis, the Borrower Advocate 
 shall submit to the Chief Operating Officer a report on the 
 activities of the Office during the preceding year that--
 ``(A) identifies the activities carried out by the 
 Borrower Advocate;
 ``(B) summarizes the complaints received from 
 borrowers, including the number of such complaints, and 
 explains the activities undertaken by the PBO to 
 address such complaints;
 ``(C) proposes changes in the administrative 
 practices of the PBO to mitigate problems experienced 
 by borrowers; and
 ``(D) identifies potential legislative changes 
 which may be appropriate to mitigate such problems.'';
 (7) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); and
 (8) by inserting after subsection (h) the following:
 ``(i) Enforcement Unit.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary 
 shall establish within the PBO an enforcement unit (referred to 
 in this section as the `Unit') to review and investigate 
 violations of this Act and recommend enforcement actions in 
 accordance with paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Chief enforcement officer.--
 ``(A) Appointment.--The Secretary shall appoint an 
 official to be known as the `Chief Enforcement Officer' 
 who shall serve as the head of the Unit. The Secretary 
 shall appoint an individual to serve as the Chief 
 Enforcement Officer solely on the basis of such 
 individual's integrity and expertise in law and 
 investigations and without regard to such individual's 
 political affiliation.
 ``(B) Authority.--The Chief Enforcement Officer 
 shall report directly to the Secretary without being 
 required to report through any other official of the 
 Department of Education.
 ``(C) Term.--The Chief Enforcement Officer shall be 
 appointed for a term of 6 years and may be reappointed 
 for additional terms of 6 years at the discretion of 
 the Secretary.
 ``(D) Removal.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Chief Enforcement 
 Officer may not be removed during the Officer's 
 term except for cause.
 ``(ii) Notice to congress.--If the 
 Secretary removes the Chief Enforcement Officer 
 before the expiration of the Officer's term, 
 the Secretary shall submit to the authorizing 
 committees a report that explains the reasons 
 for such removal. The report shall be submitted 
 to the authorizing committees not later than 30 
 days after the date on which the removal takes 
 effect.
 ``(3) Duties.--The Chief Enforcement Officer shall have the 
 following duties:
 ``(A) Receive, process, and analyze allegations 
 that a covered entity has violated Federal law or has 
 engaged in unfair, deceptive, or abusive practices.
 ``(B) Review and investigate such allegations or 
 refer such allegations to an entity described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (E) of paragraph (6).
 ``(C) After reviewing and investigating an 
 allegation under subparagraph (B), in consultation with 
 the Chief Operating Officer--
 ``(i) if the covered entity subject to such 
 allegation is an entity described in clause (i) 
 or (iii) of paragraph (8)(A), make 
 recommendations with respect to such covered 
 entity, including--
 ``(I) whether such covered entity 
 should be limited, suspended, or 
 terminated from participation in one or 
 more programs under title IV;
 ``(II) whether such covered entity 
 should be subject to an emergency 
 action under section 487(c)(1)(G);
 ``(III) whether such covered entity 
 should be subject to a civil penalty 
 described in section 487(c)(3)(B);
 ``(IV) whether such covered entity 
 should be subject to a criminal penalty 
 described in section 490; or
 ``(V) whether such covered entity 
 should be subject to a combination of 
 any of the actions described in 
 subclauses (I) though (IV);
 ``(ii) if the covered entity subject to 
 such allegation is an entity described in 
 clause (ii) of paragraph (8)(A), make 
 recommendations with respect to such covered 
 entity, including whether such covered entity 
 should be limited, suspended, or terminated 
 from administering or providing services with 
 respect to one or more programs under title IV; 
 and
 ``(iii) provide the Secretary with such 
 recommendations.
 ``(4) Secretarial review and action.--After receiving 
 notice of a determination of the Chief Enforcement Officer 
 under paragraph (3)(C), the Secretary shall decide whether or 
 not to pursue enforcement action against the entity concerned, 
 in accordance with the procedures established under section 
 487(c)(3). In a case in which the Chief Enforcement Officer 
 recommends enforcement action against an entity, but the 
 Secretary decides not to pursue such enforcement action, the 
 Secretary shall notify the Chief Enforcement Officer, in 
 writing, of the rationale for such decision.
 ``(5) Coordination and staffing.--The Chief Enforcement 
 Officer shall--
 ``(A) coordinate with relevant Federal and State 
 agencies and oversight bodies; and
 ``(B) hire staff with the expertise necessary to 
 conduct investigations, respond to allegations against 
 covered entities, and enforce compliance with laws 
 governing Federal student financial assistance programs 
 under title IV.
 ``(6) Information sharing.--The Chief Enforcement Officer 
 shall develop and implement a process for sharing relevant 
 information about allegations against covered entities with--
 ``(A) the Borrower Advocate appointed under 
 subsection (f);
 ``(B) personnel of the Department on responsible 
 for processing borrower defense claims submitted under 
 section 493H;
 ``(C) other relevant Federal agencies;
 ``(D) States, including State law enforcement and 
 regulatory agencies; and
 ``(E) recognized accrediting agencies or 
 associations.
 ``(7) Report to congress.--On an annual basis, the Chief 
 Enforcement Officer shall submit to the authorizing committees 
 a report that includes--
 ``(A) the number of allegations about covered 
 entities received by Unit in the year covered by the 
 report;
 ``(B) the number of such allegations investigated 
 by the Unit;
 ``(C) the number of such allegations that were 
 referred to the Secretary under paragraph (3)(C) and a 
 summary of any action taken by the Secretary with 
 respect to such allegations;
 ``(D) the number of such allegations that were 
 referred to other Federal agencies and the names of the 
 agencies to which the allegations were referred; and
 ``(E) the number of such allegations that remain 
 under review or investigation as of the date of the 
 report.
 ``(8) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Covered entity.--In this subsection, the term 
 `covered entity' means--
 ``(i) an institution of higher education 
 (as defined in section 102) that participates 
 in the Federal student financial assistance 
 programs authorized under title IV;
 ``(ii) a contractor that contracts with the 
 PBO to provide services relating to such 
 programs, or a subcontractor of such 
 contractor; or
 ``(iii) a third party servicer.
 ``(B) Third party servicer.--the term `third party 
 servicer' has the meaning given that term in section 
 481(c).''.

 TITLE II--TEACHER QUALITY ENHANCEMENT

 PART A--TEACHER AND SCHOOL LEADER QUALITY PARTNERSHIP GRANTS

SEC. 2001. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 200 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1021) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 200. DEFINITIONS.

 ``Except as otherwise provided, in this title:
 ``(1) Arts and sciences.--The term `arts and sciences' 
 means--
 ``(A) when referring to an organizational unit of 
 an institution of higher education, any academic unit 
 that offers one or more academic majors in disciplines 
 or content areas corresponding to the academic subject 
 matter areas in which teachers provide instruction; and
 ``(B) when referring to a specific academic subject 
 area, the disciplines or content areas in which 
 academic majors are offered by the arts and sciences 
 organizational unit.
 ``(2) Blended learning.--The term `blended learning' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 4102 of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7112).
 ``(3) Children from low-income families.--The term 
 `children from low-income families' means children described in 
 section 1124(c)(1)(A) of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6333(c)(1)(A)).
 ``(4) Comprehensive literacy instruction.--The term 
 `comprehensive literacy instruction' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 2221(b)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6641(b)(1)).
 ``(5) Digital learning.--The term `digital learning' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 4102 of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7112).
 ``(6) Diverse teacher candidates.--The term `diverse 
 teacher candidates' means teacher candidates who are--
 ``(A) members of racial and ethnic groups 
 underrepresented in the teaching profession; or
 ``(B) linguistically and culturally prepared to 
 educate students in high-need schools.
 ``(7) Early childhood educator.--The term `early childhood 
 educator' means an individual with primary responsibility for 
 the education of children in an early childhood education 
 program.
 ``(8) Educational service agency.--The term `educational 
 service agency' has the meaning given the term in section 8101 
 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(9) Educator.--The term `educator' means a teacher, 
 principal or other school leader, specialized instructional 
 support personnel, or other staff member who provides or 
 directly supports instruction, such as a school librarian, 
 counselor, or paraprofessional.
 ``(10) Eligible partnership.--The term `eligible 
 partnership' means an entity--
 ``(A) that--
 ``(i) shall include--
 ``(I) a high-need local educational 
 agency;
 ``(II)(aa) a high-need school or a 
 consortium of high-need schools served 
 by such high-need local educational 
 agency; or
 ``(bb) as applicable, a high-need 
 early childhood education program;
 ``(III) a partner institution;
 ``(IV) a school, department, or 
 program of education within such 
 partner institution, which may include 
 an existing teacher professional 
 development program with proven 
 outcomes within a four-year institution 
 of higher education that provides 
 intensive and sustained collaboration 
 between faculty and local educational 
 agencies consistent with the 
 requirements of this title; and
 ``(V) a school or department of 
 arts and sciences within such partner 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) shall include--
 ``(I)(aa) a partner education 
 institution;
 ``(bb) a school, department, or 
 program of education within such 
 partner institution, which may include 
 an existing teacher professional 
 development program with proven 
 outcomes within a four-year institution 
 of higher education that provides 
 intensive and sustained collaboration 
 between faculty and local educational 
 agencies consistent with the 
 requirements of this title; or
 ``(cc) a school or department of 
 arts and sciences within such partner 
 institution; and
 ``(II) a State educational agency 
 that will serve to place graduates of 
 partnership programs into high-need 
 local educational agencies, schools, or 
 early childhood programs, or schools 
 that have been identified for 
 comprehensive support and improvement 
 under section 1111(d)(2) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311(d)(2)); and
 ``(B) that may include any of the following:
 ``(i) The Governor of the State.
 ``(ii) The State educational agency.
 ``(iii) The State board of education.
 ``(iv) The State agency for higher 
 education.
 ``(v) A public or private nonprofit 
 educational organization.
 ``(vi) An educational service agency.
 ``(vii) A public school teacher, principal, 
 or school leader organization.
 ``(viii) A high-performing local 
 educational agency, or a consortium of such 
 local educational agencies, that can serve as a 
 resource to the partnership.
 ``(ix) A charter school (as defined in 
 section 4310 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7221i)).
 ``(x) A school or department within the 
 partner institution that focuses on psychology 
 and human development.
 ``(xi) A school or department within the 
 partner institution for teacher or school 
 leader preparation with comparable expertise in 
 the disciplines of teaching, learning, and 
 child and adolescent development.
 ``(xii) An entity operating a program that 
 provides alternative routes to State 
 certification of teachers or principals.
 ``(11) English learner.--The term `English learner' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(12) Evidence-based.--The term `evidence-based' has the 
 meaning given the term in subclauses (I) and (II) of section 
 8101(21)(A)(i) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801(21)(A)).
 ``(13) Evidence of student learning.--The term `evidence of 
 student learning' means multiple measures of student learning 
 that include the following:
 ``(A) Valid and reliable student assessment data, 
 which may include data--
 ``(i) on student learning gains on 
 statewide academic assessments under section 
 1111(b)(2) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965;
 ``(ii) from student academic achievement 
 assessments used at the national, State, or 
 local levels, where available and appropriate 
 for the curriculum and students taught;
 ``(iii) from classroom-based summative 
 assessments; and
 ``(iv) from high quality validated 
 performance-based assessments that are aligned 
 with challenging State academic standards 
 adopted under section 1111(b)(1) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)(1)).
 ``(B) Not less than one of the following additional 
 measures:
 ``(i) Student work, including measures of 
 performance criteria and evidence of student 
 growth.
 ``(ii) Teacher-generated information about 
 student goals and growth.
 ``(iii) Parental feedback about student 
 goals and growth.
 ``(iv) Student feedback about learning and 
 teaching supports.
 ``(v) Assessments of affective engagement 
 and self-efficacy.
 ``(vi) Other appropriate measures, as 
 determined by the State.
 ``(14) Foster care.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `foster care' means 24-
 hour substitute care for a child placed away from the 
 child's parents or guardians and for whom the State 
 agency has placement and care responsibility. The term 
 includes care through a placement in a foster family 
 home, a foster home of a relative, a group home, an 
 emergency shelter, a residential facility, a child care 
 institution, or a pre-adoptive home.
 ``(B) Rule.--A child shall be considered to be in 
 foster care under subparagraph (A) without regard to 
 whether--
 ``(i) the foster care facility is licensed 
 and payments are made by the State or local 
 agency for the care of the child;
 ``(ii) adoption subsidy payments are being 
 made prior to the finalization of an adoption; 
 or
 ``(iii) Federal matching funds for any 
 payments described in clause (i) or (ii) are 
 being made.
 ``(15) High-need early childhood education program.--The 
 term `high-need early childhood education program' means an 
 early childhood education program serving children from low-
 income families that is located within the geographic area 
 served by a high-need local educational agency.
 ``(16) High-need local educational agency.--The term `high-
 need local educational agency' means a local educational 
 agency--
 ``(A)(i) that serves not fewer than 10,000 low-
 income children;
 ``(ii) for which not less than 40 percent of the 
 children served by the agency are low-income children;
 ``(iii) that meets the eligibility requirements for 
 funding under the Small, Rural School Achievement 
 Program under section 5211(b) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 or the Rural and Low-
 Income School Program under section 6221(b) of such 
 Act; or
 ``(iv) that has a percentage of low-income children 
 that is in the highest quartile among such agencies in 
 the State; and
 ``(B)(i) for which a significant number of schools 
 served by the agency is identified by the State for 
 comprehensive supports and interventions under section 
 1111(c)(4)(D)(i) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965; or
 ``(ii) for which a significant number of schools 
 served by the agency has a high teacher turnover rate 
 or is experiencing a teacher shortage in a high-needs 
 field, as determined by the State.
 ``(17) High-need school.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `high-need school' 
 means a school that, based on the most recent data 
 available, is--
 ``(i) an elementary school, in which not 
 less than 60 percent of students are eligible 
 for a free or reduced price school lunch under 
 the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
 Act;
 ``(ii) any other school that is not an 
 elementary school, in which not less than 45 
 percent of students are eligible for a free or 
 reduced price school lunch under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1751 et seq.); or
 ``(iii) identified for comprehensive 
 support and improvement under section 
 1111(c)(4)(D) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6311(c)(4)(D)), targeted support and 
 improvement under section 1111(d)(2) of such 
 Act (20 U.S.C. 6311(d)(2)), or additional 
 targeted support under section 1111(d)(2)(C) of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 6311(d)(2)(C)).
 ``(B) Special rule.--
 ``(i) Designation by the secretary.--The 
 Secretary may, upon approval of an application 
 submitted by an eligible partnership seeking a 
 grant under this title, designate a school that 
 does not qualify as a high-need school under 
 subparagraph (A) as a high-need school for the 
 purpose of this title. The Secretary shall base 
 the approval of an application for designation 
 of a school under this clause on a 
 consideration of the information required under 
 clause (ii), and may also take into account 
 other information submitted by the eligible 
 partnership.
 ``(ii) Application requirements.--An 
 application for designation of a school under 
 clause (i) shall include--
 ``(I) the number and percentage of 
 students attending such school who 
 are--
 ``(aa) aged 5 through 17 in 
 poverty counted in the most 
 recent census data approved by 
 the Secretary;
 ``(bb) eligible for a free 
 or reduced price school lunch 
 under the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act;
 ``(cc) in families 
 receiving assistance under the 
 State program funded under part 
 A of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act; or
 ``(dd) eligible to receive 
 medical assistance under the 
 Medicaid program;
 ``(II) information about the 
 student academic achievement of 
 students at such school; and
 ``(III) for a secondary school, the 
 four-year adjusted cohort graduation 
 rate for such school.
 ``(18) Highly competent.--The term `highly competent', when 
 used with respect to an early childhood educator, means an 
 early childhood educator--
 ``(A) with specialized education and training in 
 development and education of young children from birth 
 until entry into kindergarten or a specialization in 
 infants and toddlers or pre-school children;
 ``(B) with a baccalaureate degree in an academic 
 major in an early childhood or related field; and
 ``(C) who has demonstrated a high level of 
 knowledge and use of content and pedagogy in the 
 relevant areas associated with quality early childhood 
 education.
 ``(19) Homeless child.--The term `homeless child' means an 
 individual who is a homeless child or youth under section 725 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 
 11434a).
 ``(20) Induction program.--The term `induction program' 
 means a formalized program for new teachers, principals, or 
 school leaders, during not less than the teachers', principals, 
 or school leaders' first 2 years of, respectively, teaching or 
 leading, that is designed to provide support for, and improve 
 the professional performance and increase the retention in the 
 education field of, beginning teachers, principals, or school 
 leaders. Such program shall promote effective teaching or 
 leadership skills and shall include the following components:
 ``(A) High-quality and structured teacher or school 
 leader mentoring led by a trained and expert mentor who 
 has demonstrated high skill and effectiveness and who 
 teaches or leads, or has taught or led, in the same or 
 similar field, grade, or subject as the mentee.
 ``(B) Periodic, structured time for collaboration, 
 including with mentors, as well as time for 
 information-sharing among teachers, principals, other 
 school leaders and administrators, other appropriate 
 instructional staff, and participating faculty or 
 program staff in the partner institution.
 ``(C) The application of evidence-based 
 instructional practices.
 ``(D) Opportunities for new teachers, principals, 
 or school leaders to draw directly on the expertise of 
 mentors, faculty or program staff, and researchers, 
 including through mentor observation and feedback, to 
 support the integration of evidence-based research and 
 practice.
 ``(E) The development of skills in evidence-based 
 instructional and behavioral supports and 
 interventions.
 ``(F) Programs to support the health and well-being 
 of teachers, particularly in high-need schools or high-
 need local educational agencies. These may include 
 programs that focus on social emotional learning, 
 organizational interventions, workplace wellness, and 
 stress management.
 ``(G) Faculty or program staff who--
 ``(i) model the integration of research and 
 practice in the classroom and school; and
 ``(ii) assist new teachers or school 
 leaders with the effective use and integration 
 of educational and accessible technology and 
 universal design for learning into the 
 classroom or school.
 ``(H) Interdisciplinary collaboration among teacher 
 leaders or school leaders, faculty or program staff, 
 researchers, and other staff who prepare new teachers 
 or school leaders with respect to, as applicable, the 
 learning process, the assessment of learning, or the 
 leadership of a school.
 ``(I) As applicable to the role, assistance with 
 understanding of the effective use of data, 
 particularly student achievement data, and the 
 applicability of such data to inform and improve 
 classroom instruction and school leadership.
 ``(J) Regular and structured observation and 
 evaluation of new teachers, principals, or other school 
 leaders that are based in part on evidence of student 
 learning, shall include multiple measures of educator 
 performance, and shall provide clear, timely, and 
 useful feedback to teachers, principals, or other 
 school leaders to be used to improve instruction, as 
 applicable.
 ``(K) With respect to a principal induction 
 program, the development of local-educational-agency-
 wide systems such as rigorous leader standards, 
 continuous ongoing identification of goals for 
 improvement, and support for achieving those goals.
 ``(L) The development of skills in improving the 
 school culture and climate related to school leadership 
 and the role of the principal, including to--
 ``(i) nurture teacher and staff development 
 to strengthen classroom practice;
 ``(ii) support teacher health and well-
 being, including through programs that focus on 
 social emotional learning, organizational 
 interventions, workplace wellness, and stress 
 management;
 ``(iii) build and sustain an inclusive 
 culture of learning among adults and children;
 ``(iv) strengthen communications and 
 relationships with teachers, parents, 
 caregivers, paraprofessionals, and community 
 stakeholders;
 ``(v) facilitate the sharing of knowledge, 
 insight, and best practices in the community 
 served by the school, preschool program, or 
 early childhood education program, including 
 with youth serving programs (such as before- 
 and after-school and summer programs); and
 ``(vi) build relationships and communicate 
 effectively with State and local educational 
 agency officials.
 ``(21) Infant or toddler with a disability.--The term 
 `infant or toddler with a disability' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 632 of the Individuals with Disabilities 
 Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1432).
 ``(22) Mentoring.--The term `mentoring' means the mentoring 
 or coaching of new or prospective teachers, principals, or 
 school leaders through a program that--
 ``(A) includes clear criteria for the selection of 
 teacher, principal, or school leader mentors who may be 
 program staff and who will provide role model 
 relationships for mentees, which criteria shall be 
 developed by the eligible partnership and based on 
 measures of teacher or school leader effectiveness;
 ``(B) provides high-quality training for such 
 mentors, including instructional strategies for 
 culturally relevant teaching practices, literacy 
 instruction and classroom management (including 
 approaches that improve the schoolwide climate for 
 learning, create inclusive classroom environments, and 
 address the social and emotional needs of students, 
 which may include positive behavioral interventions and 
 supports);
 ``(C) provides regular and ongoing opportunities 
 for mentors and mentees to observe each other's 
 teaching or leading methods in classroom or school 
 settings during the day in a high-need school in the 
 high-need local educational agency in the eligible 
 partnership;
 ``(D) provides paid release time for mentors;
 ``(E) for teachers, provides mentoring to each 
 mentee by a colleague who teaches in the same field, 
 grade, or subject as the mentee;
 ``(F) for teachers, promotes empirically-based 
 practice of, and evidence-based research on, where 
 applicable--
 ``(i) teaching and learning;
 ``(ii) assessment of student learning;
 ``(iii) the development of teaching skills 
 through the use of instructional and behavioral 
 interventions, including trauma-informed 
 practices; and
 ``(iv) the improvement of the mentees' 
 capacity to measurably advance student 
 learning; and
 ``(G) includes--
 ``(i) common planning time or regularly 
 scheduled collaboration for the mentor and 
 mentee; and
 ``(ii) as applicable, joint professional 
 development opportunities.
 ``(23) Parent.--The term `parent' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(24) Partner institution.--The term `partner institution' 
 means an institution of higher education, which may include a 
 2-year institution of higher education offering a dual program 
 with a 4-year institution of higher education, participating in 
 an eligible partnership that has a teacher or school leader 
 preparation program that is accredited by the State--
 ``(A) in the case of a teacher preparation 
 program--
 ``(i) whose graduates exhibit strong 
 performance on State-determined qualifying 
 assessments for new teachers through--
 ``(I) demonstrating that 80 percent 
 or more of the graduates of the program 
 who intend to enter the field of 
 teaching have passed all of the 
 applicable State qualification 
 assessments for new teachers, which 
 shall include an assessment of each 
 prospective teacher's subject matter 
 knowledge in the content area in which 
 the teacher intends to teach; or
 ``(II) that is not designated as a 
 low-performing teacher preparation 
 program in the State as determined by 
 the State--
 ``(aa) using criteria 
 consistent with the 
 requirements for the State 
 assessment under section 207(a) 
 before the first publication of 
 such report card; and
 ``(bb) using the State 
 assessment required under 
 section 207(a), after the first 
 publication of such report card 
 and for every year thereafter; 
 and
 ``(ii) that requires--
 ``(I) each student in the program 
 to meet high academic standards or 
 demonstrate a record of success, as 
 determined by the institution 
 (including prior to entering and being 
 accepted into a program), and 
 participate in intensive clinical 
 experience;
 ``(II) each student in the program 
 preparing to become a teacher who meets 
 the applicable State certification and 
 licensure requirements, including any 
 requirements for certification obtained 
 through alternative routes to 
 certification, or, with regard to 
 special education teachers, the 
 qualifications described in section 
 612(a)(14)(C) of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1412(a)(14)(C)); and
 ``(III) each student in the program 
 preparing to become an early childhood 
 educator to become highly competent; 
 and
 ``(B) in the case of a school leader preparation 
 program--
 ``(i) whose graduates exhibit a strong 
 record of successful school leadership as 
 demonstrated by--
 ``(I) a high percentage of such 
 graduates taking positions as assistant 
 principals and principals within 3 
 years of completing the program; and
 ``(II) a high percentage of such 
 graduates rated effective or above in 
 State school leader evaluation and 
 support systems (as described in 
 section 2101(c)(4)(B)(ii) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965) or, if no such ratings are 
 available, other, comparable indicators 
 of performance; and
 ``(ii) that requires each student in the 
 program to participate in an intensive, high-
 quality clinical experience in an authentic 
 setting (including by assuming substantial 
 leadership responsibilities) for at least one 
 full academic semester (or the equivalent) in 
 which the student can be evaluated on 
 leadership skills and the student's effect on 
 student learning as part of program completion.
 ``(25) Professional development.--The term `professional 
 development' has the meaning given the term in section 8101 of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801).
 ``(26) Profession-ready.--The term `profession-ready'--
 ``(A) when used with respect to a principal or 
 other school leader, means a principal or other school 
 leader who--
 ``(i) has an advanced degree, or other 
 appropriate credential;
 ``(ii) has completed a principal or other 
 school leader preparation process and is fully 
 certified and licensed by the State in which 
 the principal or other school leader is 
 employed;
 ``(iii) has demonstrated instructional 
 leadership, including the ability to collect, 
 analyze, and utilize data on evidence of 
 student learning and evidence of classroom 
 practice;
 ``(iv) has demonstrated proficiency in 
 professionally recognized leadership standards, 
 such as through--
 ``(I) a performance assessment;
 ``(II) completion of a residency 
 program; or
 ``(III) other measures of 
 leadership effectiveness, as determined 
 by the State; and
 ``(v) has demonstrated the ability to work 
 with students with disabilities and students 
 who are culturally and linguistically diverse;
 ``(B) when used with respect to a teacher, means a 
 teacher who--
 ``(i) has completed a teacher preparation 
 program and is fully certified and licensed to 
 teach by the State in which the teacher is 
 employed;
 ``(ii) has a baccalaureate degree or 
 higher;
 ``(iii) has demonstrated content knowledge 
 in the subject or subjects the teacher teaches;
 ``(iv) has demonstrated the ability to work 
 with students with disabilities and students 
 who are culturally and linguistically diverse;
 ``(v) has demonstrated teaching skills, 
 such as through--
 ``(I) a teacher performance 
 assessment; or
 ``(II) other measures of teaching 
 skills, as determined by the State; and
 ``(vi) has demonstrated proficiency with 
 the use of educational and accessible 
 technology; and
 ``(C) when used with respect to any other educator 
 not described in subparagraph (A) or (B), means an 
 educator who has completed an appropriate preparation 
 program and is fully certified or licensed by the State 
 in which the educator is employed.
 ``(27) Residency program.--The term `residency program' 
 means a school-based educator preparation program, based on 
 models of effective teaching and leadership residencies, in 
 which a prospective teacher, principal, or other school 
 leader--
 ``(A) for 1 academic year, works alongside a mentor 
 teacher, principal, or other school leader who is--
 ``(i) the educator of record; and
 ``(ii) is rated as effective or above in 
 the State's school leader evaluation and 
 support system (as described in section 
 2101(c)(4)(B)(ii) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6611(c)(4)(B)(ii))) or, if no such ratings are 
 available, other, on comparable indicators of 
 performance;
 ``(B) receives concurrent, aligned instruction 
 during the year described in subparagraph (A) from the 
 partner institution, which may be courses taught by 
 local educational agency personnel or residency program 
 faculty, in, as applicable--
 ``(i) the teaching of the content area in 
 which the teacher will become certified or 
 licensed;
 ``(ii) pedagogical practices, including the 
 teaching skills defined in paragraph (33); and
 ``(iii) leadership, management, 
 organizational, and instructional skills 
 necessary to serve as a principal or other 
 school leader;
 ``(C) acquires effective teaching or leadership 
 skills through the integration of pedagogy, classroom 
 or school practice, and teacher or leadership 
 mentoring; and
 ``(D) prior to completion of the program--
 ``(i) demonstrates the prerequisite skills 
 to advance student learning, which may be 
 measured by a teacher or school leader 
 performance assessment;
 ``(ii) attains full State teacher, 
 principal, or school leader certification or 
 licensure;
 ``(iii) with respect to special education 
 teachers, meets the qualifications described in 
 section 612(a)(14)(C) of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1412(a)(14)(C)); and
 ``(iv) becomes profession-ready.
 ``(28) School leader.--The term `school leader' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(29) School leader preparation entity.--The term `school 
 leader preparation entity' means an institution of higher 
 education or a nonprofit organization, including those 
 institutions or organizations that provide alternative routes 
 to certification, that is approved by the State to prepare 
 school leaders to be effective.
 ``(30) School leader preparation program.--The term `school 
 leader preparation program' means a program offered by a school 
 leader preparation entity, whether a traditional or alternative 
 route, that is approved by the State to prepare school leaders 
 to be effective and that leads to a specific State 
 certification to be a school leader.
 ``(31) School leader skills.--The term `school leader 
 skills' refers to evidenced-based competencies for principals 
 and other school leaders such as--
 ``(A) shaping a vision of academic success for all 
 students;
 ``(B) creating a safe and inclusive learning 
 environment;
 ``(C) cultivating leadership in others;
 ``(D) improving instruction; and
 ``(E) managing people, data, and processes to 
 foster school improvement.
 ``(32) Teacher leader.--The term `teacher leader' means an 
 effective educator who carries out formalized leadership 
 responsibilities based on the demonstrated needs of the 
 elementary school or secondary school in which the teacher is 
 employed, while maintaining a role as a classroom instructor 
 who--
 ``(A) is trained in and practices teacher 
 leadership; and
 ``(B) fosters a collaborative culture to--
 ``(i) support educator development, 
 effectiveness, and student learning;
 ``(ii) support access and use research to 
 improve practice and student learning;
 ``(iii) promote professional learning for 
 continuous improvement;
 ``(iv) facilitate improvements in 
 instruction and student learning; promote the 
 appropriate use of assessments and data for 
 school and district improvement;
 ``(v) improve outreach and collaboration 
 with families and community;
 ``(vi) advance the profession by shaping 
 and implementing policy;
 ``(vii) advocate for increased access to 
 great teaching and learning for all students; 
 and
 ``(viii) demonstrate cultural competencies 
 and provide instruction and support as such.
 ``(33) Teaching skills.--The term `teaching skills' means 
 skills that enable a teacher to--
 ``(A) increase student learning, achievement, and 
 the ability to apply knowledge;
 ``(B) effectively convey, explain, and provide 
 opportunities for students to develop the skills 
 aligned with the full depth and breadth of the State 
 challenging academic standards, including the 
 application of academic subject matter;
 ``(C) effectively teach higher-order analytical, 
 evaluation, problem-solving, critical thinking, social 
 and emotional, collaboration, and communication skills;
 ``(D) employ strategies grounded in the disciplines 
 of teaching and learning that--
 ``(i) are based on empirically-based 
 practice and evidence-based research, where 
 applicable, related to teaching and learning;
 ``(ii) are specific to academic subject 
 matter; and
 ``(iii) focus on the identification of 
 students' specific learning needs, particularly 
 students with disabilities, students who are 
 English learners, students who are gifted and 
 talented, and students with low literacy 
 levels, and the tailoring of academic 
 instruction to such needs;
 ``(E) design and conduct ongoing assessments of 
 student learning, which may include the use of 
 formative assessments, performance-based assessments, 
 project-based assessments, or portfolio assessments, 
 that measures higher-order thinking skills (including 
 application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation) and 
 use this information to inform and personalize 
 instruction;
 ``(F) support the social, emotional, and academic 
 achievement of all students including effectively 
 manage a classroom creating a positive and inclusive 
 classroom environment, including the ability to 
 implement positive behavioral interventions, trauma-
 informed care, and other support strategies;
 ``(G) support an inclusive learning environment 
 through culturally responsive teaching;
 ``(H) support accessible technology-rich 
 instruction, assessment, and learning management in 
 content areas, accessible technology literacy, and the 
 use of universal design;
 ``(I) demonstrate proficiency with the use of 
 educational and accessible technology;
 ``(J) communicate and work with families, and 
 involve families in their children's education; and
 ``(K) use, in the case of an early childhood 
 educator or an educator at the elementary school or 
 secondary school level, age-appropriate and 
 developmentally appropriate strategies and practices 
 for children and youth in early childhood education and 
 elementary school or secondary school programs, 
 respectively.
 ``(34) Teacher performance assessment.--The term `teacher 
 performance assessment' means a pre-service assessment used to 
 measure teacher performance that is approved by the State and 
 is--
 ``(A) based on professional teaching standards;
 ``(B) used to measure the effectiveness of a 
 teacher's--
 ``(i) curriculum planning informed by an 
 understanding of students' prior knowledge, 
 experiences, and racial, linguistic, cultural, 
 and community assets;
 ``(ii) instruction of students, including 
 the skills necessary to advance student 
 learning, and including appropriate plans, 
 differentiation, and modifications to support 
 student learning needs, including English 
 learners and students with disabilities;
 ``(iii) assessment of students, including 
 analysis of evidence of student learning;
 ``(iv) ability to analyze, reflect on, and 
 improve teaching practice in response to 
 student learning; and
 ``(v) demonstrate cultural competencies 
 through curriculum planning and instruction.
 ``(C) validated based on professional assessment 
 standards;
 ``(D) reliably scored by trained evaluators, with 
 appropriate oversight of the process to ensure 
 consistency; and
 ``(E) used to support continuous improvement of 
 educator practice.
 ``(35) Teacher preparation entity.--The term `teacher 
 preparation entity' means an institution of higher education, a 
 nonprofit organization, or other organization that is approved 
 by a State to prepare teachers to be effective in the 
 classroom.
 ``(36) Teacher preparation program.--The term `teacher 
 preparation program' means a program offered by a teacher 
 preparation entity that leads to a specific State teacher 
 certification.
 ``(37) Trauma-informed care.--The term `trauma-informed 
 care' is defined as the evidence-based practices outlined in 
 section 4108(B)(II)(aa) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965.''.

SEC. 2002. PURPOSES.

 Section 201 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``by improving the 
 preparation of prospective teachers and enhancing professional 
 development activities for new teachers'' and inserting ``, 
 school leaders, including teacher leaders, and other educators 
 by improving the preparation of prospective teachers, school 
 leaders, and other educators and enhancing professional 
 development activities for new teachers, school leaders, and 
 other educators'';
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (3) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(4) hold teacher, principal and school leader, and other 
 educator preparation programs accountable for preparing 
 effective teachers, principals and school leaders, and other 
 educators;
 ``(5) recruit individuals, including members of racial and 
 ethnic groups underrepresented in the teaching profession and 
 individuals from other occupations (including informal 
 education and youth development fields), as profession-ready 
 teachers and other educators, ensuring such individuals receive 
 appropriate training in pedagogy and classroom management, with 
 an emphasis on areas of State-identified teacher shortage; and
 ``(6) meet the staffing needs of high-need local 
 educational agencies and high-need schools through close 
 partnerships with educator preparation programs within 
 institutions of higher education.''.

SEC. 2003. PARTNERSHIP GRANTS.

 Section 202 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022a) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``equitable 
 distribution,'' after ``professional development,'';
 (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) a description of the extent to which the program to 
 be carried out with grant funds, as described in subsection 
 (c), will prepare prospective teachers, school leaders, and new 
 educators with strong teaching, school leadership, and other 
 professional skills necessary to increase learning and academic 
 achievement;'';
 (C) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``, school 
 leaders, and other educators,'' after ``new teachers'';
 (D) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, 
 school leader, and other educator'' after 
 ``other teacher''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, 
 school leader, and other educator'' after 
 ``promote teacher'';
 (E) in paragraph (6)--
 (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (I), 
 (J), and (K) as subparagraphs (J), (K), and 
 (M), respectively;
 (ii) by striking subparagraphs (F), (G), 
 and (H) and inserting the following:
 ``(F) how the partnership will prepare educators to 
 teach and work with students with disabilities, 
 including training related to early identification of 
 students with disabilities and participation as a 
 member of individualized education program teams, as 
 defined in section 614(d)(1)(B) of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act to ensure that students with 
 disabilities receive effective services, consistent 
 with the requirements of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act, that are needed for such 
 students to achieve to challenging State academic 
 standards;
 ``(G) how the partnership will prepare educators to 
 teach and work with students who are English learners 
 to ensure that students who are English learners 
 receive the services that are needed for such students 
 to achieve to challenging State academic standards;
 ``(H) in the case of activities related to 
 principal and school leader preparation programs, how 
 the partnership will prepare principals and other 
 school leaders to foster instruction that supports the 
 success of all students, including students with 
 disabilities, students who are English learners, and 
 students in early childhood education in alignment with 
 State early learning standards for early childhood 
 education programs;
 ``(I) how faculty at the partner institution will 
 work, during the term of the grant, with mentor 
 educators in the classrooms and administrators of high-
 need schools served by the high-need local educational 
 agency in the partnership to--
 ``(i) provide high-quality professional 
 development activities to strengthen the 
 content knowledge and teaching skills of 
 elementary school and secondary school teachers 
 and other educators, including multi-tiered 
 systems of support and universal design for 
 learning;
 ``(ii) train other classroom teachers, 
 principals or other school leaders, school 
 librarians, and other educators to implement 
 literacy programs that incorporate the 
 components of comprehensive literacy 
 instruction; and
 ``(iii) provide evidence-based, high-
 quality professional development activities to 
 strengthen the instructional and leadership 
 skills of elementary school and secondary 
 school principals or other school leaders and 
 district superintendents, if the partner 
 institution has a principal or school leader 
 preparation program;'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (J) (as so 
 redesignated), by inserting ``as applicable'' 
 before ``how the partnership'';
 (iv) in subparagraph (K) (as so 
 redesignated), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (v) by inserting after subparagraph (K) (as 
 so resdesignated) the following:
 ``(L) how faculty at the partner institution for 
 school leader preparation will work, during the term of 
 the grant, with their--
 ``(i) State to use rigorous, research-based 
 leader standards and align program 
 accreditation criteria and principal licensure 
 requirements with those standards; and
 ``(ii) high-needs local education agencies 
 that hire their graduates to use rigorous, 
 evidence-based leader standards and align 
 program content and local educational agencies' 
 evaluation systems with those standards; and''; 
 and
 (vi) in subparagraph (M) (as so 
 redesignated), by inserting ``, principals or 
 other school leaders'' after ``teachers''; and
 (F) in paragraph (7)--
 (i) in the matter before subparagraph (A), 
 by striking ``under this section'' and 
 inserting ``under paragraphs (1)(B)(iv) and (3) 
 of subsection (d)'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``as 
 applicable,'' before ``a demonstration''; and
 (iii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``scientifically valid'' and inserting 
 ``evidence-based'';
 (2) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 ``(c) Use of Grant Funds.--An eligible partnership that receives a 
grant under this section--
 ``(1) shall use such grant to carry out --
 ``(A) a program for the pre-baccalaureate or post-
 baccalaureate preparation of teachers described in 
 subsection (d);
 ``(B) a teaching residency program, or a principal 
 or other school leader residency program, described in 
 subsection (e);
 ``(C) a high-quality `Grow Your Own' program; or
 ``(D) a combination of such programs; and
 ``(2) may use such grant to carry out other educator 
 development programs under subsection (f), based upon the 
 results of the needs assessment in subsection (b)(1).'';
 (3) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``limited English 
 proficient'' both places it appears and 
 inserting ``English learners''; and
 (ii) by striking ``scientifically valid'' 
 both places it appears and inserting 
 ``evidence-based'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (B)(ii)(VI), by 
 striking ``reading instruction'' both places it 
 appears and inserting ``comprehensive literacy 
 instruction'';
 (B) in paragraph (5)(B), by striking ``limited 
 English proficient students'' and inserting ``students 
 who are English learners'';
 (C) in paragraph (5)(C), by inserting 
 ``paraprofessionals,'' after ``occupations,''; and
 (D) in paragraph (6)(A), by striking ``reading 
 instruction'' and inserting ``comprehensive literacy 
 instruction'';
 (4) by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:
 ``(e) Partnership Grants for the Establishment of Teaching and 
Principal or Other School Leader Residency Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible partnership receiving a 
 grant to carry out an effective teaching residency program or 
 principal or other school leader residency program that meets 
 the following requirements:
 ``(A) Teaching residency program.--An eligible 
 partnership carrying out a teaching residency program 
 shall--
 ``(i) support a teaching residency program 
 described in paragraph (2) for high-need 
 schools, as determined by the needs of high-
 need local educational agency in the 
 partnership, and in high-need subjects and 
 areas, as defined by such local educational 
 agency; and
 ``(ii) place graduates of the teaching 
 residency program in cohorts that facilitate 
 professional collaboration, both among 
 graduates of the residency program and between 
 such graduates and mentor teachers in the 
 receiving school.
 ``(B) Principal or school leader residency 
 program.--An eligible partnership carrying out a 
 principal or school leader residency program shall 
 support a program described in paragraph (3) for high-
 need schools, as determined by the needs of the high-
 need local educational agency in the partnership.
 ``(2) Teaching residency program.--
 ``(A) Establishment and design.--A teaching 
 residency program under this paragraph shall be a 
 program based upon models of successful teaching 
 residencies that serves as a mechanism to prepare 
 teachers for success in high-need schools in the 
 eligible partnership and shall be designed to include 
 the following characteristics of successful programs:
 ``(i) The integration of pedagogy, 
 classroom practice and teacher mentoring.
 ``(ii) The exposure to principles of child 
 and youth development, and understanding and 
 applying principles of learning, behavior, and 
 community and family engagement.
 ``(iii) The exposure to principles of 
 universal design for learning and multi-tiered 
 systems of support.
 ``(iv) Engagement of teaching residents in 
 rigorous coursework that results in a 
 baccalaureate or master's degree while 
 undertaking a guided teaching clinical 
 experience.
 ``(v) Experience and learning opportunities 
 alongside a trained and experienced mentor 
 teacher--
 ``(I) whose teaching shall 
 complement the residency program so 
 that school-based clinical practice is 
 tightly aligned and integrated with 
 coursework;
 ``(II) who shall have extra 
 responsibilities as a teacher leader of 
 the teaching residency program, as a 
 mentor for residents, and as a teacher 
 coach during the induction program for 
 new teachers, and for establishing, 
 within the program, a learning 
 community in which all individuals are 
 expected to continually improve their 
 capacity to advance student learning; 
 and
 ``(III) who may be relieved from 
 teaching duties or may be offered a 
 stipend as a result of such additional 
 responsibilities.
 ``(vi) The establishment of clear criteria 
 for the selection of mentor teachers based on 
 the appropriate subject area knowledge and 
 measures of teacher effectiveness, which shall 
 be based on, but not limited to, observations 
 of the following:
 ``(I) Planning and preparation, 
 including demonstrated knowledge of 
 content, pedagogy, and assessment, 
 including the use of formative, 
 summative, and diagnostic assessments 
 to inform instruction and improve 
 student learning.
 ``(II) Appropriate instruction that 
 engages all students.
 ``(III) Collaboration with 
 colleagues to improve instruction.
 ``(IV) Analysis of evidence of 
 student learning.
 ``(V) Collaboration and the 
 cultivation of relationships with 
 external stakeholders (which may 
 include professional disciplinary 
 organizations and nonprofit advocacy 
 organizations) to foster the sharing of 
 evidence-based resources to promote 
 high-quality, effective practices.
 ``(vii) The development of admissions goals 
 and priorities--
 ``(I) that are aligned with the 
 hiring objectives of the local 
 educational agency partnering with the 
 program, as well as the instructional 
 initiatives and curriculum of such 
 agency to hire qualified graduates from 
 the teaching residency program; and
 ``(II) which may include 
 consideration of applicants who reflect 
 the communities in which they will 
 teach as well as consideration of 
 individuals from underrepresented 
 populations in the teaching profession.
 ``(viii) Continued support for residents 
 once such residents are hired as the teachers 
 of record, through an induction program, 
 evidence-based professional development, and 
 networking opportunities to support the 
 residents through not less than the residents' 
 first 2 years of teaching.
 ``(B) Selection of individuals as teacher 
 residents.--
 ``(i) Eligible individual.--In order to be 
 eligible to be a teacher resident in a teaching 
 residency program under this paragraph, an 
 individual shall--
 ``(I) be a recent graduate of a 4-
 year institution of higher education or 
 a mid-career professional possessing 
 strong content knowledge or a record of 
 professional accomplishment;
 ``(II) in the case of an 
 undergraduate residency, enrolled as an 
 undergraduate student in a partner 
 institution as defined in this title; 
 and
 ``(III) submit an application to 
 the residency program.
 ``(ii) Selection criteria.--An eligible 
 partnership carrying out a teaching residency 
 program under this subsection shall establish 
 criteria for the selection of eligible 
 individuals to participate in the teaching 
 residency program based on the following 
 characteristics:
 ``(I) Strong content knowledge or 
 record of accomplishment in the field 
 or subject area to be taught.
 ``(II) Strong verbal and written 
 communication skills, which may be 
 demonstrated by performance on 
 appropriate assessments.
 ``(III) Other attributes linked to 
 effective teaching, which may be 
 determined by interviews or performance 
 assessments, as specified by the 
 eligible partnership.
 ``(3) Partnership grants for the development of principal 
 and other school leader residency programs.--
 ``(A) Establishment and design.--A principal or 
 other school leader residency program under this 
 paragraph shall be a program based upon models of 
 successful principal or other school leader 
 residencies, and may include the development or support 
 of principal pipelines, that serve as a mechanism to 
 prepare principals and other school leaders for success 
 in high-need schools in the eligible partnership and 
 shall be designed to include the following 
 characteristics of successful programs:
 ``(i) Engagement of principal or other 
 school leader residents in rigorous graduate-
 level coursework to earn an appropriate 
 advanced credential while undertaking a guided 
 principal or other school leader clinical 
 experience.
 ``(ii) Experience and learning 
 opportunities, including those that provide 
 continuous feedback throughout the program on a 
 participants' progress, alongside a trained and 
 experienced mentor principal or other school 
 leader--
 ``(I) whose mentoring shall be 
 based on standards of effective 
 mentoring practice and shall complement 
 the residence program so that school-
 based clinical practice is tightly 
 aligned with coursework; and
 ``(II) who may be relieved from 
 some portion of principal or other 
 school leader duties or may be offered 
 a stipend as a result of such 
 additional responsibilities.
 ``(iii) The establishment of clear criteria 
 for the selection of mentor principals or other 
 school leaders, which may be based on 
 observations of the following:
 ``(I) Demonstrating awareness of, 
 and having experience with, the 
 knowledge, skills, and attitudes to--
 ``(aa) establish and 
 maintain a professional 
 learning community that 
 effectively extracts 
 information from data to 
 improve the school culture and 
 climate, and personalize 
 instruction for all students to 
 result in improved student 
 achievement;
 ``(bb) create and maintain 
 a learning culture within the 
 school that provides an 
 inclusive climate conducive to 
 the development of all members 
 of the school community, 
 including one of continuous 
 improvement and learning for 
 adults tied to student learning 
 and other school goals;
 ``(cc) develop the 
 professional capacity and 
 practice of school personnel 
 and foster a professional 
 community of teachers and other 
 professional staff;
 ``(dd) engage in continuous 
 professional development, 
 utilizing a combination of 
 academic study, developmental 
 simulation exercises, self-
 reflection, mentorship, and 
 internship;
 ``(ee) understand youth 
 development appropriate to the 
 age level served by the school, 
 and use this knowledge to set 
 high expectations and standards 
 for the academic, social, 
 emotional, and physical 
 development of all students;
 ``(ff) understand the 
 science of adverse childhood 
 experiences to lead schools 
 that implement trauma-informed 
 practices; and
 ``(gg) actively engage with 
 families and the community to 
 create shared responsibility 
 for student academic 
 performance and successful 
 development.
 ``(II) Planning and articulating a 
 shared and coherent schoolwide 
 direction and policy for achieving high 
 standards of student performance, and 
 closing gaps in achievement among 
 subgroups of students.
 ``(III) Identifying and 
 implementing the activities and 
 rigorous curriculum necessary for 
 achieving such standards of student 
 performance.
 ``(IV) Supporting a culture of 
 learning, collaboration, and 
 professional behavior and ensuring 
 quality measures of instructional 
 practice.
 ``(V) Communicating with, and 
 engaging, parents, families, and other 
 external communities.
 ``(VI) Cultivating relationships 
 and collaborating with external 
 stakeholders, which may include 
 professional disciplinary organizations 
 and nonprofit advocacy organizations, 
 to foster the sharing of evidence-based 
 resources to promote high-quality, 
 effective practices.
 ``(VII) Collecting, analyzing, and 
 utilizing data and other evidence of 
 student learning and evidence of 
 classroom practice to guide decisions 
 and actions for continuous improvement 
 and to ensure performance 
 accountability.
 ``(iv) The development of admissions goals 
 and priorities--
 ``(I) that are aligned with the 
 hiring objectives of the local 
 educational agency partnering with the 
 program, as well as the instructional 
 initiatives and curriculum of such 
 agency to hire qualified graduates from 
 the principal residency program; and
 ``(II) which may include 
 consideration of applicants who reflect 
 the communities in which they will 
 serve and consideration of individuals 
 from underrepresented populations in 
 school leadership positions.
 ``(v) Continued support for residents once 
 such residents are hired as principals or other 
 school leaders, through an induction program, 
 evidence-based professional development to 
 support the knowledge and skills of the 
 principal or other school leader in a continuum 
 of learning and content expertise in 
 developmentally appropriate or age-appropriate 
 educational practices, and networking 
 opportunities to support the residents through 
 not less than the residents' first 2 years of 
 serving as principal or other school leader of 
 a school.
 ``(B) Selection of individuals as principal or 
 other school leader residents.--
 ``(i) Eligible individual.--In order to be 
 eligible to be a principal or other school 
 leader resident in a principal or other school 
 leader residency program under this paragraph, 
 an individual shall--
 ``(I) have prior prekindergarten 
 through grade 12 teaching experience;
 ``(II) have experience as an 
 effective leader, manager, and written 
 and oral communicator; and
 ``(III) submit an application to 
 the residency program.
 ``(ii) Selection criteria.--An eligible 
 partnership carrying out a principal or other 
 school leader residency program under this 
 subsection shall establish criteria for the 
 selection of eligible individuals to 
 participate in the principal residency program 
 based on the following characteristics:
 ``(I) Strong instructional 
 leadership skills in an elementary 
 school or secondary school setting.
 ``(II) Strong verbal and written 
 communication skills, which may be 
 demonstrated by performance on 
 appropriate assessments.
 ``(III) Other attributes linked to 
 effective leadership, such as sound 
 judgment, organizational capacity, 
 collaboration, commitment to equity and 
 inclusiveness, and openness to 
 continuous learning, which may be 
 determined by interviews or performance 
 assessment, as specified by the 
 eligible partnership.
 ``(4) Stipends or salaries; applications; agreements; and 
 repayments.--
 ``(A) Stipends or salaries.--A teaching residency 
 program, or a principal or other school leader 
 residency program, under this subsection--
 ``(i) shall provide a 1-year living stipend 
 or salary to residents during the teaching 
 residency program or the principal or other 
 school leader residency program; and
 ``(ii) may provide a stipend to a mentor 
 teacher or mentor principal.
 ``(B) Applications.--
 ``(i) In general.--Each residency candidate 
 desiring a stipend or salary during the period 
 of residency shall submit an application to the 
 eligible partnership at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information and 
 assurances, as the eligible partnership may 
 require, and which shall include an agreement 
 to serve described in clause (ii).
 ``(ii) Agreements to serve.--Each 
 application submitted under clause (i) shall 
 contain or be accompanied by an agreement that 
 the applicant will--
 ``(I) upon successfully completing 
 the 1-year teaching residency program, 
 or principal or other school leader 
 residency program, serve as a full-time 
 teacher, principal, or other school 
 leader for a total of not less than 3 
 school years at--
 ``(aa) a high-need school 
 served by the high-need local 
 educational agency in the 
 eligible partnership and, in 
 the case of a teacher, teach a 
 subject or area that is 
 designated as high-need by the 
 partnership; or
 ``(bb) in a case in which 
 no appropriate position is 
 available in a high-need school 
 served by the high-need local 
 educational agency in the 
 eligible partnership, any other 
 high-need school;
 ``(II) provide to the eligible 
 partnership a certificate, from the 
 chief administrative officer of the 
 local educational agency in which the 
 teacher or principal or other school 
 leader is employed, of the employment 
 required under subclause (I) at the 
 beginning of, and upon completion of, 
 each year or partial year of service;
 ``(III) in the case of a teacher 
 resident, meet the requirements to be a 
 profession-ready teacher;
 ``(IV) in the case of a principal 
 or other school leader resident, meet 
 the requirements to be a profession-
 ready principal or other school leader; 
 and
 ``(V) comply with the requirements 
 set by the eligible partnership under 
 subparagraph (C) if the applicant is 
 unable or unwilling to complete the 
 service obligation required by this 
 subparagraph.
 ``(C) Repayments.--
 ``(i) In general.--An eligible partnership 
 carrying out a teaching residency program, or a 
 principal or other school leader residency 
 program, under this subsection shall require a 
 recipient of a stipend or salary under 
 subparagraph (A) who does not complete, or who 
 notifies the partnership that the recipient 
 intends not to complete, the service obligation 
 required by subparagraph (B) to repay such 
 stipend or salary to the eligible partnership, 
 together with interest, at a rate specified by 
 the partnership in the agreement, and in 
 accordance with such other terms and conditions 
 specified by the eligible partnership, as 
 necessary.
 ``(ii) Other terms and conditions.--Any 
 other terms and conditions specified by the 
 eligible partnership may include reasonable 
 provisions for prorate repayment of the stipend 
 or salary described in subparagraph (A) or for 
 deferral of a resident's service obligation 
 required by subparagraph (B), on grounds of 
 health, incapacitation, inability to secure 
 employment in a school served by the eligible 
 partnership, being called to active duty in the 
 Armed Forces of the United States, or other 
 extraordinary circumstances.
 ``(iii) Use of repayments.--An eligible 
 partnership shall use any repayment received 
 under this subparagraph to carry out additional 
 activities that are consistent with the 
 purposes of this section.'';
 (5) by striking subsection (f);
 (6) by redesignating subsections (g) through (k) as 
 subsections (h) through (l), respectively; and
 (7) by inserting after subsection (e) the following:
 ``(f) Teacher Leader Development Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--A teacher leader development program 
 carried out with a grant awarded under this section shall 
 provide for the professional development of teachers, as 
 described in paragraph (2), who maintain their roles as 
 classroom teachers and who also carry out formalized leadership 
 responsibilities to increase the academic achievement of 
 students and promote data-driven instructional practices that 
 address the demonstrated needs at the elementary schools and 
 secondary schools in which the teachers are employed, such as--
 ``(A) development of curriculum and curricular 
 resources;
 ``(B) facilitating the work of committees and 
 teams;
 ``(C) family and community engagement;
 ``(D) school discipline and culture;
 ``(E) peer observations and coaching;
 ``(F) dual enrollment instruction; or
 ``(G) cultural competencies.
 ``(2) Professional development.--The professional 
 development of teachers in a teacher leader development program 
 carried out with a grant awarded under this section shall 
 include--
 ``(A) one year of professional development, 
 training, and support that may--
 ``(i) include--
 ``(I) the engagement of teachers in 
 rigorous coursework and fieldwork 
 relevant to their role as a teacher 
 leader, including available teacher 
 leader standards; and
 ``(II) regular observations and 
 professional support from--
 ``(aa) a principal, vice 
 principal, or a designated 
 instructional leader of the 
 school;
 ``(bb) a representative 
 from the institution of higher 
 education that is a partner in 
 the eligible partnership;
 ``(cc) a representative 
 from another entity that is a 
 partner in the eligible 
 partnership; and
 ``(dd) another member of 
 the teacher leader cohort, if 
 applicable, or a peer teacher; 
 and
 ``(ii) result in the awarding of a 
 credential in teacher leadership; and
 ``(B) one or 2 additional years of support from a 
 principal, vice principal, or a designated 
 instructional leader of the school, a representative 
 from the institution of higher education that is a 
 partner in the eligible partnership, and a 
 representative from another entity that is a partner in 
 the eligible partnership.
 ``(3) Teacher leader development program plan.--In carrying 
 out a teacher leader development program under this section, an 
 eligible partnership shall develop a plan that shall describe--
 ``(A) how the work hours of teacher leaders will be 
 allocated between their classroom responsibilities and 
 responsibilities as a teacher leader, which shall 
 include a description of whether the teacher leader 
 will be relieved from teaching duties during their 
 participation in the teacher leader development 
 program;
 ``(B) how the partnership will support teacher 
 leaders after the first year of professional 
 development in the program; and
 ``(C) how teacher leader activities could be 
 sustained by the eligible partnership after the program 
 concludes, which may include a description of 
 opportunities for the teacher leaders to assist in the 
 educator preparation program at the institution of 
 higher education in the partnership.
 ``(4) Selection of teacher leaders; use of funds.--In 
 carrying out a teacher leader development program under this 
 section, an eligible partnership--
 ``(A) shall select a teacher for participation in 
 the program--
 ``(i) who--
 ``(I) is fully certified to teach 
 in the State of the high-need local 
 educational agency that is a partner in 
 the eligible partnership;
 ``(II) is employed by such high-
 need local educational agency;
 ``(III) has not less than 3 years 
 of teaching experience; and
 ``(IV) submits an application for 
 participation to the eligible 
 partnership; and
 ``(ii) based on selection criteria that 
 includes--
 ``(I) demonstration of strong 
 content knowledge or a record of 
 accomplishment in the field or subject 
 area the teacher will support as a 
 teacher leader; and
 ``(II) demonstration of attributes 
 linked to effective teaching that are 
 determined through interviews, 
 observations, other exhibits, student 
 achievement, or performance 
 assessments, such as those leading to 
 an advanced credential;
 ``(B) may develop admissions goals and priorities 
 for the teacher leader development program that--
 ``(i) are aligned with the demonstrated 
 needs of the school or high-need local 
 educational agency in which the teacher is 
 employed;
 ``(ii) considers cultural competencies that 
 would make the applicant effective in the 
 applicant's teacher leader role; and
 ``(iii) considers whether the teacher has 
 substantial teaching experience in the school 
 in which the teacher is employed or in a school 
 that is similar to the school in which the 
 teacher is employed;
 ``(C) shall use the grant funds to pay for costs of 
 training and supporting teacher leaders for not less 
 than 2 years and not more than 3 years;
 ``(D) may use the grant funds to pay for a portion 
 of a stipend for teacher leaders if such grant funds 
 are matched by additional non-Federal public or private 
 funds as follows:
 ``(i) during each of the first and second 
 years of the grant period, grant funds may pay 
 not more than 50 percent of such stipend; and
 ``(ii) during the third year of the grant 
 period, grant funds may pay not more than 33 
 percent of such stipend; and
 ``(E) may require teacher leaders to pay back the 
 cost of attaining the credential described in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(ii) if they do not complete their term of 
 service in the teacher leader development program.
 ``(g) Partnership Grants for the Establishment of Grow Your Own 
Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible partnership that receives a 
 grant under this section may use such grant to carry out a 
 high-quality `Grow Your Own' program to address subject or 
 geographic areas of teacher or school leader shortages or to 
 increase the diversity of the teacher or school leader 
 workforce.
 ``(2) Elements of a grow your own program.--A Grow Your Own 
 program carried out under this section shall--
 ``(A) integrate career-focused courses on education 
 topics with school-based learning experience;
 ``(B) provide opportunities for candidates to 
 practice and develop the skills and dispositions that 
 will help them become skilled educators and leaders;
 ``(C) support candidates as they complete their 
 associate, baccalaureate, or master's degree and earn 
 their teaching or school leadership credential; and
 ``(D) offer financial aid, in addition to financial 
 assistance that may be received under title IV, to 
 candidates and work in partnership with members of the 
 eligible partnership to provide academic, counseling, 
 and programmatic supports.
 ``(2) Establishment and design.--To create and enhance 
 multiple pathways to enter the educator and leadership 
 workforce, an eligible partnership carrying out a Grow Your Own 
 program under this section, in collaboration with organizations 
 representing educators and leaders and additional 
 stakeholders--
 ``(A) shall--
 ``(i) establish an advisory group to review 
 barriers impacting underrepresented populations 
 entering the teaching and school leadership 
 profession, identify local teacher and leader 
 workforce needs, develop policies on the 
 creation or expansion of Grow Your Own 
 programs, and provide guidance and oversight on 
 the implementation of such programs;
 ``(ii) track and evaluate the effectiveness 
 of the program, including, at a minimum, using 
 the data required under section 204(a)(1);
 ``(iii) require candidates to complete all 
 State requirements to become fully certified;
 ``(iv) provide academic and testing 
 supports, including advising and financial 
 assistance, to candidates for admission and 
 completion of education preparation programs as 
 well as State licensure assessments;
 ``(v) include efforts, to the extent 
 feasible, to recruit current paraprofessionals, 
 as defined under section 8101 of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801), instructional assistants, district 
 employees not certified to teach or lead (such 
 as long-term substitute teachers), after school 
 and summer program staff, parent school 
 volunteers, retired military personnel, and 
 other career changers with experience in hard 
 to staff areas who are not currently certified 
 to teach or lead with a specific focus on 
 recruiting individuals who are reflective of 
 the race, ethnicity, and native language of the 
 existing community's student population; and
 ``(vi) provide a year-long clinical 
 experience or teaching or school leadership 
 residency in which candidates teach or lead 
 alongside an expert mentor teacher or school 
 leader; and
 ``(B) may include--
 ``(i) a stipend to cover candidate living 
 expenses or childcare costs; and
 ``(ii) compensation for mentors.''.

SEC. 2004. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 Section 203 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022b) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``five-year period.'' 
 and inserting ``five-year period, except such partnership may 
 receive an additional grant during such period if such grant is 
 used to establish a teaching residency program, or a principal 
 or other school leader residency program, if such residency 
 program was not established with the prior grant.''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``teacher preparation 
 program'' and inserting ``teacher education, 
 school leader preparation, or educator 
 development program'';
 (ii) by inserting ``and demonstrated 
 success in having a diverse set of candidates 
 complete the program, and entering and 
 remaining in the profession'' after ``such 
 program''; and
 (iii) by striking ``; and'' at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as 
 subparagraph (C); and
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following:
 ``(B) provide a 1-year preservice clinical or 
 residency experience that includes the integration of 
 coursework and clinical practice and offers cohorts of 
 candidates the opportunity to learn to teach or lead in 
 partner schools or teaching academies; and''.

SEC. 2005. ACCOUNTABILITY AND EVALUATION.

 Section 204(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1022c(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Eligible Partnership Evaluation.--Each eligible partnership 
submitting an application for a grant under this part shall establish, 
and include in such application, an evaluation plan that includes 
rigorous, comprehensive, and measurable performance objectives. The 
plan shall include objectives and measures for--
 ``(1) achievement for all prospective and new educators as 
 measured by the eligible partnership;
 ``(2) after the completion of the partnership program, 
 educator retention at the end of year 3 and year 5;
 ``(3) pass rates and scaled scores for initial State 
 certification or licensure of teachers or pass rates and 
 average scores on valid and reliable teacher performance 
 assessments; and
 ``(4)(A) the percentage of profession-ready teachers, 
 principals or other school leaders hired by the high-need local 
 educational agency participating in the eligible partnership;
 ``(B) the percentage of profession-ready teachers, 
 principals, and other educators hired by the high-need local 
 educational agency who are members of underrepresented groups;
 ``(C) the percentage of profession-ready teachers hired by 
 the high-need local educational agency who teach high-need 
 academic subject areas, such as reading, science, technology, 
 engineering, mathematics, computer science, and foreign 
 language (including less commonly taught languages and critical 
 foreign languages), or any other well-rounded education subject 
 (as defined in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801));
 ``(D) the percentage of profession-ready teachers hired by 
 the high-need local educational agency who teach in high-need 
 areas, including special education, bilingual education, 
 language instruction educational programs for English language 
 learners, and early childhood education;
 ``(E) the percentage of profession-ready teachers, 
 principals or other school leaders, and other educators hired 
 by the high-need local educational agency who teach in high-
 need schools, disaggregated by the elementary school and 
 secondary school levels;
 ``(F) as applicable, the percentage of early childhood 
 education program classes in the geographic area served by the 
 eligible partnership taught by early childhood educators who 
 are highly competent as a result of participation in the 
 partnership program;
 ``(G) as applicable, the percentage of educators who have 
 completed the partnership program able to--
 ``(i) integrate technology effectively into 
 curricula and instruction, including technology 
 consistent with the principles of universal design for 
 learning; and
 ``(ii) use technology effectively to collect, 
 manage, and analyze data to improve teaching and 
 learning for the purpose of improving student learning 
 outcomes; and
 ``(H) as applicable, the percentage of educators who have 
 completed the partnership program taking school leadership 
 positions who, after 3 years in the role, receive ratings of 
 effective or above in State school leader evaluation and 
 support systems (as described in section 2014(c)(4)(B)(ii) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965) or, if no 
 such ratings are available, other comparable indicators of 
 performance.''.

SEC. 2006. ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PROGRAMS THAT PREPARE TEACHERS, 
 PRINCIPALS, OR OTHER SCHOOL LEADERS.

 Section 205 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022d) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking the subsection header and inserting 
 the following: ``Institutional and Program Report Cards 
 on the Quality of Teacher and School Leader 
 Preparation''; and
 (B) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Report card.--Each teacher preparation or school 
 leader preparation entity approved to operate teacher 
 preparation or school leader preparation programs in the State 
 and that receives or enrolls students receiving Federal 
 assistance shall report annually to the State and the general 
 public, in a uniform and comprehensive manner that conforms 
 with the definitions and methods established by the Secretary, 
 the following:
 ``(A) Pass rates and scaled scores.--For the most 
 recent year for which the information is available for 
 each teacher or school leader preparation program 
 offered by the teacher preparation or school leader 
 preparation entity the following:
 ``(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), 
 for those students who took the assessments 
 used for teacher or school leader certification 
 or licensure by the State in which the entity 
 is located and are enrolled in the teacher or 
 school leader preparation program, and for 
 those who have taken such assessments and have 
 completed the teacher or school preparation 
 program during the 2-year period preceding such 
 year, for each of such assessments--
 ``(I) the percentages of students 
 enrolled in the preparation program, 
 and those who have completed such 
 program, who passed such assessment;
 ``(II) the percentage of students 
 who have taken such assessment who 
 enrolled in and completed the teacher 
 or school leader preparation program; 
 and
 ``(III) the average scaled score 
 for all students who took such 
 assessment.
 ``(ii) In the case of an entity that 
 requires a valid and reliable teacher 
 performance assessment in order to complete the 
 preparation program, the entity may submit in 
 lieu of the information described in clause (i) 
 the pass rate and average score of students 
 taking the teacher performance assessment.
 ``(B) Entity information.--A description of the 
 following:
 ``(i) The median grade point average and 
 range of grade point averages for admitted 
 students.
 ``(ii) The number of students in the 
 entity, disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and 
 gender, except that such disaggregation shall 
 not be required in a case in which the result 
 would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual student.
 ``(iii) The number of hours and types of 
 supervised clinical preparation required for 
 each program.
 ``(iv) The total number and percentage of 
 students who have completed programs for 
 certification or licensure disaggregated by 
 subject area and by race, ethnicity, gender, 
 income status, and language diversity 
 (graduates who have bilingual or dual language 
 immersion endorsements), except that such 
 disaggregation shall not be required in a case 
 in which the result would reveal personally 
 identifiable information about an individual 
 student.
 ``(v) The percentage and total number of 
 program completers who have been certified or 
 licensed as teachers or school leaders 
 (disaggregated by subject area of certification 
 or licensure and by race, ethnicity, and 
 gender, except that such disaggregation shall 
 not be required in a case in which the number 
 of students in a category is insufficient to 
 yield statistically reliable information or the 
 results would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual student).
 ``(vi) The 3- and 5-year teacher or school 
 leader retention rates, including, at a 
 minimum, in the same school and local 
 educational agency, and within the profession 
 (disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and gender, 
 except that such disaggregation shall not be 
 required in a case in which the number of 
 students in a category is insufficient to yield 
 statistically reliable information or the 
 results would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual student).
 ``(C) Accreditation.--Whether the program or entity 
 is accredited by a specialized accrediting agency 
 recognized by the Secretary for accreditation of 
 professional teacher or school leader education 
 programs.
 ``(D) Designation as low-performing.--Which 
 programs (if any) offered by the entity have been 
 designated as low-performing by the State under section 
 207(a).'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting ``and school 
 leader'' after ``teacher''; and
 (II) by inserting ``, including 
 teacher performance assessments'' after 
 ``the State'';
 (ii) by amending subparagraph (D) to read 
 as follows:
 ``(D)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), for 
 each of the assessments used by the State for teacher 
 or school leader certification or licensure, 
 disaggregated by subject area, race, ethnicity, and 
 gender, except that such disaggregation shall not be 
 required in a case in which the result would reveal 
 personally identifiable information about an individual 
 student--
 ``(I) for each entity located in the State, 
 the percentage of students at each entity who 
 have completed 100 percent of the nonclinical 
 coursework and taken the assessment who pass 
 such assessment;
 ``(II) the percentage of all such students 
 in all such programs and entities who have 
 taken the assessment who pass such assessment;
 ``(III) the percentage of students who have 
 taken the assessment and who enrolled in and 
 completed a teacher or school leader 
 preparation program; and
 ``(IV) the average scaled score of 
 individuals participating in such a program, or 
 who have completed such a program during the 2-
 year period preceding the first year for which 
 the annual State report card is provided, who 
 took each such assessment.
 ``(ii) In the case of a State that has implemented 
 a valid and reliable teacher performance assessment, 
 the State may submit in lieu of the information 
 described in clause (i) the pass rate and average score 
 of students taking the teacher performance assessment, 
 disaggregated by subject area, race, ethnicity, and 
 gender, except that such disaggregation shall not be 
 required in a case in which the result would reveal 
 personally identifiable information about an individual 
 student.'';
 (iii) by striking subparagraphs (G) through 
 (L) and inserting the following:
 ``(G) For each teacher and school leader 
 preparation program in the State the following:
 ``(i) The programs' admission rate, median 
 grade point average, and range of grade point 
 averages for admitted students.
 ``(ii) The number of students in the 
 program disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and 
 gender, except that such disaggregation shall 
 not be required in a case in which the result 
 would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual student.
 ``(iii) The number of hours and types of 
 supervised clinical preparation required.
 ``(iv) Whether such program has been 
 identified as low-performing, as designated by 
 the State under section 207(a).
 ``(v) For each school leader preparation 
 program in the State, the total number and 
 percentage of program completers placed as 
 principals who are rated as effective or above 
 on the State school leader evaluation and 
 support systems (as described in section 
 2101(c)(4)(B)(2) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965) or, if no such 
 ratings are available, other comparable 
 indicators of performance after three years of 
 leading a school.
 ``(H) For the State as a whole, and for each 
 teacher preparation entity in the State, the number of 
 teachers prepared, in the aggregate and reported 
 separately by the following:
 ``(i) Area of certification or licensure.
 ``(ii) Route of certification (traditional 
 versus alternative).
 ``(iii) Academic major.
 ``(iv) Degree type (baccalaureate, post-
 baccalaureate, and master's degrees).
 ``(v) Subject area for which the teacher 
 has been prepared to teach.
 ``(vi) The relationship of the subject area 
 and grade span of teachers graduated by the 
 teacher preparation entity to identified 
 teacher shortage areas of the State.
 ``(vii) The percentage of teachers 
 graduated teaching in high-need schools.
 ``(viii) Placement in a teaching or school 
 leadership position within 6 months of program 
 completion.
 ``(ix) Rates of 3- and 5-year teacher or 
 school leadership retention including, at a 
 minimum, in the same school and local 
 educational agency, and within the 
 profession.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) No requirement for reporting on students not working 
 in the state.--Nothing in this section shall require a State to 
 report data on program completers who do not work as teachers, 
 principals, or school leaders in such State.''; and
 (3) in subsection (d)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(D) The relationship of the subject area and 
 grade span of teachers graduated by teacher preparation 
 entities across the States to identified teacher 
 shortage areas.
 ``(E) The number and percentages of such graduates 
 teaching in high-need schools.''.

SEC. 2007. TEACHER DEVELOPMENT.

 Section 206 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022e) 
is amended by striking ``limited English proficient'' both places it 
appears and inserting ``English learner''.

SEC. 2008. STATE FUNCTIONS.

 Section 207 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1022f) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 207. STATE FUNCTIONS.

 ``(a) State Assessment.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to receive funds under this Act 
 or under title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6601 et seq.), a State shall conduct an 
 assessment to identify at-risk and low-performing teacher and 
 school leader preparation programs in the State and to assist 
 such programs through the provision of technical assistance.
 ``(2) Provision of low-performing list.--Each State 
 described in paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) provide the Secretary and the general public 
 an annual list of low-performing teacher and school 
 leader preparation programs and an identification of 
 those programs at risk of being placed on such list, as 
 applicable;
 ``(B) report any teacher and school leader 
 preparation program that has been closed and the 
 reasons for such closure; and
 ``(C) describe the assessment, described in 
 paragraph (1), in the report under section 205(b).
 ``(3) Determination of at-risk and low-performing 
 programs.--The levels of performance and the criteria for 
 meeting those levels for purposes of the assessment under 
 paragraph (1) shall be determined by the State in consultation 
 with a representative group of community stakeholders, 
 including, at a minimum, representatives of leaders and faculty 
 of traditional and alternative route teacher and school leader 
 preparation programs, prekindergarten through 12th grade 
 leaders and instructional staff, current teacher and school 
 leader candidates participating in traditional and alternative 
 route teacher or school leader preparation programs, the 
 State's standards board or other appropriate standards body, 
 and other stakeholders identified by the State. In making such 
 determination, the State shall consider multiple measures and 
 the information reported by teacher preparation entities under 
 section 205.
 ``(b) Reporting and Improvement.--In order to receive funds under 
this Act or under title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6601 et seq.), a State shall--
 ``(1) report to the Secretary and the general public any 
 programs described in subsection (a);
 ``(2) establish a period of improvement and redesign (as 
 established by the State) for programs identified as at-risk 
 under subsection (a);
 ``(3) provide programs identified as at-risk under 
 subsection (a) with technical assistance for a period of not 
 longer than 3 years;
 ``(4) identify at-risk programs as low-performing if there 
 is not sufficient improvement following the period of technical 
 assistance provided by the State; and
 ``(5) subject low-performing programs to the provisions 
 described in subsection (c) (as determined by the State) not 
 later than 1 year after the date of such identification as a 
 low-performing program.
 ``(c) Termination of Eligibility.--Any teacher or school leader 
preparation program that is projected to close--
 ``(1) shall be ineligible for any funding for professional 
 development activities awarded by the Department;
 ``(2) may not be permitted to provide new awards under 
 subpart 9 of part A of title IV; and
 ``(3) shall provide transitional support, including 
 remedial services if necessary, for students enrolled in the 
 program in the year prior to such closure.
 ``(d) Negotiated Rulemaking.--If the Secretary develops any 
regulations implementing subsection (c)(2), the Secretary shall submit 
such proposed regulations to a negotiated rulemaking process, which 
shall include representatives of States, institutions of higher 
education, and educational and student organizations.
 ``(e) Application of Requirements.--The requirements of this 
section shall apply to both traditional teacher preparation programs 
and alternative routes to State certification and licensure 
programs.''.

SEC. 2009. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 Section 208(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1022g(a)) is amended by striking ``sections 205 and 206'' and inserting 
``section 205''.

SEC. 2010. ELEVATION OF THE EDUCATION PROFESSION STUDY.

 Part A of title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1022 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 208 the following:

``SEC. 209. ELEVATION OF THE EDUCATION PROFESSION STUDY.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to authorize a 
feasibility study on the elevation of the education profession by 
examining State policies related to teacher and school leader education 
and certification, produce a comprehensive set of expectations that 
sets a high bar for entry into the profession and ensures that all 
entering teachers and school leaders are profession-ready, and develop 
recommendations to Congress on best practices with respect to elevating 
the education profession that are evidence-based, reliable, and 
verified by the field.
 ``(b) Establishment.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall 
 establish an Advisory Committee to carry out the elevation of 
 the education profession study described in subsection (c) and 
 make recommendations to Congress on the findings.
 ``(2) Membership of the advisory committee.--The Advisory 
 Committee shall include representatives or advocates from the 
 following categories:
 ``(A) Teacher unions.
 ``(B) School leader organizations.
 ``(C) State and local chief executives or their 
 representatives.
 ``(D) State educational agencies and local 
 educational agencies.
 ``(E) Teacher and school leader advocacy 
 organizations.
 ``(F) School administrator organizations.
 ``(G) Institutions of higher education, including 
 colleges of teacher education.
 ``(H) Civil rights organizations.
 ``(I) Organizations representing students with 
 disabilities.
 ``(J) Organizations representing English learners.
 ``(K) Nonprofit organizations representing subject-
 fields, such as STEM Educator organizations, 
 comprehensive literacy Educator organizations, and arts 
 and humanities educator organizations.
 ``(L) Professional development organizations.
 ``(M) Educational technology organizations.
 ``(N) Nonprofit research organizations.
 ``(O) Organizations representing nontraditional 
 pathways into teacher and school leader education.
 ``(P) Organizations representing parents.
 ``(c) Duties of the Advisory Committee.--
 ``(1) Feasibility study.--The Advisory Committee shall 
 conduct a feasibility study to--
 ``(A) assess the state of policies and practices 
 related to teacher and school leader education and 
 entry into the profession including barriers to 
 achieving certification and licensure, best practices 
 in producing profession-ready teachers and school 
 leaders, and recruitment and retention of teachers and 
 school leaders in schools;
 ``(B) compile best practices for educating and 
 training profession-ready teachers and school leaders 
 including evidence-based practices for training 
 teachers and school leaders to support diverse 
 learners, developing teacher and school leaders, and 
 successful pre-service and in-service educational 
 activities;
 ``(C) review certification and credentialing 
 practices throughout the Nation including minimum 
 standards in each State, differences in types of 
 credentials, and impact of different certification 
 processes in each State for teachers and school leaders 
 who relocate; and
 ``(D) recommend a comprehensive set of rigorous 
 expectations for States standards to elevate the 
 profession of teaching and to produce profession-ready 
 teachers and school leaders prepared to educate diverse 
 learners in inclusive educational settings.
 ``(2) Reports.--
 ``(A) Not later than 1 year after the Advisory 
 Committee's first meeting, the Committee shall submit 
 an interim report to the Secretary and to the 
 authorizing committees detailing the methods of the 
 study and progress in developing the set of 
 comprehensive and rigorous expectations.
 ``(B) Not later than 3 years after the Advisory 
 Committee's first meeting, the Committee shall submit a 
 final report to the Secretary and to the authorizing 
 committees detailing the findings, recommendations, and 
 suggested set of comprehensive and rigorous 
 expectations.
 ``(3) Dissemination of information.--In carrying out the 
 study under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall, after the 
 release of the study, disseminate information found in the 
 study in an accessible format to all stakeholders.
 ``(4) Database.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall produce 
 an electronically accessible clearinghouse of State 
 certification procedures and best State practices for producing 
 and retaining profession-ready teachers and school leaders.''.

SEC. 2011. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Part A of title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1022 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 209 as section 210; and
 (2) in section 210, as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``$300,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$500,000,000'';
 (B) by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2019''; 
 and
 (C) by striking ``two succeeding'' and inserting 
 ``5 succeeding''.

 PART B--ENHANCING TEACHER AND SCHOOL LEADER EDUCATION

SEC. 2101. ENHANCING TEACHER AND SCHOOL LEADER EDUCATION.

 Part B of title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1031 et seq.) is amended to read as follows:

 ``PART B--ENHANCING TEACHER AND SCHOOL LEADER EDUCATION

``SEC. 230. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this part $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2020 and each of the 5 
succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(b) Distribution of Funds.--Subparts 1 through 4 of this part 
shall each receive a minimum of 20 percent of the amount appropriated 
for a fiscal year, and the Secretary shall have discretion over the 
distribution under this part of the remaining amount appropriated for 
such fiscal year.

 ``Subpart 1--Honorable Augustus F. Hawkins Centers of Excellence

``SEC. 231. FINDINGS.

 ``Congress finds the following:
 ``(1) Our Nation's schools are experiencing a severe 
 teacher diversity gap that negatively impacts student 
 achievement and school culture--50 percent of current students 
 are students of color while only 18 percent of teachers are of 
 color, according to a 2016 study by the Brookings Institution.
 ``(2) A 2016 report conducted by the Department of 
 Education shows that teachers of color tend to provide more 
 culturally relevant teaching and better understand the 
 situations that students of color may face. These factors help 
 in the development of trusting teacher-student relationships. 
 Researchers from Vanderbilt University also found that greater 
 racial and ethnic diversity in the principal corps benefits 
 students, especially students of color.
 ``(3) Teachers and school leaders of color can also serve 
 as cultural ambassadors who help students feel more welcome at 
 school or as role models.
 ``(4) Research consistently shows that increasing diversity 
 in the teaching profession can have positive impacts on student 
 educational experiences and outcomes. Students of color 
 demonstrate greater academic achievement and social-emotional 
 development in classes with teachers of color. Studies also 
 suggest that all students, including white students, benefit 
 from having teachers of color offering their distinctive 
 knowledge, experiences, and role modeling to the student body 
 as a whole.

``SEC. 232. PURPOSE.

 ``The purpose of this subpart is to strengthen and expand the 
recruitment, training, and retention of candidates of color into the 
teaching profession.

``SEC. 233. ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION DEFINED.

 ``In this subpart, the term `eligible institution' means an 
institution of higher education that has a teacher or school leader 
preparation program that is a accredited by the State and that is--
 ``(1) a part B institution (as defined in section 322);
 ``(2) a Hispanic-serving institution (as defined in section 
 502);
 ``(3) a Tribal college or university (as defined in section 
 316);
 ``(4) an Alaska Native-serving institution (as defined in 
 section 317(b));
 ``(5) a Native Hawaiian-serving institution (as defined in 
 section 317(b));
 ``(6) a predominantly black institution (as defined in 
 section 318);
 ``(7) an Asian-American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution (as defined in section 320(b));
 ``(8) a Native American-serving, nontribal institution (as 
 defined in section 319);
 ``(9) a consortium of any of the institutions described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (8); or
 ``(10) an institution described in paragraphs (1) through 
 (8), or a consortium described in paragraph (9), in partnership 
 with any other institution of higher education, but only if the 
 center of excellence established under section 234 is located 
 at an institution described in paragraphs (1) through (8).

``SEC. 234. AUGUSTUS F. HAWKINS CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE.

 ``(a) Program Authorized.--From the amounts provided to carry out 
this subpart, the Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, 
to eligible institutions to establish centers of excellence.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--An eligible institution shall use a grant 
received under this subpart to ensure that programs offered at a center 
of excellence established by such institution prepare current and 
future teachers or school leaders to be profession-ready, and meet the 
applicable State certification and licensure requirements, including 
any requirements for certification obtained through alternative routes 
to certification, or, with regard to special education teachers, the 
qualifications described in section 612(a)(14)(C) of the Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1412(a)(14)(C)), by carrying 
out one or more of the following activities:
 ``(1) Implementing reforms within teacher or school leader 
 preparation programs to ensure that such programs are preparing 
 teachers or school leaders who meet such applicable State 
 certification and licensure requirements or qualifications, and 
 are using evidence-based instructional practices to improve 
 student academic achievement, by--
 ``(A) retraining or recruiting faculty; and
 ``(B) designing (or redesigning) teacher or school 
 leader preparation programs that--
 ``(i) prepare teachers or school leaders to 
 serve in low-performing schools and close 
 student achievement gaps; and
 ``(ii) are based on--
 ``(I) rigorous academic content;
 ``(II) evidence-based research; and
 ``(III) challenging State academic 
 standards as described in section 
 1111(b)(1) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(b)(1)); and
 ``(iii) promote effective teaching skills.
 ``(2) Providing sustained and high-quality preservice 
 clinical experience, which may include through high-quality 
 teacher or leader residency programs, including the mentoring 
 of prospective teachers by exemplary teachers or teacher 
 leaders, substantially increasing interaction between faculty 
 at institutions of higher education and new and experienced 
 teachers, principals, school leaders, and other administrators 
 at elementary schools or secondary schools, and providing 
 support, including preparation time, for such interaction.
 ``(3) Developing and implementing initiatives to promote 
 retention of teachers who meet such applicable State 
 certification and licensure requirements or qualifications, and 
 principals and other school leaders, including teachers, 
 principals, and other school leaders of color, including 
 programs that provide--
 ``(A) teacher or principal and other school leader 
 mentoring; and
 ``(B) induction and support for teachers and 
 principals and other school leaders during their first 
 three years of employment as teachers, principals, or 
 other school leaders, respectively.
 ``(4) Awarding scholarships based on financial need to help 
 students pay the costs of tuition, room, board, and other 
 expenses of completing a teacher or other school leader 
 preparation program at the Center of Excellence, not to exceed 
 the cost of attendance as defined in section 472.
 ``(5) Disseminating information on effective practices for 
 teacher or other school leader preparation and successful 
 teacher or other school leader certification and licensure 
 assessment preparation strategies.
 ``(6) Activities authorized under section 202.
 ``(c) Application.--Any eligible institution desiring a grant under 
this subpart shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 ``(d) Limitation on Administrative Expenses.--An eligible 
institution that receives a grant under this subpart may use not more 
than 2 percent of the funds provided to administer the grant.
 ``(e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary to carry out this subpart.

 ``Subpart 2--Preparing Well-Rounded Teachers

``SEC. 241. WELL-ROUNDED TEACHING GRANTS.

 ``(a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 ``(1) students have diverse learning needs and teachers 
 must be prepared to provide a high-quality, equitable education 
 to every child;
 ``(2) improving the pedagogical competencies, behavior 
 management skills, and cultural competencies of teacher 
 candidates prepares them to effectively teach students from 
 diverse backgrounds and increases the likelihood they will 
 remain in the profession; and
 ``(3) teachers who hold dual certification and receive 
 training in social and emotional learning competencies and 
 nonexclusionary, positive behavior management practices are 
 better prepared to create a supportive school climate and meet 
 the needs of all students, including English learners, racially 
 diverse students, students with disabilities, low-income 
 students, and students who have experienced trauma.
 ``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of this subpart is to--
 ``(1) strengthen and expand teacher preparation programs 
 that embed dual certification for teacher candidates in special 
 education; and
 ``(2) strengthen and expand teacher preparation programs 
 that embed training on inclusive practices, culturally 
 responsive teaching, social and emotional learning 
 competencies, universal design for learning, and 
 nonexclusionary, positive behavior management practices to 
 teacher candidates.
 ``(c) Authorization of Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amounts provided to carry out 
 this subpart, the Secretary shall award grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible partnerships to improve the 
 preparation of general education teacher candidates to ensure 
 that such teacher candidates possess the knowledge, skills, and 
 credentials necessary to effectively instruct students with 
 disabilities in general education classrooms, and an 
 understanding of positive behavior-management practices that 
 reduce the use of exclusionary and aversive disciplinary 
 practices and create a supportive school climate.
 ``(2) Duration of grants.--A grant under this subpart shall 
 be awarded for a period of not more than 5 years.
 ``(3) Non-federal share.--An eligible partnership that 
 receives a grant under this subpart shall provide not less than 
 25 percent of the cost of the activities carried out with such 
 grant from non-Federal sources, which may be provided in cash 
 or in-kind.
 ``(d) Definition of Eligible Partnership.--In this section, the 
term `eligible partnership' means a partnership that--
 ``(1) shall include--
 ``(A) one or more departments or programs at an 
 institution of higher education--
 ``(i) that prepare elementary or secondary 
 general education teachers;
 ``(ii) that have a program of study that 
 leads to an undergraduate degree, a master's 
 degree, or completion of a postbaccalaureate 
 program required for teacher certification; and
 ``(iii) the profession-ready graduates of 
 which meet the applicable State certification 
 and licensure requirements, including any 
 requirements for certification obtained through 
 alternative routes to certification, or, with 
 regard to special education teachers, the 
 qualifications described in section 
 612(a)(14)(C) of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1412(a)(14)(C));
 ``(B) a department or program that has expertise in 
 special education at an institution of higher 
 education; and
 ``(C) a high-need local educational agency; and
 ``(2) may include--
 ``(A) a department or program of mathematics, earth 
 or physical science, foreign language, or another 
 department at the institution that has a role in 
 preparing teachers; or
 ``(B) a non-profit, research-based organization.
 ``(e) Activities.--An eligible partnership that receives a grant 
under this section--
 ``(1) shall use the grant funds to--
 ``(A) develop or strengthen an undergraduate, 
 postbaccalaureate, or master's teacher preparation 
 program by integrating special education pedagogy into 
 the general education curriculum and academic content 
 that results in applicable dual State certification for 
 teacher candidates who complete the program;
 ``(B) develop or strengthen an undergraduate, 
 postbaccalaureate, or master's teacher preparation 
 program by embedding social and emotional learning 
 strategies, inclusive practices, culturally responsive 
 teaching, and nonexclusionary, positive behavior-
 management practices into the general education 
 curriculum and academic content;
 ``(C) provide teacher candidates participating in 
 the program under subparagraph (A) with skills related 
 to--
 ``(i) response to intervention, positive 
 behavioral interventions and supports 
 (including eliminating the use of aversive 
 interventions such as seclusion and 
 restraints), differentiated instruction, and 
 data-driven instruction (including the use of 
 data to identify and address disparities in 
 rates of discipline among student subgroups);
 ``(ii) universal design for learning;
 ``(iii) determining and utilizing 
 accommodations for instruction and assessments 
 for students with disabilities;
 ``(iv) collaborating with stakeholders such 
 as special educators, related services 
 providers, out-of-school time providers, and 
 parents, including participation in 
 individualized education program development 
 and implementation;
 ``(v) appropriately utilizing technology 
 and assistive technology for students with 
 disabilities; and
 ``(vi) effectively and equitably using 
 technology for digital and blended learning;
 ``(D) provide teacher candidates participating in 
 the program under subparagraph (B) with skills related 
 to--
 ``(i) social and emotional learning 
 competencies;
 ``(ii) positive behavior interventions and 
 supports or multitiered systems of support;
 ``(iii) trauma-informed care;
 ``(iv) evidenced-based restorative justice 
 practices; and
 ``(v) culturally responsive teaching and 
 anti-bias training that is evidence-based; and
 ``(E) provide extensive clinical experience for 
 participants described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) 
 with mentoring and induction support throughout the 
 program that continues during the first 2 years of 
 full-time teaching.
 ``(f) Application.--
 ``(1) Application requirements.--An eligible partnership 
 seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application 
 to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
 such information as the Secretary may require. Such application 
 shall include--
 ``(A) a self-assessment by the eligible partnership 
 of the existing teacher preparation program at the 
 institution of higher education and needs related to 
 preparing general education teacher candidates to 
 instruct students with disabilities; and
 ``(B) an assessment of the existing personnel needs 
 for general education teachers who instruct students 
 with disabilities, performed by the high-need local 
 educational agency described in subsection (d)(1)(C).
 ``(2) Peer review.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall convene a 
 peer review committee to review applications for grants 
 under this subpart and to make recommendations to the 
 Secretary regarding the selection of eligible 
 partnerships for such grants.
 ``(B) Membership.--Members of the peer review 
 committee shall be recognized experts in the fields of 
 special education, social and emotional learning, 
 teacher preparation, and general education and shall 
 not be in a position to benefit financially from any 
 grants awarded under this section.
 ``(g) Equitable Geographic Distribution.--In awarding grants under 
this subpart, the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent possible, 
provide for an equitable geographic distribution of such grants.
 ``(h) Evaluations.--
 ``(1) By the partnership.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible partnership 
 receiving a grant under this subpart shall conduct an 
 evaluation at the end of the grant period to 
 determine--
 ``(i) the effectiveness of the general 
 education teachers who completed a program 
 under subsection (c)(1) with respect to 
 instruction of students with disabilities in 
 general education classrooms; and
 ``(ii) the systemic impact of the 
 activities carried out by such grant on how 
 each institution of higher education that is a 
 member of the partnership prepares teachers for 
 instruction in elementary schools and secondary 
 schools.
 ``(B) Report to the secretary.--Each eligible 
 partnership performing an evaluation under subparagraph 
 (A) shall report the findings of such evaluation to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Report by the secretary.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the last day of the grant period for which an evaluation 
 was conducted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make 
 available to the authorizing committees and the public the 
 findings of the evaluations submitted under paragraph (1), and 
 information on best practices related to effective instruction 
 of students with disabilities in general education classrooms.

 ``Subpart 3--Preparing Teachers for English-Learner Instruction

``SEC. 251. TEACHING ENGLISH LEARNERS GRANT.

 ``(a) Authorization of Program.--The Secretary shall award grants, 
on a competitive basis, to eligible partnerships to improve the 
preparation of teacher candidates to ensure that such teacher 
candidates possess the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively 
instruct English learners.
 ``(b) Duration of Grants.--A grant under this section shall be 
awarded for a period of not more than 5 years.
 ``(c) Non-Federal Share.--An eligible partnership that receives a 
grant under this section shall provide not less than 25 percent of the 
cost of the activities carried out with such grant from non-Federal 
sources, which may be provided in cash or in kind.
 ``(d) Eligible Partnership.--The term `eligible partnership' means 
an eligible institution of higher education in partnership with a high-
need local educational agency or a high-need early childhood education 
program.
 ``(e) Uses of Funds.--An eligible partnership that receives a grant 
under this section shall use the grant to--
 ``(1) develop or strengthen an undergraduate, 
 postbaccalaureate, or master's teacher preparation program by 
 integrating strategies for teaching English learners into the 
 education curriculum and academic content;
 ``(2) provide teacher candidates participating in a program 
 under paragraph (1) with skills related to--
 ``(A) helping English learners--
 ``(i) achieve at high levels in 
 prekindergarten programs, and elementary 
 schools and secondary schools so that such 
 English learners can meet the challenging State 
 academic standards adopted under section 
 1111(b)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)(1)) by 
 the State of the school attended by the English 
 learners, which all children in the State are 
 expected to meet; and
 ``(ii) attain English proficiency;
 ``(B) appropriately identifying and meeting the 
 specific learning needs of children with disabilities 
 who are English learners;
 ``(C) appropriately using universal design for 
 learning;
 ``(D) recognizing and addressing the social and 
 emotional needs of English learners; and
 ``(E) promoting parental, family, and community 
 engagement in educational programs that serve English 
 learners;
 ``(3) provide authentic clinical learning opportunities for 
 teacher candidates participating in the program involving 
 sustained interactions with teachers and English learners at 
 public prekindergarten programs, or elementary schools or 
 secondary schools, to the extent practicable, or simulated 
 environments at the eligible institution of higher education 
 involved, that foster in-depth, first-hand engagement with 
 tasks required of a teacher providing instruction to English 
 learners; and
 ``(4) provide teacher candidates with the required 
 coursework to qualify for an English-as-a-second-language 
 certification, endorsement, or initial teaching credential, as 
 recognized by the State of the eligible partnership.
 ``(f) Application.--An eligible partnership seeking a grant under 
this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require. Such application shall include--
 ``(1) a self-assessment by the eligible partnership of the 
 existing teacher preparation program at the institution of 
 higher education and the needs related to preparing teacher 
 candidates to instruct English learners in the manner described 
 in subsection (d)(2); and
 ``(2) a self-assessment by the eligible partnership of the 
 personnel needs for teachers who instruct English learners at 
 local, public prekindergarten programs, and elementary schools 
 and secondary schools.
 ``(g) Equitable Geographic Distribution.--In awarding grants under 
this section, the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent possible, 
provide for an equitable geographic distribution of such grants.
 ``(h) Evaluations.--
 ``(1) Report from eligible partnerships.--An eligible 
 partnership receiving a grant under this section shall submit 
 to the Secretary the results of an evaluation conducted by the 
 partnership at the end of the grant period to determine--
 ``(A) the effectiveness of teachers who completed a 
 program under subsection (d)(1) with respect to 
 instruction of English learners; and
 ``(B) the systemic impact of the activities carried 
 out by such grant on how such partnership prepares 
 teachers to provide instruction in prekindergarten 
 programs, and elementary schools and secondary schools.
 ``(2) Report from the secretary.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the last day of the grant period under this section, the 
 Secretary shall make available to the authorizing committees 
 and the public--
 ``(A) the findings of the evaluations submitted 
 under paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) information on best practices related to 
 effective instruction of English learners.

``Subpart 4--Graduate Fellowships To Prepare Faculty in High-Need Areas 
 at Colleges of Education

``SEC. 261. GRADUATE FELLOWSHIPS TO PREPARE FACULTY IN HIGH-NEED AREAS 
 AT COLLEGES OF EDUCATION.

 ``(a) Grants by Secretary.--From the amounts provided to carry out 
this subpart, the Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, 
to eligible institutions to enable such institutions to make graduate 
fellowship awards to qualified individuals in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.
 ``(b) Eligible Institutions.--In this section, the term `eligible 
institution' means an institution of higher education, or a consortium 
of such institutions, that offers a program of postbaccalaureate study 
leading to a doctoral degree.
 ``(c) Applications.--An eligible institution that desires a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may reasonably require.
 ``(d) Types of Fellowships Supported.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subpart shall use the grant funds to provide 
 graduate fellowships to individuals who are preparing for the 
 professorate in order to prepare individuals to become 
 elementary school and secondary school science, technology, 
 engineering, and math teachers, special education teachers, and 
 teachers who provide instruction for English-learners, who meet 
 the applicable State certification and licensure requirements, 
 including any requirements for certification obtained through 
 alternative routes to certification, or, with regard to special 
 education teachers, the qualifications described in section 
 612(a)(14)(C) of the Individuals with Disabilities Education 
 Act (20 U.S.C. 1412(a)(14)(C)).
 ``(2) Types of study.--A graduate fellowship provided under 
 this section shall support an individual in pursuing 
 postbaccalaureate study, which leads to a doctoral degree and 
 may include a master's degree as part of such study, related to 
 teacher preparation and pedagogy in one of the following areas:
 ``(A) Science, technology, engineering, 
 mathematics, and computer science, and their related 
 subfields, if the individual has completed a master's 
 degree in mathematics, engineering, science, or 
 computer science and is pursuing a doctoral degree in 
 mathematics, science, engineering, or education.
 ``(B) Special education.
 ``(C) The instruction of English-learners, 
 including postbaccalaureate study in language 
 instruction educational programs.
 ``(e) Fellowship Terms and Conditions.--
 ``(1) Selection of fellows.--The Secretary shall ensure 
 that an eligible institution that receives a grant under this 
 subpart--
 ``(A) shall provide graduate fellowship awards to 
 individuals who plan to pursue a career in instruction 
 at an institution of higher education that has a 
 teacher preparation program; and
 ``(B) may not provide a graduate fellowship to an 
 otherwise eligible individual--
 ``(i) during periods in which such 
 individual is enrolled at an institution of 
 higher education unless such individual is 
 maintaining satisfactory academic progress in, 
 and devoting full-time study or research to, 
 the pursuit of the degree for which the 
 fellowship support was provided; or
 ``(ii) if the individual is engaged in 
 gainful employment, other than part-time 
 employment related to teaching, research, or a 
 similar activity determined by the institution 
 to be consistent with and supportive of the 
 individual's progress toward the degree for 
 which the fellowship support was provided.
 ``(2) Amount of fellowship awards.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible institution that 
 receives a grant under this subpart shall award 
 stipends to individuals who are provided graduate 
 fellowships under this subpart.
 ``(B) Awards based on need.--A stipend provided 
 under this subpart shall be in an amount equal to the 
 level of support provided by the National Science 
 Foundation graduate fellowships, except that such 
 stipend shall be adjusted as necessary so as not to 
 exceed the fellowship recipient's demonstrated need, as 
 determined by the institution of higher education where 
 the fellowship recipient is enrolled.
 ``(3) Service requirement.--
 ``(A) Teaching required.--Each individual who 
 receives a graduate fellowship under this subpart and 
 earns a doctoral degree shall teach for 1 year at an 
 institution of higher education that has a teacher 
 preparation program for each year of fellowship support 
 received under this section.
 ``(B) Institutional obligation.--Each eligible 
 institution that receives a grant under this subpart 
 shall provide an assurance to the Secretary that the 
 institution has inquired of and determined the decision 
 of each individual who has received a graduate 
 fellowship to, within 3 years of receiving a doctoral 
 degree, begin employment at an institution of higher 
 education that has a teacher preparation program, as 
 required by this section.
 ``(C) Agreement required.--Prior to receiving an 
 initial graduate fellowship award, and upon the annual 
 renewal of the graduate fellowship award, an individual 
 selected to receive a graduate fellowship under this 
 section shall sign an agreement with the Secretary 
 agreeing to pursue a career in instruction at an 
 institution of higher education that has a teacher 
 preparation program in accordance with subparagraph 
 (A).
 ``(D) Failure to comply.--If an individual who 
 receives a graduate fellowship award under this section 
 fails to comply with the agreement signed pursuant to 
 subparagraph (C), the sum of the amounts of any 
 graduate fellowship award received by such recipient 
 shall, upon a determination of such a failure, be 
 treated as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan 
 under part D of title IV, and shall be subject to 
 repayment, together with interest thereon accruing from 
 the date of the fellowship award, in accordance with 
 terms and conditions specified by the Secretary in 
 regulations under this subpart.
 ``(E) Modified service requirement.--The Secretary 
 may waive or modify the service requirement of this 
 paragraph in accordance with regulations promulgated by 
 the Secretary with respect to the criteria to determine 
 the circumstances under which compliance with such 
 service requirement is inequitable or represents a 
 substantial hardship. The Secretary may waive the 
 service requirement if compliance by the fellowship 
 recipient is determined to be inequitable or represent 
 a substantial hardship--
 ``(i) because the individual is permanently 
 and totally disabled at the time of the waiver 
 request; or
 ``(ii) based on documentation presented to 
 the Secretary of substantial economic or 
 personal hardship.
 ``(f) Institutional Support for Fellows.--An eligible institution 
that receives a grant under this section may reserve not more than ten 
percent of the grant amount for academic and career transition support 
for graduate fellowship recipients and for meeting the institutional 
obligation described in subsection (e)(3)(B).
 ``(g) Restriction on Use of Funds.--An eligible institution that 
receives a grant under this section may not use grant funds for general 
operational overhead of the institution.

 ``Subpart 5--General Provisions

``SEC. 281. COMPETITIVE PRIORITY.

 ``In awarding grants under subparts 1 through 4, the Secretary 
shall award competitive priority to eligible institutions, eligible 
partnerships, and eligible entities that demonstrate in the application 
for such a grant a plan to--
 ``(1) increase the diversity in the educator workforce 
 through--
 ``(A) recruiting, enrolling, and preparing diverse 
 teacher candidates; and
 ``(B) efforts that help retain diverse teacher 
 candidates in high-needs schools;
 ``(2) address the shortage of teachers in high-needs fields 
 including science, technology, engineering, arts, mathematics, 
 or computer science through--
 ``(A) recruiting, enrolling, and preparing teacher 
 candidates to achieve certification, as required by the 
 State, to offer instruction in high-needs fields, 
 including science, technology, engineering, music, 
 arts, mathematics, or computer science; and
 ``(B) efforts that help retain teachers of high-
 needs fields in high-needs schools;
 ``(3) expand the pipeline of school leaders through 
 preparing teacher leaders, which may be achieved by efforts 
 that may include--
 ``(A) embedding pedagogical coursework for teacher 
 candidates that fosters--
 ``(i) leadership and advocacy skills;
 ``(ii) knowledge of school management and 
 finance;
 ``(iii) school operations and business 
 skills;
 ``(iv) effective use and management of 
 educational and accessible technology;
 ``(v) strategies for community and family 
 engagement; and
 ``(vi) mentorship and coaching strategies; 
 and
 ``(B) providing opportunities for teacher 
 candidates to receive--
 ``(i) exposure to and modeling from teacher 
 leaders and school leaders; and
 ``(ii) ongoing support and continuation of 
 professional development on teacher or other 
 school leadership once exiting the teacher or 
 other school leader preparation program; and
 ``(4) recruit candidates with significant cultural and 
 community competency related to the demographics of the student 
 body in which the candidate will receive a placement, as 
 measured by standards, specified in the plan, which may 
 include--
 ``(A) a candidate's prior record of community 
 service with school-aged children in the community;
 ``(B) nominations from members of the community; 
 and
 ``(C) a candidate's involvement in relevant 
 community organizations.''.

 TITLE III--INSTITUTIONAL AID

SEC. 3001. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 311(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1057(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the following:
 ``(6) Tutoring, counseling, advising, and student service 
 programs designed to improve academic success, including 
 innovative and customized instructional courses (which may 
 include remedial education and English language instruction) 
 designed to help retain students and move the students rapidly 
 into core courses and through program completion.'';
 (2) in paragraph (8), by striking ``acquisition of 
 equipment for use in strengthening funds management'' and 
 inserting ``acquisition of technology, services, and equipment 
 for use in strengthening funds and administrative management'';
 (3) in paragraph (12), by striking ``Creating'' and all 
 that follows through ``technologies,'' and inserting 
 ``Innovative learning models and creating or improving 
 facilities for Internet or other innovative technologies,'';
 (4) by redesignating paragraph (13) as paragraph (17); and
 (5) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following:
 ``(13) Establishing community outreach programs that will 
 encourage elementary school and secondary school students to 
 develop the academic skills and the interest to pursue 
 postsecondary education.
 ``(14) The development, coordination, implementation, or 
 improvement of postsecondary career and technical education 
 programs as defined in section 135 of the Carl D. Perkins 
 Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2355).
 ``(15) Alignment and integration of career and technical 
 education programs with programs of study, as defined in 
 section 3(41) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act (20 U.S.C. 2302(41)), leading to a bachelor's 
 degree, graduate degree, or professional degree.
 ``(16) Developing or expanding access to dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs and early college high school programs.''.

SEC. 3002. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Program Purpose.--Section 311(d) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1057(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``non-Federal sources'' and 
 inserting ``non-Federal sources (which may include 
 gifts to the endowment fund restricted for a specific 
 purpose)''; and
 (B) by striking ``or greater than'' and inserting 
 ``50 percent of''; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Scholarship.--An eligible institution that uses grant 
 funds provided under this section to establish or increase an 
 endowment fund may use the interest proceeds from such 
 endowment to provide scholarships to students for the purposes 
 of attending such institution.''.
 (b) Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities.--Section 316(c) 
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``Indians'' 
 and all that follows through ``policy'' and inserting 
 ``American Indians and Alaska Natives are 
 underrepresented, instruction in Native American 
 language, and instruction to support tribal governance, 
 tribal public policy, and tribal history and 
 sovereignty'' and
 (B) in subparagraph (L) by striking ``outreach'' 
 and all that follows through ``education'' and 
 inserting ``outreach and recruitment activities and 
 programs that encourage American Indian and Alaska 
 Native elementary school students, secondary school 
 students, and adults to develop the academic skills and 
 the interest to pursue and succeed in postsecondary 
 education''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``matching funds'' and 
 inserting ``matching funds (which may include 
 gifts to the endowment fund restricted for a 
 specific purpose)''; and
 (ii) by striking ``equal to the Federal 
 funds'' and inserting ``equal to 50 percent of 
 the Federal funds''; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the 
 following:
 ``(D) Scholarships.--An eligible institution that 
 uses grant funds provided under this section to 
 establish or increase an endowment fund may use the 
 interest proceeds from such endowment to provide 
 scholarships to students for the purposes of attending 
 such institution.''.
 (c) Elimination of Pre-approval Requirement; Use of Unexpended 
Funds.--Section 316(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1059c(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (1);
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as 
 paragraphs (1) through (3), respectively; and
 (3) in paragraph (2), as so redesignated, by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(C) Use of unexpended funds.--Any funds paid to 
 an institution and not expended or used for the 
 purposes for which the funds were paid during the 5-
 year period following the date of the initial grant 
 award, may be carried over and expended during the 
 succeeding 5-year period, if such funds were obligated 
 for a purpose for which the funds were paid during the 
 5-year period following the date of the initial grant 
 award.''.
 (d) Promoting the Sustainability of Native American Languages.--
Part A of title III of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1057 
et seq.) is further amended by inserting after section 316 (20 U.S.C. 
1059c) the following:

``SEC. 316A. NATIVE AMERICAN LANGUAGE VITALIZATION AND TRAINING 
 PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amount appropriated under 
 subsection (d), the Secretary shall establish the Native 
 American Language Vitalization and Training Program under which 
 the Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to 
 eligible institutions to promote the preservation, 
 revitalization, relevancy, and use of Native American 
 languages.
 ``(2) Term.--The term of a grant under this section shall 
 be not more than 5 years.
 ``(3) Application.--
 ``(A) Streamlined process.--In carrying out the 
 program under this section, the Secretary shall 
 establish application requirements in such a manner as 
 to simplify and streamline the process for the grant 
 application under this section.
 ``(B) In general.--To be eligible to receive a 
 grant under this subsection, an eligible institution 
 shall submit to the Secretary an application at such 
 time, in such manner, and in accordance with any other 
 application requirements described in subparagraph (A), 
 that the Secretary may prescribe, and including the 
 following:
 ``(i) A description of the 5-year program 
 of the eligible institution for meeting the 
 needs of American Indians, Alaska Natives, 
 Native Hawaiians, or Native American Pacific 
 Islanders, as appropriate, in the area served 
 by the institution, and how such plan is 
 consistent with the purposes described in 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(ii)(I) An identification of the 
 population to be served by the eligible 
 institution; and
 ``(II) an identification of the status of 
 Native American language understanding and use 
 within that population and a description of the 
 manner in which the program will help preserve 
 and revitalize the relevant Native American 
 language.
 ``(iii) A description of the services to be 
 provided under the program, including the 
 manner in which the services will be integrated 
 with other appropriate language programs 
 available in the relevant community.
 ``(iv) A description, to be prepared in 
 consultation with the Secretary, of the 
 performance measures to be used to assess the 
 performance of the eligible institution in 
 carrying out the program.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--An eligible institution may use a grant under 
this section to carry out activities consistent with the purposes 
described in subsection (a)(1), including--
 ``(1) curriculum development and academic instruction, 
 including educational activities, programs, and partnerships 
 relating to students in early childhood education programs 
 through grade 12;
 ``(2) professional development for faculty at the eligible 
 institution and in-service training programs for early 
 childhood education programs through grade 12 instructors and 
 administrators; and
 ``(3) innovative Native American language programs for 
 students in early childhood education programs through grade 
 12, including language immersion programs.
 ``(c) Applicability of Other Provisions.--
 ``(1) Concurrent funding.--
 ``(A) Tribal college or university.--An eligible 
 institution that is a Tribal College or University may, 
 concurrently, receive a grant under this section and 
 funds under section 316.
 ``(B) Alaska native-serving institution or native 
 hawaiian-serving institution.--An eligible institution 
 that is an Alaska Native-serving institution or Native 
 Hawaiian-serving institution may, concurrently, receive 
 a grant under this section and funds under section 317.
 ``(C) Asian american and native american pacific 
 islander-serving institution.--An eligible institution 
 that is an Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution may, concurrently, receive 
 a grant under this section and funds under section 320.
 ``(2) Exemption.--Sections 312(b) and 313(d) shall not 
 apply to an eligible institution that receives a grant under 
 this section.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $20,000,000 (of which 
$15,000,000 shall be available for Tribal Colleges or Universities and 
$5,000,000 shall be available for the institutions described in 
subparagraphs (B) through (D) of subsection (e)(1)) for fiscal year 
2021 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means--
 ``(A) a Tribal College or University, as defined in 
 section 316;
 ``(B) an Alaska Native-serving institution, as 
 defined in section 317;
 ``(C) a Native Hawaiian-serving institution, as 
 defined in section 317; or
 ``(D) an Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution, as defined in section 
 320, which is located in American Samoa, Guam, or the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 ``(2) Native american.--The term `Native American' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 371(c)(6).''.
 (e) Predominantly Black Institutions.--Section 318(d)(3) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059e(d)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) by striking ``non-Federal sources'' and 
 inserting ``non-Federal sources (which may include 
 gifts to the endowment fund restricted for a specific 
 purpose)''; and
 (B) by striking ``equal to or greater than the 
 Federal funds'' and inserting ``equal to 50 percent of 
 the Federal funds''; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following:
 ``(D) Scholarships.--An eligible institution that 
 uses grant funds provided under this section to 
 establish or increase an endowment fund may use the 
 interest proceeds from such endowment to provide 
 scholarships to students for the purposes of attending 
 such institution.''.
 (f) Technical Correction to Section 317.-- Section 317(d)(3)(A) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.1059d(d)(3)(A) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(A) Eligibility.--No Alaskan Native-serving 
 institution of Native Hawaiian-serving institution that 
 receives funds under this section shall concurrently 
 receive funds under other provisions of this part, part 
 B, or part A of title V.''.
 (g) Technical Correction to Section 318.--Section 318(i) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059e) is amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Special Rule 
 on Eligibility'' and inserting ``Special Rules'' ;
 (2) by striking ``No Predominantly'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Eligibility.--No Predominantly''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Exemption.--Section 313(d) shall not apply to 
 institutions that are eligible to receive funds under this 
 section.''.
 (h) Technical Correction to Section 320.--Section 320(d)(3)(A) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059g(d)(3)(A)) is amended 
by inserting ``part A of'' after ``or''.

SEC. 3003. STRENGTHENING HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.

 (a) Allowable Uses of Funds.--Section 323(a) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1062(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraphs (6) and (7) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(6) Tutoring, counseling, advising, and student service 
 programs designed to improve academic success, including 
 innovative and customized instructional courses (which may 
 include remedial education and English language instruction) 
 designed to help retain students and move students rapidly into 
 core courses and through program completion.
 ``(7) Funds and administrative management, and acquisition 
 of technology, services, and equipment for use in strengthening 
 funds and administrative management.'';
 (2) in paragraph (10)--
 (A) by striking ``teacher education'' and inserting 
 ``traditional or alternative route teacher 
 preparation''; and
 (B) by striking ``preparation for teacher 
 certification'' and inserting ``preparation of 
 graduates for teacher certification or licensure'';
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (15) as paragraph (19); and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (14) the following:
 ``(15) Distance education programs and creating or 
 improving facilities for internet or other distance learning 
 academic instruction capabilities, including the purchase or 
 rental of telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(16) Establishing or improving a program that produces 
 improved results in the educational outcomes of African 
 American males.
 ``(17) Scholarships, fellowships, and other financial 
 assistance for financially needy undergraduate students, as 
 determined by the institution, to permit the enrollment and 
 degree completion of such students in the physical or natural 
 sciences, engineering, mathematics or other scientific 
 disciplines in which African Americas are underrepresented, 
 except that not more than 30 percent of the grant amount may be 
 used for this purpose.
 ``(18) Establishing or improving an office of sponsored 
 programs to assist with identifying external funding 
 opportunities, applying for external funding, and administering 
 grant awards.''.
 (b) Historically Black Colleges and Universities.--Section 323(b) 
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1062(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``non-Federal sources'' and 
 inserting ``non-Federal sources (which may include 
 gifts to the endowment fund restricted for a specific 
 purpose)''; and
 (B) by striking ``equal to or greater than the 
 Federal funds'' and inserting ``equal to 50 percent of 
 the Federal funds''; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Scholarships.--An eligible institution that uses 
 grant funds provided under this section to establish or 
 increase an endowment fund may use the interest proceeds from 
 such endowment to provide scholarships to students for the 
 purposes of attending such institution.''.
 (c) Allotments and Application Process.--
 (1) Allotments.--Section 324 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (c), by striking ``5'' and 
 inserting ``6'';
 (B) in subsection (d)(1), by striking subparagraphs 
 (A) and (B) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) less than $500,000 for a part B institution which has 
 received a grant under this part, the Secretary shall award the 
 part B institution an allotment in the amount of $500,000; and
 ``(B) less than $250,000 for a part B institution which has 
 not received a grant under this part for a fiscal year prior to 
 fiscal year 2019, the Secretary shall award the part B 
 institution an allotment in the amount of $250,000.''; and
 (C) in subsection (h)--
 (i) in paragraphs (1)(C) and (2)(C), by 
 striking ``within 5 years'' each time it 
 appears and inserting ``within 6 years''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Limitation for new institutions.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of this section, no part B institution that 
 would otherwise be eligible for funds under this part shall 
 receive an allotment under this part for a fiscal year, 
 unless--
 ``(A) such institution received an allotment under 
 this part for fiscal year 2019; or
 ``(B) the amount appropriated under section 
 399(a)(2)(A) for such fiscal year is not less than 
 $282,420,000.''.
 (2) Applications.--Section 325(c) of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063a(c)) is amended by inserting ``, 
 including goals to enhance student retention, graduation, and 
 postgraduate outcomes,'' after ``management and academic 
 programs''.
 (d) Professional or Graduate Institutions.--Section 326(c) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063b(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)--
 (A) by striking ``equipment,'' and inserting 
 ``equipment, technology, and services,''; and
 (B) by inserting ``and administrative'' after ``in 
 strengthening funds'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (12) as paragraph (13); and
 (3) by striking paragraph (11) and inserting the following:
 ``(11) tutoring, counseling, advising, and student service 
 programs designed to improve academic success, including 
 innovative and customized instructional courses (which may 
 include remedial education and English language instruction) 
 designed to help retain students and move students rapidly into 
 core courses and through program completion; and
 ``(12) distance education programs and creating or 
 improving facilities for internet or other distance learning 
 academic instruction capabilities, including the purchase or 
 rental of telecommunications technology equipment or services; 
 and''.
 (e) Eligibility.--Section 326(e)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063b(e)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (W), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (X), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(Y) University of the Virgin Islands School of 
 Medicine.''.
 (f) Conforming Amendment.--Section 326(f) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063b(f)) is amended by striking ``through (X)'' 
both places it appears and inserting ``through (Y)''.
 (g) Interaction With Other Grant Programs.--Section 326(h) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1063b(h)) is amended by 
striking ``or 724'' and inserting ``724, 727, or 729''.

SEC. 3004. HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY CAPITAL FINANCING.

 (a) Bond Insurance and Capital Finance of STEM Facilities.--Section 
343 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1066b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``an escrow 
 account'' and inserting ``a bond insurance fund'';
 (B) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``(except that 
 loans for the purpose of science, technology, 
 engineering, or mathematics related academic facilities 
 shall carry not more than a 1 percent rate of 
 interest)'' after ``charge such interest on loans'';
 (C) in paragraph (8)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``an escrow account'' and 
 inserting ``a bond insurance fund''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``the 
 escrow account'' and inserting ``the bond 
 insurance fund'';
 (D) in paragraph (9), by striking ``escrow 
 account'' each place it appears and inserting ``bond 
 insurance fund''; and
 (E) in paragraph (12), by striking ``, except as 
 otherwise required by the Secretary''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``escrow account'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``bond insurance fund''.
 (b) Increased Aggregate Bond Limit.--Section 344(a) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1066c(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``$1,100,000,000'' and inserting ``$3,600,000,000'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$733,333,333'' and 
 inserting ``two-thirds''; and
 (3) in paragraph (2), by striking ``$366,666,667'' and 
 inserting ``one-third''.
 (c) Strengthening Technical Assistance.--Section 345 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1066d) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (9) and inserting the following:
 ``(9) may, directly or by grant or contract, provide 
 financial counseling and technical assistance to eligible 
 institutions to prepare the institutions to qualify, apply for, 
 and maintain a capital improvement loan, including a loan under 
 this part; and''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (10) and inserting the following:
 ``(10) may provide for the modification or deferment of a 
 loan made under this part based on need of the institution, as 
 defined by the Secretary, for a period not to exceed 6 fiscal 
 years, and, during the period of deferment of such a loan, 
 interest on the loan will not accrue or be capitalized.''.
 (d) HBCU Capital Financing Advisory Board.--Paragraph (2) of 
Section 347(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1066f(c)) 
is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Report.--On an annual basis, the Advisory Board shall 
 prepare and submit to the authorizing committees a report on--
 ``(A) the financial status of the historically 
 Black colleges and universities described in paragraph 
 (1)(A);
 ``(B) an overview of all loans awarded under the 
 program under this part, including the most recent 
 loans awarded for the fiscal year in which the report 
 is submitted; and
 ``(C) administrative and legislative 
 recommendations for addressing the issues related to 
 construction financing facing historically Black 
 colleges and universities.''.

SEC. 3005. STRENGTHENING HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES 
 AND OTHER MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 371(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1067q(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A)--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``appropriated,'' and all that follows through ``2019'' 
 and inserting the following: ``appropriated, 
 $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding 
 fiscal year''; and
 (B) by striking the second sentence; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``$100,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$117,500,000'';
 (ii) in clause (ii), by striking 
 ``$100,000,000'' and inserting ``$99,875,000'';
 (iii) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' 
 at the end;
 (iv) in clause (iii)--
 (I) by striking ``$55,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$65,000,000''; and
 (II) by striking ``(D)'' and 
 inserting ``(E)'';
 (v) by redesignating clause (iii) as clause 
 (iv); and
 (vi) by inserting after clause (ii) the 
 following:
 ``(iii) $17,625,000 shall be available for 
 allocation under subparagraph (D); and'';
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as 
 subparagraph (E) and--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``$30,000,000'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``$35,000,000'';
 (ii) in clause (ii), by striking 
 ``$15,000,000'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``$18,000,000''; and
 (iii) in clauses (iii) and (iv), by 
 striking ``$5,000,000'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``$6,000,000''; and
 (C) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(C) Allocation and allotment hbcus.--The amount 
 made available for allocation under this subparagraph 
 by subparagraph (A)(ii) for any fiscal year shall be 
 available to eligible institutions described in 
 subsection (a)(1) and shall be made available as grants 
 under section 323 and allotted among such institutions 
 under section 324, treating such amount, plus the 
 amount appropriated for such fiscal year in a regular 
 or supplemental appropriation Act to carry out part B 
 of this title, as the amount appropriated to carry out 
 part B of this title for purposes of allotments under 
 section 324, for use by such institutions with a 
 priority for--
 ``(i) activities described in paragraphs 
 (1), (2), (4), (5), and (10) of section 323(a); 
 and
 ``(ii) other activities, consistent with 
 the institution's comprehensive plan and 
 designed to increase the institution's capacity 
 to prepare students for careers in the physical 
 or natural sciences, mathematics, computer 
 science or information technology or sciences, 
 engineering, language instruction in the less-
 commonly taught languages or international 
 affairs, or nursing or allied health 
 professions.
 ``(D) Allocation and allotment pbis.--The amount 
 made available for allocation under this subparagraph 
 by subparagraph (A)(iii) for any fiscal year shall be 
 available to eligible institutions described in 
 subsection (a)(5) and shall be available for a 
 competitive grant program to award grants of $600,000 
 annually for programs in any of the following areas:
 ``(i) science, technology, engineering, or 
 mathematics (STEM);
 ``(ii) health education;
 ``(iii) internationalization or 
 globalization;
 ``(iv) teacher preparation; or
 ``(v) improving educational outcomes of 
 African American males.''.

SEC. 3006. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 Section 399(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1068h(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``2009'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2021'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``$135,000,000'' and inserting ``$150,000,000'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``$30,000,000'' and inserting ``$45,000,000'';
 (C) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``$15,000,000'' and inserting ``$25,000,000'';
 (D) in subparagraph (D), by striking 
 ``$75,000,000'' and inserting ``$90,000,000'';
 (E) in subparagraph (E), by striking 
 ``$25,000,000'' and inserting ``$30,000,000''; and
 (F) in subparagraph (F), by striking 
 ``$30,000,000'' and inserting ``$60,000,000'';
 (3) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``$375,000,000'' and inserting ``$400,000,000''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``$125,000,000'' and inserting ``$135,000,000'';
 (4) in paragraph (3), by striking ``$10,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$220,000,000''; and
 (5) in paragraph (4)(A), by striking ``$185,000'' and 
 inserting ``$225,000''.

 TITLE IV--STUDENT ASSISTANCE

SEC. 4001. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided in this title or the amendments made 
by this title, this title and the amendments made by this title shall 
take effect on July 1, 2021.

 PART A--GRANTS TO STUDENTS IN ATTENDANCE AT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER 
 EDUCATION

 Subpart 1--Federal Pell Grants

SEC. 4011. AMOUNT OF GRANTS.

 Section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``through fiscal year 2017''; and
 (B) by inserting ``or as a postbaccalaureate in 
 accordance with subsection (c)(1)(B)'' after ``as an 
 undergraduate'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)(A)(ii), by striking 
 ``paragraph (7)(B)'' and inserting ``paragraph 
 (6)(B)'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (6), and redesignating 
 paragraph (7) as paragraph (6); and
 (C) in paragraph (6)(C) (as so redesignated), by 
 amending clause (iii) to read as follows:
 ``(iii) Subsequent award years.--
 ``(I) Award years 2018-2019, 2019-
 2020 and 2020-2021.--For each of the 
 award years 2018-2019, 2019-2020, and 
 2020-2021 the amount determined under 
 this subparagraph for purposes of 
 subparagraph (B)(iii) shall be equal to 
 the amount determined under clause (ii) 
 for award year 2017-2018.
 ``(II) Award year 2021-2022.--For 
 award year 2021-2022, the amount 
 determined under this subparagraph for 
 purposes of subparagraph (B)(iii) shall 
 be equal to--
 ``(aa) $6,195 or the total 
 maximum Federal Pell Grant for 
 the preceding award year (as 
 determined under clause 
 (iv)(II)), whichever is 
 greater, increased by $625; 
 reduced by
 ``(bb) $5,135 or the 
 maximum Federal Pell Grant for 
 which a student was eligible 
 for the preceding award year, 
 as specified in the last 
 enacted appropriation Act 
 applicable to that year, 
 whichever is greater, and
 ``(cc) rounded to the 
 neared $5.
 ``(III) Award year 2022-2023 and 
 each subsequent award year.--For award 
 year 2022-2023 and each subsequent 
 award year, the amount determined under 
 this subparagraph for purposes of 
 subparagraph (B)(iii) shall be equal 
 to--
 ``(aa) $6,820 or the total 
 maximum Federal Pell Grant for 
 the preceding award year (as 
 determined under clause 
 (iv)(II)), whichever is 
 greater, increased by a 
 percentage equal to the annual 
 adjustment percentage for the 
 award year for which the amount 
 under this subparagraph is 
 being determined; reduced by
 ``(bb) $5,135 or the 
 maximum Federal Pell Grant for 
 which a student was eligible 
 for the preceding award year, 
 as specified in the last 
 enacted appropriation Act 
 applicable to that year, 
 whichever is greater; and
 ``(cc) rounded to the 
 nearest $5.'';
 (3) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking the matter 
 preceding subparagraph (A) and inserting the following: 
 ``After receiving an application for a Federal Pell 
 Grant under this subpart, the Secretary (including any 
 contractor of the Secretary processing applications for 
 Federal Pell Grants under this subpart) shall, in a 
 timely manner, furnish to the student financial aid 
 administrator at each institution of higher education 
 that a student awarded a Federal Pell Grant under this 
 subpart is attending, the expected family contribution 
 for each such student. Each such student financial 
 administrator shall--''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``after academic 
 year 1986-1987''; and
 (4) in subsection (j)--
 (A) in paragraph (1) by inserting before the period 
 the following: ``, or if such institution of higher 
 education is subject to an ineligibility determination 
 under section 435(a)(9) or 493I(b)''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``, final 
 adjusted cohort default rate, or on-time repayment 
 rate'' before ``determination''.

SEC. 4012. GRANT ELIGIBILITY.

 Section 401(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070a(c)) is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) Period of eligibility for grants.--The period during 
 which a student may receive Federal Pell Grants shall be the 
 period required for the completion of the first undergraduate 
 baccalaureate course of study being pursued by that student at 
 the institution at which the student is in attendance except 
 that--
 ``(A) any period during which the student is 
 enrolled in a noncredit or remedial course of study as 
 defined in paragraph (2) shall not be counted for the 
 purpose of this paragraph; and
 ``(B) the period during which a student may receive 
 Federal Pell Grants shall also include the period 
 required for the completion of the first 
 postbaccalaureate course of study at an eligible 
 institution that meets the definition of institution of 
 higher education in section 101, in a case in which--
 ``(i) the student received a Federal Pell 
 Grant during the period required for the 
 completion of the student's first undergraduate 
 baccalaureate course of study for fewer than 14 
 semesters, or the equivalent of fewer than 14 
 semesters, as determined under paragraph (5);
 ``(ii) the student would otherwise be 
 eligible for a Federal Pell Grant, but for the 
 completion of such baccalaureate course of 
 study; and
 ``(iii) the period during which the student 
 receives Federal Pell Grants does not exceed 
 the student's duration limits under paragraph 
 (5).''; and
 (2) in paragraph (5)--
 (A) by striking ``(5) The period'' and inserting 
 the following: ``(5) Maximum period.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the period'';
 (B) by striking ``12'' each place the term appears 
 and inserting ``14''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) Exception.--
 ``(i) In general.--Any Federal Pell Grant 
 that a student received during a period 
 described in subclause (I) or (II) of clause 
 (ii) shall not count toward the student's 
 duration limits under this paragraph.
 ``(ii) Applicable periods.--Clause (i) 
 shall apply with respect to any Federal Pell 
 Grant awarded to a student to attend an 
 institution--
 ``(I) during a period--
 ``(aa) for which the 
 student received a loan under 
 this title; and
 ``(bb) for which the loan 
 described in item (aa) is 
 forgiven under--

 ``(AA) section 
 437(c)(1) or 464(g)(1) 
 due to the closing of 
 the institution;

 ``(BB) section 493H 
 due to the student's 
 successful assertion of 
 a defense to repayment 
 of the loan; or

 ``(CC) section 
 432(a)(6), section 
 685.215 of title 34, 
 Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or a 
 successor regulation), 
 or any other loan 
 forgiveness provision 
 or regulation under 
 this Act, as a result 
 of a determination by 
 the Secretary or a 
 court that the 
 institution committed 
 fraud or other 
 misconduct; or

 ``(II) during a period for which 
 the student did not receive a loan 
 under this title but for which, if the 
 student had received such a loan, the 
 student would have qualified for loan 
 forgiveness under subclause (I)(bb).''.

SEC. 4013. EXTENDING FEDERAL PELL GRANT ELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN SHORT-
 TERM PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070a) is amended by inserting after subsection (j) the 
following:
 ``(k) Job Training Federal Pell Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--For the award year beginning on July 1, 
 2021, and each subsequent award year, the Secretary shall carry 
 out a program through which the Secretary shall award job 
 training Federal Pell Grants to students in eligible job 
 training programs approved by the Secretary in accordance with 
 paragraph (4).
 ``(2) Terms and conditions.--Each job training Federal Pell 
 Grant awarded under this subsection shall have the same terms 
 and conditions, and be awarded in the same manner, as a Federal 
 Pell Grant awarded under subsection (a), except as follows:
 ``(A) A student who is eligible to receive a job 
 training Federal Pell Grant under this subsection is a 
 student who--
 ``(i) has not yet attained a 
 postbaccalaureate degree; and
 ``(ii) is enrolled, or accepted for 
 enrollment, in an eligible job training program 
 at an institution of higher education.
 ``(B) The amount of a job training Federal Pell 
 Grant for an eligible student shall be determined under 
 subsection (b), except that subsection (b)(4) shall not 
 apply.
 ``(3) Treatment of job training federal pell grant.--
 ``(A) Inclusion in total eligibility period.--The 
 period during which a student received a job training 
 Federal Pell Grant under this subsection shall be 
 included in calculating the duration limits with 
 respect to such student under subsection (c)(5) and to 
 the extent that such period was a fraction of a 
 semester or the equivalent, only that same fraction of 
 such semester or equivalent shall count towards such 
 duration limits.
 ``(B) Prevention of double benefits.--No student 
 may for the same payment period receive both a job 
 training Federal Pell Grant under this subsection and a 
 Federal Pell Grant under subsection (a).
 ``(4) Approval of eligible job training programs.--
 ``(A) Eligible job training program.--An eligible 
 job training program shall be a career and technical 
 education program at an institution of higher education 
 that the Secretary determines meets the following 
 requirements:
 ``(i) The job training program provides not 
 less than 150, and less than 600, clock hours 
 of instructional time over a period of not less 
 than 8, and less than 15, weeks.
 ``(ii) The job training program provides 
 training aligned with the requirements of high-
 skill, high-wage, or in-demand industry sectors 
 or occupations in the State or local area in 
 which the job training program is provided, as 
 determined by an industry or sector partnership 
 in such State or local area.
 ``(iii) The job training program has been 
 determined by the institution of higher 
 education and by such industry or sector 
 partnership to provide academic content, an 
 amount of instructional time, and a recognized 
 postsecondary credential that are sufficient 
 to--
 ``(I) meet the hiring requirements 
 of potential employers in the sectors 
 or occupations described in clause 
 (ii); and
 ``(II) satisfy any applicable 
 educational prerequisite requirement 
 for professional license or 
 certification, so that a student who 
 completes the program and seeks 
 employment is qualified to take any 
 licensure or certification examination 
 needed to practice or find employment 
 in such sectors or occupations.
 ``(iv) The job training program prepares 
 students to pursue related certificate or 
 degree programs at an institution of higher 
 education, including--
 ``(I) by ensuring the acceptability 
 of the credits received under the job 
 training program toward meeting such 
 certificate or degree program 
 requirements (such as through an 
 articulation agreement); and
 ``(II) by ensuring that a student 
 who completes noncredit coursework in 
 the job training program, upon 
 completion of the job training program 
 and enrollment in such a related 
 certificate or degree program, will 
 receive academic credit for such 
 noncredit coursework that will be 
 accepted toward meeting such 
 certificate or degree program 
 requirements.
 ``(v) The job training program provides to 
 the Secretary the annual earnings expected to 
 be paid in the sectors or occupations for which 
 the program provides training not later than 6 
 months after completion of such program (in 
 this subsection referred to as the `expected 
 earnings'), as such earnings are determined by 
 an industry or sector partnership in the State 
 or local area in which the program is provided, 
 and which shall be--
 ``(I) greater than the average or 
 median annual earnings paid to 
 individuals with only a high school 
 diploma (or the equivalent) based on 
 the most recently available data from 
 the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the 
 Bureau of the Census with respect to 
 such State or local area, or the Nation 
 as a whole, as selected by such 
 program;
 ``(II) validated by the Secretary; 
 and
 ``(III) used to review the job 
 training program under subparagraph 
 (C).
 ``(vi) The job training program is part of 
 a career pathway, and includes counseling for 
 students to--
 ``(I) support each such student in 
 achieving the student's education and 
 career goals; and
 ``(II) ensure that each such 
 student receives information on--
 ``(aa) the sectors or 
 occupations described in clause 
 (ii) for which the job training 
 program provides training 
 (including the expected 
 earnings to be paid, and, if 
 available, the mean and median 
 earnings (described in 
 subparagraph (C)(ii)) paid, in 
 such sectors or occupations)); 
 and
 ``(bb) the related 
 certificate or degree programs 
 described in clause (iv) for 
 which the job training program 
 provides preparation.
 ``(vii) The job training program meets the 
 requirements under section 104 that are 
 applicable to a program of training to prepare 
 students for gainful employment in a recognized 
 occupation.
 ``(viii) The job training program does not 
 exceed by more than 50 percent the minimum 
 number of clock hours required by a State to 
 receive a professional license or certification 
 in the State.
 ``(ix) The job training program is provided 
 by an institution of higher education that--
 ``(I) is approved by an accrediting 
 agency or association that meets the 
 requirements of section 496(a)(4)(C);
 ``(II) during the preceding 5 
 years, has not been subject to any 
 adverse actions or negative actions by 
 the accrediting agency or association 
 of the institution, State or Federal 
 enforcement agencies, or the Secretary;
 ``(III) is listed on the provider 
 list under section 122(d) of the 
 Workforce Innovation and Opportunity 
 Act (29 U.S.C. 3152(d)); and
 ``(IV) has a designated official 
 responsible for engaging with the 
 workforce development system in the 
 State or local area in which the job 
 training program is provided.
 ``(x) The job training program has a 
 verified completion rate and a verified annual 
 earnings rate that meets the requirements of 
 clauses (i) and (iii) of section 481(b)(2)(A), 
 respectively, and satisfies the criteria 
 described in clause (v) of such section.
 ``(xi) The State board representing the 
 State in which the job training program is 
 provided certifies to the Secretary that the 
 program meets the requirements of clauses (ii), 
 (viii), and (ix)(III).
 ``(B) Initial approval by the secretary.--Not later 
 than 180 days after the date on which a job training 
 program is submitted for approval under this 
 subparagraph, the Secretary shall make a determination 
 as to whether such job training program is an eligible 
 job training program in accordance with subparagraph 
 (A).
 ``(C) Review of approval.--
 ``(i) In general.--Not later than 3 years 
 after the date an eligible job training program 
 is approved under subparagraph (B), and not 
 less than once every 3 years thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall, using the data collected under 
 paragraph (5) and such other information as the 
 Secretary may require, determine whether such 
 job training program continues to meet the 
 requirements of subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Requirements.--Subject to clause 
 (iii), a determination under clause (i) that a 
 job training program continues to meet the 
 requirements of subparagraph (A) shall, at a 
 minimum, require the Secretary to determine 
 that the mean or median earnings (whichever is 
 higher) paid to students not later than 6 
 months after completing such program is equal 
 to or greater than the expected earnings of the 
 program.
 ``(iii) Exception and appeals.--
 ``(I) Exception.--The Secretary may 
 extend, by not more than an additional 
 6 months, the period by when, after 
 completion of the job training program, 
 the mean or median earnings (whichever 
 is higher) paid to students meets the 
 requirements of clause (ii), in a case 
 in which the job training program 
 requesting such extension provides 
 sufficient justification for such 
 extension (as determined by the 
 Secretary).
 ``(II) Appeals.--Not later than 60 
 days after receiving notification from 
 the Secretary of the loss of 
 eligibility resulting from the review 
 under subparagraph (C), a job training 
 program may appeal any loss of 
 eligibility under this subparagraph by 
 demonstrating extenuating 
 circumstances.
 ``(III) Secretarial requirements.--
 The Secretary shall issue a decision on 
 any appeal submitted by a job training 
 program under subclause (II) not later 
 than 45 days after its submission.
 ``(5) Data collection.--Using the postsecondary student 
 data system established under section 132(l) or a successor 
 system (whichever includes the most recent data) to streamline 
 reporting requirements and minimize reporting burdens, and in 
 coordination with the National Center for Education Statistics, 
 the Secretary of Labor, and each institution of higher 
 education offering an eligible job training program under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall, on at least an annual basis, 
 collect data with respect to each such eligible job training 
 program, including the following:
 ``(A) The number and demographics of students who 
 enroll in the program.
 ``(B) The number of credits attempted and 
 accumulated annually by students enrolled in the 
 program.
 ``(C) The share of such students who cease 
 enrollment on or before the completion of 60 percent of 
 the payment period or period of enrollment.
 ``(D) The verified completion rate and the verified 
 annual earnings rate described in clauses (i) and (iii) 
 of section 481(b)(2)(A), respectively, for the program.
 ``(E) The number and demographics of--
 ``(i) students who complete the program; 
 and
 ``(ii) students who do not complete the 
 program.
 ``(F) The outcomes of the students who complete the 
 program, including--
 ``(i) the share of such students who 
 continue enrollment at the institution of 
 higher education offering the program;
 ``(ii) the share of such students who 
 transfer to another institution of higher 
 education;
 ``(iii) the share of such students who 
 complete a subsequent certificate or degree 
 program;
 ``(iv) the share of such students who 
 secure employment 6 months and 1 year, 
 respectively--
 ``(I) after completion of such 
 program; or
 ``(II) in the case of a program 
 that prepares students for a 
 professional license or certification 
 exam, after acquiring such license or 
 certification;
 ``(v) the expected earnings in the sectors 
 or occupations for which the program provides 
 training;
 ``(vi) the mean and median earnings paid in 
 such sectors or occupations to such students 
 not later than 6 months after completing such 
 program (as described in paragraph (4)(C)(ii)); 
 and
 ``(vii) in the case of a job training 
 program that prepares students for a 
 professional license or certification exams, 
 the share of such students who pass such exams.
 ``(6) Title of job training federal pell grant.--Grants 
 made under this subsection shall be known as `job training 
 Federal Pell Grants'.
 ``(7) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Articulation agreement.--The term 
 `articulation agreement' has the meaning given the term 
 in section 486A.
 ``(B) Career and technical education.--The term 
 `career and technical education' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 3 of the Carl D. Perkins Career and 
 Technical Education Act (20 U.S.C. 2302).
 ``(C) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' means an eligible 
 institution for purposes of this subpart that is an 
 institution of higher education (as defined in section 
 101) or a postsecondary vocational institution (as 
 defined in section 102(c)).
 ``(D) WIOA definitions.--The terms `career 
 pathway', `industry or sector partnership', `in-demand 
 industry sector or occupation', `recognized 
 postsecondary credential', `State board', and 
 `workforce development system' have the meanings given 
 such terms in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).''.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Education shall--
 (1) submit to the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a report on the 
 impact of eligible job training programs described in 
 subsection (k) of section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1079a), as added by this section, based on the 
 most recent data collected under paragraph (5) of such 
 subsection (k); and
 (2) make the report described in paragraph (1) available 
 publicly on the website of the Department of Education.

SEC. 4014. PROVIDING FEDERAL PELL GRANTS FOR IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN 
 VETERAN'S DEPENDENTS.

 (a) Amendment.--Section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1070a et seq.) as amended by this subpart, is further amended by 
inserting after subsection (k) the following:
 ``(l) Scholarships for Veteran's Dependents.--
 ``(1) Definition of eligible veteran's dependent.--In this 
 subsection, the term `eligible veteran's dependent' means a 
 dependent or an independent student--
 ``(A) whose parent or guardian was a member of the 
 Armed Forces of the United States and died as a result 
 of performing military service in Iraq or Afghanistan 
 after September 11, 2001; and
 ``(B) who, at the time of the parent or guardian's 
 death, was--
 ``(i) less than 24 years of age; or
 ``(ii) enrolled at an institution of higher 
 education on a part-time or full-time basis.
 ``(2) Grants.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall award a 
 Federal Pell Grant, as modified in accordance with the 
 requirements of this subsection, to each eligible 
 veteran's dependent to assist in paying the eligible 
 veteran's dependent's cost of attendance at an 
 institution of higher education.
 ``(B) Designation.--Federal Pell Grants made under 
 this subsection may be known as `Iraq and Afghanistan 
 Service Grants'.
 ``(3) Prevention of double benefits.--No eligible veteran's 
 dependent may receive a grant under both this subsection and 
 subsection (a) or (k).
 ``(4) Terms and conditions.--The Secretary shall award Iraq 
 and Afghanistan Service Grants under this subsection in the 
 same manner and with the same terms and conditions, including 
 the length of the period of eligibility, as the Secretary 
 awards Federal Pell Grants under subsection (a), except that--
 ``(A) the award rules and determination of need 
 applicable to the calculation of Federal Pell Grants 
 under subsection (a) shall not apply to Iraq and 
 Afghanistan Service Grants;
 ``(B) the provisions of paragraph (2)(A)(iii) and 
 (3) of subsection (b), and subsection (f), shall not 
 apply;
 ``(C) the maximum period determined under 
 subsection (c)(5) shall be determined by including all 
 Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grants received by the 
 eligible veteran's dependent, including such Grants 
 received under subpart 10 before the date of enactment 
 of the College Affordability Act; and
 ``(D) an Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant to an 
 eligible veteran's dependent for any award year shall 
 equal the maximum Federal Pell Grant available under 
 subsection (b)(5) for that award year, except that an 
 Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant--
 ``(i) shall not exceed the cost of 
 attendance of the eligible veteran's dependent 
 for that award year; and
 ``(ii) shall be adjusted to reflect the 
 attendance by the eligible veteran's dependent 
 on a less than full-time basis in the same 
 manner as such adjustments are made for a 
 Federal Pell Grant under subsection (a).
 ``(5) Estimated financial assistance.--For purposes of 
 determinations of need under part F, an Iraq and Afghanistan 
 Service Grant shall not be treated as estimated financial 
 assistance as described in sections 471(3) and 480(j).''.
 (b) Effective Date; Transition.--
 (1) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall take effect with respect to the award year that begins 
 following the date of enactment of this Act, and each 
 succeeding award year.
 (2) Transition.--The Secretary shall take such steps as are 
 necessary to transition from the Iraq and Afghanistan Service 
 Grants program under subpart 10 of part A of title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070h), as in effect on 
 the day before the effective date of this Act, and the Iraq and 
 Afghanistan Service Grants program under section 401(l) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a(j)), as added by 
 this section.

SEC. 4015. FEDERAL PELL GRANT FRAUD PREVENTION.

 Section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a et 
seq.), as amended by this subpart, is further amended by inserting 
after subsection (l) the following:
 ``(m) Prevention of Fraud.--
 ``(1) Report.--Not later than December 31 of each year, the 
 Secretary shall prepare and submit a report to the authorizing 
 committees that includes the following information with respect 
 to unusual enrollment history:
 ``(A) The number and percentage of total applicants 
 who were flagged for an unusual enrollment history in 
 the preceding award year.
 ``(B) The number and percentage of institutions 
 that have had fewer than 2 percent of applicants 
 flagged for an unusual enrollment history in the 
 preceding award year.
 ``(C) The name of each institution that has had 
 more than 2 percent of total applicants flagged for an 
 unusual enrollment history in the preceding award year.
 ``(D) If the percentage of total applicants in 
 subparagraph (A) is greater than 2 percent, a detailed 
 plan from the Secretary as to how to reduce that 
 percentage below 2 percent by the following award year.
 ``(2) Definition.--For the purposes of this subsection the 
 term `unusual enrollment history' means, with respect to the 
 application for Federal student aid--
 ``(A) a pattern in which a student attends an 
 institution long enough to receive a disbursement of 
 credit balance funds authorized by this title, does not 
 complete the enrollment period, enrolls at another 
 institution and repeats this pattern to collect an 
 additional credit balance of funds authorized by this 
 title without earning academic credit; or
 ``(B) any other enrollment pattern that the 
 Department believes may signal an attempt by a student 
 to receive funds authorized under this title in a 
 fraudulent manner.''.

SEC. 4016. FEDERAL PELL GRANTS ON BEHALF OF INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070a), as amended by this subpart, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(n) Federal Pell Grants on Behalf of Incarcerated Individuals.--
 ``(1) Institutional requirements.--An eligible institution 
 may not award a Federal Pell Grant to an incarcerated 
 individual or on behalf of such individual, unless the 
 institution meets the following:
 ``(A) The institution is approved to enroll 
 incarcerated individuals by--
 ``(i) the Secretary in accordance with 
 paragraph (2); and
 ``(ii) an accrediting agency or association 
 that meets the requirements of section 
 496(a)(4)(D).
 ``(B) The institution--
 ``(i) is an institution of higher education 
 (as defined in section 101) or a postsecondary 
 vocational institution (as defined in section 
 102(c)); and
 ``(ii) during the preceding 5 years, has 
 not been subject to the denial, withdrawal, 
 suspension, or termination of accreditation.
 ``(C) The institution provides each incarcerated 
 individual, upon completion of a course offered by the 
 institution, with academic credits that are the 
 equivalent to credits earned by non-incarcerated 
 students for an equivalent course of study.
 ``(D) The institution provides to the Secretary 
 confirmation from each facility involved that the 
 course of study offered by the institution at such 
 facility is accessible to incarcerated individuals 
 (including such individuals who are individuals with 
 disabilities).
 ``(E) The institution does not enroll incarcerated 
 individuals in a course of study offered primarily as a 
 distance education program, except in a case in which 
 the institution provides to the Secretary--
 ``(i) confirmation that the distance 
 education program offers levels of faculty 
 interaction, peer engagement, and student 
 support sufficient to enable incarcerated 
 individuals to successfully participate in such 
 a program; and
 ``(ii) evidence of the institution's 
 success in offering other distance education 
 programs;
 ``(F) The institution develops and carries out a 
 process to allow each incarcerated individual to access 
 the transcripts and any other educational records of 
 such individual held by the institution, without regard 
 to the facility at which the individual is being held 
 or whether the individual has been released from such a 
 facility.
 ``(G) The institution develops and carries out a 
 process to allow each incarcerated individual an 
 opportunity to provide feedback on courses that is 
 comparable to the opportunity to provide such feedback 
 that the institution offers to non-incarcerated 
 students.
 ``(H) The institution does not directly charge an 
 incarcerated individual--
 ``(i) in the case of such an individual who 
 is an individual with a disability, for any 
 cost of the provision of reasonable 
 accommodations for the individual to 
 participate in a course of study offered by the 
 institution;
 ``(ii) in the case of such an individual 
 with an expected family contribution for an 
 award year that would not disqualify the 
 individual from receiving a Federal Pell Grant, 
 for any amount of the cost of attendance not 
 covered by the Federal Pell Grant or other 
 Federal assistance received by the institution 
 on behalf of the individual by ensuring that 
 any such amount is offset--
 ``(I) by a State or institutional 
 grant; or
 ``(II) other non-Federal financial 
 assistance that does not have to be 
 repaid by such individual; or
 ``(iii) in the case of such an individual 
 with an expected family contribution for an 
 award year that would disqualify the individual 
 from receiving a Federal Pell Grant, an amount 
 that exceeds such expected family contribution.
 ``(I) The institution makes available to 
 incarcerated individuals who are considering enrolling 
 in a course of study offered by the institution, in 
 simple and understandable terms, the following:
 ``(i) Information with respect to each 
 course of study at the institution for which 
 such an individual may receive a Federal Pell 
 Grant, including--
 ``(I) the cost of attendance;
 ``(II) the mode of instruction 
 (such as distance education, in-person 
 instruction, or a combination of such 
 modes);
 ``(III) how enrollment in such 
 course of study will impact the period 
 of eligibility for Federal Pell Grants 
 for such an individual, including in a 
 case in which the individual is 
 transferred to another facility or 
 released before the completion of such 
 course;
 ``(IV) the transferability of 
 credits earned, and the acceptability 
 of such credits toward a certificate or 
 degree program offered by the 
 institution;
 ``(V) the process for continuing 
 postsecondary education--
 ``(aa) upon transfer to 
 another facility; or
 ``(bb) after the student's 
 period of incarceration or 
 confinement; and
 ``(VI) the process for continuing 
 enrollment at the institution after the 
 student's period of incarceration or 
 confinement, including any barriers to 
 admission (such as criminal history 
 questions on applications for admission 
 to such institution).
 ``(ii) In the case of an institution that 
 offers a program to prepare incarcerated 
 individuals for gainful employment in a 
 recognized occupation (as such term is defined 
 in section 104)--
 ``(I) information on any applicable 
 State licensure and certification 
 requirements, including the 
 requirements of the State in which the 
 facility involved is located and each 
 State in which such individuals 
 permanently reside; and
 ``(II) restrictions related to the 
 employment of formerly incarcerated 
 individuals for each recognized 
 occupation for which the course of 
 study prepares students, including such 
 restrictions--
 ``(aa) in Federal law; and
 ``(bb) in the laws of the 
 State in which the facility 
 involved is located and each 
 State in which such individuals 
 permanently reside.
 ``(J) The institution submits the information 
 described in subparagraph (I) to each facility 
 involved, the Secretary, and the accrediting agency or 
 association described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
 ``(2) Approval by the secretary.--
 ``(A) Initial eligibility.--With respect to an 
 institution that seeks to award Federal Pell Grants to 
 incarcerated individuals under this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall make an initial determination about 
 whether such institution meets the requirements of this 
 subsection, which shall include a confirmation that the 
 institution--
 ``(i) has secured the approval required 
 under paragraph (1)(A)(ii); and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of paragraph 
 (1)(B).
 ``(B) Ongoing eligibility.--Not later than 5 years 
 after the Secretary makes an initial determination 
 under subparagraph (A) that an institution meets the 
 requirements of this subsection, and not less than 
 every 5 years thereafter, the Secretary shall determine 
 whether such institution continues to meet the 
 requirements of this subsection, based on--
 ``(i) a review of the data collected under 
 paragraph (3) with respect to the courses of 
 study offered by such institution in which 
 incarcerated individuals are enrolled, and 
 other applicable information that may be 
 available to the Secretary; and
 ``(ii) whether such institution meets the 
 requirements of paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Data collection.--The Secretary shall, on at least an 
 annual basis, collect data with respect to each course of study 
 offered by each institution at which incarcerated individuals 
 are enrolled, including--
 ``(A) the demographics of such individuals;
 ``(B) the share of such individuals receiving 
 Federal Pell Grants;
 ``(C) information on the academic outcomes of such 
 individuals (such as credits attempted and earned, and 
 credential and degree completion);
 ``(D) to the extent practicable, information on 
 post-release outcomes of such individuals (such as 
 continued postsecondary enrollment, employment, and 
 recidivism); and
 ``(E) any data from student satisfaction surveys 
 conducted by the institution or the facility involved 
 regarding such course of study.
 ``(4) Best practices in educating incarcerated 
 individuals.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, and at least once 
 every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary shall collect and 
 disseminate to institutions awarding Federal Pell Grants to 
 incarcerated individuals under this subsection, best practices 
 with respect to the postsecondary education of such 
 individuals.
 ``(5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Facility.--The term `facility' means--
 ``(i) a place used for the confinement of 
 individuals convicted of a criminal offense 
 that is owned by, or under contract to, the 
 Bureau of Prisons, a State, or a unit of local 
 government; or
 ``(ii) a facility to which an individual 
 subject to involuntary civil confinement is 
 committed.
 ``(B) Facility involved.--The term `facility 
 involved' means, when used with respect to an 
 institution of higher education, a facility at which a 
 course of study of the institution is offered to 
 incarcerated individuals.
 ``(C) Incarcerated individual.--The term 
 `incarcerated individual' means an individual who is 
 incarcerated in a facility or who is subject to an 
 involuntary civil commitment.
 ``(D) Non-incarcerated student.--The term `non-
 incarcerated student' means a student at an institution 
 of higher education who is not an incarcerated 
 individual.''.
 (b) Report on Impacts of Federal Pell Grants Awarded to 
Incarcerated Individuals.-- Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall submit to the 
authorizing committees and make publicly available on the website of 
the Department of Education, a report on the impacts of subsection (n) 
of section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a), 
as added by this section, based on the most recent data collected under 
paragraph (3) of such subsection (n).

 Subpart 2--Federal Early Outreach and Student Services Programs

 CHAPTER 1--FEDERAL TRIO PROGRAMS

SEC. 4021. PROGRAM AUTHORITY; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 402A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070a-11) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ``$200,000'' and all 
 that follows through the period at the end and inserting the 
 following: ``$220,000, except that for any fiscal year for 
 which such minimum individual grant amount would result in 
 fewer than 2,780 grants awarded under this chapter, an 
 individual grant authorized under this chapter shall be awarded 
 in an amount that would result in not fewer than 2,780 grants 
 awarded under this chapter for such fiscal year.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by amending subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) 
 to read as follows:
 ``(A) Accountability for outcomes.--In making 
 grants under this chapter, the Secretary shall consider 
 each applicant's prior success in achieving high-
 quality service delivery, as determined under 
 subsection (f) under the particular program for which 
 funds are sought. The level of consideration given the 
 factor of prior success in achieving high-quality 
 service delivery shall not vary from the level of 
 consideration given such factor during fiscal years 
 1994 through 1997, except that grants made under 
 section 402H shall not be given such consideration.'';
 (B) in paragraph (6)--
 (i) in the heading, by striking ``With 
 other programs for disadvantaged students''; 
 and
 (ii) by striking the last sentence;
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (7) and (8) as 
 paragraphs (8) and (9), respectively;
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following:
 ``(7) Inclusion of homeless and foster students.--The 
 Secretary shall, as appropriate, require each applicant for 
 funds under the programs authorized by this chapter (other than 
 the programs authorized under section 402E or 402G) to identify 
 and conduct outreach to foster care youth and homeless 
 individuals and make available to foster care youth and 
 homeless individuals services under such programs, including 
 mentoring, tutoring, and other services provided by such 
 programs.'';
 (E) in paragraph (8), as so redesignated, by 
 striking ``8 months'' both places it appears and 
 inserting ``90 days''; and
 (F) in paragraph (9), as so redesignated--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking ``Not later than 
 180 days after the date of enactment of 
 the Higher Education Opportunity Act,'' 
 and inserting ``Not less than 90 days 
 before the date on which a competition 
 for a grant under this chapter 
 begins,'';
 (II) in clause (iii), by striking 
 ``prior experience'' and inserting 
 ``accountability for outcomes''; and
 (III) in clause (v), by striking 
 ``prior experience'' and inserting 
 ``accountability for outcomes''; and
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (B) and 
 redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph 
 (B);
 (iii) in subparagraph (B), as so 
 redesignated, by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(vii) Technical components of 
 applications.--
 ``(I) Treatment of nonsubstantive 
 technical components of applications.--
 With respect to any competition for a 
 grant under this chapter, the Secretary 
 may not reject grant applications on 
 the sole basis of a failure to meet 
 page limits and formatting standards 
 (including with respect to font size, 
 font style, font type, line spacing, 
 paragraph justification, and page 
 margins).
 ``(II) Treatment of technical 
 budget errors in applications.--
 ``(aa) In general.--With 
 respect to any competition for 
 a grant under this chapter, the 
 Secretary may not reject grant 
 applications on the sole basis 
 of a typographical or rounding 
 error in a proposed budget 
 until the Secretary has given 
 the applicant an opportunity 
 for correction in accordance 
 with item (bb).
 ``(bb) Notice and 
 opportunity for correction.--
 The Secretary shall provide 
 notice and identification of an 
 error described in item (aa) to 
 the applicant before awarding 
 grants for each competition and 
 shall allow the applicant to 
 submit a revised application 
 that corrects the identified 
 error.
 ``(cc) Treatment of revised 
 applications.--The Secretary 
 shall treat the revised 
 application in the same manner 
 as a timely submitted 
 application.
 ``(dd) Failure to 
 correct.--If an applicant has 
 received a notice and 
 opportunity for correction of a 
 typographical or rounding error 
 in a proposed budget in 
 accordance with item (bb) and 
 the applicant fails to correct 
 the error and submit a revised 
 application, the Secretary may 
 reject or penalize that grant 
 application.'';
 (3) in subsection (d)(3), by adding at the end the 
 following: ``In addition, the Secretary shall host at least one 
 virtual, interactive training to ensure that any interested 
 applicants have access to technical assistance.'';
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of 
 subparagraph (C);
 (ii) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (D) and inserting a semicolon; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) documentation that the student has been determined 
 eligible for a Federal Pell Grant authorized under section 401; 
 or
 ``(F) for a grant authorized under section 402B or 402F of 
 this chapter, documentation that a student is attending a 
 school that--
 ``(i) elects, or for which the local educational 
 agency serving the school elects on behalf of the 
 school, to receive special assistance payment under 
 section 11(a)(1)(F)(ii) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)(ii)); or
 ``(ii) had a percentage of enrolled students who 
 were identified students (defined in clause (i) of 
 section 11(a)(1)(F) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F))) that meets or exceeds the threshold 
 described in clause (viii) of such section (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)) during the school year that ends prior 
 to the first period for which such grant is awarded.''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of 
 subparagraph (C);
 (ii) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (D) and inserting a semicolon; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) documentation that the student has been determined to 
 be eligible for a Federal Pell Grant authorized under section 
 401; or
 ``(F) for a grant authorized under section 402B or 402F of 
 this chapter, documentation that a student is attending a 
 school that--
 ``(i) elects, or for which the local educational 
 agency serving the school elects on behalf of the 
 school, to receive special assistance payment under 
 section 11(a)(1)(F)(ii) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)(ii)); or
 ``(ii) had a percentage of enrolled students who 
 were identified students (defined in clause (i) of 
 section 11(a)(1)(F) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F))) that meets or exceeds the threshold 
 described in clause (viii) of such section (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)) during the school year that ends prior 
 to the first period for which such grant is awarded.'';
 (5) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``prior experience'' and 
 inserting ``accountability in outcomes'' in the 
 heading;
 (ii) by striking ``on or after January 1, 
 2009'' and inserting ``on or after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act''; 
 and
 (iii) by striking ``prior experience of'' 
 and inserting ``success in achieving'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``college 
 students, and'' and inserting ``college students, 
 foster care youth, homeless individuals, and''; and
 (C) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) in clause (iv), by striking 
 ``will make such students eligible for 
 programs such as the Academic 
 Competitiveness Grants Program'' and 
 inserting ``includes at least 4 years 
 of mathematics, 3 years of science, and 
 2 years of a foreign language'';
 (II) by redesignating clauses (v) 
 and (vi) as clauses (vi) and (vii), 
 respectively; and
 (III) by inserting after clause 
 (iv) the following:
 ``(v) the completion of financial aid 
 applications, including the Free Application 
 for Federal Student Aid described in section 
 483(a) and college admissions applications;''.
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) by inserting ``except in the 
 case of programs that specifically 
 target veterans,'' after ``under 
 section 402C,'';
 (II) in clause (v), by striking 
 ``will make such students eligible for 
 programs such as the Academic 
 Competitiveness Grants Program'' and 
 inserting ``includes at least 4 years 
 of mathematics, 3 years of science, and 
 2 years of a foreign language'';
 (III) by redesignating clauses (vi) 
 and (vii) as clauses (vii) and (viii), 
 respectively; and
 (IV) by inserting after clause (v) 
 the following:
 ``(vi) the completion of financial aid 
 applications, including the Free Application 
 for Federal Student Aid described in section 
 483(a) and college admission applications;'';
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraphs (C), 
 (D), and (E), as subparagraphs (D), (E), and 
 (F), respectively;
 (iv) by inserting after subparagraph (B) 
 the following:
 ``(C) For programs authorized under section 402C 
 that specifically target veterans, the extent to which 
 the eligible entity met or exceeded the entity's 
 objectives for such program regarding--
 ``(i) the delivery of service to a total 
 number of students served by the program, as 
 agreed upon by the entity and the Secretary for 
 the period of the program;
 ``(ii) such students' academic performance 
 as measured by standardized tests;
 ``(iii) the retention and completion of 
 participants in the program;
 ``(iv) the provision of assistance to 
 students served by the program in completing 
 financial aid applications, including the Free 
 Application for Federal Student Aid described 
 in section 483(a) and college admission 
 applications;
 ``(v) the enrollment of such students in an 
 institution of higher education; and
 ``(vi) to the extent practicable, the 
 postsecondary completion of such students.'';
 (v) in subparagraph (D)(ii), as 
 redesignated in clause (iii)--
 (I) in subclause (I), by striking 
 ``in which such students were 
 enrolled'' and inserting ``at any 
 baccalaureate granting institution 
 within 6 years of initial enrollment in 
 the project''; and
 (II) in subclause (II), by striking 
 items (aa) and (bb) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(aa) the transfer of such 
 students to institutions of higher 
 education that offer baccalaureate 
 degrees, regardless of whether the 
 transferring student completes a degree 
 or certificate; or
 ``(bb) the completion of a degree 
 or certificate by such students at any 
 accredited institution within 4 years 
 of initial enrollment in the 
 project;'';
 (vi) in subparagraph (E), as redesignated--
 (I) in clause (iii), by striking 
 ``; and'' and inserting ``within 2 
 years of receiving the baccalaureate 
 degree;''; and
 (II) in clause (iv), by striking 
 ``graduate study and the attainment of 
 doctoral degrees by former program 
 participants.'' and inserting 
 ``graduate study; and
 ``(v) the attainment of doctoral degrees by 
 former program participants within 10 years of 
 receiving the baccalaureate degree.''; and
 (vii) in subparagraph (F), as 
 redesignated--
 (I) in clause (i), by inserting 
 ``within 2 years of service'' before 
 the semicolon; and
 (II) in clause (ii), by inserting 
 ``or re-enrollment'' after ``the 
 enrollment'';
 (6) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by striking ``$900,000,000 for fiscal year 2009 
 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the five 
 succeeding fiscal years.'' and inserting 
 ``$1,120,000,000 for fiscal year 2021, and each of the 
 5 succeeding fiscal years. The amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in the preceding sentence for fiscal year 
 2022 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years shall be 
 deemed increased by the annual adjustment percentage. 
 For purposes of this subsection, the term `adjustment 
 percentage' as applied to a fiscal year, means the 
 estimated percentage change in the Consumer Price Index 
 (as determined by the Secretary, using the definition 
 in section 478(f)) for the most recent calendar year 
 ending before the beginning of that fiscal year.'';
 (B) by striking ``\1/2\ of'';
 (C) by striking ``, and to provide'' and inserting 
 ``, to provide''; and
 (D) by striking ``current grantees.'' and all that 
 follows through ``additional readers.'' and inserting 
 ``current grantees, and to carry out the requirements 
 of subsection (c)(9)(A).'';
 (7) in subsection (h)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(4) Homeless individual.--The term `homeless individual' 
 has the meaning given the term `homeless children and youth' 
 under section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 11434a).
 ``(5) Low-income individual.--The term `low-income 
 individual' means--
 ``(A) an individual from a family whose taxable 
 income for the preceding year did not exceed 150 
 percent of the poverty line applicable to the 
 individual's family size as determined under section 
 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 
 U.S.C. 9902(2));
 ``(B) an individual whose taxable income as 
 reported on the individual's most recently completed 
 Free Application for Federal Student Aid under section 
 483(a) did not exceed 150 percent of such poverty line;
 ``(C) an individual who has been determined to be 
 eligible for a Federal Pell Grant authorized under 
 section 401; or
 ``(D) for grants authorized under 402B and 402F of 
 this chapter, a student who is attending a school 
 that--
 ``(i) elects, or for which the local 
 educational agency serving the school elects on 
 behalf of the school, to receive special 
 assistance payment under section 
 11(a)(1)(F)(ii) of the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)(ii)); or
 ``(ii) had a percentage of enrolled 
 students who were identified students (defined 
 in clause (i) of section 11(a)(1)(F) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1759a(a)(1)(F))) that meets or 
 exceeds the threshold described in clause 
 (viii) of such section (42 U.S.C. 
 1759a(a)(1)(F)) during the school year that 
 ends prior to the first year of the period for 
 which such grant is awarded.'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (5) as subsection 
 (i) and subparagraphs (A) through (D) as paragraphs (1) 
 through (4); and
 (C) by redesignating paragraph (6) as subsection 
 (j); and
 (8) in subsection (j), as redesignated, by striking 
 ``subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (5)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (i)''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Chapter 1 of subpart 2 of part A of 
title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-11) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``homeless children and youths as defined 
 in section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``homeless individuals''; 
 and
 (2) by striking ``homeless children and youths (as such 
 term is defined in section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a))'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``homeless individuals''.

SEC. 4022. TALENT SEARCH.

 Section 402B of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
12) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (4); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) to advise such youths regarding the postsecondary 
 education selection process, including consideration of 
 financial aid awards offered, potential Federal loan burden, 
 and likelihood of graduating; and'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (5); and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(6) education or counseling services to assist students 
 and their families regarding career choice; and
 ``(7) connections to programs providing financial literacy 
 and economic literacy so that students and their families are 
 able to make informed choices regarding postsecondary 
 education, including considering degree choices and potential 
 Federal loan burdens.'';
 (3) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``career'' and 
 inserting ``academic''; and
 (4) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) require an assurance that the entity carrying out the 
 project has reviewed and revised policies and practices as 
 needed to remove barriers to the participation and retention in 
 the project of homeless individuals, including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth;
 ``(6) require that such entity submit, as part of the 
 application for the project, a description of the activities 
 that will be undertaken to reach out to such homeless 
 individuals and foster care youth as part of the project; and
 ``(7) require an assurance that such entity will prepare 
 and submit the report required under section 402H(e) at the 
 conclusion of the project regarding such homeless individuals 
 and foster care youth.''.

SEC. 4023. UPWARD BOUND.

 Section 402C of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
13) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking paragraphs (5) and (6) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(5) assistance to students and their families regarding 
 career choice;
 ``(6) education or counseling services designed to improve 
 the financial literacy and economic literacy of students or the 
 students' parents in order to aid them in making informed 
 decisions about the postsecondary education selection process 
 and assist students and their families in making informed 
 choices regarding the postsecondary education selection 
 process; and
 ``(7) in the case of such a project that is not 
 specifically designed for veterans, as part of core curriculum, 
 instruction in mathematics through pre-calculus, science, 
 foreign language, language arts, and literature, and in the 
 case of such a project that is specifically designed for 
 veterans, instruction in mathematics through pre-calculus, 
 science, foreign language, and language arts.'';
 (2) by striking subsections (c) and (g) and redesignating 
 subsections (d), (e), (f), and (h) as subsections (c), (d), 
 (e), and (f), respectively;
 (3) in subsection (c), as so redesignated--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``youth'' and 
 inserting ``participants'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``youth participating in 
 the project'' and inserting ``project 
 participants''; and
 (ii) by striking ``youth;'' and inserting 
 ``participants;'' and
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking ``youth 
 participating in the project'' and inserting 
 ``participants''; and
 (4) in subsection (d), as so redesignated--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) require an assurance that the entity carrying out the 
 project has reviewed and revised policies and practices as 
 needed to remove barriers to the participation and retention in 
 the project of homeless individuals, including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth;
 ``(7) require that such entity submit, as part of the 
 application, a description of the activities that will be 
 undertaken to reach out to such homeless individuals and foster 
 care youth regarding the project; and
 ``(8) require an assurance that such entity will prepare 
 and submit the report required under section 402H(e) at the 
 conclusion of the project regarding such homeless individuals 
 and foster care youth.''; and
 (5) in subsection (e), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``$60'' and inserting ``$90'';
 (B) by striking ``$300'' and inserting ``$450'';
 (C) by striking ``$40'' and inserting ``$60''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following: ``Adults 
 participating in a project specifically targeting 
 veterans under this section may be paid stipends not in 
 excess of $100 per month during the year.''.

SEC. 4024. STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES.

 Section 402D of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
14) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``limited English 
 proficient'' and inserting ``low-income and first 
 generation college students, including limited English 
 proficient students''; and
 (B) in paragraph (4), by striking ``, including--'' 
 and all that follows through the end of the paragraph 
 and inserting a period;
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``including 
 financial planning for postsecondary education;'' and 
 inserting ``including--
 ``(A) financial planning for postsecondary 
 education, including loan burdens required, repayment 
 options, and expected earnings in potential career 
 fields;
 ``(B) basic personal income, household money 
 management, and financial planning skills; and
 ``(C) basic economic decisionmaking skills.'';
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (C) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) basic and emergency supplemental living assistance 
 grants in accordance with subsection (f).'';
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (6)(B), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) require an assurance that the entity carrying out the 
 project has reviewed and revised policies and practices as 
 needed to remove barriers to the participation and retention in 
 the project of homeless individuals, including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth;
 ``(8) require that such entity submit, in the application 
 for the project, a description of the activities that will be 
 undertaken to reach out to such homeless individuals and foster 
 care youth, who are enrolled or accepted for enrollment at the 
 institution; and
 ``(9) require an assurance that such entity will prepare 
 and submit the report required under section 402H(e) at the 
 conclusion of the project regarding such homeless individuals 
 and foster care youth.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Basic and Emergency Supplemental Living Assistance Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out the activities required 
 under subsection (b)(7) with a grant received under this 
 section, the recipient of such grant shall provide basic and 
 emergency supplemental living assistance grants to assist 
 students who are current participants in the student support 
 services program offered by the institution (in this subsection 
 referred to as `eligible students')--
 ``(A) in the case of a basic supplemental living 
 assistance grant, in covering reasonable, anticipated 
 expenses necessary for the completion of an academic 
 year of the students' first undergraduate baccalaureate 
 course of study; and
 ``(B) in the case of an emergency supplemental 
 living assistance grant, in covering reasonable, 
 unanticipated expenses necessary for the students to 
 persist in college during such academic year.
 ``(2) Amount of grants.--The recipient may determine--
 ``(A) the appropriate division of the funds between 
 basic and emergency supplemental assistance grants, 
 except that funds shall be provided for both basic and 
 emergency grants;
 ``(B) the amount of each such grant and the total 
 grant funds that an eligible student may receive, 
 except that a student may not receive more than a total 
 of $500 in emergency supplemental assistance grants per 
 academic year; and
 ``(C) the anticipated and unanticipated expenses 
 referred to in paragraph (1) that such grants will 
 cover based on the needs of eligible students, which--
 ``(i) may vary by factors including 
 academic year, housing, parental status, 
 location in urban or rural area, or other 
 circumstances; and
 ``(ii) for an individual student, may 
 cover--
 ``(I) any component of the cost of 
 attendance for the student;
 ``(II) an allowance for actual or 
 expected expenses incurred for 
 dependent care that exceeds such 
 expenses determined for the student 
 under section 472(8);
 ``(III) an allowance for actual or 
 expected expenses for transportation 
 that exceeds such expenses determined 
 for the student under section 472; and
 ``(IV) personal items or expenses 
 not otherwise covered by the cost of 
 attendance for the student.
 ``(3) Percentage of total funds.--The recipient may use not 
 more than 2 percent of the funds awarded under this section for 
 grants under this subsection.
 ``(4) Determination of need.--A grant provided to a student 
 under this subsection shall not be considered in determining 
 that student's need for grant or work assistance under this 
 title, except that in no case shall the total amount of student 
 financial assistance awarded to a student under this title 
 exceed that student's cost of attendance by more than $500.
 ``(5) Consultation.--In making grants to students under 
 this subsection, an institution shall ensure that adequate 
 consultation takes place between the student support service 
 program office and the institution's financial aid office.
 ``(6) Supplement, not supplant.--Funds received by a grant 
 recipient that are used under this subsection shall be used to 
 supplement, and not supplant, non-Federal funds expended for 
 student support services programs.
 ``(7) Funds.--For a fiscal year for which the funds 
 allocated for projects authorized under this section from the 
 amounts appropriated pursuant to the authority of section 
 402A(g) exceeds the funds allocated for such purpose for fiscal 
 year 2020, not more than 2 percent of such excess funds may be 
 made available for grants under this subsection.''.

SEC. 4025. POSTBACCALAUREATE ACHIEVEMENT PROGRAM AUTHORITY.

 Section 402E of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
15) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) by striking ``summer''; and
 (B) by inserting ``or faculty-led research 
 experiences'' before the semicolon;
 (2) in subsection (d)(4)--
 (A) by striking ``summer''; and
 (B) by inserting ``or faculty-led experiences who 
 have stipends'' after ``internships''; and
 (3) in subsection (f)(1), by striking ``$2,800'' and 
 inserting ``$4,000''.

SEC. 4026. EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY CENTERS.

 Section 402F of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-
16) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``pursue'' and 
 inserting ``begin or re-enter'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``students;'' and 
 inserting ``students, including--
 ``(A) financial planning for postsecondary 
 education, including student loan debt, repayment 
 options, and expected earnings in potential career 
 fields;
 ``(B) basic personal income, household money 
 management, and financial planning skills; and
 ``(C) basic economic decisionmaking skills;''; and
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) require an assurance that the entity carrying out the 
 project has reviewed and revised policies and practices as 
 needed to remove barriers to the participation and retention in 
 the project of homeless individuals, including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth;
 ``(5) require that such entity submit, as part of the 
 application, a description of the activities that will be 
 undertaken to reach out to such homeless individuals and foster 
 care youth regarding the project; and
 ``(6) require an assurance that such entity will prepare 
 and submit the report required under section 402H(e) at the 
 conclusion of the project regarding such homeless individuals 
 and foster care youth.''.

SEC. 4027. STAFF DEVELOPMENTAL ACTIVITIES.

 Section 402G(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070a-17(b)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``webinars, online classes,'' after 
 ``seminars, workshops,'';
 (2) by striking ``new directors'' and inserting ``staff'';
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (5) as 
 paragraphs (2) through (6), respectively;
 (4) by inserting before paragraph (2), as so redesignated, 
 the following:
 ``(1) Legislative and regulatory requirements and program 
 management for new directors of programs funded under this 
 chapter.'';
 (5) in paragraph (2), as redesignated, by inserting ``for 
 continuing directors and staff of programs'' after ``operation 
 of programs''; and
 (6) in paragraph (4), as redesignated, by striking ``model 
 programs'' and inserting ``innovations''.

SEC. 4028. REPORTS AND EVALUATIONS.

 (a) Other Reporting Requirements.--Section 402H of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-18) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``, 
 including a rigorous evaluation of the programs 
 and projects assisted under section 402C. The 
 evaluation of the programs and projects 
 assisted under section 402C shall be 
 implemented not later than June 30, 2010'' and 
 inserting ``The issues such evaluations shall 
 measure shall include the effectiveness of 
 programs and projects assisted under this 
 chapter in--
 ``(i) meeting or exceeding the stated 
 objectives regarding the outcome criteria under 
 section 402A(f);
 ``(ii) enhancing the access of low-income 
 individuals and first-generation college 
 students to postsecondary education;
 ``(iii) preparing individuals for 
 postsecondary education; and
 ``(iv) comparing students who participate 
 in the programs funded under this chapter with 
 students who do not participate in such 
 programs with respect to--
 ``(I) level of education completed;
 ``(II) retention rates;
 ``(III) graduation rates;
 ``(IV) college admission and 
 completion rates; and
 ``(V) other issues as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate.''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting 
 ``and take into account the agreed upon target 
 determined under section 402A(f)(4)'' before 
 the period; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) Practices.--The evaluations described in paragraph 
 (1) shall identify institutional, community, and program or 
 project practices that are effective in--
 ``(A) enhancing the access of low-income 
 individuals and first-generation college students to 
 postsecondary education;
 ``(B) the preparation of such individuals and 
 students for postsecondary education;
 ``(C) fostering the success of the individuals and 
 students in postsecondary education; and
 ``(D) for programs and projects assisted under 
 section 402C, the characteristics of students who 
 benefit most from such programs and projects.''; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by inserting ``, including the 
 authorizing committees'' before the period.
 (b) Homeless Individuals and Foster Care Youth.--Section 402H of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-18) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Report Regarding Homeless Individuals and Foster Care 
Youth.--Each entity carrying out a project under section 402B, 402C, 
402D, or 402F shall, at the conclusion of the project, prepare and 
submit a report to the Secretary that includes--
 ``(1) where available, data on the number of homeless 
 individuals and foster care youth served through the project; 
 and
 ``(2) a description of any strategies or program 
 enhancements that were used in the project and that were 
 effective in meeting the needs of such homeless individuals and 
 foster care youth.''.

 CHAPTER 2--GAINING EARLY AWARENESS AND READINESS FOR UNDERGRADUATE 
 PROGRAMS

SEC. 4031. GAINING EARLY AWARENESS AND READINESS FOR UNDERGRADUATE 
 PROGRAMS.

 Chapter 2 of subpart 2 of part A of title IV of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-21 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 404A (20 U.S.C. 1070a-21)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) of 
 subsection (a)(1), by inserting ``, including for 
 college readiness'' after ``academic support''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) by amending paragraph (3) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(3) Priority.--In making awards to eligible entities 
 described in subsection (c), the Secretary may give a 
 competitive priority--
 ``(A) to eligible entities that--
 ``(i) on the day before the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, 
 carried out successful educational opportunity 
 programs under this chapter (as this chapter 
 was in effect on such day); and
 ``(ii) have a prior, demonstrated 
 commitment to early intervention leading to 
 college access and readiness through 
 collaboration and replication of successful 
 strategies; or
 ``(B) to eligible entities that ensure that 
 students that received assistance under this chapter on 
 the day before the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act continue to receive such assistance 
 through the completion of secondary school.'';
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Multiple award prohibition.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible entity described in 
 subsection (c)(1) that receives a grant under this 
 chapter shall not be eligible to receive an additional 
 grant under this chapter until after the date on which 
 the grant period with respect to such grant expires.
 ``(B) Exception for no-cost extension.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), an eligible entity 
 described in subsection (c)(1) that receives a grant 
 under this chapter that has been extended under section 
 75.261 of title 34, Code of Federal Regulations may 
 receive an additional grant under this chapter prior to 
 the date on which the grant period applicable to such 
 extension expires.''; and
 (2) in section 404B (20 U.S.C. 1070a-22)--
 (A) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1), by inserting ``(except with respect to 
 continuation awards under this chapter)'' after 
 ``grants''; and
 (B) in subsection (d)(1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``; 
 and'' and inserting a period; and
 (iii) by striking subparagraph (C);
 (3) in section 404C (20 U.S.C. 1070a-23)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (I), by striking 
 ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (ii) in subparagraph (J), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting a semicolon; 
 and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(K) provide an assurance that the eligible entity 
 has reviewed and revised policies and practices as 
 needed to remove barriers to the participation and 
 retention of homeless individuals (as defined in 
 section 402A) in the program, including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth;
 ``(L) describe the activities that will be 
 undertaken to reach out to such homeless individuals 
 and foster care youth as part of the program; and
 ``(M) provide an assurance that the eligible entity 
 will prepare and submit the report required under 
 section 404G(c) at the conclusion of the grant 
 regarding such homeless individuals and foster care 
 youth.'';
 (B) in subsection (b)(1)(A)--
 (i) by inserting ``matching funds'' after 
 ``will provide'';
 (ii) by inserting ``equaling'' after 
 ``private funds,''; and
 (iii) by striking ``the cost of the 
 program, which matching funds'' and inserting 
 ``the total Federal grant award under this 
 chapter, which'';
 (C) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ``at any 
 point during the grant award period'' after ``obligated 
 to students''; and
 (D) by striking subsection (d) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(d) Peer Review Panels and Competitions.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(1) convene peer review panels to assist in making 
 determinations regarding the awarding of grants under this 
 chapter; and
 ``(2) host a grant competition to make new awards under 
 this chapter in any year in which there are funds available to 
 make new awards.'';
 (4) in section 404D (20 U.S.C. 1070a-24)--
 (A) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or 
 former participants of a program under this 
 chapter'' and inserting ``, former participants 
 of a program under this chapter, or peers and 
 near peers'';
 (ii) in paragraph (3), by inserting 
 ``academic, social, and postsecondary 
 planning'' after ``supportive'';
 (iii) in paragraph (10)--
 (I) by redesignating subparagraphs 
 (E) through (K) as subparagraphs (F) 
 through (L), respectively;
 (II) by inserting after 
 subparagraph (D) the following:
 ``(E) counseling or referral services to address 
 the behavioral, social-emotional, and mental health 
 needs of at-risk students;'';
 (III) in subparagraph (I), as 
 redesignated by subclause (I), by 
 inserting ``, cognitive, non-cognitive, 
 and credit-by-examination'' after 
 ``skills'';
 (IV) in subparagraph (K), as 
 redesignated by subclause (I), by 
 striking ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (V) in subparagraph (L), as 
 redesignated by subclause (I), by 
 striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (VI) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(M) capacity building activities that create 
 college-going cultures in participating schools and 
 local educational agencies.''; and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(16) Creating or expanding secondary school drop-out 
 recovery programs that allow students who have dropped out of 
 secondary school to complete a regular secondary school diploma 
 and begin college-level work.
 ``(17) Establishing data collection and data sharing 
 agreements to obtain, analyze, and report postsecondary outcome 
 data for eligible students for a period of not more than 72 
 months after the end of the grant award period, which may 
 include postsecondary enrollment, persistence, and completion 
 data.
 ``(18) Establishing or maintaining an agreement with a 
 consortium of eligible entities described in section 404A(c) 
 to--
 ``(A) foster collaborative approaches to research 
 and evaluation;
 ``(B) improve the quality of data collection, data 
 sharing, analysis and reporting; and
 ``(C) apply evidence to improve programs and 
 evaluation under this chapter.
 ``(19) Facilitating the recruitment, participation, and 
 retention of homeless individuals (as defined in section 402A) 
 and foster care youth in the services provided under this 
 chapter, including--
 ``(A) establishing partnerships with community-
 based organizations, child welfare agencies, homeless 
 shelters, and local educational agency liaisons for 
 homeless individuals to identify such individuals and 
 youth, improve policies and practices, and to establish 
 data sharing agreements;
 ``(B) carrying out activities (consistent with the 
 McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11301 
 et seq.)) to facilitate continued participation of 
 students who are no longer enrolled in a school served 
 under this chapter due to changes in residence 
 resulting from homelessness or foster care placement, 
 including--
 ``(i) allowing continued participation when 
 such a student is no longer enrolled, on a 
 temporary basis, in a school served under this 
 chapter; or
 ``(ii) providing transitional services and 
 referrals when such a student is no longer 
 enrolled, on a permanent basis, in a school 
 served under this chapter; and
 ``(C) carrying out other activities to meet the 
 needs of such homeless individuals and foster care 
 youth.
 ``(20) Providing services under this chapter to students 
 who have received services under a previous grant award under 
 this chapter but have not yet completed grade 12.'';
 (B) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``and 
 technical assistance'' after ``support''; and
 (ii) by striking paragraph (9); and
 (C) in subsection (d)--
 (i) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or'';
 (ii) by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
 paragraph (5); and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (3) the 
 following:
 ``(4) eligible for free or reduced-price lunch under the 
 Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et 
 seq.); or'';
 (5) in section 404E (20 U.S.C. 1070a-25)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by redesignating paragraph (2) as 
 paragraph (3);
 (ii) by inserting after paragraph (1) the 
 following:
 ``(2) Application requirements.--
 ``(A) Plan for maintenance of financial 
 assistance.--An eligible entity proposing to establish 
 or maintain a financial assistance program providing 
 scholarships for students assisted by the program of 
 the eligible entity under this chapter shall include a 
 plan regarding the financial application program with 
 the application submitted under section 404C.
 ``(B) Scholarship details.--Under a plan described 
 in subparagraph (A), an eligible entity--
 ``(i) may elect to offer 1 or more types of 
 scholarships; and
 ``(ii) shall describe, for each type of 
 scholarship--
 ``(I) the minimum and maximum 
 awards for the scholarships, consistent 
 with subsection (d), based on criteria 
 and disbursement priorities established 
 by the eligible entity;
 ``(II) the duration of the 
 scholarships, which may be single-year 
 or multi-year awards;
 ``(III) the enrollment requirements 
 for participating students, which may 
 include providing scholarships for 
 participating students who are enrolled 
 in an institution of higher education 
 on less than a full-time basis during 
 any award year; and
 ``(IV) any additional student 
 eligibility criteria established by the 
 eligible entity for earning and 
 maintaining scholarships under this 
 section, including--
 ``(aa) financial need;
 ``(bb) meeting 
 participation milestones in the 
 activities offered by the 
 eligible entity under section 
 404D;
 ``(cc) meeting and 
 maintaining satisfactory 
 academic milestones; and
 ``(dd) other criteria 
 aligned with State and local 
 goals to incentivize 
 postsecondary readiness, 
 access, and success.''; and
 (iii) in paragraph (3), as redesignated by 
 clause (i), by striking ``may award'' and 
 inserting ``may use not less than 10 percent 
 and not more than 50 percent of funds made 
 available under this chapter to award'';
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``Limitation'' and inserting ``State 
 Limitation''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking 
 ``eligible entity demonstrates'' and all that 
 follows through the period at the end and 
 inserting the following: ``eligible entity--
 ``(A) demonstrates that the eligible entity has 
 another means of providing the students with the 
 financial assistance described in this section or 
 eligible students have reasonable access to State and 
 local financial assistance programs; and
 ``(B) describes such means or access in the 
 application submitted under section 404C.'';
 (C) in subsection (e)--
 (i) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Scholarship plan.--Each eligible entity 
 described in section 404A(c)(1) that receives a grant 
 under this chapter shall hold in reserve, for the 
 students served by such grant as described in section 
 404B(d)(1)(A) or 404D(d), an estimated amount that is 
 based on the eligible entity's scholarship plan 
 described in subsection (a)(1).
 ``(B) Interest use.--Interest earned on funds held 
 in reserve under subparagraph (A) may be used by the 
 eligible entity to administer the scholarship program 
 during the award period and through the post-award 
 period described in paragraph (4).'';
 (ii) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting ``, 
 or been accepted for enrollment,'' after 
 ``enrolled''; and
 (iii) in paragraph (3)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``and'' after the semicolon;
 (II) by redesignating subparagraph 
 (B) as subparagraph (C); and
 (III) by inserting after 
 subparagraph (A) the following:
 ``(B) the costs associated with enrolling in an 
 institution of higher education; and''; and
 (D) in subsection (g)--
 (i) in paragraph (3)--
 (I) by inserting ``or, if the 
 eligible entity chooses, in another 
 program of study or credential program 
 for which an individual could use funds 
 received under a Federal Pell Grant to 
 attend,'' before ``that is located''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``except that, at 
 the State's option'' and inserting 
 ``except that, at the eligible entity's 
 option''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``and 
 qualifies for an award, consistent with the 
 eligible entity's scholarship plan as described 
 in subsection (a)(2)'' after ``404D(a)'';
 (6) in section 404G (20 U.S.C. 1070a-27)--
 (A) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' 
 after the semicolon;
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by inserting after paragraph (2) the 
 following:
 ``(3) include the following metrics:
 ``(A) The number of students completing the Free 
 Application for Federal Student Aid under section 483.
 ``(B) If applicable, the number of students 
 receiving a scholarship under section 404E.
 ``(C) The graduation rate of participating students 
 from high school.
 ``(D) The enrollment of participating students in 
 postsecondary education.
 ``(E) Such other metrics as the Secretary may 
 require.'';
 (B) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as 
 subsections (d) and (e), respectively;
 (C) by inserting after subsection (b) the 
 following:
 ``(c) Report on Homeless Individuals and Foster Care Youth.--Each 
eligible entity that receives a grant under section 404A shall, at the 
conclusion of such grant, prepare and submit a report to the Secretary 
that includes--
 ``(1) where available, the number of homeless individuals 
 (as defined in section 402A) and foster care youth served 
 through the program; and
 ``(2) a description of any strategies or program 
 enhancements that were used by the eligible entity in carrying 
 out the program that were effective in meeting the needs of 
 such homeless individuals and foster care youth.'';
 (D) in subsection (d), as so redesignated--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by inserting 
 ``and Technical Assistance'' after ``Federal 
 Evaluation'';
 (ii) in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1)--
 (I) by inserting ``after 
 consultation with the community of 
 eligible entities receiving grants 
 under this chapter and'' after 
 ``Secretary shall,'';
 (II) by striking ``0.75'' and 
 inserting ``1''; and
 (III) by striking ``evaluate the 
 effectiveness of the program and, as 
 appropriate, disseminate the results of 
 the evaluation. Such evaluation shall 
 include a separate analysis of'';
 (iii) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and 
 (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, 
 and indenting the margins appropriately; and
 (iv) before subparagraph (A) (as 
 redesignated by clause (iii)), by inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) provide pre-application technical assistance 
 workshops for eligible entities and potential applicants in any 
 year in which new awards are expected to be made;
 ``(2) support initiatives designed to improve the research, 
 data collection and infrastructure, and evaluation capacity of 
 eligible entities; and
 ``(3) evaluate the effectiveness of the program and, as 
 appropriate, disseminate the results of the evaluation. Such 
 evaluation may include a separate analysis of--''; and
 (7) in section 404H, by striking ``$400,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 2009'' and inserting ``$500,000,000 for fiscal year 
 2021''.

 Subpart 3--Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants

SEC. 4041. PURPOSE; APPROPRIATIONS AUTHORIZED.

 Section 413A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070b) 
is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 ``(a) Purpose of Subpart.--It is the purpose of this subpart to--
 ``(1) provide, through institutions of higher education, 
 supplemental grants to assist in making available the benefits 
 of postsecondary education to qualified students who 
 demonstrate financial need in accordance with the provisions of 
 part F of this title; and
 ``(2) to establish grant programs at various institutions 
 of higher education, as defined in section 101, to determine 
 best practices and policies regarding the distribution of 
 emergency grant aid to assist students in completing their 
 program of study, notwithstanding aid they may have received in 
 accordance with the provisions of part F of this title.'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1), by striking ``appropriated'' and 
 all that follows through the end and inserting ``appropriated--
 ``(A) $1,150,000,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 ``(B) $1,300,000,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 ``(C) $1,450,000,000, for fiscal year 2023;
 ``(D) $1,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2024; and
 ``(E) $1,750,000,000 for fiscal year 2025 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.'';
 (3) in subsection (b), by redesignating paragraph (2) as 
 paragraph (3); and
 (4) in subsection (b), by inserting after paragraph (1) the 
 following:
 ``(2) For the purpose of enabling the Secretary to fund emergency 
grant aid programs under section 420DD, there are allocated, from funds 
authorized under paragraph (b)(1), $12,500,000 for fiscal year 2021 and 
each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.

SEC. 4042. INSTITUTIONAL ELIGIBILITY.

 Section 413C(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070b-2) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``agrees'' and inserting ``except 
 as provided in paragraph (4), agrees''; and
 (B) by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (3)(D), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) agrees that the Federal share of an award under this 
 subpart to an institution eligible for assistance under title 
 III or title V shall equal 100 percent of such award.''.

SEC. 4043. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.

 Section 413D of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070b-
3) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 413D. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) Allocation Formula for Fiscal Years 2021 Through 2025.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amount appropriated under 
 section 413A(b)(1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 allocate to each institution--
 ``(A) for fiscal year 2021, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 90 percent of the amount the 
 institution received under subsection (a) for 
 fiscal year 2020, as such subsection was in 
 effect with respect to such fiscal year (in 
 this subparagraph referred to as `the 2020 
 amount for the institution'); or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (c);
 ``(B) for fiscal year 2022, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 80 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (c);
 ``(C) for fiscal year 2023, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 60 percent of the fiscal year 2020 
 amount for the institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (c);
 ``(D) for fiscal year 2024, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 40 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (c); 
 and
 ``(E) for fiscal year 2025, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 20 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (c).
 ``(2) Ratable reduction.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the amount appropriated under 
 section 413A(b)(1) for a fiscal year is less than the 
 amount required to be allocated to the institutions 
 under this subsection, then the amount of the 
 allocation to each institution shall be ratably 
 reduced.
 ``(B) Additional appropriations.--If the amounts 
 allocated to each institution are ratably reduced under 
 subparagraph (A) for a fiscal year and additional 
 amounts are appropriated for such fiscal year, the 
 amount allocated to each institution from the 
 additional amounts shall be increased on the same basis 
 as the amounts under subparagraph (A) were reduced 
 (until each institution receives the amount required to 
 be allocated under this subsection).
 ``(b) Allocation Formula for Fiscal Year 2026 and Each Succeeding 
Fiscal Year.--From the amount appropriated under section 413A(b)(1) for 
fiscal year 2026 and each succeeding fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
allocate to each institution the fair share amount for the institution 
determined under subsection (c).
 ``(c) Determination of Fair Share Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the fair share 
 amount for an institution for a fiscal year shall be equal to 
 the sum of the institution's undergraduate student need 
 described in paragraph (2) for the preceding fiscal year.
 ``(2) Institutional undergraduate student need 
 calculation.--The institutional undergraduate student need for 
 an institution for a fiscal year shall be equal to the sum of 
 the following:
 ``(A) An amount equal to 50 percent of the amount 
 that bears the same proportion to the available 
 appropriated amount for such fiscal year as the total 
 amount of Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at the 
 institution for the preceding fiscal year bears to the 
 total amount of Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at all 
 institutions participating under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year.
 ``(B) An amount equal to 50 percent of the amount 
 that bears the same proportion to the available 
 appropriated amount for such fiscal year as the total 
 amount of the undergraduate student need at the 
 institution for the preceding fiscal year bears to the 
 total amount of undergraduate student need at all 
 institutions participating under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year.
 ``(3) Eligibility for fair share amount.--The Secretary may 
 not allocate funds under this subpart to any institution that, 
 for 2 or more fiscal years during any 3 fiscal year period 
 beginning not earlier than the first day of the first fiscal 
 year that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph, has a student population with less than 7 percent of 
 undergraduate students who are recipients of Federal Pell 
 Grants.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Average cost of attendance.--The term `average cost 
 of attendance' has the meaning given the term in section 
 4202(e)(5)(B).
 ``(2) Undergraduate student need.--The term `undergraduate 
 student need' means, with respect to an undergraduate student 
 for an award year, the lesser of the following:
 ``(A) The total of the amount equal to (except the 
 amount computed by this clause shall not be less than 
 zero)--
 ``(i) the average cost of attendance for 
 the award year, minus
 ``(ii) such undergraduate student's 
 expected family contribution (computed in 
 accordance with part F of this title) for the 
 preceding award year.
 ``(B) The total loan annual limit for a Federal 
 Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan and a Federal Direct 
 Loan.''.

SEC. 4044. EMERGENCY FINANCIAL AID GRANT PROGRAM.

 Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070b et seq.) is amended by inserting after subpart 12, as added by 
section 4093, the following:

 ``Subpart 13--Emergency Financial Aid Grants

``SEC. 420DD. EMERGENCY FINANCIAL AID GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Emergency Financial Aid Grant Programs Authorized.--The 
Secretary shall carry out a grant program to make grants, in accordance 
with subsection (c), to eligible entities to provide emergency 
financial aid grants to students in accordance with subsection (d).
 ``(b) Matching Funds.--
 ``(1) Limitation on amount of federal share.--Except as 
 provided in paragraph (3), the Federal share of the cost of any 
 emergency grant aid program carried out under this section may 
 not exceed 50 percent.
 ``(2) Limitation.--Matching funds provided by an eligible 
 entity under this subsection may not include in-kind 
 contributions.
 ``(3) Exceptions.--The Federal share of the cost of an 
 emergency grant aid program carried out under this section 
 shall equal 100 percent if the institution carrying out the 
 emergency grant aid is an institution of higher education 
 eligible for assistance under title III or V.
 ``(c) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible entity desiring to carry 
 out an emergency grant aid program under this section shall 
 submit an application to the Secretary, at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(2) Outreach.--The Secretary shall, at least 30 days 
 before each deadline to submit applications under paragraph 
 (1), conduct outreach to institutions of higher education 
 described in subsection (b)(3) to provide such institutions 
 with information on the opportunity to apply under paragraph 
 (1) to carry out an emergency grant aid program under this 
 section.
 ``(3) Contents.--Each application under paragraph (1) shall 
 include a description of the emergency grant aid program to be 
 carried out by the eligible entity, including--
 ``(A) an estimate of the number of emergency 
 financial aid grants that such entity will make in an 
 award year and how such eligible entity assessed such 
 estimate;
 ``(B) the criteria the eligible entity will use to 
 determine an emergency for which an eligible student 
 will be eligible to receive an emergency financial aid 
 grant;
 ``(C) an assurance that an emergency for which an 
 eligible student will be eligible to receive an 
 emergency financial aid grant will include financial 
 challenges that would directly impact the ability of an 
 eligible student to continue and complete the course of 
 study of such student, including--
 ``(i) a loss of employment, transportation, 
 child care, utilities, or housing of the 
 student;
 ``(ii) a medical condition (including 
 pregnancy) of the student, or a dependent of 
 the student;
 ``(iii) with respect to the eligible 
 student, food insecurity; and
 ``(iv) in the case of an eligible student 
 who is a dependent student--
 ``(I) the death of a parent or 
 guardian of such eligible student; or
 ``(II) a medical condition of the 
 parent or guardian of such eligible 
 student which results in the loss of 
 employment of such parent or guardian;
 ``(D) a description of the process by which an 
 eligible student may apply and receive an emergency 
 financial aid grant;
 ``(E) an assurance that the eligible entity, when 
 applicable, will make information available to eligible 
 students about the eligibility of such students and 
 their dependents for assistance under the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program under the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), the 
 special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children under the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), and the program of block grants 
 for States for temporary assistance for needy families 
 established under part A of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 ``(F) how the eligible entity will administer the 
 emergency grant aid program, including the processes 
 the eligible entity will use to respond to 
 applications, approve applications, and disburse 
 emergency financial aid grants outside of normal 
 business hours;
 ``(G) an assurance that the process by which an 
 eligible student applies for an emergency financial aid 
 grant includes--
 ``(i) to the extent practicable, an 
 interview; and
 ``(ii) at least one opportunity to appeal a 
 denial of such a grant;
 ``(H) an assurance that the eligible entity will 
 acknowledge receipt of a student's request and 
 distribute funds in a timely manner as determined by 
 the Secretary;
 ``(I) a description of how the school intends to 
 limit fraud or abuse; and
 ``(J) any other information the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(4) Priority.--In selecting eligible entities to carry 
 out an emergency grant aid program under this section, the 
 Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity in which at 
 least 30 percent of the students enrolled at such eligible 
 entity are eligible to receive a Federal Pell Grant.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity may only use funds 
 provided under this section to make emergency financial aid 
 grants to eligible students.
 ``(2) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Amount.--An emergency financial aid grant to 
 an eligible student may not be in an amount greater 
 than $750.
 ``(B) Total amount.--The total amount of the 
 Federal share of emergency financial aid grants that an 
 eligible student may receive from an eligible entity 
 may not exceed $2,000. An eligible student may receive 
 an amount under this section that would cause the 
 amount of total financial aid received by such student 
 to exceed the cost of attendance of the institution of 
 higher education in which the student is enrolled.
 ``(e) Reporting and Oversight.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not less frequently than once annually, 
 each eligible entity that receives a grant under this subpart 
 shall submit to the Secretary a report on the progress of the 
 eligible entity in carrying out the programs supported by such 
 grant.
 ``(2) Form of report.--The report under paragraph (1) shall 
 be submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require. The 
 Secretary shall issue uniform guidelines describing the 
 information that shall be reported by grantees under such 
 paragraph.
 ``(3) Content of report.--The report under paragraph (1) 
 shall include, at minimum, the following:
 ``(A) The number of students that received a grant, 
 including the number of students who received more than 
 one grant.
 ``(B) The average award amount awarded to eligible 
 students.
 ``(C) The types of emergencies declared and 
 frequencies emergencies declared by eligible students.
 ``(D) The number of students that applied for 
 emergency grant aid.
 ``(E) The number of students that were denied such 
 grants.
 ``(F) The average amount of time it took an 
 eligible entity to respond to requests for emergency 
 grant aid and average amount of time it took the 
 eligible entity to award or deny the emergency grant 
 aid.
 ``(G) Outcomes of the eligible students that 
 received emergency grant aid, including rates of 
 persistence, retention, and completion, and a 
 comparison of such rates for such students as compared 
 to such rates for Federal Pell recipients at the 
 institution.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
 institution of higher education that on the date such entity 
 receives a grant under this section, is participating in the 
 FSEOG program under subpart 3.
 ``(2) Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' means 
 a student who--
 ``(A) is enrolled in an eligible entity on an at 
 least half-time basis; and
 ``(B) who is making satisfactory academic progress.
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.''.

Subpart 4--Special Programs for Students Whose Families Are Engaged in 
 Migrant and Seasonal Farmwork

SEC. 4051. SPECIAL PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS WHOSE FAMILIES ARE ENGAGED IN 
 MIGRANT AND SEASONAL FARMWORK.

 Section 418A(i) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070d-2(i)) is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2021''.

 Subpart 5--Child Care Access Means Parents in School

SEC. 4061. CCAMPIS REAUTHORIZATION.

 Section 419N of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070e) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking ``The amount'' and 
 inserting ``Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (C), the amount''; and
 (II) by striking ``1 percent'' and 
 inserting ``2 percent'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking 
 ``subsection (g)'' and inserting ``subsection 
 (h)''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Performance bonus.--
 ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraph (A), for any fiscal year for which 
 the amount appropriated under subsection (h) is 
 not less than $140,000,000, the Secretary may 
 pay a performance bonus to an eligible 
 institution of higher education.
 ``(ii) Maximum amount.--A bonus paid to an 
 eligible institution of higher education under 
 clause (i) for a fiscal year shall not exceed 
 an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of 
 the annual grant payment received by the 
 institution under paragraph (3)(B) for the 
 fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which 
 the bonus is paid.
 ``(iii) Use of bonus.--A bonus received by 
 an institution under clause (i) shall be used 
 by the institution in the same manner as a 
 grant under this section and shall be treated 
 as grant funds for purposes of the application 
 of paragraph (5), except that the Secretary may 
 extend the grant period as necessary for the 
 institution to use such bonus.
 ``(iv) Eligible institution of higher 
 education.--In this subparagraph, the term 
 `eligible institution of higher education' 
 means an institution of higher education that--
 ``(I) has received a grant under 
 this section for not less than the 
 period of three consecutive fiscal 
 years preceding the fiscal year in 
 which the bonus is paid under clause 
 (i);
 ``(II) for each such preceding 
 fiscal year, has met or exceeded the 
 performance levels established by the 
 institution for such year under 
 subsection (e)(1)(B)(v); and
 ``(III) has demonstrated the need 
 for such bonus.'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``4 
 years'' and inserting ``5 years''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``subsection (e)(2)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (e)(3)''; and
 (C) by amending paragraph (5) to read as follows:
 ``(5) Use of funds.--Grant funds under this section shall 
 be used by an institution of higher education to support or 
 establish a campus-based child care program primarily serving 
 the needs of low-income students enrolled at the institution of 
 higher education. Grant funds under this section may be used to 
 provide the following services to the extent necessary to 
 enable low-income students enrolled at the institution of 
 higher education to pursue postsecondary education--
 ``(A) evening, summer, weekend and before and after 
 school services; and
 ``(B) services to expectant parents, such as the 
 provision of information regarding the relationship 
 between prenatal health and early child development and 
 the administration of a home visit closely following 
 the birth of the child.'';
 (2) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 ``(c) Applications.--
 ``(1) In general.--An institution of higher education 
 desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application 
 to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied 
 by such information as the Secretary may require. Such 
 application shall--
 ``(A) demonstrate that the institution is an 
 eligible institution described in subsection (b)(4);
 ``(B) specify the amount of funds requested;
 ``(C) demonstrate the need of low-income students 
 at the institution for campus-based child care services 
 by including in the application--
 ``(i) information regarding student 
 demographics, including the share of students 
 enrolled full-time;
 ``(ii) an assessment of child care capacity 
 on or near campus;
 ``(iii) information regarding the waiting 
 lists for child care services on or near 
 campus;
 ``(iv) information regarding additional 
 needs created by concentrations of poverty or 
 by geographic isolation;
 ``(v) information about the number of low-
 income student parents being served through 
 campus-based child care services; and
 ``(vi) other relevant data;
 ``(D) specify the estimated percentage of the 
 institution's grant that will be used directly to 
 subsidize the fee charged for on-campus and off-campus 
 childcare, respectively, for low-income students;
 ``(E) contain a description of the activities to be 
 assisted, including whether the grant funds will 
 support an existing child care program or a new child 
 care program;
 ``(F) identify the resources, including technical 
 expertise and financial support, that the institution 
 will draw upon to support the child care program and 
 the participation of low-income students in the program 
 (such as accessing social services funding, using 
 student activity fees to help pay the costs of child 
 care, using resources obtained by meeting the needs of 
 parents who are not low-income students, and accessing 
 foundation, corporate, or other institutional support) 
 and demonstrate that the use of the resources will not 
 result in increases in student tuition;
 ``(G) contain an assurance that the institution 
 will meet the child care needs of low-income students 
 through the provision of services, or through a 
 contract for the provision of services;
 ``(H) describe the extent to which the child care 
 program will coordinate with the institution's early 
 childhood education curriculum, to the extent the 
 curriculum is available, to meet the needs of the 
 students in the early childhood education program at 
 the institution, and the needs of the parents and 
 children participating in the child care program 
 assisted under this section;
 ``(I) in the case of an institution seeking 
 assistance for a new child care program--
 ``(i) provide a timeline, covering the 
 period from receipt of the grant through the 
 provision of the child care services, 
 delineating the specific steps the institution 
 will take to achieve the goal of providing low-
 income students with child care services;
 ``(ii) specify any measures the institution 
 will take to assist low-income students with 
 child care during the period before the 
 institution provides child care services; and
 ``(iii) include a plan for identifying 
 resources needed for the child care services, 
 including space in which to provide child care 
 services, and technical assistance if 
 necessary;
 ``(J) contain an assurance that any child care 
 facility assisted under this section will meet the 
 applicable State and local government licensing, 
 certification, approval, or registration requirements;
 ``(K) in the case of an institution that is awarded 
 a grant under this section after the date of the 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, provide an 
 assurance that, not later than three years after the 
 date on which such grant is awarded, any child care 
 facility assisted with such grant will--
 ``(i) meet Head Start performance standards 
 under subchapter B of chapter 13 of title 45, 
 Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on 
 the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act) and any successor 
 regulations;
 ``(ii) be in the top tier of the quality 
 rating improvement system for such facilities 
 used by the State in which the facility is 
 located;
 ``(iii) meet the licensing requirements of 
 the State in which the facility is located and 
 the quality requirements under the Child Care 
 and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.); or
 ``(iv) be accredited by a national early 
 childhood accrediting body with demonstrated 
 valid and reliable program quality standards;
 ``(L) contain an assurance that the institution, 
 when applicable, will make information available to 
 students receiving child care services provided under 
 this section about the eligibility of such students and 
 their dependents for assistance under the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program under the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), the 
 special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children under the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), and the program of block grants 
 for States for temporary assistance for needy families 
 established under part A of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 ``(M) contain an abstract summarizing the contents 
 of such application and how the institution intends to 
 achieve the purpose under subsection (a); and
 ``(N) contain an assurance that the institution 
 will provide information on the institution's website 
 regarding the availability of child care subsidies for 
 student parents and the dependent care cost allowance 
 available to parents with dependent children in 
 accordance with section 472.
 ``(2) Technical assistance.--The Secretary may provide 
 technical assistance to eligible institutions to help such 
 institutions qualify for, apply for, and maintain a grant under 
 this section.'';
 (3) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``to institutions of higher education that 
 submit applications describing programs that'';
 (B) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) based on the extent to which institutions of higher 
 education that submit applications for such a grant leverage 
 local or institutional resources, including in-kind 
 contributions, to support the activities assisted under this 
 section;'';
 (C) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (3);
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (1), the 
 following:
 ``(2) to institutions of higher education that, compared to 
 other institutions of higher education that submit applications 
 for such a grant, demonstrate a high likelihood of need for 
 campus-based child care based on student demographics (such as 
 a high proportion of low-income students or independent 
 students); and''; and
 (E) in paragraph (3) (as redesignated by 
 subparagraph (C)), by inserting ``to institutions of 
 higher education that submit applications describing 
 programs that'' before ``utilize''; and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(B)--
 (i) by redesignating clauses (ii), (iii), 
 and (iv) as clauses (vi), (vii), and (viii), 
 respectively; and
 (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end 
 of clause (i) and inserting the following: 
 ``which shall include--
 ``(I) the number of full- and part-
 time students, respectively, receiving 
 child care services under this section 
 at least once per week during the 
 academic year;
 ``(II) the number of credits 
 accumulated by students receiving such 
 child care services; and
 ``(III) the number of students 
 receiving child care services under 
 this section at least once per week 
 during the academic year who--
 ``(aa) remain enrolled at 
 the institution during the 
 academic year for which they 
 received such services;
 ``(bb) enroll at the 
 institution for the following 
 academic year; and
 ``(cc) graduate or transfer 
 within--

 ``(AA) 150 percent 
 of the normal time for 
 completion of a 
 student's four-year 
 degree granting 
 program; or

 ``(BB) 200 percent 
 of the normal time for 
 completion of a 
 student's two-year 
 degree-granting 
 program;

 ``(ii) with respect to the total student 
 enrollment at the institution and the total 
 enrollment of low-income students at the 
 institution, respectively--
 ``(I) the rate at which students 
 who complete an academic year at the 
 institution re-enroll in the 
 institution for the following academic 
 year; and
 ``(II) the percentage of students 
 graduating or transferring within--
 ``(aa) 150 percent of the 
 normal time for completion of a 
 student's four-year degree 
 granting program; or
 ``(bb) 200 percent of the 
 normal time for completion of a 
 student's two-year degree 
 granting program;
 ``(iii) the percentage of the institution's 
 grant that was used directly to subsidize the 
 fee charged for on-campus and off-campus 
 childcare, respectively, for low-income 
 students;
 ``(iv) whether the institution restricts 
 eligibility for child care services to only 
 full-time students;
 ``(v) the sufficiently ambitious levels of 
 performance established for such year by the 
 institution that demonstrate meaningful 
 progress and allow for meaningful evaluation of 
 program quality based on the information in 
 clauses (i)(III) and (iii);'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (3);
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Report.--
 ``(A) Report required.--On an annual basis, the 
 Secretary shall submit to the authorizing committees a 
 report that includes--
 ``(i) a summary of the information 
 described in paragraph (1); and
 ``(ii) each abstract submitted under 
 subsection (c)(1)(M) by an institution of 
 higher education that receives a grant under 
 this section.
 ``(B) Public availability.--The Secretary shall 
 make each report submitted under subparagraph (A) 
 publicly available.'';
 (D) in paragraph (3), as so redesignated, by 
 inserting ``(other than the information provided under 
 subparagraph (B)(v) of such paragraph)'' after 
 ``paragraph (1)''; and
 (E) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to institutions of higher education 
 receiving grants under this section to help such institutions 
 meet the reporting requirements under this subsection.''; and
 (5) in subsection (g), by striking ``such sums as may be 
 necessary for fiscal year 2009'' and inserting ``$200,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2021''.

 Subpart 6--Jumpstart to College Grant Programs

SEC. 4071. JUMPSTART TO COLLEGE GRANT PROGRAMS.

 Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.) is further amended by inserting after subpart 7 the 
following:

 ``Subpart 8--Jumpstart to College

``SEC. 419O. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subpart:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
 institution of higher education in partnership with one or more 
 local educational agencies (which may be an educational service 
 agency). Such partnership may also include other entities such 
 as nonprofit organizations or businesses, and schools in 
 juvenile detention centers.
 ``(2) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 ``(3) ESEA terms.--The terms `dual or concurrent enrollment 
 program', `early college high school', `educational service 
 agency', `four-year adjusted cohort graduation rate', `local 
 educational agency', `secondary school', and `State' have 
 meanings given the terms in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(4) Low-income student.--The term `low-income student' 
 means a student counted under section 1124(c) of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6333(c)).
 ``(5) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity 
 Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).

``SEC. 419P. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; RESERVATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--To carry out this subpart, there are authorized 
to be appropriated $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 
five succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(b) Reservations.--From the funds appropriated under subsection 
(a) for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve--
 ``(1) not less than 40 percent for grants to eligible 
 entities under section 419Q;
 ``(2) not less than 55 percent for grants to States under 
 section 419R; and
 ``(3) not less than 5 percent for national activities under 
 section 419T.

``SEC. 419Q. GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE ENTITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities, on a competitive basis, to assist such entities in 
establishing or supporting an early college high school or dual or 
concurrent enrollment program in accordance with this section.
 ``(b) Duration.--Each grant under this section shall be awarded for 
a period of 6 years.
 ``(c) Grant Amount.--The Secretary shall ensure that the amount of 
each grant under this section is sufficient to enable each grantee to 
carry out the activities described in subsection (h), except that a 
grant under this section may not exceed $2,000,000.
 ``(d) Matching Requirement.--
 ``(1) In general.--For each year that an eligible entity 
 receives a grant under this section, the entity shall 
 contribute matching funds, in the amounts described in 
 paragraph (2), for the activities supported by the grant.
 ``(2) Amounts described.--The amounts described in this 
 paragraph are--
 ``(A) for each of the first and second years of the 
 grant period, 20 percent of the grant amount;
 ``(B) for each of the third and fourth years of the 
 grant period, 30 percent of the grant amount;
 ``(C) for the fifth year of the grant period, 40 
 percent of the grant amount; and
 ``(D) for the sixth year of the grant period, 50 
 percent of the grant amount.
 ``(3) Determination of amount contributed.--
 ``(A) In-kind contributions.--The Secretary shall 
 allow an eligible entity to meet the requirements of 
 this subsection through in-kind contributions.
 ``(B) Non-federal sources.--Not less than half of 
 each amount described in paragraph (2) shall be 
 provided by the eligible entity from non-Federal 
 sources.
 ``(e) Supplement, Not Supplant.--An eligible entity shall use a 
grant received under this section only to supplement funds that would, 
in the absence of such grant, be made available from other Federal, 
State, or local sources for activities supported by the grant, not to 
supplant such funds.
 ``(f) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that--
 ``(1) propose to establish or support an early college high 
 school or other dual or concurrent enrollment program that will 
 serve a student population of which not less than 51 percent 
 are low-income students;
 ``(2) include a local educational agency which serves a 
 high school that is--
 ``(A) identified for comprehensive support and 
 improvement under section 1111(c)(4)(D)(i) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(c)(4)(D)(i)); or
 ``(B) implementing a targeted support and 
 improvement plan as described in section 1111(d)(2) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(d)(2));
 ``(3) are from States that provide assistance to early 
 college high schools or other dual enrollment programs, such as 
 assistance to defray the costs of higher education (including 
 costs of tuition, fees, and textbooks); and
 ``(4) propose to establish or support an early college high 
 school or dual or concurrent enrollment program that meets 
 quality standards established by--
 ``(A) a nationally recognized accrediting agency or 
 association that offers accreditation specifically for 
 such programs; or
 ``(B) a State process specifically for the review 
 and approval of such programs.
 ``(g) Equitable Distribution.--The Secretary shall ensure, to the 
extent practicable, that eligible entities receiving grants under this 
section--
 ``(1) are from a representative cross section of--
 ``(A) urban, suburban, and rural areas; and
 ``(B) regions of the United States; and
 ``(2) include both two-year and four-year institutions of 
 higher education.
 ``(h) Uses of Funds.--
 ``(1) Mandatory activities.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible entity shall use 
 grant funds received under this section--
 ``(i) to support the activities described 
 in its application under subsection (i);
 ``(ii) to create and maintain a coherent 
 system of supports for students, teachers, 
 principals, and faculty under the program, 
 including--
 ``(I) college and career readiness, 
 academic, and social support services 
 for students; and
 ``(II) professional development for 
 secondary school teachers, faculty, and 
 principals, and faculty from the 
 institution of higher education, 
 including--
 ``(aa) joint professional 
 development activities; and
 ``(bb) activities to assist 
 such teachers, faculty, and 
 principals in using effective 
 parent and community engagement 
 strategies and to help ensure 
 the success of students 
 academically at risk of not 
 enrolling in or completing 
 postsecondary education, first-
 generation college students, 
 and students described in 
 section 1111(b)(2)(B)(xi) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(b)(2)(B)(xi));
 ``(iii) to carry out liaison activities 
 among the partners that comprise the eligible 
 entity pursuant to an agreement or memorandum 
 of understanding documenting commitments, 
 resources, roles, and responsibilities of the 
 partners consistent with the design of the 
 program;
 ``(iv) for outreach programs to ensure that 
 secondary school students and their families, 
 including students academically at risk of not 
 enrolling in or completing postsecondary 
 education, first-generation college students, 
 and students described in section 
 1111(b)(2)(B)(xi) of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6311(b)(2)(B)(xi)), are--
 ``(I) aware of, and recruited into, 
 the early college high school or dual 
 or concurrent enrollment program; and
 ``(II) assisted with the process of 
 enrolling and succeeding in the early 
 college high school or dual or 
 concurrent enrollment program, which 
 may include providing academic support;
 ``(v) to collect, share, and use data (in 
 compliance with section 444 of the General 
 Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g)) for 
 program improvement and program evaluation; and
 ``(vi) to review and strengthen its program 
 to maximize the potential that students 
 participating in the program will eventually 
 complete a recognized postsecondary credential, 
 including by optimizing--
 ``(I) the curriculum of the 
 program;
 ``(II) the use of high-quality 
 assessments of student learning, such 
 as performance-based, project-based, or 
 portfolio assessments that measure 
 higher-order thinking skills;
 ``(III) the sequence of courses 
 offered by the program; and
 ``(IV) the alignment of academic 
 calendars between the secondary schools 
 and the institution of higher education 
 participating in the program.
 ``(B) New programs.--In the case of an eligible 
 entity that uses a grant under this section to 
 establish an early college high school or dual or 
 concurrent enrollment program, the entity shall use 
 such funds during the first year of the grant period--
 ``(i) to design the curriculum and sequence 
 of courses in collaboration with, at a 
 minimum--
 ``(I) faculty from the institution 
 of higher education;
 ``(II) teachers and faculty from 
 the local educational agency; and
 ``(III) in the case of a career and 
 technical education program, employers 
 or workforce development entities to 
 ensure that the program is aligned with 
 labor market demand;
 ``(ii) to develop and implement an 
 articulation agreement between the institution 
 of higher education and the local educational 
 agency that governs how secondary and 
 postsecondary credits will be awarded under the 
 program; and
 ``(iii) to carry out the activities 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) Allowable activities.--An eligible entity may use 
 grant funds received under this section to support the 
 activities described in its application under subsection (i), 
 including by--
 ``(A) purchasing textbooks and equipment that 
 support the program's curriculum;
 ``(B) pursuant to the assurance provided by the 
 eligible entity under subsection (i)(3)(A), paying 
 tuition and fees for postsecondary courses taken by 
 students under the program;
 ``(C) incorporating work-based learning 
 opportunities (other than by paying wages of students) 
 into the program (which may include partnering with 
 entities that provide such opportunities), including--
 ``(i) internships;
 ``(ii) career-based capstone projects;
 ``(iii) pre-apprenticeships and registered 
 apprenticeships provided by eligible providers 
 of apprenticeship programs described in section 
 122(a)(2)(B) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3152(a)(2)(B)); and
 ``(iv) work-based learning opportunities 
 provided under chapters 1 and 2 of subpart 2 of 
 part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a-11 et seq.);
 ``(D) providing students with transportation to and 
 from the program;
 ``(E) paying costs for--
 ``(i) high school teachers to obtain the 
 skills, credentials, or industry certifications 
 necessary to teach for the institution of 
 higher education participating in the program; 
 or
 ``(ii) postsecondary faculty to become 
 certified to teach high school; or
 ``(F) providing time during which secondary school 
 teachers and faculty and faculty from an institution of 
 higher education can collaborate, which may include 
 professional development, the planning of team 
 activities for such teachers and faculty and curricular 
 design and student assessment
 ``(i) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this section, an eligible entity shall submit to the Secretary 
 an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
 such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Contents of application.--The application under 
 paragraph (1) shall include, at minimum, a description of--
 ``(A) the partnership that comprises the eligible 
 entity, including documentation of partner commitments, 
 resources and budget, roles, and responsibilities;
 ``(B) how the partners that comprise the eligible 
 entity will coordinate to carry out the mandatory 
 activities described in subsection (h)(1);
 ``(C) the number of students intended to be served 
 by the program and demographic information relating to 
 such students;
 ``(D) how the eligible entity's curriculum and 
 sequence of courses form a program of study leading to 
 a recognized postsecondary credential;
 ``(E) how postsecondary credits earned will be 
 transferable to institutions of higher education within 
 the State, including any applicable statewide transfer 
 agreements and any provisions of such agreements that 
 are specific to dual or concurrent enrollment programs;
 ``(F) how the eligible entity will conduct outreach 
 to students;
 ``(G) how the eligible entity will determine the 
 eligibility of students for postsecondary courses, 
 including an explanation of the multiple factors the 
 entity will take into account to assess the readiness 
 of students for such courses; and
 ``(H) the sustainability plan for the early college 
 high school or other dual or concurrent enrollment 
 program.
 ``(3) Assurances.--The application under paragraph (1) 
 shall include assurances from the eligible entity that--
 ``(A) students participating in a program funded 
 with a grant under this section will not be required to 
 pay tuition or fees for postsecondary courses taken 
 under the program;
 ``(B) postsecondary credits earned by students 
 under the program will be transcribed upon completion 
 of the required course work; and
 ``(C) instructors of postsecondary courses under 
 the program will meet the same standards applicable to 
 other faculty at the institution of higher education 
 that is participating in the program.

``SEC. 419R. GRANTS TO STATES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to States, on a 
competitive basis, to assist States in supporting or establishing early 
college high schools or dual or concurrent enrollment programs.
 ``(b) Duration.--Each grant under this section shall be awarded for 
a period of 6 years.
 ``(c) Grant Amount.--The Secretary shall ensure that the amount of 
each grant under this section is sufficient to enable each grantee to 
carry out the activities described in subsection (f).
 ``(d) Matching Requirement.--For each year that a State receives a 
grant under this section, the State shall provide, from non-Federal 
sources, an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of the grant 
received by the State for such year to carry out the activities 
supported by the grant.
 ``(e) Supplement, Not Supplant.--A State shall use a grant received 
under this section only to supplement funds that would, in the absence 
of such grant, be made available from other Federal, State, or local 
sources for activities supported by the grant, not to supplant such 
funds.
 ``(f) Uses of Funds.--
 ``(1) Mandatory activities.--A State shall use grant funds 
 received under this section to--
 ``(A) support the activities described in its 
 application under subsection (g);
 ``(B) plan and implement a statewide strategy for 
 expanding access to early college high schools and dual 
 or concurrent enrollment programs for students who are 
 underrepresented in higher education to raise statewide 
 rates of secondary school graduation, readiness for 
 postsecondary education, and completion of recognized 
 postsecondary credentials, with a focus on students 
 academically at risk of not enrolling in or completing 
 postsecondary education;
 ``(C) identify any obstacles to such a strategy 
 under State law or policy;
 ``(D) provide technical assistance (either directly 
 or through a knowledgeable intermediary) to early 
 college high schools and other dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs, which may include--
 ``(i) brokering relationships and 
 agreements that forge a strong partnership 
 between elementary and secondary and 
 postsecondary partners; and
 ``(ii) offering statewide training, 
 professional development, and peer learning 
 opportunities for school leaders, instructors, 
 and counselors or advisors;
 ``(E) identify and implement policies that will 
 improve the effectiveness and ensure the quality of 
 early college high schools and dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs, such as eligibility and access, 
 funding, data and quality assurance, governance, 
 accountability, and alignment policies;
 ``(F) update the State's requirements for a student 
 to receive a regular high school diploma to align with 
 the challenging State academic standards and entrance 
 requirements for credit-bearing coursework as described 
 in subparagraphs (A) and (D) of section 1111(b)(1) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(b)(1));
 ``(G) incorporate indicators regarding student 
 access to and completion of early college high schools 
 and dual or concurrent enrollment programs into the 
 school quality and student success indicators included 
 in the State system of annual meaningful 
 differentiation as described under section 
 1111(c)(4)(B)(v)(I) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311(c)(4)(B)(v)(I));
 ``(H) disseminate best practices for early college 
 high schools and dual or concurrent enrollment 
 programs, which may include best practices from 
 programs in the State or other States;
 ``(I) facilitate statewide secondary and 
 postsecondary data collection, research and evaluation, 
 and reporting to policymakers and other stakeholders; 
 and
 ``(J) conduct outreach programs to ensure that 
 secondary school students, their families, and 
 community members are aware of early college high 
 schools and dual or concurrent enrollment programs in 
 the State.
 ``(2) Allowable activities.--A State may use grant funds 
 received under this section to--
 ``(A) establish a mechanism to offset the costs of 
 tuition, fees, standardized testing and performance 
 assessment costs, and support services for low-income 
 students, and students from underrepresented 
 populations enrolled in early college and high schools 
 or dual or concurrent enrollment;
 ``(B) establish formal transfer systems within and 
 across State higher education systems, including two-
 year and four-year public and private institutions, to 
 maximize the transferability of college courses;
 ``(C) provide incentives to school districts that--
 ``(i) assist high school teachers in 
 getting the credentials needed to participate 
 in early college high school programs and dual 
 or concurrent enrollment; and
 ``(ii) encourage the use of college 
 instructors to teach college courses in high 
 schools;
 ``(D) support initiatives to improve the quality of 
 early college high school and dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs at participating institutions, 
 including by assisting such institutions in aligning 
 programs with the quality standards described in 
 section 419Q(f)(3);
 ``(E) support the development, implementation, and 
 strengthening of Advanced Placement and International 
 Baccalaureate programs especially at high schools with 
 low levels of participation by low-income students and 
 underrepresented students in such programs; and
 ``(F) reimburse low-income students to cover part 
 or all of the costs of an Advanced Placement or 
 International Baccalaureate examination.
 ``(g) State Applications.--
 ``(1) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this section, a State shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Contents of application.--The application under 
 paragraph (1) shall include, at minimum, a description of--
 ``(A) how the State will carry out the mandatory 
 State activities described in subsection (f)(1);
 ``(B) how the State will ensure that any programs 
 funded with a grant under this section are coordinated 
 with programs under--
 ``(i) the Carl D. Perkins Career and 
 Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2301 
 et seq.);
 ``(ii) the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.);
 ``(iii) the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 et seq.); 
 and
 ``(iv) the Individuals with Disabilities 
 Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.);
 ``(C) how the State intends to use grant funds to 
 address achievement gaps for each category of students 
 described in section 1111(b)(2)(B)(xi) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311(b)(2)(B)(xi));
 ``(D) how the State will access and leverage 
 additional resources necessary to sustain early college 
 high schools or other dual or concurrent enrollment 
 programs;
 ``(E) how the State will identify and eliminate 
 barriers to implementing effective early college high 
 schools and dual or concurrent enrollment programs 
 after the grant expires, including by engaging 
 businesses and nonprofit organizations; and
 ``(F) such other information as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate.

``SEC. 419S. REPORTING AND OVERSIGHT.

 ``(a) In General.--Not less frequently than once annually, each 
State and eligible entity that receives a grant under this subpart 
shall submit to the Secretary a report on the progress of the State or 
eligible entity in carrying out the programs supported by such grant.
 ``(b) Form of Report.--The report under subsection (a) shall be 
submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require. The Secretary shall 
issue uniform guidelines describing the information that shall be 
reported by grantees under such subsection.
 ``(c) Contents of Report.--
 ``(1) In general.--The report under subsection (a) shall 
 include, at minimum, the following:
 ``(A) The number of students enrolled in the early 
 college high school or dual or concurrent enrollment 
 program.
 ``(B) The number and percentage of students 
 reimbursed by the State for part or all of the costs of 
 an Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate 
 examination and the student test scores.
 ``(C) The number and percentage of students 
 enrolled in the early college high school or dual or 
 concurrent enrollment program who earn a recognized 
 postsecondary credential concurrently with a high 
 school diploma.
 ``(D) The number of postsecondary credits earned by 
 eligible students while enrolled in the early college 
 high school or dual or concurrent enrollment program 
 that may be applied toward a recognized postsecondary 
 credential.
 ``(E) The number and percentage of students who 
 earn a high school diploma.
 ``(F) The number and percentage of graduates who 
 enroll in postsecondary education.
 ``(2) Categories of students.--The information described in 
 each of subparagraphs (A) through (G) of paragraph (1) shall be 
 set forth separately for each category of students described in 
 section 1111(b)(2)(B)(xi) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)(2)(B)(xi)).

``SEC. 419T. NATIONAL ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Reporting by Secretary.--Not less frequently than once 
annually, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that 
includes--
 ``(1) an analysis of the information received from States 
 and eligible entities under section 419S;
 ``(2) an identification of best practices for carrying out 
 programs supported by grants under this subpart; and
 ``(3) the results of the evaluation under subsection (b).
 ``(b) National Evaluation.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
of the enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary shall 
seek to enter into a contract with an independent entity to perform an 
evaluation of the grants awarded under this subtitle. Such evaluation 
shall apply rigorous procedures to obtain valid and reliable data 
concerning student outcomes by social and academic characteristics and 
monitor the progress of students from secondary school to and through 
postsecondary education.
 ``(c) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to States and eligible entities concerning best practices 
and quality improvement programs in early college high schools and dual 
or concurrent enrollment programs and shall disseminate such best 
practices among eligible entities, States, and local educational 
agencies.
 ``(d) Administrative Costs.--From amounts reserved to carry out 
this section under section 419P(b)(3), the Secretary may reserve such 
sums as may be necessary for the direct administrative costs of 
carrying out the Secretary's responsibilities under this subtitle.

``SEC. 419U. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 ``(a) Employees.--Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to 
alter or otherwise affect the rights, remedies, and procedures afforded 
to the employees of local educational agencies (including schools) or 
institutions of higher education under Federal, State, or local laws 
(including applicable regulations or court orders) or under the terms 
of collective bargaining agreements, memoranda of understanding, or 
other agreements between such employees and their employers.
 ``(b) Graduation Rate.--A student who graduates from an early 
college high school supported by a grant under section 419Q within 100 
percent of the normal time for completion described in the eligible 
entity's application under such section shall be counted in the four-
year adjusted cohort graduation rate for such high school.''.

 Subpart 7--TEACH Grants

SEC. 4081. REVISED DEFINITIONS OF TEACH GRANTS.

 Section 420L of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070g) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Teacher preparation program.--The term `teacher 
 preparation program' means a State-approved course of study 
 provided by an institution of higher education, the completion 
 of which signifies that an enrollee has met all the State's 
 educational or training requirements for initial certification 
 or licensure to teach in the State's elementary schools or 
 secondary schools.''.

SEC. 4082. REVISIONS TO ESTABLISHING TEACH GRANT PROGRAM.

 Section 420M of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070g-
1) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``an application'' and inserting 
 ``a Free Application for Federal Student Aid authorized 
 under section 483(a)''; and
 (B) by striking ``in the amount of'' and all that 
 follows through the period at the end and inserting the 
 following: ``except as provided in subsection (d)(4), 
 in the amount of--
 ``(A) $8,000, to be available to a teacher 
 candidate who is enrolled as an undergraduate junior at 
 the eligible institution;
 ``(B) $8,000, to be available to a teacher 
 candidate who is enrolled as an undergraduate senior at 
 the eligible institution; and
 ``(C) $4,000, to be available to a teacher 
 candidate who is enrolled in the first or second year 
 of an associate's degree program and intends to teach 
 in an early childhood education program.''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``undergraduate'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``associate, 
 undergraduate,''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Associate degree students.--
 ``(A) Maximum amount for associate degree study.--
 The period during which an associate degree student 
 intending to teach in an early childhood education 
 program may receive grants under this subpart shall be 
 the period required for the completion of an 
 associate's degree course of study pursued by the 
 teacher candidate at the eligible institution at which 
 the teacher candidate is in attendance, except that the 
 total amount that a teacher candidate may receive under 
 this subpart for an associate's degree course of study 
 shall not exceed $8,000.
 ``(B) Effect on further undergraduate or post-
 baccalaureate study.--In the case of a teacher 
 candidate intending to teach in an early childhood 
 education program who receives a grant under this 
 subpart for an associate's degree course of study and 
 who seeks to receive a grant described in subparagraph 
 (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1), the amount of such 
 grant shall be equal to--
 ``(i) one half of the amount that is equal 
 to $16,000, minus the amount the teacher 
 candidate received under this subpart for the 
 associate's degree course of study of such 
 candidate, to be available to a teacher 
 candidate who is enrolled as an undergraduate 
 junior at the eligible institution; and
 ``(ii) one half of the amount that is equal 
 to $16,000, minus the amount the teacher 
 candidate received under this subpart for the 
 associate's degree course of study of such 
 candidate, to be available to a teacher 
 candidate who is enrolled as an undergraduate 
 senior at the eligible institution.''.

SEC. 4083. REVISIONS TO TEACH GRANT AGREEMENTS TO SERVE AND 
 ELIGIBILITY.

 Section 420N of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070g-
2) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the heading of paragraph (2), by striking 
 ``Demonstration of teach'' and insert ``Teach'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)(A)(ii)(II), by striking 
 ``batteries in an undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, or 
 graduate school admissions test'' and inserting 
 ``assessments used for admission to an undergraduate, 
 post-baccalaureate, or graduate school program'';
 (C) in paragraphs (2)(B)(i), by striking ``or 
 another high-need'' and inserting ``early childhood 
 education, or another high-need''; and
 (D) in paragraph (2)(B)(ii), by striking ``, such 
 as Teach for America,'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by inserting 
 before the semicolon at the end the following: 
 ``or in a high-need early childhood education 
 program (as defined in section 200(15))'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (C)--
 (I) by striking ``or'' at the end 
 of clause (vi);
 (II) by redesignating clause (vii) 
 as clause (viii);
 (III) by inserting after clause 
 (vi), as so amended, the following:
 ``(vii) early childhood education; or''; 
 and
 (IV) in clause (viii), as so 
 redesignated, by adding ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (iii) in subparagraph (D)--
 (I) by inserting ``or early 
 childhood education program'' after 
 ``school''; and
 (II) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end; and
 (iv) by striking subparagraph (E);
 (B) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (2);
 (C) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (3) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) the Secretary will--
 ``(A) notify, or ensure that the applicable loan 
 servicer will notify, the applicant of--
 ``(i) the date on which submission of the 
 certification under paragraph (1)(D) is 
 required; and
 ``(ii) any failure to submit such 
 certification; and
 ``(B) allow employers and borrowers to use 
 electronic signatures to certify such employment.'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking ``In the event'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), in the 
 event''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Clarification.--
 ``(A) Application.--Paragraph (1) may only apply 
 with respect to a recipient of a grant under this 
 subpart if--
 ``(i) after completing the course of study 
 for which the recipient received the grant, 
 such recipient does not serve as a full-time 
 teacher as required under subsection (b)(1) for 
 at least--
 ``(I) 1 year, as certified under 
 subsection (b)(1)(D) on a date that is 
 not later than 5 years after the date 
 such course of study was completed;
 ``(II) 2 years, as certified under 
 subsection (b)(1)(D) on a date that is 
 not later than 6 years after the date 
 such course of study was completed;
 ``(III) 3 years, as certified under 
 subsection (b)(1)(D) on a date that is 
 not later than 7 years after the date 
 such course of study was completed; or
 ``(IV) 4 years, as certified under 
 subsection (b)(1)(D) on a date that is 
 not later than 8 years after the date 
 such course of study was completed; or
 ``(ii) the recipient elects to have such 
 grant treated as a loan in accordance with such 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Appeal.--A recipient of a grant may appeal a 
 decision to convert a loan under paragraph (1).''; and
 (4) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (5);
 (B) in paragraph (1), by striking ``subsection 
 (b)(1)(C)(vii)'' and inserting ``subsection 
 (b)(1)(C)(viii)''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1), the 
 following:
 ``(2) Change of school description or program definition.--
 If a recipient of an initial grant under this subpart teaches 
 in a school or an early childhood education program for an 
 academic year during which the school is identified as a school 
 described in section 465(a)(2)(A) or a program that meets the 
 definition of section 200(15), but the school or program no 
 longer meets such description or definition during a subsequent 
 academic year, the grant recipient may fulfill the service 
 obligation described in subsection (b)(1) by continuing to 
 teach at that school or program.
 ``(3) Change of teacher duties or assignment.--If a 
 recipient of an initial grant under this subpart teaches as a 
 full-time teacher described in subsection (b)(1)(A), but the 
 recipient no longer meets such description during a subsequent 
 academic year due to switching academic roles to that of a 
 full-time co-teacher, teacher leader, instructional or academic 
 coach, department chairperson, special education case manager, 
 guidance counselor, or school administrator within a school or 
 program, the grant recipient may fulfill the service obligation 
 described in subsection (b)(1) by continuing to work in any 
 such academic role on a full-time basis at that school or 
 program.
 ``(4) Change in high-need field status.--If a recipient of 
 an initial grant under this subpart teaches in a field at a 
 school or an early childhood education program for an academic 
 year during which the field is designated under subsection 
 (b)(1)(C)(viii), but the field no longer is so designated 
 during a subsequent academic year, the grant recipient may 
 fulfill the service obligation described in subsection (b)(1) 
 by continuing to teach in such field at such school or early 
 childhood education program.''.

SEC. 4084. REVISIONS TO TEACH GRANT DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING.

 Section 420P of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070g-
4) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 420P. DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING.

 ``(a) Data Collection.--
 ``(1) Aggregate student data.--On an annual basis, using 
 the postsecondary student data system established under section 
 132(l) or a successor system (whichever includes the most 
 recent data) to streamline reporting requirements and minimize 
 reporting burdens, and in coordination with the National Center 
 for Education Statistics, the Secretary shall determine, 
 disaggregate in accordance with paragraph (2), and make 
 available to the public in accordance with paragraph (3), with 
 respect to each institution (and each category of institution 
 listed in section 132(d)) that received a payment under this 
 subpart in the previous academic year, the following 
 information:
 ``(A) The number and mean dollar amount of TEACH 
 Grants awarded to students at the institution.
 ``(B) The number and proportion of TEACH Grant 
 recipients who exit their program of study before 
 completing the program.
 ``(C) The number and proportion of TEACH Grant 
 recipients who complete their program of study and 
 begin employment as a teacher in the first academic 
 year following the year of such completion.
 ``(D) The number and proportion of individuals 
 employed as teachers who received a TEACH Grant and 
 whose TEACH Grants are converted into loans during the 
 8-year period following the year in which the recipient 
 completed the recipient's program of study, set forth 
 separately for each year in such period.
 ``(E) The number and proportion of TEACH Grant 
 recipients who fulfill the terms of their agreement to 
 serve under section 420N(b) during the 8-year period 
 following the year in which the recipient completed the 
 recipient's program of study, set forth separately for 
 each year in such period.
 ``(2) Disaggregation.--The information determined under 
 paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) except in cases in which such disaggregation 
 would reveal personally identifiable information about 
 an individual student, shall be disaggregated by--
 ``(i) race;
 ``(ii) ethnicity;
 ``(iii) gender;
 ``(iv) socioeconomic status;
 ``(v) Federal Pell Grant eligibility 
 status;
 ``(vi) status as a first-generation college 
 student (as defined in section 402A(h));
 ``(vii) military or veteran status;
 ``(viii) disability status;
 ``(ix) level of study (associate, 
 undergraduate, postbaccalaureate, or graduate, 
 as applicable); and
 ``(x) each teacher preparation program 
 offered by an institution; and
 ``(B) may be disaggregated by any combination of 
 subgroups or descriptions described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 ``(3) Availability of data.--The information determined 
 under paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) remain available to the public for a period 
 of not less than 10 years after its initial release by 
 the Secretary; and
 ``(B) be updated as necessary to reflect the most 
 accurate and up-to-date information for each 
 institution for each year of data collection.
 ``(b) Information From Institutions.--Each institution that 
receives a payment under this subpart shall provide to the Secretary, 
on an annual basis, such information as may be necessary for the 
Secretary to carry out subsection (a).
 ``(c) Reports and Dissemination.--
 ``(1) Initial and interim reports.--Not later than 3 years 
 after the date on which the first TEACH Grant is awarded under 
 this subpart after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, and at least once every 3 years thereafter, 
 the Secretary shall submit to the authorizing committees a 
 report that includes the information required under paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(2) Elements.--Each report under this subsection shall 
 include, based on information determined under subsection (a), 
 the following:
 ``(A) A review of the utilization of TEACH Grants 
 at teacher preparation programs at institutions that 
 received a payment under this subpart.
 ``(B) A review of TEACH Grant practices that 
 correlate with higher rates of completion of agreements 
 under section 420N(b).
 ``(C) Guidance and recommendations on how effective 
 utilization of TEACH Grants can be replicated.
 ``(3) Availability.--Each report under this subsection 
 shall be made available to the public in an accessible format--
 ``(A) on a website of the Department of Education; 
 and
 ``(B) in any other format determined to be 
 appropriate by the Secretary.''.

 Subpart 8--Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa College Access

SEC. 4091. NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS AND AMERICAN SAMOA COLLEGE ACCESS.

 Subpart 10 of part A of title IV (20 U.S.C. 1070(h)) is amended to 
read as follows:

 ``Subpart 10--Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa College 
 Access

``SEC. 420R. PUBLIC SCHOOL GRANTS.

 ``(a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this subpart to establish a 
program that enables college-bound residents of the Northern Mariana 
Islands and American Samoa to have greater choices among institutions 
of higher education.
 ``(b) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under 
 subsection (j), the Secretary shall provide--
 ``(A) 50 percent of such amount to the Northern 
 Mariana Islands for the Governor to award grants to 
 eligible institutions that enroll eligible students to 
 pay the difference between the tuition and fees charged 
 for in-State students and the tuition and fees charged 
 for out-of-State students on behalf of each eligible 
 student enrolled in the eligible institution; and
 ``(B) 50 percent of such amount to the American 
 Samoa for the Governor to award grants to eligible 
 institutions that enroll eligible students to pay the 
 difference between the tuition and fees charged for in-
 State students and the tuition and fees charged for 
 out-of-State students on behalf of each eligible 
 student enrolled in the eligible institution.
 ``(2) Maximum student amounts.--The amount paid on behalf 
 of an eligible student under this section shall be--
 ``(A) not more than $15,000 for any one award year 
 (as defined in section 481); and
 ``(B) not more than $45,000 in the aggregate.
 ``(3) Proration.--The Governor shall prorate payments under 
 this section for students who attend an eligible institution on 
 less than a full-time basis.
 ``(c) Reduction for Insufficient Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the funds appropriated pursuant to 
 subsection (j) for any fiscal year are insufficient to award a 
 grant in the amount determined under subsection (a) on behalf 
 of each eligible student enrolled in an eligible institution, 
 then the Governor, in consultation with the Secretary of 
 Education, shall--
 ``(A) first, ratably reduce the amount of the 
 tuition and fee payment made on behalf of each eligible 
 student who has not received funds under this section 
 for a preceding year; and
 ``(B) after making reductions under subparagraph 
 (A), ratably reduce the amount of the tuition and fee 
 payments made on behalf of all other eligible students.
 ``(2) Adjustments.--The Governor, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of Education, may adjust the amount of tuition and 
 fee payments made under paragraph (1) based on--
 ``(A) the financial need of the eligible students 
 to avoid undue hardship to the eligible students; or
 ``(B) undue administrative burdens on the Governor.
 ``(3) Further adjustments.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) 
 and (2), the Governor may prioritize the making or amount of 
 tuition and fee payments under this subsection based on the 
 income and financial need of eligible students.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this subpart:
 ``(1) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means an institution that--
 ``(A) is a public four-year institution of higher 
 education located in one of the several States, the 
 District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States 
 Virgin Islands, or Guam;
 ``(B) is eligible to participate in the student 
 financial assistance programs under title IV; and
 ``(C) enters into an agreement with the Governors 
 of the Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa 
 containing such conditions as each Governor may 
 specify, including a requirement that the institution 
 use the funds made available under this section to 
 supplement and not supplant assistance that otherwise 
 would be provided to eligible students from the 
 Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa.
 ``(2) Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' means 
 an individual who--
 ``(A) graduated from a public institution of higher 
 education located in the Northern Mariana Islands or 
 American Samoa;
 ``(B) begins the individual's course of study 
 within the 3 calendar years (excluding any period of 
 service on active duty in the Armed Forces or service 
 under the Peace Corps Act (22 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.) or 
 subtitle D of title I of the National and Community 
 Service Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12571 et seq.)) of 
 graduation from a public institution of higher 
 education located in the Northern Mariana Islands or 
 American Samoa;
 ``(C) is enrolled or accepted for enrollment, on at 
 least a half-time basis, in a baccalaureate degree or 
 other program (including a program of study abroad 
 approved for credit by the institution at which such 
 student is enrolled) leading to a recognized 
 educational credential at an eligible institution;
 ``(D) if enrolled in an eligible institution, is 
 maintaining satisfactory progress in the course of 
 study the student is pursuing in accordance with 
 section 484(c); and
 ``(E) has not completed the individual's first 
 undergraduate baccalaureate course of study.
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(4) Governor.--The term `Governor' means the Governor of 
 the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands or American 
 Samoa.
 ``(e) Construction.--Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to 
require an institution of higher education to alter the institution's 
admissions policies or standards in any manner to enable an eligible 
student to enroll in the institution.
 ``(f) Applications.--Each student desiring a tuition payment under 
this section shall submit an application to the eligible institution at 
such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the 
eligible institution may require.
 ``(g) Administration of Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each Governor shall carry out the 
 program under this section in consultation with the Secretary. 
 Each Governor may enter into a grant, contract, or cooperative 
 agreement with another public or private entity to administer 
 the program under this section if the Governor determines that 
 doing so is a more efficient way of carrying out the program.
 ``(2) Policies and procedures.--Each Governor, in 
 consultation with institutions of higher education eligible for 
 participation in the program authorized under this section, 
 shall develop policies and procedures for the administration of 
 the program.
 ``(3) Memorandum of agreement.--Each Governor and the 
 Secretary shall enter into a Memorandum of Agreement that 
 describes--
 ``(A) the manner in which the Governor shall 
 consult with the Secretary with respect to 
 administering the program under this section; and
 ``(B) any technical or other assistance to be 
 provided to the Governor by the Secretary for purposes 
 of administering the program under this section (which 
 may include access to the information in the common 
 financial reporting form developed under section 483).
 ``(h) Governor's Report.--Each Governor shall report to the 
Secretary and the authorizing committees annually regarding--
 ``(1) the number of eligible students attending each 
 eligible institution and the amount of the grant awards paid to 
 those institutions on behalf of the eligible students;
 ``(2) the extent, if any, to which a ratable reduction was 
 made in the amount of tuition and fee payments made on behalf 
 of eligible students; and
 ``(3) the progress in obtaining recognized academic 
 credentials of the cohort of eligible students for each year.
 ``(i) GAO Report.--Not later than 24 months of the date of the 
enactment of this College Affordability Act, the Comptroller General of 
the United States shall report on the effect of the program assisted 
under this section on educational opportunities for eligible students. 
The Comptroller General shall analyze whether eligible students had 
difficulty gaining admission to eligible institutions because of any 
preference afforded to in-State residents by eligible institutions, and 
shall expeditiously report any findings regarding such difficulty to 
Congress. In addition the Comptroller General shall--
 ``(1) analyze and identify any challenges eligible students 
 face in gaining admission to eligible institutions, including 
 admission aided by assistance provided under this subpart, due 
 to--
 ``(A) caps on the number of out-of-State students 
 the institution will enroll;
 ``(B) significant barriers imposed by academic 
 entrance requirements (such as grade point average and 
 standardized scholastic admissions tests); and
 ``(C) absence of admission programs benefitting 
 minority students; and
 ``(2) report the findings of the analysis described in 
 paragraph (1) and the assessment described in paragraph (2) to 
 Congress and the Governor.
 ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and 
American Samoa to carry out this subpart $5,000,000, to be available 
until expended, for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding 
fiscal years.
 ``(k) Effective Date.--This subpart shall take effect with respect 
to payments for periods of instruction that begin on or after January 
1, 2021.

``SEC. 420S. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Personnel.--The Secretary shall arrange for the assignment of 
an individual, pursuant to subchapter VI of chapter 33 of title 5, 
United States Code, to serve as an adviser to each Governor with 
respect to the programs assisted under this subpart.
 ``(b) Administrative Expenses.--Each Governor may use not more than 
5 percent of the funds made available for a program under section 420R 
for a fiscal year to pay the administrative expenses of a program under 
section 420R for the fiscal year.
 ``(c) Inspector General Review.--Each of the programs assisted 
under this subpart shall be subject to audit and other review by the 
Inspector General of the Department of Education in the same manner as 
programs are audited and reviewed under the Inspector General Act of 
1978 (5 U.S.C. App.).
 ``(d) Gifts.--The Governor may accept, use, and dispose of 
donations of services or property for purposes of carrying out this 
subpart.
 ``(e) Maximum Student Amount Adjustments.--Each Governor shall 
establish rules to adjust the maximum student amounts described in 
section 440S(b)(2) for eligible students described in section 
440S(d)(2) who transfer between the eligible institutions described in 
section 440S(d)(1).''.

 Subpart 9--Student Success

SEC. 4092. COMMUNITY COLLEGE STUDENT SUCCESS GRANT PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 Part A of title IV (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.) is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 11--Community College Student Success

``SEC. 420T. COMMUNITY COLLEGE STUDENT SUCCESS GRANT PROGRAM 
 AUTHORIZED.

 ``From the amounts appropriated under 420BB, the Secretary of 
Education shall establish and carry out the community college student 
success grant program to award grants under sections 420U and 420V, on 
a competitive basis, to eligible institutions to plan and implement 
community college student success programs designed to increase--
 ``(1) the rate at which program participants graduate from 
 a program of study at such eligible institution within 150 
 percent of the normal time for graduation; and
 ``(2) transfer rates of program participants.

``SEC. 420U. GRANTS TO PLAN COMMUNITY COLLEGE STUDENT SUCCESS PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) Planning Grants Authorized.--From the amounts appropriated to 
carry out this section under section 420BB for a fiscal year, the 
Secretary shall award planning grants for such fiscal year, on a 
competitive basis, to eligible institutions to develop plans for 
community college student success programs.
 ``(b) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for a 
1-year period.
 ``(c) Peer Review Process; Priority.--In awarding grants under this 
section for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) carry out a peer review process that--
 ``(A) requires that each application submitted 
 under subsection (d) be peer reviewed by a panel of 
 readers composed of individuals selected by the 
 Secretary, which shall include--
 ``(i) not less than 50 percent of readers--
 ``(I) who are not employees of the 
 Federal Government; and
 ``(II) who have relevant research 
 or practical experience with respect to 
 student support programs designed to 
 increase graduation rates and transfer 
 rates at public 2-year institutions of 
 higher education; and
 ``(ii) to the maximum extent practicable, 
 individuals who are members of groups 
 underrepresented in higher education, including 
 African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, 
 Alaska Natives, Asian Americans, Native 
 American Pacific Islanders (including Native 
 Hawaiians), and individuals with disabilities; 
 and
 ``(B) ensures that no individual assigned under 
 subparagraph (A) to review an application has any 
 conflict of interest with regard to that application 
 that may make the individual unable to impartially 
 conduct such review; and
 ``(2) give priority to eligible institutions that are 
 eligible to receive funding under title III or V.
 ``(d) Application.--An eligible institution desiring a grant under 
this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require, which shall include--
 ``(1) the graduation rate and transfer rate for the most 
 recent academic year for which data are available for eligible 
 students and all students, respectively;
 ``(2) an analysis of how implementing a community college 
 student success program may improve the graduation rate or 
 transfer rate for eligible students; and
 ``(3) a description of the methods the eligible institution 
 has previously used to improve the graduation rate or transfer 
 rate with respect to eligible students and all students, 
 respectively.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--An eligible institution that receives a grant 
under this section shall use the grant to develop a plan to implement a 
community college student success program at the eligible institution.
 ``(f) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which an 
eligible institution receives a grant under this section, such eligible 
institution shall submit to the Secretary a report that includes--
 ``(1) a plan for implementing a community college student 
 success program at the eligible institution, including--
 ``(A) the sufficiently ambitious outcome goals for 
 achieving significant improvements in graduation rates 
 and transfer rates for program participants, as such 
 rates are defined by the eligible institution, in 
 consultation with the Secretary, before the end of the 
 grant period;
 ``(B) the number of such eligible students who will 
 participate in such program, including how such 
 eligible students will be identified, referred, and 
 selected, in cases where the interest in the program is 
 larger than the budget for the program;
 ``(C) based on the most recent academic year for 
 which data are available, disaggregated by full-time 
 students and all students--
 ``(i) graduation rates; and
 ``(ii) transfer rates;
 ``(D) an analysis of the financial needs of the 
 full-time students;
 ``(E) a description of how the eligible institution 
 will effectively staff a community college student 
 success program; and
 ``(F) a timeline for the implementation of such 
 program;
 ``(2) a budgetary analysis that includes--
 ``(A) a description of how the eligible institution 
 will provide non-Federal funds for such program under 
 subsection (d) of section 420V; and
 ``(B) a description of how the eligible institution 
 will continue to fund such program after the end of the 
 grant period for the grant awarded to the institution 
 under section 420V; and
 ``(3) such other information as the Secretary may require.

``SEC. 420V. GRANTS TO IMPLEMENT COMMUNITY COLLEGE STUDENT SUCCESS 
 PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) Implementation Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amounts appropriated to carry 
 out this section under section 420BB for a fiscal year, the 
 Secretary shall award grants for such fiscal year, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible institutions awarded a grant 
 under section 420U to implement community college student 
 success programs.
 ``(2) Consultation.--In awarding grants under this section 
 for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall consult with the 
 independent evaluator before finalizing which eligible 
 institutions will receive such a grant for such fiscal year.
 ``(b) Requirements for Selection.--To be eligible to receive a 
grant under this section, an eligible institution shall meet the 
following requirements:
 ``(1) The eligible institution was awarded a grant under 
 section 420U at least 1 year before such eligible institution 
 submits an application under subsection (e).
 ``(2) The eligible institution submits an application under 
 subsection (e).
 ``(3) The eligible institution demonstrates, on the date of 
 the application described in subsection (e), the availability 
 of non-Federal funding for the matching funds required under 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of subsection (d)(1).
 ``(c) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section shall be for a 
5-year period.
 ``(d) Non-Federal Contribution.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an 
 eligible institution awarded a grant under this section shall 
 contribute in cash from non-Federal sources, the following:
 ``(A) For the second year of the grant period, an 
 amount equal to 20 percent of the cost of carrying out 
 the community college student success program at the 
 institution for such year.
 ``(B) For the third year of the grant period, an 
 amount equal to 30 percent of the cost of carrying out 
 such program for such year.
 ``(C) For the fourth year of the grant period, an 
 amount equal to 40 percent of the cost of carrying out 
 such program for such year.
 ``(D) For the fifth year of the grant period, an 
 amount equal to 50 percent of the cost of carrying out 
 such program for such year.
 ``(2) Exception.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), 
 with respect to an exempt institution awarded a grant 
 under this section, for each year of the grant period 
 beginning with the second year through the fifth year, 
 the Secretary shall not require the institution to make 
 a cash contribution from non-Federal sources in an 
 amount that is greater than the amount equal to 5 
 percent of the cost of carrying out the community 
 college student success program at the institution for 
 such year.
 ``(B) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph:
 ``(i) Exempt institution.--The term `exempt 
 institution' means an eligible institution that 
 is a--
 ``(I) Tribal college or university; 
 or
 ``(II) an institution located in 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
 American Samoa, the United States 
 Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic 
 of the Marshall Islands, the Federated 
 States of Micronesia, or the Republic 
 of Palau.
 ``(ii) Tribal college or university.--The 
 term `Tribal college or university' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 316 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c).
 ``(e) Application.--An eligible institution desiring a grant under 
this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require, which shall include a copy of the report described in 420U(e).
 ``(f) Required Use of Funds.--An eligible institution that receives 
a grant under this section shall use the grant funds to--
 ``(1) implement a community college student success 
 program; and
 ``(2) regularly review--
 ``(A) data to monitor the academic progress of 
 eligible students participating in such program; and
 ``(B) the meeting and program participation 
 requirements described in section 420AA(1).
 ``(g) Permissible Use of Funds.--An eligible institution that 
receives a grant under this section may use the grant to--
 ``(1) establish or expand a data tracking system that 
 includes early alerts to complete the regular reviews required 
 under subsection (f)(2);
 ``(2) provide eligible students participating in the 
 community college student success program for which the grant 
 is awarded with financial assistance to cover the costs 
 described in paragraph (2), (3), or (8) of section 472;
 ``(3) establish or expand career development services for 
 such students, such as career workshops or career counseling;
 ``(4) establish or expand tutoring services for such 
 students;
 ``(5) cover the employment of administrators for the 
 program whose sole job shall be to administer the program, 
 without regard to whether the employment is full-time or less 
 than full-time; and
 ``(6) provide financial support for eligible students 
 participating in such program to enroll in courses offered 
 during enrollment periods that are outside the fall and spring 
 semesters (or equivalent terms).
 ``(h) Reports.--Using the postsecondary student data system 
established under section 132(l) or a successor system (whichever 
includes the most recent data) to streamline reporting requirements and 
minimize reporting burdens, and in coordination with the National 
Center for Education Statistics, the Secretary shall, on at least an 
annual basis, collect data with respect to each community college 
student success program, including the following:
 ``(1) Each eligible institution that receives a grant under 
 this subpart shall, on an annual basis, provide to the 
 Secretary such information as may be necessary for the 
 Secretary to collect such data, including--
 ``(A) the demographic characteristics of the 
 students participating in the community college student 
 success program;
 ``(B) the average number of credits attempted and 
 average number of credits earned, rate of retention, 
 rate of degree completion, and rates of transfer of 
 such eligible students; and
 ``(C) the graduation rate of such eligible 
 students.
 ``(2) Each such eligible institution shall, not less than 
 once for each year of the grant period, submit to the Secretary 
 an annual performance report for such year of the grant period 
 that includes--
 ``(A) an analysis of the implementation and 
 progress of such program based on the sufficiently 
 ambitious outcome goals described in the report 
 submitted by the institution under section 
 420U(e)(1)(A), including challenges to and changes made 
 to such program;
 ``(B) if according to the analysis under 
 subparagraph (A), the program is not on track to meet 
 such sufficiently ambitious outcome goals, a 
 description of the plans to adjust the program to 
 improve the performance of the program;
 ``(C) the participation of such eligible students 
 in tutoring, career services (which can include benefit 
 counseling), and meetings with program advisors; and
 ``(D) when data is available, which shall compare 
 the data collected for such year under this paragraph 
 with such data collected for each of the 2 years 
 preceding the date on which the grant was awarded.
 ``(3) Not later than 6 years after the date on which the 
 eligible institution received such grant, submit a final report 
 to the Secretary that includes an analysis of--
 ``(A) the factors that contributed to the success 
 or failure of the community college student success 
 program in meeting the ambitious outcome goals 
 described in the report submitted by the institution 
 under section 3(e)(1)(A);
 ``(B) the challenges faced in attempting to 
 implement such program;
 ``(C) information on how to improve such program;
 ``(D) whether the program has created an 
 institution-wide reform with respect to graduation 
 rates and transfer rates for all students, and if so, 
 how such reform was created; and
 ``(E) how the eligible institution will continue to 
 fund such program after the end of the grant period.

``SEC. 420W. EVALUATIONS.

 ``(a) Independent Evaluations.--Before finalizing which eligible 
institutions will receive grants under section 420V for a fiscal year, 
the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Institute of 
Education Sciences, shall enter into a contract with an independent 
evaluator--
 ``(1) to consult with the Secretary on which eligible 
 institutions should receive the grants; and
 ``(2) to use the What Works Clearinghouse Standards 
 (without reservations) to evaluate, throughout the duration of 
 the grant period of such grants--
 ``(A) each community college student success 
 program for which such grant is awarded, including 
 whether the program met its ambitious outcome goals 
 described in the report submitted by the institution 
 under section 420U(e)(1)(A);
 ``(B) the average impact of community college 
 student success programs on graduation rates and 
 transfer rates for eligible students;
 ``(C) the variation in program impact across 
 eligible institutions with respect to such rates; and
 ``(D) whether such programs lead to higher 
 graduation rates and transfer rates of eligible 
 students per dollar spent for such students by such 
 institutions compared with such rates at eligible 
 institutions without such programs.
 ``(b) Results of Evaluations.--The results of the evaluations under 
subsection (a) shall be made publicly available on the website of the 
Department of Education.
 ``(c) Funding for Evaluations.--The Secretary may reserve not more 
than 15 percent of the funds appropriated under section 420BB for a 
fiscal year to carry out this section for such fiscal year.

``SEC. 420X. OUTREACH AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 ``(a) Outreach.--The Secretary shall conduct outreach activities to 
notify eligible institutions of the availability of grants under this 
subpart.
 ``(b) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance--
 ``(1) to eligible institutions that may be interested in 
 applying for grants under this subpart, including assistance 
 with applications for such grants; and
 ``(2) to eligible institutions awarded grants under this 
 subpart, including assistance with--
 ``(A) establishing ambitious outcome goals 
 described in section 420U(e)(1)(A); and
 ``(B) the implementation of a community college 
 student success program.
 ``(c) Funding for Technical Assistance for Evaluations.--The 
Secretary may reserve not more than 7 percent of the funds appropriated 
under section 420BB for a fiscal year for technical assistance under 
this section for such fiscal year.

``SEC. 420Y. REPORT TO CONGRESS.

 ``Not later than 1 year after the date on which the Secretary 
receives the final evaluation results under section 420W for eligible 
institutions that were awarded grants under section 420V for the same 
fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that 
includes--
 ``(1) the number of grants awarded under section 420V for 
 such fiscal year, and the amount of such grants;
 ``(2) the number of grants awarded under section 420U to 
 eligible institutions that received the grants described in 
 paragraph (1), and the amount of such grants;
 ``(3) the number of grants awarded under section 420U to 
 eligible institutions that would have been eligible but did not 
 receive the grants in paragraph (1);
 ``(4) such final evaluation results; and
 ``(5) any other information the Secretary may deem 
 relevant.

``SEC. 420Z. SUPPLEMENT, NOT SUPPLANT.

 ``Funds awarded to an eligible institution under this subpart shall 
be used only to supplement the amount of funds that would, in the 
absence of the Federal funds provided under this subpart, be made 
available from non-Federal sources or other Federal sources to carry 
out the activities under this subpart, and not to supplant such funds.

``SEC. 420AA. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subpart:
 ``(1) Community college student success program.--The term 
 `community college student success program' means a program 
 carried out by an eligible institution under which the 
 institution carries out the following:
 ``(A) Provides eligible students participating in 
 such program with an amount that covers the cost of 
 tuition and fees that are not covered by any Federal, 
 State, or institutional financial assistance received 
 by the student.
 ``(B) Requires eligible students participating in 
 such program to--
 ``(i) be enrolled in the eligible 
 institution and carry a full-time academic 
 workload during each fall and spring semester 
 (or equivalent terms) during which the student 
 participates in such program;
 ``(ii) if the eligible student is referred 
 to remedial courses or is on academic 
 probation, meet, on at least a weekly basis or 
 under an alternate schedule, as determined by 
 the institution, with a tutor, except that in 
 the case of an eligible student who is 
 academically struggling, but who is not 
 referred to remedial courses or on academic 
 probation, the student may meet with a tutor as 
 often as the program advisor for such student 
 requires or under an alternate schedule, as 
 determined by the institution;
 ``(iii) meet with a program advisor--
 ``(I) twice each month during the 
 first semester (or equivalent term) of 
 participation in such program; and
 ``(II) as directed by the program 
 advisor in subsequent semesters (or 
 equivalent terms) under subparagraph 
 (C)(ii); and
 ``(iv) meet with an on-campus career 
 advisor or participate in a career services 
 event once each semester (or equivalent term) 
 or under an alternate schedule, as determined 
 by the institution.
 ``(C) Provides a program advisor to each eligible 
 student participating in such program who--
 ``(i) provides comprehensive academic and 
 personal advising to the eligible student, 
 including--
 ``(I) the creation and 
 implementation of an academic plan for 
 the student to graduate from a program 
 of study at the eligible institution 
 within 150 percent of the normal time 
 for graduation from such program;
 ``(II) if an eligible student is 
 referred to remedial courses, 
 encouraging such student to complete 
 such courses as quickly as possible; 
 and
 ``(III) assisting the eligible 
 student with developing and achieving 
 academic goals, including creating 
 strong transfer pathways that 
 demonstrate programmatic transfer for 
 students interested in transferring to 
 a 4-year institution of higher 
 education;
 ``(ii) after the eligible student 
 participating in such program completes a 
 semester (or equivalent term), creates for the 
 eligible student a needs-based advising 
 schedule that indicates, based on the eligible 
 student's academic performance, the frequency 
 with which such eligible student shall be 
 required to meet with a program advisor for 
 each subsequent semester (or equivalent term) 
 of program participation;
 ``(iii) has a caseload of not more than 150 
 eligible students;
 ``(iv) tracks the attendance of the 
 eligible student at the meetings described in 
 clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) of subparagraph 
 (B);
 ``(v) monitors the academic progress of the 
 eligible student; and
 ``(vi) provides each eligible student who 
 meets the requirements of subparagraph (B), on 
 at least a monthly basis, with financial 
 incentives, such as a transportation pass or a 
 gas card.
 ``(D) Provides free tutoring and career services 
 (which can include benefit counseling) to eligible 
 students participating in such program, and may reserve 
 places in select courses for such eligible students in 
 order to create a community within cohorts of eligible 
 students.
 ``(E) Provides information to eligible students 
 participating in such program about the eligibility of 
 such students for assistance under the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program under the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) and the 
 program of block grants for States for temporary 
 assistance for needy families established under part A 
 of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 
 et seq.).
 ``(2) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means a public 2-year institution of higher 
 education.
 ``(3) Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' means 
 a student enrolled at an eligible institution who--
 ``(A) on the date such eligible student would begin 
 participation in a community college student success 
 program at such eligible institution--
 ``(i) is enrolled in a program of study 
 leading to an associate degree;
 ``(ii) is enrolled at such institution and 
 carrying a full-time academic workload during 
 each fall and spring semester (or equivalent 
 terms) during which the student participates in 
 such program;
 ``(iii) is--
 ``(I) a first-time undergraduate 
 student; or
 ``(II) a continuing or transfer 
 student with not more than 15 credits 
 and a minimum grade point average of 
 2.0 (or its equivalent); and
 ``(iv) is considered by the eligible 
 institution to need no more than two remedial 
 courses; and
 ``(B) if the student is eligible for financial aid 
 under title IV, has completed the Free Application for 
 Federal Student Aid or other common financial reporting 
 form under section 483(a); and
 ``(C) meets any other requirements established by 
 the institution.
 ``(4) Full-time academic workload.--The term `full-time 
 academic workload', when used with respect to a semester or 
 equivalent term, means at least 12 credits (or the equivalent).
 ``(5) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term under section 101.
 ``(6) Transfer rate.--The term `transfer rate', when used 
 with respect to students enrolled in a program of study at an 
 eligible institution, means the rate at which such students 
 transfer to a 4-year institution of higher education.

``SEC. 420BB. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart 
$1,000,000,000, to be available until expended for fiscal year 2021 and 
each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.

SEC. 4093. FEDERAL PELL BONUS PROGRAM.

 Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 12--Federal Pell Grant Bonus Program

``SEC. 420CC. FEDERAL PELL GRANT BONUS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall allot funds in an amount 
determined under subsection (b) to each eligible institution to support 
the attainment of bachelor's degrees among low-income students, which 
may include providing financial aid and student support services to 
such students.
 ``(b) Allotment Formula.--For each fiscal year, each eligible 
institution shall be allotted an amount under subsection (a) that bears 
the same proportion to the amount appropriated under subsection (c) for 
such fiscal year as the number of bachelor's degrees awarded by the 
institution for the award year ending prior to the beginning of the 
preceding fiscal year to students who, during such award year, received 
a Federal Pell Grant and graduated from the program in which such 
students were enrolled in the normal time for completion of such 
program (within the meaning of section 132(i)(1)(J)(i)) bears to the 
total number of bachelor's degrees awarded to such students by all 
eligible institutions for such award year.
 ``(c) Data.--In determining the allotments under subsection (b), 
the Secretary may request from eligible institutions any data that may 
be necessary.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated, and there are appropriated, to carry out this section 
$500,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal year. Any 
amounts appropriated under this subsection shall be available until 
expended.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means an institution of higher education (as 
 defined in section 101)--
 ``(A) in which, for the 3 most recent award years, 
 the average percentage of undergraduate students 
 enrolled at the institution who received Federal Pell 
 Grants is not less than 25 percent of the total number 
 of undergraduate students enrolled at such institution; 
 and
 ``(B) that has not opted out of receiving an 
 allotment under this section.
 ``(2) Low-income student.--The term `low-income student' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 499R(3).''.

 PART B--FEDERAL FAMILY EDUCATION LOAN PROGRAM

SEC. 4101. TERMINATION OF CERTAIN REPAYMENT PLAN OPTIONS AND 
 OPPORTUNITY TO CHANGE REPAYMENT PLANS.

 (a) Selection of Repayment Plans.--Section 428(b) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (D)--
 (i) in clause (ii), by striking ``may 
 annually change the selection of a repayment 
 plan under this part,'' and inserting ``may at 
 any time after July 1, 2021, change the 
 selection of a repayment plan under this part 
 to one of the 2 repayment plans described in 
 paragraph (9)(C),''; and
 (ii) in clause (iii), by striking ``be 
 subject to income contingent repayment in 
 accordance with subsection (m);'' and inserting 
 ``be subject to income-based repayment in 
 accordance with section 493C(f);''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (E)(i), by striking ``the 
 option of repaying the loan in accordance with a 
 standard, graduated, income-sensitive, or extended 
 repayment schedule (as described in paragraph (9)) 
 established by the lender in accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary; and'' and inserting ``the 
 option of repaying the loan in accordance with a 
 repayment plan described in paragraph (9)(C) 
 established by the lender in accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary; and''; and
 (2) in paragraph (9), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Selection of repayment plans on and after 
 july 1, 2021.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 this paragraph, or any other provision of law, and in 
 accordance with regulations, beginning on July 1, 2021, 
 the lender shall offer a borrower of a loan made, 
 insured, or guaranteed under this part the opportunity 
 to change repayment plans, and to enroll in one of the 
 following repayment plans:
 ``(i) A fixed repayment plan described in 
 section 493E.
 ``(ii) The income-based repayment plan 
 under section 493C(f).''.
 (b) Assignment by the Secretary.--Section 428(m) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078(m)) is amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Income 
 Contingent and'';
 (2) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) Authority of secretary to require.--The Secretary may 
 require borrowers who have defaulted on loans made under this 
 part that are assigned to the Secretary under subsection (c)(8) 
 to repay those loans under the income-based repayment plan 
 under section 493C(f).''; and
 (3) in the heading for paragraph (2), by striking ``income 
 contingent or''.

SEC. 4102. TERMINATION OF INTEREST CAPITALIZATION FOR SUBSIDIZED LOANS 
 AFTER CERTAIN PERIODS.

 Section 428(c)(3)(C) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1078(c)(3)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (iii), by inserting before the semicolon the 
 following: ``, and with respect to a forbearance granted to a 
 borrower on or after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act on a loan made, insured or guaranteed under 
 this section, provide information to the borrower to assist the 
 borrower in understanding that interest shall accrue on the 
 loan but not be capitalized at the expiration of such period of 
 forbearance''; and
 (2) in clause (iv)--
 (A) in subclause (III), by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: ``, except that 
 this subclause shall not apply with respect to any 
 period of forbearance beginning on or after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act''; and
 (B) in subclause (IV), by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: ``except that this 
 subclause shall not apply with respect to any period of 
 forbearance beginning on or after the date of enactment 
 of the College Affordability Act''.

SEC. 4103. TERMINATION OF INTEREST CAPITALIZATION FOR PLUS LOANS AFTER 
 CERTAIN PERIODS.

 Section 428B(d)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1078-2(d)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``Interest on'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (C), interest on''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Interest capitalization.--Interest shall not 
 be added to the principal amount of a loan made under 
 this section at the expiration of any period that 
 begins on or after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, of--
 ``(i) deferment described in clause 
 (i)(II), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of section 
 427(a)(2)(C) or clause (i)(II), (ii), (iii), 
 (iv), or (v) of section 428(b)(1)(M); or
 ``(ii) forbearance.''.

SEC. 4104. CONSOLIDATION LOANS.

 (a) Subsequent Consolidation Loans.--Section 428C(a)(3)(B)(i)(V) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078-3(a)(3)(B)(i)(V)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of item (bb);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of item (cc) and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(dd) for the purpose of 
 separating a joint 
 consolidation loan into 2 
 separate Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loans under 
 section 455(g)(2); or
 ``(ee) for the purpose of 
 section 455(m)(9)(A)(ii), 
 493C(f)(2)(G), or 493E(c).''.
 (b) Termination of Interest Capitalization After Certain Periods.--
Section 428C(b)(4)(C)(ii)(III) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1078-3(b)(4)(C)(ii)(III)) is amended by inserting before the 
semicolon the following: ``, except that with respect to a period of 
deferment described in clause (i)(II), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of 
section 428(b)(1)(M), or any period of forbearance, beginning on or 
after the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act on such a 
consolidation loan, interest shall not be capitalized at the expiration 
of such period of deferment or forbearance''.

SEC. 4105. DEFAULT REDUCTION PROGRAM.

 Section 428F(a)(1)(C) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1078-6(a)(1)(C)) is amended by striking ``to remove the record 
of the default from the borrower's credit history'' and inserting ``to 
remove any adverse item of information relating to such loan from the 
borrower's credit history''.

SEC. 4106. TERMINATION OF INTEREST CAPITALIZATION FOR UNSUBSIDIZED 
 LOANS AFTER CERTAIN PERIODS.

 Section 428H(e)(2)(A)(ii)(III) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1078-8(e)(2)(A)(ii)(III)) is amended by inserting before the 
semicolon the following: ``, except that with respect to a period of 
deferment described in clause (i)(II), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of section 
427(a)(2)(C) or clause (i)(II), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of section 
428(b)(1)(M), or any period of forbearance, beginning on or after the 
date of enactment of the College Affordability Act on a loan made, 
insured, or guaranteed under this section, interest shall not be added 
to the principal amount of the loan at the expiration of such period of 
deferment or forbearance''.

SEC. 4107. DISBURSEMENT OF STUDENT LOANS.

 Section 428G of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078-
7(a)) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Adjusted cohort default rate.--Beginning on the date 
 on which the final adjusted cohort default rates are published 
 by the Secretary for not less than 3 fiscal years under section 
 435(m), an institution whose adjusted cohort default rate (as 
 determined under section 435(m)) for each of the 3 most recent 
 fiscal years for which data are available is less than 5 
 percent may disburse any loan made, insured, or guaranteed 
 under this part in a single installment for any period of 
 enrollment that is not more than 1 semester, 1 trimester, 1 
 quarter, or 4 months.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by inserting before the period the 
 following: ``, or beginning on the date on which the final 
 adjusted cohort default rates are published by the Secretary 
 for fiscal year 2018 under section 435(m), an adjusted cohort 
 default rate (as determined under section 435(m)) of less than 
 2 percent''.

SEC. 4108. STUDENT LOAN CONTRACT AND LOAN DISCLOSURES.

 (a) Student Loan Contract.--Section 432(m)(1)(D) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1082(m)(1)(D)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(iv) Student loan contract.--
 ``(I) In general.--Any master 
 promissory note form described in this 
 subparagraph that is developed or used 
 for loans made under part D for periods 
 of enrollment beginning on or after the 
 date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act shall be referred to 
 as a `student loan contract'.
 ``(II) Clarification on use.--
 Notwithstanding clause (i), each 
 student loan contract for a part D loan 
 made for periods of enrollment 
 beginning on or after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability 
 Act shall--
 ``(aa) not be entered into 
 by a student unless the student 
 has completed all required 
 counseling related to such 
 loan, including counseling 
 required under section 485(l);
 ``(bb) be signed by the 
 student entering such student 
 loan contract after completion 
 of such counseling; and
 ``(cc) be used only for the 
 academic year for which the 
 initial loans are made under 
 the contract, and shall not be 
 valid for additional loans for 
 the same or subsequent periods 
 of enrollment.''.
 (b) Loan Disclosures.--Section 432(m)(1)(D) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1082(m)(1)(D)) is further amended by adding 
after clause (iv) (as added) the following:
 ``(v) Loan disclosures.--For loans made for 
 periods of enrollment beginning on or after the 
 date of enactment of the College Affordability 
 Act, the Secretary shall take such steps as are 
 necessary to streamline the student loan 
 disclosure requirements under this Act. The 
 Secretary shall ensure that information 
 required to be disclosed to a student who is 
 applying for, receiving, or preparing to repay 
 a loan under part D of this Act shall be 
 streamlined in a manner that--
 ``(I) based upon consumer testing, 
 reduces and simplifies the paperwork 
 students are required to complete; and
 ``(II) limits the number of times 
 students are presented with disclosures 
 by incorporating the streamlined 
 disclosures into required student loan 
 counseling under section 485(l), the 
 student loan contract under this 
 subparagraph, or both.''.

SEC. 4109. BORROWER ADVOCATE CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 Section 433 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1083) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(13), by striking ``Student Loan 
 Ombudsman'' and inserting ``Borrower Advocate''; and
 (2) in subsection (e)(3)(E), by striking ``Student Loan 
 Ombudsman'' and inserting ``Borrower Advocate''.

SEC. 4110. COHORT DEFAULT RATES.

 (a) Ineligibility Based on High Default Rates.--
 (1) In general.--Section 435(a) of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1085(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (7)(A), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(iii) Default management plan.--The 
 default management plan required under clause 
 (i) may not include placing students in 
 forbearance as a means of reducing the cohort 
 default rate or the adjusted cohort default 
 rate of the institution.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) Ineligibility based on high adjusted cohort default 
 rates.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (D), beginning on the date that 
 is one year after the date on which the final adjusted 
 cohort default rates are published by the Secretary for 
 not less than 3 fiscal years, in a case in which one of 
 the following determinations is made with respect to an 
 institution, such institution shall be ineligible to 
 participate in a program under this title for the 
 fiscal year for which the determination is made and for 
 the two succeeding fiscal years:
 ``(i) The institution's adjusted cohort 
 default rate is greater than 20 percent for 
 each of the 3 most recent fiscal years for 
 which the final adjusted cohort default rates 
 are published.
 ``(ii) With respect to the 6 most recent 
 fiscal years for which the final adjusted 
 cohort default rates are published--
 ``(I) the institution's adjusted 
 cohort default rate is greater than 15 
 percent for each such fiscal year; and
 ``(II) the Secretary determines 
 that, during such 6-year period, the 
 institution has not made adequate 
 progress in meeting standards for 
 student achievement established by the 
 relevant accrediting agency or 
 association pursuant to section 
 496(a)(5)(A).
 ``(iii) With respect to the 8 most recent 
 fiscal years for which the final adjusted 
 cohort default rates are published--
 ``(I) the institution's adjusted 
 cohort default rate is greater than 10 
 percent for each such fiscal year; and
 ``(II) the Secretary determines 
 that, during such 8-year period, the 
 institution has not made adequate 
 progress in meeting standards for 
 student achievement established by the 
 relevant accrediting agency or 
 association pursuant to section 
 496(a)(5)(A).
 ``(B) Exceptions for certain categories of 
 educational programs.--With respect to an institution 
 that loses eligibility to participate in a program 
 under this title in accordance with subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), such institution may request and be granted an 
 exception to such loss of eligibility for a category of 
 educational programs at such institution by 
 demonstrating to the Secretary that the adjusted cohort 
 default rate for the category of educational programs 
 is 15 percent or less for each fiscal year of the 6-
 year period on which such loss of eligibility for the 
 institution is based.
 ``(C) Determination of the adjusted cohort rate for 
 a category of educational programs.--In determining the 
 adjusted cohort default rate for a category of 
 educational programs for purposes of this paragraph--
 ``(i) subsection (m) shall be applied--
 ``(I) in paragraph (1)--
 ``(aa) in subparagraph (A), 
 by substituting `received for 
 enrollment in the category of 
 educational programs for which 
 such rate is being determined' 
 for `received for attendance at 
 the institution'; and
 ``(bb) in subparagraph 
 (E)(i)(II), by substituting, 
 `percentage of students 
 enrolled in the category of 
 educational programs for which 
 such rate is being determined' 
 for `percentage of students 
 enrolled at the institution'; 
 and
 ``(II) as if the following were 
 added at the end of paragraph (2):
 ```(E) In the case of a student who has received a 
 loan for enrollment in more than one category of 
 educational programs, the student (and such student's 
 subsequent repayment or default) is attributed to the 
 last category of educational programs in which such 
 student was enrolled.'.
 ``(D) Transition exception.--
 ``(i) In general.--A covered institution 
 with an adjusted cohort default rate that is 
 greater than 20 percent for the first fiscal 
 year for which such rates are published by the 
 Secretary may request that any determination of 
 such institution's ineligibility under 
 paragraph (9)(A) not be based on the adjusted 
 cohort default rate of such institution for any 
 or all of the first 3 fiscal years for which 
 such rates are published by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Requirement.--To be granted a 
 request under clause (i), an institution shall 
 submit to the Secretary a default management 
 plan as specified in paragraph (7).
 ``(iii) Definition of covered 
 institution.--In this subparagraph, the term 
 `covered institution' means--
 ``(I) a public institution of 
 higher education;
 ``(II) a part B institution (as 
 defined in section 322); or
 ``(III) a private, nonprofit 
 institution of higher education at 
 which not less than 45 percent of the 
 total student enrollment consists of 
 low-income students (as such term is 
 defined in section 419N(b)(7)).
 ``(E) Category of educational programs defined.--
 The term `category of educational programs', when used 
 with respect to an institution, means one of the 
 following:
 ``(i) The educational programs at the 
 institution leading to an undergraduate, non-
 degree credential.
 ``(ii) The educational programs at the 
 institution leading to an associate's degree.
 ``(iii) The educational programs at the 
 institution leading to a bachelor's degree.
 ``(iv) The educational programs at the 
 institution leading to a graduate, non-degree 
 credential.
 ``(v) The educational program at the 
 institution leading to a graduate degree.
 ``(10) Application of adjusted cohort default rate.--
 Beginning on the date on which the final adjusted cohort 
 default rates are published by the Secretary for not less than 
 3 fiscal years--
 ``(A) paragraph (1) shall be applied by 
 substituting `paragraph (9)' for `paragraph (2)'.
 ``(B) paragraph (3) shall be applied by 
 substituting `adjusted cohort default rate, calculated 
 in accordance with subsection (m)(1)(D), is greater 
 than 20 percent for any 3 consecutive fiscal years' for 
 `cohort default rate, calculated in accordance with 
 subsection (m), is equal to or greater than the 
 threshold percentage specified in paragraph (2)(B)(iv) 
 for any two consecutive fiscal years';
 ``(C) paragraph (4) shall be applied--
 ``(i) in subparagraph (C), by substituting 
 `adjusted cohort default rate is greater than 
 15 percent' for `cohort default rate equals or 
 exceeds 20 percent'; and
 ``(ii) in the matter following subparagraph 
 (C), by substituting `adjusted cohort default 
 rate to reflect the percentage of defaulted 
 loans in the representative sample that are 
 required to be excluded pursuant to subsection 
 (m)(1)(B)' for `cohort default rate to reflect 
 the percentage of defaulted loans in the 
 representative sample that are required to be 
 excluded pursuant to subsection (m)(1)(B)';
 ``(D) paragraph (5)(A) shall be applied by 
 substituting `paragraph (9)' for `paragraph (2)'; and
 ``(E) paragraph (7) shall be applied--
 ``(i) in subparagraph (A)(i)--
 ``(I) in the matter preceding 
 subclause (I), by substituting 
 `adjusted cohort default rate is 
 greater than 20 percent' for `cohort 
 default rate is equal to or greater 
 than the threshold percentage specified 
 in paragraph (2)(B)(iv)'; and
 ``(II) in subclauses (I) and (II), 
 by substituting `adjusted cohort 
 default rate' for `cohort default 
 rate'; and
 ``(ii) in subparagraph (B)(i), by 
 substituting `adjusted cohort default rate is 
 greater than 20 percent' for `cohort default 
 rate is equal to or greater than the threshold 
 percentage specified in paragraph 
 (2)(B)(iv)'.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 435(a)(2) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1085(a)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph heading, by adding at the end 
 the following: ``before fiscal year 2018''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(iv), by striking ``and any 
 succeeding fiscal year'' and inserting ``through fiscal 
 year 2017''.
 (b) Adjusted Cohort Default Rate Defined.--Section 435(m)(1) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1085(m)(1)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(D)(i) With respect to a cohort default rate calculated 
 for an institution under this paragraph for fiscal year 2018 
 and for each succeeding fiscal year, such cohort default rate 
 shall be adjusted as follows:
 ``(I) In determining the number of current and 
 former students at an institution who enter repayment 
 for such fiscal year--
 ``(aa) any such student who is in 
 nonmandatory forbearance for such fiscal year 
 for a period of greater than 18 months but less 
 than 36 months shall not be counted as entering 
 repayment for such fiscal year;
 ``(bb) such a student shall be counted as 
 entering repayment for the first fiscal year 
 for which the student ceases to be in a period 
 of forbearance and otherwise meets the 
 requirements for being in repayment; and
 ``(cc) any such student who is in a period 
 of forbearance for 3 or more years shall be 
 counted as in default and included in the 
 institution's total number of students in 
 default.
 ``(II) Such rate shall be multiplied by the 
 percentage of students enrolled at the institution for 
 such fiscal year who are borrowing a loan under part D 
 of this title.
 ``(ii) The result obtained under this subparagraph for an 
 institution shall be referred to in this Act as the `adjusted 
 cohort default rate'.''.
 (c) Publication of Adjusted Cohort Default Rate.--Section 435(m) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1085(m)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Adjusted cohort default rates.--Beginning on the date 
 on which the final adjusted cohort default rates for fiscal 
 year 2018 are made available for publication by the Secretary, 
 paragraph (4) shall be applied by substituting `adjusted cohort 
 default' for `cohort default' each place it appears.''.

SEC. 4111. AUTOMATIC INCOME MONITORING PROCEDURES AFTER A TOTAL AND 
 PERMANENT DISABILITY DISCHARGE.

 Section 437(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Automatic income monitoring.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall establish and implement, with respect 
 to any borrower described in subparagraph (B), 
 procedures to--
 ``(i) obtain (for each year of the income-
 monitoring period described in subparagraph (B) 
 and without further action by the borrower) 
 such information as is reasonably necessary 
 regarding the income of such borrower for the 
 purpose of determining the borrower's continued 
 eligibility for the loan discharge described in 
 subparagraph (B) for such year, and any other 
 information necessary to determine such 
 continued eligibility of the borrower for such 
 year, except that in the case of a borrower 
 whose returns and return information indicate 
 that the borrower has no earned income for any 
 year of such income-monitoring period, such 
 borrower shall be treated as not having earned 
 income in excess of the poverty line for such 
 year subject to clause (ii);
 ``(ii) allow the borrower, at any time, to 
 opt out of clause (i) and prevent the Secretary 
 from obtaining information under such clause 
 without further action by the borrower; and
 ``(iii) provide the borrower with an 
 opportunity to update the information obtained 
 under clause (i) before the determination of 
 the borrower's continued eligibility for such 
 loan discharge for such year.
 ``(B) Applicability.--Subparagraph (A) shall 
 apply--
 ``(i) to each borrower of a covered loan 
 (defined in section 455(d)(10)) that is 
 discharged under this subsection or section 
 464(c)(1)(F) due to the permanent and total 
 disability of the borrower; and
 ``(ii) during the income-monitoring period 
 under this subsection, defined in this 
 paragraph as the period--
 ``(I) beginning on the date on 
 which such loan is so discharged; and
 ``(II) during which the Secretary 
 determines whether a reinstatement of 
 the obligation of, and resumption of 
 collection on, such loan may be 
 necessary.''.

SEC. 4112. AUTOMATIC CLOSED SCHOOL DISCHARGE.

 Section 437(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (6), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following:
 ``(2) Automatic closed school discharge.--
 ``(A) Secretarial requirements.--With respect to a 
 borrower described in subparagraph (B), the Secretary 
 shall, without any further action by the borrower, 
 discharge the borrower's liability on the loan 
 described in subparagraph (B)(i).
 ``(B) Borrower requirements.--A borrower described 
 in this subparagraph means a borrower who--
 ``(i) receives a loan--
 ``(I) made, insured, or guaranteed 
 under this title for enrollment in a 
 program that the borrower was unable to 
 complete due to the closure of the 
 institution; and
 ``(II) for which the Secretary has 
 not already discharged the borrower's 
 liability on such loan pursuant to this 
 subsection; and
 ``(ii) as of the date that is 2 years after 
 the closure of the institution, has not re-
 enrolled in an institution of higher education 
 that participates in programs under this 
 title.''.

SEC. 4113. REPAYMENT OF PARENT LOANS DUE TO STUDENT DISABILITY.

 Section 437(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``If a student'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Death.--If a student''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Disability.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall discharge a 
 parent's liability on a loan described in section 428B 
 by repaying the amount owed on the loan if the student 
 on whose behalf the parent has received the loan--
 ``(i) becomes permanently and totally 
 disabled (as determined in accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary); or
 ``(ii) is unable to engage in any 
 substantial gainful activity by reason of any 
 medically determinable physical or mental 
 impairment that can be expected to result in 
 death, has lasted for a continuous period of 
 not less than 60 months, or can be expected to 
 last for a continuous period of not less than 
 60 months.
 ``(B) Disability determinations.--Subsection (a)(2) 
 shall apply to a disability determination under this 
 paragraph in the same manner as such subsection applies 
 to a determination under subsection (a)(1).
 ``(C) Safeguards.--The safeguards to prevent fraud 
 and abuse developed under subsection (a)(1) shall apply 
 under this paragraph.
 ``(D) Reinstatement of loans.--The Secretary may 
 promulgate regulations to reinstate the obligation of, 
 and resume collection on, loans discharged under this 
 paragraph in cases in which the Secretary determines 
 that the reinstatement and resumption is necessary and 
 appropriate based upon the regulations developed under 
 subsection (a)(1).''.

 PART C--FEDERAL WORK-STUDY PROGRAMS

SEC. 4201. PURPOSE; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 441 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-51) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``part, such sums as may 
 be necessary for fiscal year 2009 and each of the five 
 succeeding fiscal years.'' and inserting ``part--
 ``(1) $1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 ``(2) $1,750,000,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 ``(3) $2,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2023;
 ``(4) $2,250,000,000 for fiscal year 2024; and
 ``(5) $2,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2025 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``child 
 development and early learning (including Head Start 
 and Early Head Start programs carried out under the 
 Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.)),'', before 
 ``literacy training,'';
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'';
 (C) in paragraph (4)(C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) work-based learning designed to give students 
 experience in any activity described in paragraph (1), (2), 
 (3), or (4), without regard to whether credit is awarded.''; 
 and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Work-based Learning Defined.--For purposes of this part, the 
term `work-based learning' means sustained interactions with industry, 
community, or academic professionals in real workplace settings that 
shall--
 ``(1) include on campus opportunities;
 ``(2) foster in-depth, first-hand engagement with the tasks 
 required of a given career field that are aligned to a 
 student's field of study; and
 ``(3) may include internships, fellowships, research 
 assistant positions, teacher residencies, participation in 
 cooperative education, and apprenticeships registered under the 
 Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly known as the ``National 
 Apprenticeship Act''; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 
 et seq.).''.

SEC. 4202. ALLOCATION FORMULA.

 Section 442 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-52) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 442. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) Reservations.--
 ``(1) Reservation for improved institutions.--
 ``(A) Amount of reservation for improved 
 institutions.--Beginning with the first fiscal year 
 that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of the 
 College Affordability Act, for a fiscal year in which 
 the amount appropriated under section 441(b) exceeds 
 $700,000,000, the Secretary shall--
 ``(i) reserve the lesser of--
 ``(I) an amount equal to 20 percent 
 of the amount by which the amount 
 appropriated under section 441(b) 
 exceeds $700,000,000; or
 ``(II) $150,000,000; and
 ``(ii) allocate the amount reserved under 
 clause (i) to each improved institution in an 
 amount equal to the greater of the following:
 ``(I) The amount that bears the 
 same proportion to the amount reserved 
 under clause (i) as the total amount of 
 all Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at 
 the improved institution for the second 
 preceding fiscal year bears to the 
 total amount of Federal Pell Grant 
 funds awarded at improved institutions 
 participating under this part for the 
 second preceding fiscal year.
 ``(II) $5,000.
 ``(B) Improved institution described.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, an improved institution is an 
 institution that, on the date the Secretary makes an 
 allocation under subparagraph (A)(ii)--
 ``(i) is an institution of higher education 
 (as defined under section 101) participating 
 under this part;
 ``(ii) is with respect to--
 ``(I) the completion rate or 
 graduation rate of Federal Pell Grant 
 recipients at the institution, in the 
 top 75 percent of all institutions 
 participating under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year;
 ``(II) the percentage of Federal 
 Pell Grant recipients at the 
 institution, in the top 50 percent of 
 the institutions described in subclause 
 (I); and
 ``(III) the annual increase in the 
 completion rate or graduation rate of 
 Federal Pell Grant recipients at the 
 institution, in the top 50 percent of 
 the institutions described in 
 subclauses (I) and (II).
 ``(C) Completion rate or graduation rate.--For 
 purposes of determining the completion rate or 
 graduation rate under this section, a Federal Pell 
 Grant recipient who is either a full-time student or a 
 part-time student shall be counted as a completer or 
 graduate if, within 150 percent of the normal time for 
 completion of or graduation from the program, the 
 student has completed or graduated from the program, or 
 enrolled in any program of an institution participating 
 in any program under this title for which the prior 
 program provides substantial preparation.
 ``(2) Reservation for grant program.--From the amount 
 appropriated under section 441(b) for a fiscal year and 
 remaining after the Secretary reserves funds under subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary shall reserve $30,000,000 to carry out 
 grants under section 449.
 ``(3) Reallocation of amount returned by improved 
 institutions.--If an institution returns to the Secretary any 
 portion of the sums allocated to such institution under this 
 subsection for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall reallot 
 such excess to improved institutions on the same basis as under 
 paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(4) Publication.--Beginning 1 year after the first 
 allocations are made to improved institutions under paragraph 
 (1)(A) and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall make 
 publicly available--
 ``(A) a list of the improved institutions that 
 received funding under such paragraph in the prior 
 fiscal year;
 ``(B) the percentage of students at each such 
 improved institution that are Federal Pell Grant 
 recipients;
 ``(C) the completion rate or graduation rate for 
 the students described in subparagraph (B) with respect 
 to each such improved institution; and
 ``(D) a comparison between the information 
 described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) for the 
 prior fiscal year for such improved institution, and 
 such information for the year prior to such year.
 ``(c) Allocation Formula for Fiscal Years 2021 Through 2025.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amount appropriated under 
 section 441(b) for a fiscal year and remaining after the 
 Secretary reserves funds under subsection (a), the Secretary 
 shall allocate to each institution--
 ``(A) for fiscal year 2021, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 90 percent of the amount the 
 institution received under this subsection and 
 subsection (a) for fiscal year 2020, as such 
 subsections were in effect with respect to such 
 fiscal year (in this subparagraph referred to 
 as `the 2020 amount for the institution'); or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (d);
 ``(B) for fiscal year 2022, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 80 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (d);
 ``(C) for fiscal year 2023, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 60 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (d);
 ``(D) for fiscal year 2024, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 40 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (d); 
 and
 ``(E) for fiscal year 2025, an amount equal to the 
 greater of--
 ``(i) 20 percent of the 2020 amount for the 
 institution; or
 ``(ii) the fair share amount for the 
 institution determined under subsection (d).
 ``(2) Ratable reduction.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the amount appropriated under 
 section 441(b) for a fiscal year and remaining after 
 the Secretary reserves funds under subsection (a) is 
 less than the amount required to be allocated to the 
 institutions under this subsection, then the amount of 
 the allocation to each institution shall be ratably 
 reduced.
 ``(B) Additional appropriations.--If the amounts 
 allocated to each institution are ratably reduced under 
 subparagraph (A) for a fiscal year and additional 
 amounts are appropriated for such fiscal year, the 
 amount allocated to each institution from the 
 additional amounts shall be increased on the same basis 
 as the amounts under subparagraph (A) were reduced 
 (until each institution receives the amount required to 
 be allocated under this subsection).
 ``(d) Allocation Formula for Fiscal Year 2026 and Each Succeeding 
Fiscal Year.--Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), from the amount 
appropriated under section 441(b) for fiscal year 2026 and each 
succeeding fiscal year and remaining after the Secretary reserves funds 
under subsection (a), the Secretary shall allocate to each institution 
the fair share amount for the institution determined under subsection 
(d).
 ``(e) Determination of Fair Share Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the fair share 
 amount for an institution for a fiscal year shall be equal to 
 the sum of--
 ``(A) 100 percent of the institution's 
 undergraduate student need described in paragraph (2) 
 for the preceding fiscal year; and
 ``(B) 25 percent of the institution's graduate 
 student need described in paragraph (3) for the 
 preceding fiscal year.
 ``(2) Institutional undergraduate student need 
 calculation.--The undergraduate student need for an institution 
 for a fiscal year shall be equal to the sum of the following:
 ``(A) An amount equal to 50 percent of the amount 
 that bears the same proportion to the available 
 appropriated amount for such fiscal year as the total 
 amount of Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at the 
 institution for the preceding fiscal year bears to the 
 total amount of Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at all 
 institutions participating under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year.
 ``(B) An amount equal to 50 percent of the amount 
 that bears the same proportion to the available 
 appropriated amount for such fiscal year as the total 
 amount of the undergraduate student need at the 
 institution for the preceding fiscal year bears to the 
 total amount of undergraduate student need at all 
 institutions participating under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year.
 ``(3) Institutional graduate student need calculation.--The 
 graduate student need for an institution for a fiscal year 
 shall be equal to the amount that bears the same proportion to 
 the available appropriated amount for such fiscal year as the 
 total amount of the graduate student need at the institution 
 for the preceding fiscal year bears to the total amount of 
 graduate student need at all institutions participating under 
 this part for the preceding fiscal year.
 ``(4) Eligibility for fair share amount.--The Secretary may 
 not allocate funds under this part to any institution that, for 
 two or more fiscal years during any three fiscal year period 
 beginning not earlier than the first day of the first fiscal 
 year that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this 
 paragraph, has--
 ``(A) a student population with less than 7 percent 
 of undergraduate students who are recipients of Federal 
 Pell Grants; or
 ``(B) if the institution only enrolls graduate 
 students, a student population with less than 5 percent 
 of students that have an expected family contribution 
 of zero.
 ``(5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Available appropriated amount.--In this 
 section, the term `available appropriated amount' 
 means--
 ``(i) the amount appropriated under section 
 441(b) for a fiscal year, minus
 ``(ii) the amounts reserved under 
 subsection (a) for such fiscal year.
 ``(B) Average cost of attendance.--The term 
 `average cost of attendance' means, with respect to an 
 institution, the average of the attendance costs for a 
 fiscal year for students which shall include--
 ``(i) tuition and fees, computed on the 
 basis of information reported by the 
 institution to the Secretary, which shall 
 include--
 ``(I) total revenue received by the 
 institution from undergraduate and 
 graduate tuition and fees for the 
 second year preceding the year for 
 which it is applying for an allocation; 
 and
 ``(II) the institution's enrollment 
 for such second preceding year;
 ``(ii) standard living expenses equal to 
 150 percent of the difference between the 
 income protection allowance for a family of 
 five with one in college and the income 
 protection allowance for a family of six with 
 one in college for a single independent 
 student; and
 ``(iii) books and supplies, in an amount 
 not exceeding $1,000.
 ``(C) Graduate student need.--The term `graduate 
 student need' means, with respect to a graduate student 
 for a fiscal year, the lesser of the following:
 ``(i) The amount equal to (except the 
 amount computed by this clause shall not be 
 less than zero)--
 ``(I) the average cost of 
 attendance for the preceding fiscal 
 year, minus
 ``(II) such graduate student's 
 expected family contribution (computed 
 in accordance with part F of this 
 title) for the preceding fiscal year.
 ``(ii) The total annual loan limit for a 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan.
 ``(D) Undergraduate student need.--The term 
 `undergraduate student need' means, with respect to an 
 undergraduate student for a fiscal year, the lesser of 
 the following:
 ``(i) The total of the amount equal to 
 (except the amount computed by this clause 
 shall not be less than zero)--
 ``(I) the average cost of 
 attendance for the fiscal year, minus
 ``(II) such undergraduate student's 
 expected family contribution (computed 
 in accordance with part F of this 
 title) for the preceding fiscal year.
 ``(ii) The total annual loan limit for a 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan and a 
 Federal Direct Loan.
 ``(f) Return of Surplus Allocated Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except with respect to funds returned 
 under subsection (a)(3), if an institution returns to the 
 Secretary any portion of the sums allocated to such institution 
 under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 reallot such excess to institutions that used at least 10 
 percent of the total amount of funds granted to such 
 institution under this section to compensate students employed 
 during a qualified period of nonenrollment (as such term is 
 defined in section 443(f)) on the same basis as excess eligible 
 amounts are allocated under subsection (d).
 ``(2) Use of funds.--Funds received by institutions 
 pursuant to this subsection shall, to maximum extent 
 practicable, be used to compensate students employed in work-
 based learning positions.
 ``(3) Retained funds.--
 ``(A) Amount returned.--If an institution returns 
 more than 10 percent of its allocation under paragraph 
 (1), the institution's allocation for the next fiscal 
 year shall be reduced by the amount returned.
 ``(B) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive this 
 paragraph for a specific institution if the Secretary 
 finds that enforcing this paragraph would be contrary 
 to the interest of the program.
 ``(g) Filing Deadlines.--The Secretary may require applications 
under this section, at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.''.

SEC. 4203. GRANTS FOR FEDERAL WORK-STUDY PROGRAMS.

 Section 443 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-53) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) provide that funds granted an institution of higher 
 education, pursuant to this section may only be used to make 
 payments to students participating in work-study programs 
 except that an institution--
 ``(A) shall, beginning fiscal year 2023--
 ``(i) use at least 3 percent of the total 
 amount of funds granted to such institution 
 under this section for such fiscal year to 
 compensate students who have exceptional need 
 (as defined in section 413C(c)(2)) and are 
 employed in a work-based learning position 
 during a qualified period of nonenrollment, as 
 defined in subsection (f), except that the 
 Secretary may waive this clause if the 
 Secretary determines that enforcing this clause 
 would cause hardship for students at the 
 institution; and
 ``(ii) use at least 7 percent of the total 
 amount of funds granted to such institution 
 under this section for such fiscal year to 
 compensate students employed in work-based 
 learning positions, except that the Secretary 
 may waive this clause if the Secretary 
 determines that enforcing this clause would 
 cause hardship for students at the institution;
 ``(B) may--
 ``(i) use a portion of the sums granted to 
 it to compensate students employed in community 
 service;
 ``(ii) use a portion of the sums granted to 
 it to meet administrative expenses in 
 accordance with section 489;
 ``(iii) use a portion of the sums granted 
 to it to meet the cost of a job location and 
 development program in accordance with section 
 446 of this part; and
 ``(iv) transfer funds in accordance with 
 the provisions of section 488;'';
 (B) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by striking ``$300'' and inserting 
 ``$500''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``except as provided 
 under subsection (f),'' before ``provide'';
 (C) in paragraph (5)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting 
 ``and'' after the semicolon; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) the Federal share shall equal 100 percent if 
 the institution is eligible for assistance under title 
 III or title V;''.
 (D) in paragraph (6)--
 (i) by inserting ``who demonstrate 
 exceptional need (as defined in section 
 413C(c)(2))'' after ``students''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``and prioritize 
 employment for students who are currently 
 homeless individuals described in section 725 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 11434a) or foster care youth'' after 
 ``institution'';
 (E) in paragraph (7), by striking ``vocational'' 
 and inserting ``career'';
 (F) in paragraph (8)(A)(i), by striking ``or 
 vocational goals'' and inserting ``career goals'';
 (G) in paragraph (10), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (H) in paragraph (11), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (I) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) provide assurances that compensation of students 
 employed in the work-study program in accordance with the 
 agreement shall include reimbursement for reasonable travel 
 (not including the purchase of a vehicle) directly related to 
 such work-study program;
 ``(13) provide assurances that the institution will 
 administer and use feedback from the surveys required under 
 section 450, to improve the experiences of students employed in 
 the work-study program in accordance with the agreement;
 ``(14) provide assurances that the institution will collect 
 data from students and employers such that the employment made 
 available from funds under this part will, to the maximum 
 extent practicable, complement and reinforce the educational 
 goals or career goals of each student receiving assistance 
 under this part; and
 ``(15) provide assurances that if the institution receives 
 funds under section 442(a)(1)(A), such institution shall--
 ``(A) use such funds to compensate students 
 employed in the work-study program in accordance with 
 the agreement; and
 ``(B) prioritize the awarding of such funds (and 
 increasing the amount of each award) to students--
 ``(i) who demonstrate exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2)); and
 ``(ii) who are employed in work-based 
 learning opportunities through the work study 
 program in accordance with the agreement.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) provide that--
 ``(A) in the case of an institution that has not 
 received a waiver from the Secretary, such institution 
 will not use more than 25 percent of the funds made 
 available to such institution under this part for any 
 fiscal year for the operation of the program described 
 in paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) in the case of an institution that has 
 received a waiver from the Secretary, such institution 
 will not use more than 50 percent of the funds made 
 available to such institution under this part for any 
 fiscal year for the operation of the program described 
 in paragraph (1);''.
 (B) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by inserting ``and complement and 
 reinforce the educational goals or career goals 
 of each student receiving assistance under this 
 part'' after ``academically relevant''; and
 (ii) by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) provide assurances that compensation of students 
 employed in the work-study program in accordance with the 
 agreement shall include reimbursement for reasonable travel 
 (not including the purchase of a vehicle) directly related to 
 such work-study program.'';
 (3) in subsection (d)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``In any academic year to which 
 subsection (b)(2)(A) applies, an institution shall 
 ensure that'' and inserting ``An institution may use 
 the''; and
 (B) by striking ``travel'' and inserting 
 ``reasonable travel (not including the purchase of a 
 vehicle)''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Qualified Period of Nonenrollment.--
 ``(1) In general.--A student may be awarded work-study 
 employment during a qualified period of nonenrollment if--
 ``(A) the student demonstrates exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2)) in the award year prior 
 to the qualified period of nonenrollment;
 ``(B) the student is employed in a work-based 
 learning position; and
 ``(C) the employment--
 ``(i) involves less than 25 percent 
 administrative work; and
 ``(ii) is for at least 20 hours per week, 
 unless the institution waives such 
 requirement--
 ``(I) at the request of the 
 student; or
 ``(II) based on a finding by the 
 institution that such requirement 
 presents a hardship in finding a work-
 based learning position for the 
 student.
 ``(2) Funds earned.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any funds earned by a student 
 (beyond standard living expenses (as such term is 
 described in section 413D(c)(3)(C))) during the 
 qualified period of nonenrollment less than or equal to 
 $2,500 may not be applied to such student's cost of 
 attendance for the next period in which the student is 
 enrolled.
 ``(B) Excess funds.--Any funds earned by a student 
 (beyond standard living expenses (as such term is 
 described in section 413D(c)(3)(C))) during the 
 qualified period of nonenrollment in excess of $2,500 
 shall be applied to such student's cost of attendance 
 for the next period in which the student is enrolled.
 ``(3) Definition of qualified period of nonenrollment.--In 
 this subsection, the term `qualified period of nonenrollment' 
 means, with respect to a student, a period of nonenrollment 
 that--
 ``(A) occurs between a period of enrollment and a 
 period of anticipated enrollment; and
 ``(B) the duration of which is no longer than 6 
 months.
 ``(g) Cooperative Education.--
 ``(1) In general.--A student may be awarded work-study 
 employment for participation in cooperative education on--
 ``(A) a part-time basis; or
 ``(B) a full-time basis for a period equal to or 
 less than 6 months.
 ``(2) Private agreements for cooperative education.--As 
 part of its agreement described in subsection (b), an 
 institution of higher education may, at its option, enter into 
 an additional agreement with the Secretary which shall provide 
 for the operation by the institution of a program of 
 cooperative education of its students (on the basis described 
 in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1)) by a private for-
 profit organization under an agreement between the institution 
 and such organization that complies with the requirements of 
 subsection (c).
 ``(3) Full-time basis period.--The period specified in 
 paragraph (1)(B) may be non-consecutive and include 
 participation during qualified periods of nonenrollment (as 
 defined in subsection (f)(3)).
 ``(4) Cooperative education defined.--In this subsection, 
 the term `cooperative education' means a program of alternating 
 or parallel periods of academic study and work-based learning 
 designed to give students work experiences related to their 
 academic or career objectives.
 ``(h) Notification Regarding SNAP.--
 ``(1) In general.--An institution receiving a grant under 
 this part shall send a notification (by email or other 
 electronic means) to each eligible student informing the 
 student of their potential eligibility for participation in the 
 SNAP and the process for obtaining more information, confirming 
 eligibility, and accessing benefits under that program. The 
 notification shall be developed by the Secretary of Education 
 in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, and shall 
 include details on eligibility requirements for participation 
 in the SNAP that a student must satisfy. The notification shall 
 be, to the extent practicable, specific to the student's State 
 of residence and shall provide contact information for the 
 local office where an application for the SNAP may be made.
 ``(2) Evidence of participation in federally financed work-
 study program.--The notification under paragraph (1) shall 
 include an official document confirming that the recipient is 
 an eligible student sufficient for purposes of demonstrating 
 that the exclusion from ineligibility for participation in the 
 SNAP under section 6(e)(4) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 
 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2015(e)(4)) applies to the student.
 ``(3) Guidance.--The Secretary of Education, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall provide 
 guidance to States and institutions of higher education on how 
 to identify and communicate with students who are likely to be 
 eligible for the SNAP, including those eligible for a State or 
 federally financed work-study program.
 ``(4) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 ``(A) The term `eligible student' means a student 
 receiving work-study assistance under this part.
 ``(B) The term `SNAP' means the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program (as defined in section 
 3(t) of the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 
 2012(t))).''.

SEC. 4204. FLEXIBLE USE OF FUNDS.

 Section 445 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-55) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) In addition to the carry-over sums authorized under 
 paragraph (1) of this section, an institution may permit a 
 student who completed the previous award period to continue to 
 earn unearned portions of the student's work-study award from 
 that previous period if--
 ``(A) any reduction in the student's need upon 
 which the award was based is accounted for in the 
 remaining portion; and
 ``(B) the student is currently employed in a work-
 based learning position.''; and
 (2) by striking ``10 percent'' both places it appears and 
 inserting ``20 percent''.

SEC. 4205. JOB LOCATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.

 Section 446 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-56) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``10 percent or 
 $75,000'' and inserting ``20 percent or $150,000''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``vocational'' 
 and inserting ``career''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking paragraphs (1) and (2); and
 (B) by inserting before paragraph (3) the 
 following:
 ``(1) provide satisfactory assurance that the institution 
 will prioritize placing students with exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2)) and Federal work-study 
 recipients in jobs located and developed under this section; 
 and
 ``(2) provide satisfactory assurances that the funds 
 available under this section will be used to locate and develop 
 work-based learning positions;''; and
 (C) in paragraph (6), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``, including--
 ``(A) the number of students employed in work-based 
 learning positions through such program;
 ``(B) the number of students demonstrating 
 exceptional need (as defined in section 413C(c)(2)) and 
 Federal work-study recipients employed through such 
 program; and
 ``(C) the number of students demonstrating 
 exceptional need (as defined in section 413C(c)(2)) and 
 Federal work-study recipients employed in work-based 
 learning positions through such program.''.

SEC. 4206. COMMUNITY SERVICE.

 Section 447 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-57) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 447. ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO CONDUCT COMMUNITY SERVICE WORK STUDY 
 PROGRAMS.

 ``Each institution participating under this part may use up to 10 
percent of the funds made available under section 489(a) and 
attributable to the amount of the institution's expenditures under this 
part to conduct that institution's program of community service-
learning, including--
 ``(1) development of mechanisms to assure the academic 
 quality of the student experience;
 ``(2) assuring student access to educational resources, 
 expertise, and supervision necessary to achieve community 
 service objectives;
 ``(3) assuring, to the maximum extent practicable, that the 
 community service-learning program will support the educational 
 goals or career goals of students participating in such 
 program;
 ``(4) collaboration with public and private nonprofit 
 agencies, and programs assisted under the National and 
 Community Service Act of 1990 in the planning, development, and 
 administration of such programs; and
 ``(5) to recruit and compensate students for community 
 service-learning (including compensation for time spent in 
 training and for reasonable travel (not including the purchase 
 of a vehicle) directly related to such community service).''.

SEC. 4207. AMENDMENTS TO WORK COLLEGES.

 Section 448 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-58) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``student'' after 
 ``comprehensive'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(2)(D), by inserting ``student'' after 
 ``comprehensive'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking ``Each eligible institution'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible institution''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Application dates.--The Secretary shall require an 
 eligible institution that submits an application for funding 
 under this section for the first time to submit such 
 application 5 months prior to the application due date for 
 returning applicants.''; and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking subparagraph (B) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(B) is accredited by an accrediting agency or 
 association recognized by the Secretary pursuant to 
 part H, has operated a work-study program under this 
 part for at least the 2 years preceding the date of the 
 determination, and has operated a comprehensive student 
 work-learning-service program for at least the 2 years 
 preceding the date of the determination;'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting 
 ``student'' after ``comprehensive''; and
 (iii) in subparagraph (D), by inserting 
 ``student'' after ``comprehensive''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) 
 through (F) as subparagraphs (B) through (G), 
 respectively; and
 (ii) by inserting before subparagraph (B), 
 as redesignated by clause (i), the following:
 ``(A) is a 4-year, degree-granting program;''.

SEC. 4208. PILOT GRANT PROGRAM.

 Part C of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087-51 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 449. WORK-BASED LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES PILOT GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a program 
 to provide grants to eligible institutions participating under 
 this part to establish or expand a program to develop work-
 based learning positions.
 ``(2) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Duration.--A grant awarded under this section 
 shall be for a period of not more than 4 years, but may 
 be renewed by the Secretary for a period of 2 years.
 ``(B) Amount.--A grant under this section may not 
 be in an amount greater than $1,000,000.
 ``(b) Application.--To be selected to receive a grant under this 
section an eligible institution participating under this part shall 
submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, 
and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including 
a plan that describes how the eligible institution will establish or 
expand a program to develop work-based learning positions that will--
 ``(1) benefit students who demonstrate exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2));
 ``(2) identify in-demand industry sectors and occupations 
 (as defined in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102) and as determined by the 
 Bureau of Labor and Statistics, State departments of labor, and 
 local boards (as defined in such section 3)) and develop 
 partnerships with high-demand employers (including nonprofit 
 organizations, joint labor-management organizations, for-profit 
 firms, or public agencies);
 ``(3) involve participating employers in evaluating and 
 improving such program;
 ``(4) track and report academic and employment outcomes for 
 participating students; and
 ``(5) be able to continue after the end of the grant term.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Grant funds awarded under this program shall 
be used to pay wages for students participating under this program and 
develop work-based learning positions that--
 ``(1) are for a period of at least 12 weeks;
 ``(2) serve students who demonstrate exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2));
 ``(3) limit administrative work to no more than 25 percent 
 of such position;
 ``(4) provide a minimum of 15 hours of work per week during 
 periods of enrollment and 30 hours per week during periods of 
 nonenrollment, except such requirement may be waived by the 
 institution in consultation with a student;
 ``(5) include career coaching from participating employers 
 (including mock interviews, resume writing assistance, career 
 exploration, and counseling on applying for and attaining 
 employment); and
 ``(6) provide participating students with opportunities to 
 meet with employers in fields or industries related to those of 
 participating employers.
 ``(d) Report.--On a date that is before the date on which the 
period of the grant received by an eligible institution under this 
section terminates, such institution shall submit a report to the 
Secretary including--
 ``(1) the graduation rate or completion rate (as described 
 under section 442(a)(1)(C)) with respect to students 
 participating in work-based learning positions under the pilot 
 program; and
 ``(2) the results of the work-based learning opportunities 
 program for which such institution received such grant, 
 including--
 ``(A) participating students' satisfaction with the 
 program as reported in surveys under section 450, as 
 added by section 4209 of the College Affordability Act;
 ``(B) the types of jobs in which participating 
 students were employed and the types of duties 
 performed in such jobs;
 ``(C) the academic programs of the participating 
 students;
 ``(D) the share of participating students who 
 worked at another job, in addition to the one under the 
 pilot program;
 ``(E) the percentage of participating students who, 
 during the second quarter after completing their 
 academic program, are in education or training 
 activities or unsubsidized employment;
 ``(F) the percentage of participating students 
 employed in in-demand industry sectors or occupations 
 as described in subsection (b)(2) within 2 quarters of 
 completing their academic programs; and
 ``(G) other items as deemed relevant by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(e) Reservation of Funding for Such Program.--From the amount 
appropriated under section 441(b) for a fiscal year and remaining after 
the Secretary reserves funds under section 442(a)(1), the Secretary 
shall reserve $30,000,000 to carry out grants under this section.''.

SEC. 4209. DEPARTMENT ACTIVITIES.

 Part C of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087-51 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 450. DEPARTMENT ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Surveys.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall develop, in consultation 
with work-study administrators from institutions of higher education, 
participating employers, and participating students--
 ``(1) a consumer-tested electronic survey for students 
 awarded work-study employment under the Federal work-study 
 program under this part that--
 ``(A) measures each such student's satisfaction 
 with the Federal work-study program, including--
 ``(i) any complaints the student has with 
 respect to the program;
 ``(ii) the amount and quality of the on-
 the-job training the student received;
 ``(iii) the amount and quality of on-the-
 job supervision and employer feedback the 
 student received;
 ``(iv) the amount and quality of 
 information provided by the institution about 
 the work-study program and job opportunities 
 and the availability of work-study staff at the 
 institution;
 ``(v) the quality of the assistance 
 provided by the institution to the student in 
 finding a work-study job and the availability 
 of types of jobs; and
 ``(vi) the student's overall satisfaction 
 with the work-study program;
 ``(B) measures the applicability of work-study 
 employment to the educational goals and career goals of 
 each such student;
 ``(C) elicits an assessment by each such student of 
 the capacity to manage time between work-study 
 employment and coursework;
 ``(D) measures, with respect to the program--
 ``(i) the award amounts under the program;
 ``(ii) the average number of hours students 
 worked per week, and the wages received for 
 such work;
 ``(iii) the number of on campus jobs and 
 off campus jobs;
 ``(iv) how students located work-study 
 positions;
 ``(v) the work performed at each job;
 ``(vi) whether students worked additional 
 jobs while employed in a work-study job (and 
 the reason for such additional job);
 ``(vii) whether the work-study employment 
 had an impact on the student's academic 
 performance; and
 ``(viii) the voluntarily disclosed 
 demographics of students awarded work-study 
 employment; and
 ``(E) includes such information as the Secretary 
 may require; and
 ``(2) a consumer-tested electronic survey for employers of 
 students described in paragraph (1) that--
 ``(A) measures each such employer's satisfaction 
 with the Federal work-study program, including--
 ``(i) the extent to which the employer is 
 satisfied with its ability to accommodate 
 students' schedules;
 ``(ii) the extent to which student-
 employees are prepared for the duties 
 advertised for the job; and
 ``(iii) the extent to which the employer is 
 satisfied with opportunities to make 
 recommendations for improving institutions' 
 academic programs;
 ``(B) elicits an assessment by each such employer 
 of--
 ``(i) any complaints the employer had with 
 respect to the program;
 ``(ii) any skills or knowledge necessary 
 for the job that student-employees are lacking; 
 and
 ``(iii) the extent of outreach from 
 institutions to the employer; and
 ``(C) includes such information as the Secretary 
 may require; and
 ``(3) a consumer-tested electronic survey that, not less 
 than once every 4 years, with respect to each institution of 
 higher education participating in the Federal work-study 
 program, measures--
 ``(A) methods used to recruit on-campus and off-
 campus employers;
 ``(B) if an institution operates a job location 
 development program--
 ``(i) the share of jobs filled on-campus 
 and off-campus;
 ``(ii) the share of jobs filled by--
 ``(I) work-study recipients; and
 ``(II) students who demonstrate 
 exceptional need (as defined in section 
 413C(c)(2));
 ``(iii) the primary factors considered in 
 matching work-study students and jobs;
 ``(iv) the share of students employed in 
 work-based learning opportunities; and
 ``(v) the share of students employed during 
 qualified periods of nonenrollment, including 
 the share of students with exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2)) employed during 
 qualified periods of nonenrollment;
 ``(C) the institution's Federal and non-Federal 
 contributions toward work-study wages;
 ``(D) the primary factors considered in awarding 
 students work-study and in determining the amount of 
 the award;
 ``(E) the acceptance rate among students who were 
 offered work-study aid; and
 ``(F) other information the Secretary may require.
 ``(b) Results.--The Secretary shall develop an online portal--
 ``(1) for students, employers, and institutions of higher 
 education to access the surveys required under subsection (a); 
 and
 ``(2) to compile the results of such surveys.
 ``(c) Report.--Not less than once every 4 years after the date of 
the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall submit a report 
to Congress that includes--
 ``(1) the data collected under this section (redacted for 
 personal information);
 ``(2) with respect to students employed in work-study 
 through the Federal work-study program--
 ``(A) the types of jobs such students participated 
 in;
 ``(B) the average hours worked per week;
 ``(C) the average award amount;
 ``(D) the average wage rates;
 ``(E) the extent to which students enter employment 
 with skills and knowledge gained from work-study 
 participation that have prepared them for the job; and
 ``(F) the students' satisfaction with the program 
 and primary complaints;
 ``(3) the extent to which institutions conduct outreach to 
 employers and engage them in discussions on improving academic 
 programs;
 ``(4) the extent to which institutions conduct outreach to 
 students and make jobs readily available;
 ``(5) the extent to which the work-study employment aligns 
 with students' academic programs or career goals;
 ``(6) the employers' satisfaction with the program and 
 primary complaints; and
 ``(7) recommendations for improving the program.
 ``(d) Consultation.--
 ``(1) In general.--In consulting with the entities 
 described in subsection (a) to create the electronic surveys 
 required under such subsection, the Secretary shall engage 
 with--
 ``(A) a representative sample of institutions of 
 higher education participating in the Federal work-
 study program;
 ``(B) a representative sample of employers 
 participating in the Federal work-study program; and
 ``(C) a representative sample of students 
 participating in the Federal work-study program.
 ``(2) Response rate.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) consult with a survey consultant to develop a 
 target response rate with respect to the electronic 
 surveys required under subsection (a); and
 ``(B) provide guidance to institution with respect 
 to such developed target response rate.
 ``(e) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(1) provide technical assistance to institutions 
 participating under the Federal work-study program under this 
 part to--
 ``(A) comply with the amendments made by part C of 
 title IV of the College Affordability Act and the 
 regulations issued pursuant to such part;
 ``(B) administer the surveys described in 
 subsection (a) to students and employers participating 
 in the Federal work-study program; and
 ``(C) ensure that Federal work-study positions 
 align with students' educational goals or career goals 
 to the maximum extent practicable; and
 ``(2) issue guidance and provide technical assistance to 
 institutions to support improved partnerships and coordination 
 among financial aid, career services, and academic advisors to 
 administer the Federal work-study program.
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $2,000,000 to carry out subsection (a).''.

SEC. 4210. STUDY AND REPORT.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall, not 
later than a reasonable amount of time after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, conduct a study on best practices for assisting students 
participating in the Federal work-study program under part C of title 
IV of the Higher Education Act (42 U.S.C. 1087-51 et seq.) with--
 (1) connecting to off-campus employers;
 (2) procuring work-based learning opportunities through 
 such program;
 (3) procuring employment that aligns with students' 
 educational goals or career goals;
 (4) locating employment through job location and 
 development programs;
 (5) procuring employment in in-demand industry sectors or 
 occupations (as defined in section 3 of the Workforce 
 Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102));;
 (6) balancing employment with academic programs to improve 
 graduation and completion rates; and
 (7) with respect to students with exceptional need (as 
 defined in section 413C(c)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070b-2(c)(2)))--
 (A) locating and coordinating work-study employment 
 during qualified periods of nonenrollment;
 (B) increasing participation of such students in 
 such work-study program; and
 (C) limiting the need for additional employment 
 outside the work-study program.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date on which the 
study required under subsection (a) is completed, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report 
summarizing the findings of such study.
 (c) Publish Report.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
shall make the report required under subsection (b) available to the 
public on the website of the Government Accountability Office.

 PART D--FEDERAL DIRECT LOAN PROGRAM

SEC. 4301. PROGRAM AUTHORITY.

 Section 451(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087a(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and (2)'' and inserting ``(2)''; and
 (2) by inserting ``; and (3) to make loans under section 
 460A and section 460B'' after ``section 459A''.

SEC. 4302. AMENDMENTS TO TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LOANS AND REPAYMENT 
 PLANS.

 (a) Subsidized Loans for Graduate and Professional Students.--
Section 455(a)(3) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087e(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding clause 
 (i), by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting 
 ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) For any period of instruction at an 
 institution of higher education (as defined in section 
 101) beginning on or after July 1, 2021, a graduate or 
 professional student shall be eligible to receive a 
 Federal Direct Stafford loan under this part.''.
 (b) Interest Rate on Subsidized Loans for Graduate and Professional 
Students.--Section 455(b)(8)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1087e(b)(8)(B)) is amended by inserting ``and Federal Direct 
Stafford Loans'' after ``Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans''.
 (c) Repeal of Origination Fees.--Subsection (c) of section 455 of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(c)) is repealed.
 (d) Rulemaking Regarding Termination of Certain Repayment Plans.--
Beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
Education shall carry out a plan to end all eligibility for repayment 
plans other than a fixed repayment plan described in section 493E of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965, as added by section 4632, and an 
income-based repayment plan described under section 493C(f) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965, as added by section 4631(c), for loans 
made under part B or D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 
unless the borrower is enrolled in another repayment plan before such 
effective date, in accordance with the amendments made by this Act.
 (e) Notification to Borrowers.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning on the date of enactment of this 
 Act, the Secretary of Education, in coordination with the 
 Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, shall 
 undertake a campaign to alert all borrowers of loans made, 
 insured, or guaranteed under part B or D of title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 that they are eligible to change 
 repayment plans and to enroll in one of the following repayment 
 plans:
 (A) A fixed repayment plan described in section 
 493E of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as added by 
 section 4632.
 (B) The income-based repayment plan under section 
 493C(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as added 
 by section 4631(c).
 (2) Campaign activities.--The campaign shall include the 
 following activities:
 (A) Developing consumer information materials about 
 the opportunity to change repayment plans and to enroll 
 in one of the following repayment plans:
 (i) A fixed repayment plan described in 
 such section 493E.
 (ii) The income-based repayment plan under 
 such section 493C(f).
 (B) Requiring servicers of loans made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under parts B and D of title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide such consumer 
 information to borrowers in a manner determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (f) Repayment Plans.--Section 455(d) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(d)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (6), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following:
 ``(2) Design and selection on and after july 1, 2021.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), 
 for the borrower of a loan made on or after July 1, 
 2021, and for other borrowers subject to paragraph (7), 
 the Secretary shall offer a borrower of a loan made 
 under this part 2 plans for repayment of such loan, 
 including principal and interest on the loan. The 
 borrower shall be entitled to accelerate, without 
 penalty, repayment on the borrower's loans under this 
 part. The borrower may choose--
 ``(i) a fixed repayment plan described in 
 section 493E; or
 ``(ii) the income-based repayment plan 
 under section 493C(f).
 ``(B) Selection by the secretary.--If a borrower of 
 a loan made under this part on or after July 1, 2021, 
 does not select a repayment plan described in 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary may provide the 
 borrower with a fixed repayment plan described in 
 section 493E.
 ``(C) Changes in selections.--Beginning on July 1, 
 2021, a borrower of a loan made under this part may 
 change the borrower's selection of a repayment plan in 
 accordance with paragraph (7) and under such terms and 
 conditions as may be established by the Secretary.'';
 (3) in paragraph (6)(B), as redesignated, by striking ``an 
 income contingent repayment plan.'' and inserting ``the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f).''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) Borrowers of loans made before july 1, 2021.--A 
 borrower who is in repayment on a loan made under part B or 
 part D before July 1, 2021--
 ``(A) may choose to retain the repayment plan that 
 the borrower was enrolled in on the day before such 
 date;
 ``(B) may elect to--
 ``(i) enter the income-based repayment plan 
 under section 493C(f); or
 ``(ii) enter a fixed repayment plan 
 described in section 493E; and
 ``(C) after electing to leave a repayment plan 
 other than an income-based repayment plan described 
 under section 493C(f) or a fixed repayment plan 
 described in section 493E, shall not be permitted to 
 re-elect a repayment plan that is not an income-based 
 repayment plan under section 493C(f) or a fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E.
 ``(8) Notification and automatic enrollment procedures for 
 borrowers who are delinquent on loans.--
 ``(A) Authority to obtain income information.--In 
 the case of any borrower who is at least 60 days 
 delinquent on a covered loan, the Secretary may obtain 
 such information as is reasonably necessary regarding 
 the income and family size of the borrower (and the 
 borrower's spouse, if applicable).
 ``(B) Borrower notification.--With respect to each 
 borrower of a covered loan who is at least 60 days 
 delinquent on such loan and who has not been subject to 
 the procedures under this paragraph for such loan in 
 the preceding 120 days, the Secretary shall, as soon as 
 practicable after such 60-day delinquency, provide to 
 the borrower the following:
 ``(i) Notification that the borrower is at 
 least 60 days delinquent on at least 1 covered 
 loan, and a description of all delinquent 
 covered loans, nondelinquent covered loans, and 
 noncovered loans of the borrower.
 ``(ii) A brief description of the repayment 
 plans for which the borrower is eligible and 
 the covered loans and noncovered loans of the 
 borrower that may be eligible for such plans, 
 based on information available to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(iii) The amount of monthly payments for 
 the covered and noncovered loans under the 
 income-based repayment plan under section 
 493C(f) and the fixed repayment plan described 
 in section 493E, based on information available 
 to the Secretary, including, if the income 
 information of the borrower is available to the 
 Secretary under subparagraph (A)--
 ``(I) the amount of the monthly 
 payment under the income-based 
 repayment plan under section 493C(f) 
 and the fixed repayment plan described 
 in section 493E for which the borrower 
 is eligible for the borrower's covered 
 and noncovered loans, based on such 
 income information; and
 ``(II) the income, family size, tax 
 filing status, and tax year information 
 on which each monthly payment is based.
 ``(iv) Clear and simple instructions on how 
 to select the repayment plans.
 ``(v) An explanation that, in the case of a 
 borrower for whom adjusted gross income is 
 unavailable--
 ``(I) if the borrower selects to 
 repay the covered loans of such 
 borrower pursuant to the income-based 
 repayment plan under section 493C(f) 
 that defines discretionary income in 
 such a manner that an individual not 
 required under section 6012(a)(1) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to 
 file a return with respect to income 
 taxes imposed by subtitle A of such 
 Code may have a calculated monthly 
 payment greater than $0, the borrower 
 will be required to provide the 
 Secretary with other documentation of 
 income satisfactory to the Secretary, 
 which documentation the Secretary may 
 use to determine an appropriate 
 repayment schedule; and
 ``(II) if the borrower selects to 
 repay such loans pursuant to an income-
 driven repayment plan that is not 
 described in subclause (I), the 
 borrower will not be required to 
 provide the Secretary with such other 
 documentation of income, and the 
 borrower will have a calculated monthly 
 payment of $0.
 ``(vi) An explanation that the Secretary 
 shall take the actions under subparagraph (C) 
 with respect to such borrower, if--
 ``(I) the borrower is 120 days 
 delinquent on 1 or more covered loans 
 and has not selected a new repayment 
 plan for the covered loans of the 
 borrower; and
 ``(II) in the case of such a 
 borrower whose repayment plan for the 
 covered loans of the borrower is not an 
 income-driven repayment plan described 
 in subparagraph (D) or (E) of paragraph 
 (1), the monthly payments under such 
 repayment plan are higher than such 
 monthly payments would be under the 
 income-based repayment plan under 
 section 493C(f).
 ``(vii) Instructions on updating the 
 information of the borrower obtained under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) Secretary's initial selection of a plan.--
 With respect to each borrower described in subparagraph 
 (B) who has a repayment plan for the covered loans of 
 the borrower that meets the requirements of clause 
 (vi)(II) of subparagraph (B) and has not selected a new 
 repayment plan for such loans in accordance with the 
 notice received under such subparagraph, and who is at 
 least 120 days delinquent on such a loan, the Secretary 
 shall, as soon as practicable--
 ``(i) provide the borrower with the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f); and
 ``(ii) authorize the borrower to change the 
 Secretary's selection of a plan under this 
 clause to the fixed repayment plan described in 
 section 493E.
 ``(D) Opt-out.--A borrower of a covered loan shall 
 have the right to opt out of the procedures under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(E) Procedures.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures as are necessary to effectively implement 
 this paragraph.
 ``(9) Notification and automatic enrollment procedures for 
 borrowers who are rehabilitating defaulted loans.--
 ``(A) Authority to obtain income information.--In 
 the case of any borrower who is rehabilitating a 
 covered loan pursuant to section 428F(a), the Secretary 
 may obtain such information as is reasonably necessary 
 regarding the income and family size of the borrower 
 (and the borrower's spouse, if applicable).
 ``(B) Borrower notification.--Not later than 30 
 days after a borrower makes the 6th payment required 
 for the loan rehabilitation described in subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary shall notify the borrower of the 
 process under subparagraph (C) with respect to such 
 loan.
 ``(C) Secretary's selection of plan.--With respect 
 to each borrower who has made the 9th payment required 
 for the loan rehabilitation described in subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary shall, as soon as practicable after 
 such payment, provide the borrower with the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f), without 
 regard to whether the loan has been so rehabilitated.
 ``(D) Opt-out.--A borrower of a covered loan shall 
 have the right to opt out of the procedures under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(E) Procedures.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures as are necessary to effectively implement 
 this paragraph.
 ``(10) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Covered loan.--The term `covered loan' 
 means--
 ``(i) a loan made under this part;
 ``(ii) a loan purchased under section 459A; 
 or
 ``(iii) a loan that has been assigned to 
 the Secretary under section 428(c)(8) or part 
 E.
 ``(B) Noncovered loan.--The term `noncovered loan' 
 means a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this 
 title that is not a covered loan.
 ``(11) Application of prepayment amounts.--
 ``(A) Requirement.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this subsection or any other provision of 
 law--
 ``(i) with respect to loans made to an 
 eligible borrower under this part or part B, 
 which are held by the same holder and which 
 have different applicable rates of interest, 
 the holder of such loans shall, unless 
 otherwise requested by the borrower in writing, 
 apply the borrower's prepayment amount (within 
 the meaning of section 682.209(b) of title 34, 
 Code of Federal Regulations, or a successor 
 regulation) for one or more of such loans, 
 first toward the outstanding balance of 
 principal due on the loan with the highest 
 applicable rate of interest among such loans; 
 and
 ``(ii) except as provided in clause (i), 
 with respect to loans made to an eligible 
 borrower under this part or part B, which are 
 held by the same holder and which have the same 
 applicable rates of interest, the holder of 
 such loans shall, unless otherwise requested by 
 the borrower in writing, apply the borrower's 
 prepayment amount (within the meaning of 
 section 682.209(b) of title 34, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, or a successor regulation) for one 
 or more of such loans, first toward the 
 outstanding balance of principal due on the 
 loan with the highest principal balance among 
 such loans.
 ``(B) Eligible borrower.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `eligible borrower' means a 
 borrower with no outstanding balance of fees, 
 including collection costs and authorized late 
 charges, due on any loan made under this part 
 or part B.
 ``(ii) Prepayment amounts.--A prepayment 
 amount (as described in subparagraph (A)) made 
 by a borrower who is not an eligible borrower 
 to a holder shall be applied first toward the 
 borrower's outstanding balance of fees, 
 including collection costs and authorized late 
 charges, due on any loan made under this part 
 or part B held by such holder.''.
 (g) Application.--The amendments made by subsection (c)(4) shall--
 (1) take effect as soon as the Secretary of Education 
 determines practicable after the Secretary finalizes the 
 procedures under section 9004, but not later than 2 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (2) apply to all borrowers of covered loans (as defined in 
 section 455(d)(10) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as 
 added by subsection (c)(4)).
 (h) Maximum Repayment Period for Income-contingent Repayment.--
Section 455(e) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(e)) 
is further amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)(B)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (iv);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause (v) 
 and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(vi) makes payments under the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f); or
 ``(vii) makes payments under the fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E.''; 
 and
 ``(8) Additional qualifying repayment plans.--A borrower 
 repaying a loan pursuant to income-contingent repayment under 
 this subsection may elect at any time to terminate repayment 
 under such repayment plan and repay such loan under the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f) or the fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E.''.
 (i) Automatic Recertification of Income for Income-driven Repayment 
Plans.--Section 455(e) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087e(e)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``does not reasonably reflect the 
 borrower's current income'' and inserting ``whose 
 income has decreased relative to the adjusted gross 
 income available to the Secretary''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, consistent with the procedures 
 established under paragraph (9)(B)(iv)'' before the 
 period at the end; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) Automatic recertification.--
 ``(A) Definition.--In this paragraph, the term 
 `covered loan' has the meaning given the term in 
 subsection (d)(10).
 ``(B) In general.--Beginning as soon as the 
 Secretary determines practicable after the Secretary 
 finalizes the procedures under section 9004 of the 
 College Affordability Act, but not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of such Act, the Secretary 
 shall establish and implement, with respect to any 
 borrower described in subparagraph (C), procedures to--
 ``(i) obtain (for each year of repayment 
 and without further action by the borrower) 
 such information as is reasonably necessary 
 regarding the income of such borrower (and the 
 borrower's spouse, if applicable), for the 
 purpose of determining the repayment obligation 
 of the borrower for such year, including 
 information with respect to the borrower's 
 family size in accordance with the procedures 
 under section 9004 of the College Affordability 
 Act, subject to clause (ii);
 ``(ii) allow the borrower, at any time, to 
 opt out of clause (i) and prevent the Secretary 
 from obtaining information under such clause 
 without further action by the borrower;
 ``(iii) provide the borrower with an 
 opportunity to update the information obtained 
 under clause (i) before the determination of 
 the annual repayment obligation of the 
 borrower; and
 ``(iv) in the case of a borrower for whom 
 adjusted gross income is unavailable--
 ``(I) if the borrower has selected 
 to repay the covered loans of such 
 borrower pursuant to an income 
 contingent repayment plan that defines 
 discretionary income in such a manner 
 that an individual not required under 
 section 6012(a)(1) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 to file a return 
 with respect to income taxes imposed by 
 subtitle A of such Code may have a 
 calculated monthly payment greater than 
 $0, the borrower will be required to 
 provide the Secretary with other 
 documentation of income satisfactory to 
 the Secretary, which documentation the 
 Secretary may use to determine an 
 appropriate repayment schedule; or
 ``(II) if the borrower has selected 
 to repay such loans pursuant to an 
 income contingent repayment that is not 
 described in subclause (I), the 
 borrower will not be required to 
 provide the Secretary with such other 
 documentation of income, and the 
 borrower will have a calculated monthly 
 payment of $0.
 ``(C) Applicability.--Subparagraph (B) shall apply 
 to each borrower of a covered loan who, on or after the 
 date on which the Secretary establishes procedures 
 under such subparagraph, recertifies income and family 
 size under such plan.
 ``(D) Other requirements.--The procedures 
 established by the Secretary under this paragraph shall 
 be consistent with the requirements of paragraphs (1) 
 through (7), except as otherwise provided in this 
 paragraph.''.
 (j) Deferment and Forbearance.--Section 455(f) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(f)) is amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading, by inserting at the end the 
 following: ``and Forbearance''; and
 (2) by amending subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) to read 
 as follows:
 ``(B) in the case of a Federal Direct PLUS Loan, a 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or a Federal 
 Direct Consolidation Loan not described in subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), beginning on or after the date of enactment of 
 the College Affordability Act--
 ``(i) for a deferment during a period 
 described in paragraph (2)(A)(i), shall accrue 
 and be capitalized or paid by the borrower; and
 ``(ii) for a deferment during a period 
 described in subparagraphs (B) through (D) of 
 paragraph (2), shall accrue but not be 
 capitalized.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Forbearance.--At the expiration of a period of 
 forbearance that begins on or after the date of enactment of 
 the College Affordability Act, interest may accrue but shall 
 not be capitalized on any loans made under this part.''.
 (k) Separating Joint Consolidation Loans.--Section 455(g) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(g)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``A borrower'' and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--A borrower''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Separating joint consolidation loans.--
 ``(A) In general.--A married couple, or 2 
 individuals who were previously a married couple, and 
 who received a joint consolidation loan as such married 
 couple under subparagraph (C) of section 428C(a)(3) (as 
 such subparagraph was in effect on or before June 30, 
 2006), may apply to the Secretary for each individual 
 borrower in the married couple (or previously married 
 couple) to receive a separate Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan under this part--
 ``(i) that shall--
 ``(I) unless the Secretary receives 
 notice of an agreement described in 
 subclause (II)(aa), be equal to the sum 
 of--
 ``(aa) the unpaid principal 
 and accrued unpaid interest of 
 the percentage of the joint 
 consolidation loan that, as of 
 the day before such joint 
 consolidation loan was made, 
 was attributable to the loans 
 of the individual borrower for 
 whom such separate 
 consolidation loan is being 
 made; and
 ``(bb) any other loans 
 described in section 428C(a)(4) 
 that such individual borrower 
 selects for consolidation under 
 this part; or
 ``(II) be equal to the sum of--
 ``(aa) the unpaid principal 
 and accrued unpaid interest of 
 the percentage of the joint 
 consolidation loan that, as of 
 the date of application under 
 this paragraph, the married 
 couple (or previously married 
 couple) agrees shall be 
 considered attributable to the 
 loans of the individual 
 borrower for whom such separate 
 consolidation loan is being 
 made; and
 ``(bb) any other loans 
 described in section 428C(a)(4) 
 that such individual borrower 
 selects for consolidation under 
 this part;
 ``(ii) the proceeds of which shall be paid 
 by the Secretary to the holder or holders--
 ``(I) of the joint consolidation 
 loan for the purpose of discharging the 
 liability on the percentage of such 
 joint consolidation loan described in 
 subclause (I)(aa) or (II)(aa) of clause 
 (i); and
 ``(II) of the loans selected for 
 consolidation under subclause (I)(bb) 
 or subclause (II)(bb) of clause (i) for 
 the purpose of discharging the 
 liability on such loans;
 ``(iii) except as otherwise provided in 
 this paragraph, that has the same terms and 
 conditions, and rate of interest as the joint 
 consolidation loan;
 ``(iv) for which any payment made under 
 section 455(m)(1)(A) on the joint consolidation 
 loan during a period in which the individual 
 borrower for whom such separate consolidation 
 loan is being made was employed in a public 
 service job described in section 455(m)(1)(B) 
 shall be treated as if such payment were made 
 on the portion of the separate consolidation 
 loan described in clause (i)(I)(aa); and
 ``(v) for which any payment made under any 
 repayment plan described in section 455(d)(1) 
 on the joint consolidation loan shall be 
 treated as if such payment were made on such 
 portion of such separate consolidation loan.
 ``(B) Application for separate direct consolidation 
 loan.--
 ``(i) Joint application.--Except as 
 provided in clause (ii), to receive separate 
 consolidation loans under subparagraph (A), 
 both individual borrowers in a married couple 
 (or previously married couple) shall jointly 
 apply under subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Separate application.--An individual 
 borrower in a married couple (or previously 
 married couple) may apply for a separate 
 consolidation loan under subparagraph (A) 
 separately and without regard to whether or 
 when the other individual borrower in the 
 married couple (or previously married couple) 
 applies under subparagraph (A), in a case in 
 which--
 ``(I) the individual borrower has 
 experienced from the other individual 
 borrower--
 ``(aa) domestic violence 
 (as defined in section 40002(a) 
 of the Violence Against Women 
 Act of 1994 (34 U.S.C. 
 12291(a))); or
 ``(bb) economic abuse 
 (including behaviors that 
 control such borrower's ability 
 to acquire, use, and maintain 
 access to money, credit, or the 
 joint financial obligations of 
 both borrowers);
 ``(II) the individual borrower 
 certifies, on a form approved by the 
 Secretary, that such borrower is unable 
 to reasonably reach or access the loan 
 information of the other individual 
 borrower; or
 ``(III) the Secretary determines 
 that authorizing each individual 
 borrower to apply separately under 
 subparagraph (A) would be in the best 
 fiscal interests of the Federal 
 Government.
 ``(C) Borrower eligibility.--Notwithstanding 
 section 428C(a)(3)(A), the Secretary shall award a 
 consolidation loan under this part to each borrower 
 who--
 ``(i) applies for such loan under 
 subparagraph (A); and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 ``(3) Consumer reporting agencies.--Upon obtaining a 
 Federal Direct Consolidation Loan that discharges the liability 
 on a defaulted loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this 
 title, the Secretary, guaranty agency, or other holder of the 
 loan shall request any consumer reporting agency to which the 
 Secretary, guaranty agency or holder, as applicable, reported 
 the default of the loan, to remove any adverse item of 
 information relating to a delinquent or defaulted loan made, 
 insured, or guaranteed under this title from the borrower's 
 credit history.''.
 (l) Repeal of Subsidized Loan Usage Limitation.--Subsection (q) of 
section 455 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e) is 
repealed.

SEC. 4303. AMENDMENTS TO TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN 
 FORGIVENESS.

 Section 455(m) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087e(m)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause 
 (iii);
 (ii) in clause (iv), by striking ``and''; 
 and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(v) payments under the income-based 
 repayment plan under section 493C(f); or
 ``(vi) payments under the fixed repayment 
 plan described in section 493E; and''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``(i) is 
 employed'' and all that follows through ``has been'' 
 and inserting ``has been'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``In the case of a borrower who meets the requirements under 
 paragraph (1) for such cancellation, such cancellation shall 
 occur without further action by the borrower.'';
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (6) and (7), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) Treatment of loans refinanced under sections 460a.--
 In the case of an eligible Federal Direct Loan refinanced under 
 section 460A, any monthly payment pursuant to any repayment 
 plan listed in paragraph (1)(A) made on a loan, for which the 
 liability has been discharged by such refinanced loan and 
 without regard to whether such loan is an eligible Federal 
 Direct Loan, shall be treated as a monthly payment under 
 paragraph (1)(A) on the portion of such refinanced loan that is 
 attributable to such discharged loan.
 ``(4) On-line portal.--
 ``(A) Borrowers.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
 borrowers have access to an on-line portal that 
 provides each borrower who signs on to such portal with 
 the following:
 ``(i) Instructions on how to access the 
 database under paragraph (5) so that the 
 borrower can determine whether the borrower is 
 employed in a public service job.
 ``(ii) An identification of the loans of 
 the borrower that are eligible Federal Direct 
 Loans.
 ``(iii) With respect to each such eligible 
 Federal Direct Loan, the number of monthly 
 payments on such loan that qualify as a monthly 
 payment under paragraph (1)(A), and the 
 estimated number of monthly payments under 
 paragraph (1)(A) remaining on such loan before 
 the borrower may be eligible for loan 
 cancellation under this subsection.
 ``(iv) With respect to each loan of the 
 borrower that is not eligible for loan 
 cancellation under this subsection, an 
 explanation of why the loan is not so eligible 
 and instructions on how what, if anything, the 
 borrower may do to make the loan so eligible.
 ``(v) Instructions for the submission of 
 any forms associated with such loan 
 cancellation, and an ability for the borrower 
 to use the portal to electronically sign and 
 submit such forms.
 ``(vi) In the case of a borrower who 
 disputes a determination of the Secretary 
 relating to the entitlement of the borrower to 
 loan cancellation under paragraph (2)--
 ``(I) an ability for the borrower 
 to file a claim with the Secretary to 
 dispute such determination through the 
 portal; and
 ``(II) in the case of such a claim 
 that has been filed, the status of such 
 claim, for which updates shall be 
 provided not fewer than once every 90 
 days.
 ``(B) Employers.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
 an employer of a borrower has the ability to 
 electronically sign and submit any forms associated 
 with loan cancellation under this subsection.
 ``(C) Information.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
 any information provided through the on-line portal 
 described in this paragraph is up-to-date information.
 ``(5) Database of public service jobs.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, 
 shall establish and regularly update a database that 
 lists public service jobs.
 ``(B) Public availability.--The database 
 established under subparagraph (A) shall be made 
 available on a publicly accessible website of the 
 Department in an easily searchable format.'';
 (5) in paragraph (6), as so redesignated--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting before the period at the 
 end the following: ``(including any Federal 
 Direct Stafford Loan, Federal Direct PLUS Loan, 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or 
 Federal Direct Consolidation Loan refinanced 
 under section 460A)'';
 (ii) by striking ``The term'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(i) In general.--The term''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Treatment of certain consolidation 
 loan payments.--In the case of an eligible 
 Federal Direct Loan that is a Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan made on or after the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act, any 
 monthly payment pursuant to any repayment plan 
 listed in paragraph (1)(A) made on a loan, for 
 which the liability has been discharged by the 
 proceeds of such Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan and without regard to whether the loan is 
 an eligible Federal Direct Loan, shall be 
 treated as a monthly payment under paragraph 
 (1)(A) on the portion of such Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan that is attributable to such 
 discharged loan, except that in the case of a 
 subsequent consolidation loan, for purposes of 
 this clause--
 ``(I) any monthly payment made on 
 the first consolidation loan or any 
 other loan for which the liability has 
 been discharged by such subsequent 
 consolidation loan shall be applicable; 
 and
 ``(II) any monthly payment made on 
 a loan for which the liability has been 
 discharged by such first consolidation 
 loan shall not be applicable.'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking ``or'' at 
 the end;
 (ii) in clause (ii)--
 (I) by striking ``teaching as'' and 
 inserting the following: ``teaching--
 ``(I) as'';
 (II) by striking ``, foreign 
 language faculty, and part-time faculty 
 at community colleges), as determined 
 by the Secretary.'' and inserting ``and 
 foreign language faculty), as 
 determined by the Secretary; or'';
 (III) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(II) as a part-time faculty 
 member or instructor who--
 ``(aa) teaches not less 
 than 2 courses at an 
 institution of higher education 
 (as defined in section 101(a)), 
 a postsecondary vocational 
 institution (as defined in 
 section 102(c)), or a Tribal 
 College or University (as 
 defined in section 316(b));
 ``(bb) is not a student 
 enrolled at such institution; 
 and
 ``(cc) is not employed on a 
 full-time basis by any other 
 employer;''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) a full-time job as an employee or 
 manager of a farm or ranch that, with respect 
 to a fiscal year, has earnings of gross revenue 
 during such year from the sale of agricultural 
 products equal to or greater than--
 ``(I) in the case of 2019, $35,000; 
 or
 ``(II) in the case of any 
 succeeding year, the amount applicable 
 under this subparagraph for the 
 previous year, increased by the 
 estimated percentage change in the 
 Consumer Price Index for the most 
 recent year preceding such year; or
 ``(iv) a full-time job with a veterans or 
 military service organization as described in 
 paragraph (19) or (23) of section 501(c) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code, that does not engage in 
 partisan political campaign activity.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Full-time job as health care practitioner.--
 The term `full-time professionals engaged in health 
 care practitioner occupations' includes an individual 
 who--
 ``(i) has a full-time job as a health care 
 practitioner;
 ``(ii) provides medical services in such 
 full-time job at a nonprofit or public hospital 
 or other nonprofit or public health care 
 facility; and
 ``(iii) is prohibited from being employed 
 directly by such hospital or other health care 
 facility by State law.''; and
 (6) in paragraph (10), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``section 428J, 428K, 428L, or 460'' and inserting ``section 
 428K or 428L''.

SEC. 4304. FEDERAL DIRECT PERKINS LOANS TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

 Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087a et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 455 the following 
new section:

``SEC. 455A. FEDERAL DIRECT PERKINS LOANS.

 ``(a) Designation of Loans.--Loans made to borrowers under this 
section shall be known as `Federal Direct Perkins Loans'.
 ``(b) In General.--It is the purpose of this section to authorize 
loans to be awarded by institutions of higher education through 
agreements established under section 463(f). Unless otherwise specified 
in this section, all terms and conditions and other requirements 
applicable to Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford loans established 
under section 455(a)(2)(D) shall apply to loans made pursuant to this 
section.
 ``(c) Eligible Borrowers.--Any student meeting the requirements for 
student eligibility under section 464(b) (including graduate and 
professional students as defined in regulations promulgated by the 
Secretary) shall be eligible to borrow a Federal Direct Perkins Loan, 
provided the student attends an eligible institution with an agreement 
with the Secretary under section 463(f), and the institution uses its 
authority under that agreement to award the student a loan.
 ``(d) Loan Limits.--The annual and aggregate limits for loans under 
this section shall be the same as those established under section 464, 
and aggregate limits shall include loans made by institutions under 
agreements under section 463(a).
 ``(e) Applicable Rates of Interest.--Loans made pursuant to this 
section shall bear interest, on the unpaid principal balance of the 
loan, at the rate of 5 percent per year.''.

SEC. 4305. COMMON MANUAL FOR LOAN SERVICERS.

 Section 456(a)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087f(a)(2)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting before the 
period at the end the following: ``, including the applicable 
procedures and policies described in the manual developed under section 
493F''.

SEC. 4306. REFINANCING FFEL AND FEDERAL DIRECT LOANS.

 Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087a et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 460A. REFINANCING FFEL AND FEDERAL DIRECT LOANS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program under 
which the Secretary, upon the receipt of an application from a 
qualified borrower, makes a loan under this part, in accordance with 
the provisions of this section, in order to permit the borrower to 
obtain the interest rate provided under subsection (c).
 ``(b) Refinancing Direct Loans.--
 ``(1) Federal direct loans.--Upon application of a 
 qualified borrower, the Secretary shall repay a Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, a 
 Federal Direct PLUS Loan, or a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan of the qualified borrower, for which the first 
 disbursement was made, or the application for the consolidation 
 loan was received, before July 1, 2020, with the proceeds of a 
 refinanced Federal Direct Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct PLUS Loan, or a 
 Federal Direct Consolidation Loan, respectively, issued to the 
 borrower in an amount equal to the sum of the unpaid principal, 
 accrued unpaid interest, and late charges of the original loan.
 ``(2) Refinancing ffel program loans as refinanced federal 
 direct loans.--Upon application of a qualified borrower for any 
 loan that was made, insured, or guaranteed under part B and for 
 which the first disbursement was made, or the application for 
 the consolidation loan was received, before July 1, 2010, the 
 Secretary shall make a loan under this part, in an amount equal 
 to the sum of the unpaid principal, accrued unpaid interest, 
 and late charges of the original loan to the borrower in 
 accordance with the following:
 ``(A) The Secretary shall pay the proceeds of such 
 loan to the eligible lender of the loan made, insured, 
 or guaranteed under part B, in order to discharge the 
 borrower from any remaining obligation to the lender 
 with respect to the original loan.
 ``(B) A loan made under this section that was 
 originally--
 ``(i) a loan originally made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under section 428 shall be a Federal 
 Direct Stafford Loan;
 ``(ii) a loan originally made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under section 428B shall be a 
 Federal Direct PLUS Loan;
 ``(iii) a loan originally made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under section 428H shall be a 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan; and
 ``(iv) a loan originally made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under section 428C shall be a 
 Federal Direct Consolidation Loan.
 ``(C) The interest rate for each loan made by the 
 Secretary under this paragraph shall be the rate 
 provided under subsection (c).
 ``(c) Interest Rates.--
 ``(1) In general.--The interest rate for the refinanced 
 Federal Direct Stafford Loans, Federal Direct Unsubsidized 
 Stafford Loans, Federal Direct PLUS Loans, and Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loans, shall be a rate equal to--
 ``(A) in any case where the original loan was a 
 loan under section 428 or 428H, a Federal Direct 
 Stafford loan, or a Federal Direct Unsubsidized 
 Stafford Loan, that was issued to an undergraduate 
 student, a rate equal to the rate for Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loans and Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loans issued to undergraduate students for the 12-month 
 period beginning on July 1, 2019, and ending on June 
 30, 2020;
 ``(B) in any case where the original loan was a 
 loan under section 428 or 428H, a Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loan, or a Federal Direct Unsubsidized 
 Stafford Loan, that was issued to a graduate or 
 professional student, a rate equal to the rate for 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans issued to 
 graduate or professional students for the 12-month 
 period beginning on July 1, 2019, and ending on June 
 30, 2020;
 ``(C) in any case where the original loan was a 
 loan under section 428B or a Federal Direct PLUS Loan, 
 a rate equal to the rate for Federal Direct PLUS Loans 
 for the 12-month period beginning on July 1, 2019, and 
 ending on June 30, 2020; and
 ``(D) in any case where the original loan was a 
 loan under section 428C or a Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan, a rate calculated in accordance 
 with paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Interest rates for consolidation loans.--
 ``(A) Method of calculation.--In order to determine 
 the interest rate for any refinanced Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan under paragraph (1)(D), the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) determine each of the component loans 
 that were originally consolidated in the loan 
 under section 428C or the Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan, and calculate the 
 proportion of the unpaid principal balance of 
 the loan under section 428C or the Federal 
 Direct Consolidation Loan that each component 
 loan represents;
 ``(ii) use the proportions determined in 
 accordance with clause (i) and the interest 
 rate applicable for each component loan, as 
 determined under subparagraph (B), to calculate 
 the weighted average of the interest rates on 
 the loans consolidated into the loan under 
 section 428C or the Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan; and
 ``(iii) apply the weighted average 
 calculated under clause (ii) as the interest 
 rate for the refinanced Federal Direct 
 Consolidation Loan.
 ``(B) Interest rates for component loans.--The 
 interest rates for the component loans of a loan made 
 under section 428C or a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan shall be the following:
 ``(i) The interest rate for any loan under 
 section 428 or 428H, Federal Direct Stafford 
 Loan, or Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loan issued to an undergraduate student shall 
 be a rate equal to the lesser of--
 ``(I) the rate for Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loans and Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loans issued to 
 undergraduate students for the 12-month 
 period beginning on July 1, 2019, and 
 ending on June 30, 2020; or
 ``(II) the original interest rate 
 of the component loan.
 ``(ii) The interest rate for any loan under 
 section 428 or 428H, Federal Direct Stafford 
 Loan, or Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loan issued to a graduate or professional 
 student shall be a rate equal to the lesser 
 of--
 ``(I) the rate for Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loans issued to 
 graduate or professional students for 
 the 12-month period beginning on July 
 1, 2019, and ending on June 30, 2020; 
 or
 ``(II) the original interest rate 
 of the component loan.
 ``(iii) The interest rate for any loan 
 under section 428B or Federal Direct PLUS Loan 
 shall be a rate equal to the lesser of--
 ``(I) the rate for Federal Direct 
 PLUS Loans for the 12-month period 
 beginning on July 1, 2019, and ending 
 on June 30, 2020; or
 ``(II) the original interest rate 
 of the component loan.
 ``(iv) The interest rate for any component 
 loan that is a loan under section 428C or a 
 Federal Direct Consolidation Loan shall be the 
 weighted average of the interest rates that 
 would apply under this subparagraph for each 
 loan comprising the component consolidation 
 loan.
 ``(v) The interest rate for any eligible 
 loan that is a component of a loan made under 
 section 428C or a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan and is not described in clauses (i) 
 through (iv) shall be the interest rate on the 
 original component loan.
 ``(3) Fixed rate.--The applicable rate of interest 
 determined under paragraph (1) for a refinanced loan under this 
 section shall be fixed for the period of the loan.
 ``(d) Terms and Conditions of Loans.--
 ``(1) In general.--A loan that is refinanced under this 
 section shall have the same terms and conditions as the 
 original loan, except as otherwise provided in this section.
 ``(2) No automatic extension of repayment period.--
 Refinancing a loan under this section shall not result in the 
 extension of the duration of the repayment period of the loan, 
 and the borrower shall retain the same repayment term that was 
 in effect on the original loan. Nothing in this paragraph shall 
 be construed to prevent a borrower from electing a different 
 repayment plan at any time in accordance with section 
 455(d)(4).
 ``(e) Definition of Qualified Borrower.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term 
 `qualified borrower' means a borrower--
 ``(A) of a loan under this part or part B for which 
 the first disbursement was made, or the application for 
 a consolidation loan was received, before July 1, 2020; 
 and
 ``(B) who meets the eligibility requirements based 
 on income or debt-to-income ratio established by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Income requirements.--The Secretary shall establish 
 eligibility requirements based on income or debt-to-income 
 ratio that take into consideration providing access to 
 refinancing under this section for borrowers with the greatest 
 financial need.
 ``(f) Notification to Borrowers.--The Secretary, in coordination 
with the Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, shall 
undertake a campaign to alert borrowers of loans that are eligible for 
refinancing under this section that the borrowers are eligible to apply 
for such refinancing. The campaign shall include the following 
activities:
 ``(1) Developing consumer information materials about the 
 availability of Federal student loan refinancing.
 ``(2) Requiring servicers of loans under this part or part 
 B to provide such consumer information to borrowers in a manner 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary, in consultation with 
 the Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.''.

SEC. 4307. REFINANCING PRIVATE STUDENT LOANS.

 Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087a et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 460B. FEDERAL DIRECT REFINANCED PRIVATE LOAN PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible private education loan.--The term `eligible 
 private education loan' means a private education loan, as 
 defined in section 140(a) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1650(a)), that--
 ``(A) was disbursed to the borrower before July 1, 
 2020; and
 ``(B) was for the borrower's own postsecondary 
 educational expenses for an eligible program at an 
 institution of higher education participating in the 
 loan program under this part, as of the date that the 
 loan was disbursed.
 ``(2) Federal direct refinanced private loan.--The term 
 `Federal Direct Refinanced Private Loan' means a loan issued 
 under subsection (b)(1).
 ``(3) Private educational lender.--The term `private 
 educational lender' has the meaning given the term in section 
 140(a) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1650(a)).
 ``(4) Qualified borrower.--The term `qualified borrower' 
 means an individual who--
 ``(A) has an eligible private education loan;
 ``(B) has been current on payments on the eligible 
 private education loan for the 6 months prior to the 
 date of the qualified borrower's application for 
 refinancing under this section, and is in good standing 
 on the loan at the time of such application;
 ``(C) is not in default on the eligible private 
 education loan or on any loan made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under this part or part B or E; and
 ``(D) meets the eligibility requirements described 
 in subsection (b)(2).
 ``(b) Program Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, shall carry out a program under 
 which the Secretary, upon application by a qualified borrower 
 who has an eligible private education loan, shall issue such 
 borrower a loan under this part in accordance with the 
 following:
 ``(A) The loan issued under this program shall be 
 in an amount equal to the sum of the unpaid principal, 
 accrued unpaid interest, and late charges of the 
 private education loan.
 ``(B) The Secretary shall pay the proceeds of the 
 loan issued under this program to the private 
 educational lender of the private education loan, in 
 order to discharge the qualified borrower from any 
 remaining obligation to the lender with respect to the 
 original loan.
 ``(C) The Secretary shall require that the 
 qualified borrower undergo loan counseling that 
 provides all of the information and counseling required 
 under clause (i) and clauses (iv) through (xiv) of 
 section 485(b)(1)(A) (as amended by the College 
 Affordability Act) before the loan is refinanced in 
 accordance with this section, and before the proceeds 
 of such loan are paid to the private educational 
 lender.
 ``(D) The Secretary shall issue the loan as a 
 Federal Direct Refinanced Private Loan, which shall 
 have the same terms, conditions, and benefits as a 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, except as 
 otherwise provided in this section.
 ``(2) Borrower eligibility.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, shall establish 
 eligibility requirements--
 ``(A) based on income or debt-to-income ratio that 
 take into consideration providing access to refinancing 
 under this section for borrowers with the greatest 
 financial need;
 ``(B) to ensure eligibility only for borrowers in 
 good standing;
 ``(C) to minimize inequities between Federal Direct 
 Refinanced Private Loans and other Federal student 
 loans;
 ``(D) to preclude windfall profits for private 
 educational lenders; and
 ``(E) to ensure full access to the program 
 authorized in this subsection for borrowers with 
 private loans who otherwise meet the criteria 
 established in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B).
 ``(c) Interest Rate.--
 ``(1) In general.--The interest rate for a Federal Direct 
 Refinanced Private Loan is--
 ``(A) in the case of a Federal Direct Refinanced 
 Private Loan for a private education loan originally 
 issued for undergraduate postsecondary educational 
 expenses, a rate equal to the rate for Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loans and Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loans issued to undergraduate students for the 12-month 
 period beginning on July 1, 2019, and ending on June 
 30, 2020; and
 ``(B) in the case of a Federal Direct Refinanced 
 Private Loan for a private education loan originally 
 issued for graduate or professional degree 
 postsecondary educational expenses, a rate equal to the 
 rate for Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans 
 issued to graduate or professional students for the 12-
 month period beginning on July 1, 2019, and ending on 
 June 30, 2020.
 ``(2) Combined undergraduate and graduate study loans.--If 
 a Federal Direct Refinanced Private Loan is for a private 
 education loan originally issued for both undergraduate and 
 graduate or professional postsecondary educational expenses, 
 the interest rate shall be a rate equal to the rate for Federal 
 Direct PLUS Loans for the 12-month period beginning on July 1, 
 2019, and ending on June 30, 2020.
 ``(3) Fixed rate.--The applicable rate of interest 
 determined under this subsection for a Federal Direct 
 Refinanced Private Loan shall be fixed for the period of the 
 loan.
 ``(d) No Inclusion in Aggregate Limits.--The amount of a Federal 
Direct Refinanced Private Loan, or a Federal Direct Consolidated Loan 
to the extent such loan was used to repay a Federal Direct Refinanced 
Private Loan, shall not be included in calculating a borrower's annual 
or aggregate loan limits under section 428 or 428H.
 ``(e) No Eligibility for Service-Related Repayment.--A Federal 
Direct Refinanced Private Loan, or any Federal Direct Consolidation 
Loan to the extent such loan was used to repay a Federal Direct 
Refinanced Private Loan, shall not be eligible for any loan repayment 
or loan forgiveness program under section 428K, 428L, or 460 or for the 
repayment plan for public service employees under section 455(m).
 ``(f) Private Educational Lender Reporting Requirement.--
 ``(1) Reporting required.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, shall establish a 
 requirement that private educational lenders report the data 
 described in paragraph (2) to the Secretary, to Congress, to 
 the Secretary of the Treasury, and to the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, in order to allow for 
 an assessment of the private education loan market.
 ``(2) Contents of reporting.--The data that private 
 educational lenders shall report in accordance with paragraph 
 (1) shall include each of the following about private education 
 loans (as defined in section 140(a) of the Truth in Lending Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 1650(a))):
 ``(A) The total amount of private education loan 
 debt the lender holds.
 ``(B) The total number of private education loan 
 borrowers the lender serves.
 ``(C) The average interest rate on the outstanding 
 private education loan debt held by the lender.
 ``(D) The proportion of private education loan 
 borrowers who are in default on a loan held by the 
 lender.
 ``(E) The proportion of the outstanding private 
 education loan volume held by the lender that is in 
 default.
 ``(F) The proportions of outstanding private 
 education loan borrowers who are 30, 60, and 90 days 
 delinquent.
 ``(G) The proportions of outstanding private 
 education loan volume that is 30, 60, and 90 days 
 delinquent.
 ``(g) Notification to Borrowers.--The Secretary, in coordination 
with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the Bureau of 
Consumer Financial Protection, shall undertake a campaign to alert 
borrowers about the availability of private student loan refinancing 
under this section.''.

 PART E--FEDERAL PERKINS LOANS

SEC. 4401. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR PERKINS LOAN.

 Section 461(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087aa(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(1) In general.--'';
 (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3); and
 (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as 
 paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively.

SEC. 4402. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR PERKINS LOAN.

 Section 462 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087bb) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``From'' and 
 inserting ``For any fiscal year before fiscal year 2021, 
 from''; and
 (2) in subsection (i)(1), by striking ``for any fiscal 
 year,'' and inserting ``for any fiscal year before fiscal year 
 2021,''.

SEC. 4403. FEDERAL DIRECT PERKINS LOAN ALLOCATION.

 Part E of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087aa et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 462 the 
following:

``SEC. 462A. FEDERAL DIRECT PERKINS LOAN ALLOCATION.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to make funds 
available, in accordance with section 452, to each participating 
institution in an amount not to exceed the sum of an institution's 
allocation of funds under subsection (b)(1)(B) to enable each such 
participating institution to make Federal Direct Perkins Loans under 
section 455A to eligible students at such participating institution.
 ``(b) Available Direct Perkins Annual Loan Authority.--
 ``(1) Availability and allocations.--
 ``(A) In general.--There are hereby made available, 
 from funds made available for loans made under part D, 
 not to exceed $2,400,000,000 of annual loan authority 
 for award year 2021-2022 and each succeeding award 
 year, to be allocated as provided in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Allocation formula.--Except as provided in 
 paragraphs (2) and (3), for each award year, the 
 Secretary shall allocate an amount to each 
 participating institution that is equal to--
 ``(i) 100 percent of the institutional 
 undergraduate student need (as determined under 
 subparagraph (C)) for the preceding award year; 
 and
 ``(ii) 25 percent of the institutional 
 graduate student need (as determined under 
 subparagraph (D)) for the preceding award year.
 ``(C) Institutional undergraduate student need 
 calculation.--The institutional undergraduate student 
 need for a participating institution for an award year 
 shall be equal to the sum of the following:
 ``(i) An amount equal to 50 percent of the 
 amount that bears the same proportion to the 
 amount made available under subparagraph (A) 
 for such award year as the total amount of 
 Federal Pell Grant funds awarded at the 
 participating institution for the preceding 
 award year bears to the total amount of Federal 
 Pell Grant funds awarded at all participating 
 institutions for the preceding award year.
 ``(ii) An amount equal to 50 percent of the 
 amount that bears the same proportion to the 
 amount made available under subparagraph (A) 
 for such award year as the total amount of the 
 undergraduate student need at the participating 
 institution for the preceding award year bears 
 to the total amount of undergraduate student 
 need at all participating institutions for the 
 preceding award year.
 ``(D) Institutional graduate student need 
 calculation.--The institutional graduate student need 
 for a participating institution for an award year shall 
 be equal to the amount that bears the same proportion 
 to the amount made available under subparagraph (A) for 
 such award year as the total amount of the graduate 
 student need at the participating institution for the 
 preceding award year bears to the total amount of 
 graduate student need at all participating institutions 
 for the preceding award year.
 ``(2) Required minimum amount.--In no case shall the sum of 
 a participating institution's allocation of loan authority 
 computed under paragraph (1)(B) be less than the average of the 
 institution's total principal amount of loans made under this 
 part for each of the academic years 2012-2013 through 2016-
 2017.
 ``(3) Additional adjustments.--If the Secretary determines 
 that the sum of a participating institution's allocation of 
 loan authority under paragraph (1)(B) is below the minimum 
 amount required under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) for each participating institution for which 
 the minimum amount under paragraph (3) is not 
 satisfied, increase the amount of such sum to the 
 amount of the required minimum under such paragraph; 
 and
 ``(B) ratably reduce the amount of the sum of such 
 loan authority of all participating institutions not 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Annual loan authority.--The term `annual loan 
 authority' means the total original principal amount of loans--
 ``(A) made available for loans under part D; and
 ``(B) that may be allocated under subsection (b)(1) 
 for an award year to participating institutions to make 
 Federal Direct Perkins Loans under section 455A.
 ``(2) Average cost of attendance.--The term `average cost 
 of attendance' has the meaning given the term in section 
 4202(e)(5)(B).
 ``(3) Graduate student need.--The term `graduate student 
 need' means, with respect to a graduate student for an award 
 year, the lesser of the following:
 ``(A) The amount equal to (except the amount 
 computed by this subparagraph shall not be less than 
 zero)--
 ``(i) the average cost of attendance for 
 the preceding award year, minus
 ``(ii) such graduate student's expected 
 family contribution (computed in accordance 
 with part F of this title) for the preceding 
 award year.
 ``(B) The total annual loan limit for a Federal 
 Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan.
 ``(4) Undergraduate student need.--The term `undergraduate 
 student need' means, with respect to an undergraduate student 
 for an award year, the lesser of the following:
 ``(A) The total of the amount equal to (except the 
 amount computed by this clause shall not be less than 
 zero)--
 ``(i) the average cost of attendance for 
 the award year, minus
 ``(ii) such undergraduate student's 
 expected family contribution (computed in 
 accordance with part F of this title) for the 
 preceding award year.
 ``(B) The total loan annual limit for a Federal 
 Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan and a Federal Direct 
 Loan.
 ``(5) Participating institution.--The term `participating 
 institution' means an institution of higher education--
 ``(A) that has an agreement under section 463(f);
 ``(B) that participates in the Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loan Program; and
 ``(C) is not an institution described in section 
 102(a)(1)(C).''.

SEC. 4404. AGREEMENTS WITH INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION FOR 
 PURPOSES OF THE PERKINS LOAN PROGRAM.

 (a) Amendments.--Section 463 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1087cc) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the heading, by inserting ``for Loans Made 
 Before July 1, 2021'' after ``Agreements'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)(A), by inserting ``before July 
 1, 2021'' after ``students'';
 (C) in paragraph (4), by striking ``thereon--'' and 
 all that follows and inserting ``thereon, if the 
 institution has failed to maintain an acceptable 
 collection record with respect to such loan, as 
 determined by the Secretary in accordance with criteria 
 established by regulation, the Secretary may require 
 the institution to assign such note or agreement to the 
 Secretary, without recompense;''; and
 (D) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and the 
 Secretary shall apportion'' and all that follows 
 through ``in accordance with section 462'' and 
 inserting ``and the Secretary shall return a portion of 
 funds from loan repayments to the institution as 
 specified in section 466(b)'';
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Administrative Expenses.--An institution that has entered 
into an agreement under subsection (a) shall be entitled, for each 
fiscal year during which it services student loans from a student loan 
fund established under such agreement, to a payment in lieu of 
reimbursement for its expenses in servicing student loans made before 
July 1, 2021. Such payment shall be equal to 0.50 percent of the 
outstanding principal and interest balance of such loans being serviced 
by the institution as of September 30 of each fiscal year.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Contents of Agreements for Loans Made on or After July 1, 
2021.--An agreement with any institution of higher education that 
elects to participate in the Federal Direct Perkins Loan program under 
section 455A shall provide--
 ``(1) for the establishment and maintenance of a Direct 
 Perkins Loan program at the institution under which the 
 institution shall use annual loan authority allocated under 
 section 462A to make loans to eligible students attending the 
 institution;
 ``(2) that the institution, unless otherwise specified in 
 this subsection, shall operate the program consistent with the 
 requirements of agreements established under section 454; and
 ``(3) that if the institution ceases to be eligible to 
 receive Federal loans under this title based on loss of 
 eligibility under section 435(a), due to a high adjusted cohort 
 default rate, the Secretary shall suspend or terminate the 
 institution's eligibility to make Federal Direct Perkins Loans 
 under section 455A unless and until the institution would 
 qualify for a resumption of eligible institution status under 
 such section 435(a).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by paragraph (2) of 
subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 2021.

SEC. 4405. STUDENT LOAN INFORMATION BY ELIGIBLE INSTITUTIONS FOR 
 PURPOSES OF THE PERKINS LOAN PROGRAM.

 Section 463A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087cc-
1) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Each institution'' and 
 inserting ``For loans made before July 1, 2021, each 
 institution''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``Each institution'' and 
 inserting ``For loans made before July 1, 2021, each 
 institution''.

SEC. 4406. TERMS OF LOANS FOR PURPOSES OF THE PERKINS LOAN PROGRAM.

 Section 464 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087dd) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``section 463'' and 
 inserting ``section 463(a)'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``made before 
 July 1, 2021,'' after ``A loan''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``(with respect 
 to a loan made before July 1, 2021) or an allocation 
 under section 462A (with respect to a loan made on or 
 after July 1, 2021)'' after ``capital contribution 
 under section 462'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``made before 
 July 1, 2021,'' after ``a loan'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting 
 ``made before July 1, 2021,'' after ``any 
 loan''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting 
 ``made before July 1, 2021,'' after ``any 
 loan'';
 (C) in paragraph (3)(B), by inserting ``for a loan 
 made before July 1, 2021,'' after ``Secretary, the 
 repayment period'';
 (D) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``before July 1, 
 2021,'' after ``for a loan made'';
 (E) in paragraph (5), by striking ``The 
 institution'' and inserting ``For loans made before 
 July 1, 2021, the institution''; and
 (F) in paragraph (6), by inserting ``made before 
 July 1, 2021,'' after ``of loans'';
 (4) in subsection (d), by inserting ``made before July 1, 
 2021,'' before ``from the student loan fund'';
 (5) in subsection (e), by inserting ``with respect to loans 
 made before July 1, 2021, and'' before ``as documented in 
 accordance with paragraph (2),'';
 (6) in subsection (f)(1), by inserting ``before July 1, 
 2021'' after ``this part'';
 (7) in subsection (g)(1), by inserting ``and before July 1, 
 2021,'' after ``January 1, 1986,'';
 (8) in subsection (h)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A) by inserting ``before July 
 1, 2021,'' after ``made under this part''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``before July 1, 
 2021,'' after ``under this part''; and
 (9) in subsection (j)(1), by inserting ``before July 1, 
 2021,'' after ``under this part''.

SEC. 4407. REIMBURSEMENT FOR CANCELLATION OF PERKINS LOANS FOR CERTAIN 
 PUBLIC SERVICE.

 Section 465 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087ee) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and before July 1, 
 2021,'' after ``June 30, 1972,''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Reimbursement for Cancellations.--
 ``(1) Assigned loans.--In the case of loans made under this 
 part before July 1, 2021, and that are assigned to the 
 Secretary, the Secretary shall, from amounts repaid each 
 quarter on assigned Perkins Loans made before July 1, 2021, pay 
 to each institution for each quarter an amount equal to--
 ``(A) the aggregate of the amounts of loans from 
 its student loan fund that are canceled pursuant to 
 this section for such quarter, minus
 ``(B) an amount equal to the aggregate of the 
 amounts of any such loans so canceled that were made 
 from Federal capital contributions to its student loan 
 fund.
 ``(2) Retained loans.--In the case of loans made under this 
 part before July 1, 2021, and that are retained by the 
 institution for servicing, the institution shall deduct from 
 loan repayments owed to the Secretary under section 466, an 
 amount equal to--
 ``(A) the aggregate of the amounts of loans from 
 its student loan fund that are canceled pursuant to 
 this section for such quarter, minus
 ``(B) an amount equal to the aggregate of the 
 amounts of any such loans so canceled that were made 
 from Federal capital contributions to its student loan 
 fund.''.

SEC. 4408. DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS FROM STUDENT LOAN FUNDS FOR PURPOSES 
 OF THE PERKINS LOAN PROGRAM.

 Section 466 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087ff) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 466. DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS FROM STUDENT LOAN FUNDS.

 ``(a) Capital Distribution.--Beginning July 1, 2021, there shall be 
a capital distribution of the balance of the student loan fund 
established under this part by each institution of higher education as 
follows:
 ``(1) For the quarter beginning July 1, 2021, the Secretary 
 shall first be paid, no later than September 30, 2021, an 
 amount that bears the same ratio to the cash balance in such 
 fund at the close of June 30, 2021, as the total amount of the 
 Federal capital contributions to such fund by the Secretary 
 under this part bears to--
 ``(A) the sum of such Federal contributions and the 
 institution's capital contributions to such fund, less
 ``(B) an amount equal to--
 ``(i) the institution's outstanding 
 administrative costs as calculated under 
 section 463(b);
 ``(ii) outstanding charges assessed under 
 section 464(c)(1)(H); and
 ``(iii) outstanding loan cancellation costs 
 incurred under section 465.
 ``(2) At the end of each quarter subsequent to the quarter 
 ending September 30, 2021, the Secretary shall first be paid an 
 amount that bears the same ratio to the cash balance in such 
 fund at the close of the preceding quarter, as the total amount 
 of the Federal capital contributions to such fund by the 
 Secretary under this part bears to--
 ``(A) the sum of such Federal contributions and the 
 institution's capital contributions to such fund, less
 ``(B) an amount equal to--
 ``(i) the institution's administrative 
 costs incurred for that quarter as calculated 
 under section 463(b);
 ``(ii) charges assessed for that quarter 
 under section 464(c)(1)(H); and
 ``(iii) loan cancellation costs incurred 
 for that quarter under section 465.
 ``(3)(A) The Secretary shall calculate the amounts due to 
 the Secretary under paragraph (1) (adjusted in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B), as appropriate) and paragraph (2) and shall 
 promptly inform the institution of such calculated amounts.
 ``(B) In the event that, prior to the date of enactment of 
 the College Affordability Act, an institution made a short-
 term, interest-free loan to the institution's student loan fund 
 established under this part in anticipation of collections or 
 receipt of Federal capital contributions, and the institution 
 demonstrates to the Secretary, on or before June 30, 2021, that 
 such loan will still be outstanding after June 30, 2021, the 
 Secretary shall subtract the amount of such outstanding loan 
 from the cash balance of the institution's student loan fund 
 that is used to calculate the amount due to the Secretary under 
 paragraph (1). An adjustment of an amount due to the Secretary 
 under this subparagraph shall be made by the Secretary on a 
 case-by-case basis.
 ``(4) Any remaining balance at the end of a quarter after a 
 payment under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be retained by the 
 institution for use at its discretion. Any balance so retained 
 shall be withdrawn from the student loan fund and shall not be 
 counted in calculating amounts owed to the Secretary for 
 subsequent quarters.
 ``(5) Each institution shall make the quarterly payments to 
 the Secretary described in paragraph (2) until all outstanding 
 Federal Perkins Loans at that institution have been assigned to 
 the Secretary and there are no funds remaining in the 
 institution's student loan fund.
 ``(6) In the event that the institution's administrative 
 costs, charges, and cancellation costs described in paragraph 
 (2) for a quarter exceed the amount owed to the Secretary under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) for that quarter, no payment shall be 
 due to the Secretary from the institution for that quarter and 
 the Secretary shall pay the institution, from funds realized 
 from the collection of assigned Federal Perkins Loans made 
 before July 1, 2021, an amount that, when combined with the 
 amount retained by the institution under paragraphs (1) and 
 (2), equals the full amount of such administrative costs, 
 charges, and cancellation costs.
 ``(b) Assignment of Outstanding Loans.--Beginning July 1, 2021, an 
institution of higher education may assign all outstanding loans made 
under this part before July 1, 2021, to the Secretary, consistent with 
the requirements of section 463(a)(5). In collecting loans so assigned, 
the Secretary shall pay an institution an amount that constitutes the 
same fraction of such collections as the fraction of the cash balance 
that the institution retains under subsection (a)(2), but determining 
such fraction without regard to subparagraph (B)(i) of such 
subsection.''.

 PART F--NEED ANALYSIS

SEC. 4501. AMENDMENTS TO FAMILY CONTRIBUTION.

 Section 473(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087mm) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``academic year'' and 
 inserting ``award year''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``academic year'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``award year'';
 (B) by striking ``academic years'' and inserting 
 ``award years'';
 (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``parent or 
 guardian'' and inserting ``parent, guardian, or 
 spouse''; and
 (D) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``in the case 
 of a student whose parent or guardian is described in 
 clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B),'' before 
 ``who''.

SEC. 4502. AMENDMENTS TO DATA ELEMENTS WHEN DETERMINING THE EXPECTED 
 FAMILY CONTRIBUTION.

 Section 474(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087nn(b)) is amended in paragraph (4), by inserting before ``the net'' 
the following: ``only in the case of a pathway three applicant,''.

SEC. 4503. AMENDMENTS TO FAMILY CONTRIBUTION FOR DEPENDENT STUDENTS.

 (a) Dependent Students.--Section 475 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087oo) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by inserting before ``the 
 student'' the following: ``only in the case of a pathway three 
 applicant,'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)(B), by inserting before ``the 
 parents''' the following: ``only in the case of a pathway three 
 applicant,''; and
 (3) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ``award period'' and 
 inserting ``award year''.
 (b) Increasing Support for Working Dependent Students.--Section 
475(g)(2)(D) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087oo(g)(2)(D)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(D) an income protection allowance (or a 
 successor amount prescribed by the Secretary under 
 section 478) of $9,230 for award year 2021-2022;''.

SEC. 4504. AMENDMENTS TO FAMILY CONTRIBUTION FOR INDEPENDENT STUDENTS 
 WITHOUT DEPENDENTS OTHER THAN A SPOUSE.

 (a) Independent Students Without Dependents Other Than a Spouse.--
Section 476(a)(1)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087pp(a)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting before ``the family's 
contribution'' the following: ``only in the case of a pathway three 
applicant,''.
 (b) Increasing Support for Working Independent Students Without 
Dependents Other Than a Spouse.--Section 476 of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087pp) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``award period'' and 
 inserting ``award year''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (b)(1)(A)(iv) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(iv) an income protection allowance (or a 
 successor amount prescribed by the Secretary 
 under section 478)--
 ``(I) for single or separated 
 students, or married students where 
 both are enrolled pursuant to 
 subsection (a)(2), of $14,360 for award 
 year 2021-2022; and
 ``(II) for married students where 1 
 is enrolled pursuant to subsection 
 (a)(2), of $23,030 for award year 2021-
 2022;''.

SEC. 4505. AMENDMENTS TO FAMILY CONTRIBUTION FOR INDEPENDENT STUDENTS 
 WITH DEPENDENTS OTHER THAN A SPOUSE.

 (a) Independent Students With Dependents Other Than a Spouse.--
Section 477(a)(1)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087qq(a)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting before ``the family's 
contribution'' the following: ``only in the case of a pathway three 
applicant,''.
 (b) Increasing Support for Working Independent Students With 
Dependents Other Than a Spouse.--Section 477 of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087qq) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by striking ``award period'' and 
 inserting ``award year''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (b)(4) to read as follows:
 ``(4) Income protection allowance.--The income protection 
 allowance is determined by the following table (or a successor 
 table prescribed by the Secretary under section 478), for award 
 year 2021-2022:

 ``Income Protection Allowance
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Family Size Number in College
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 For each
 (including 1 2 3 4 5 additional
 student) subtract:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 2 $36,370 $30,160 $6,180
 3 45,290 39,100 $32,890
 4 55,920 49,720 43,540 $37,300
 5 65,990 59,750 53,570 47,360 $41,180
 6 77,170 70,960 64,790 58,540 52,350
For each
additional
 add: 8,710 ''.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 4506. INSTITUTIONAL CALCULATIONS FOR OFF-CAMPUS ROOM AND BOARD.

 (a) Authority to Prescribe Regulations.--Section 478(a) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087rr(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (A);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (B) and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) to prescribe--
 ``(i) one methodology that institutions of higher 
 education (other than institutions that receive a 
 waiver under clause (ii)) shall use, or a selection of 
 two or more methodologies from which such institutions 
 shall select and use a methodology, to determine the 
 allowance for room and board costs incurred by students 
 described in subparagraph (A) of section 472(3) and by 
 students described in subparagraph (D) of such section, 
 which shall--
 ``(I) ensure that each such allowance 
 determination is sufficient to cover reasonable 
 room and board costs incurred by the students 
 for whom such allowance is being determined; 
 and
 ``(II) include the sources of information 
 that institutions shall use in making each such 
 allowance determination; and
 ``(ii) a process for granting institutions of 
 higher education a waiver from the requirements of 
 clause (i), including--
 ``(I) a requirement that each institution 
 of higher education seeking such a waiver 
 submit to the Secretary--
 ``(aa) a description of the 
 methodology that the institution will 
 use for each allowance determination 
 described in clause (i);
 ``(bb) an assurance that each such 
 allowance determination meets the 
 requirements of clause (i)(I); and
 ``(cc) a demonstration that the 
 institution will use reliable sources 
 of information for each such allowance 
 determination; and
 ``(II) a requirement that each institution 
 of higher education that receives such a waiver 
 publicly disclose on the website of the 
 institution the methodology and sources of 
 information used by the institution for each 
 allowance determination described in clause 
 (i).''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Any regulation proposed by the Secretary under paragraph 
(1)(C) of this subsection shall not be subject to the requirements of 
paragraph (2).''.
 (b) Requirement to Prescribe Regulations.--Not later than 18 months 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education 
shall issue regulations that meet the requirements of subparagraph (C) 
of section 478(a)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087rr(a)(1)), as added by subsection (a).

SEC. 4507. UPDATED TABLES AND AMOUNTS TO NEED ANALYSIS.

 Section 478 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087rr) 
is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) In general.--For each award year after award 
 year 2021-2022, the Secretary shall publish in the 
 Federal Register a revised table of income protection 
 allowances for the purpose of sections 475(c)(4) and 
 477(b)(4), subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C).
 ``(B) Table for independent students.--For each 
 award year after award year 2021-2022, the Secretary 
 shall develop the revised table of income protection 
 allowances by increasing each of the dollar amounts 
 contained in the table of income protection allowances 
 under section 477(b)(4) by a percentage equal to the 
 estimated percentage increase in the Consumer Price 
 Index (as determined by the Secretary for the most 
 recent calendar year ending prior to the beginning of 
 the award year for which the determination is being 
 made), and rounding the result to the nearest $10.''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``academic year after academic year 2007-2008'' 
 and inserting ``award year after award year 
 2021-2022''; and
 (ii) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``shall be developed'' and all that follows 
 through the period at the end and inserting 
 ``shall be developed for each award year after 
 award year 2021-2022, by increasing each of the 
 dollar amounts contained in such section for 
 award year 2021-2022 by a percentage equal to 
 the estimated percentage increase in the 
 Consumer Price Index (as determined by the 
 Secretary for the most recent calendar year 
 ending prior to the beginning of the award year 
 for which the determination is being made), and 
 rounding the result to the nearest $10.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e)(1), by striking ``academic year'' and 
 inserting ``award year''.

SEC. 4508. ZERO EXPECTED FAMILY CONTRIBUTION.

 Section 479 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087ss) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 479. ZERO EXPECTED FAMILY CONTRIBUTION.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall consider an applicant to 
have an expected family contribution equal to zero if--
 ``(1) in the case of a dependent student--
 ``(A)(i) the student's parents are not required to 
 file--
 ``(I) a Federal income tax return; or
 ``(II) with respect to Internal Revenue 
 Service Form 1040, any of the following forms: 
 Schedule A, Schedule B, Schedule C, Schedule C-
 EZ, Schedule D, Schedule E, Schedule F, 
 Schedule H, Schedule J, and Schedule SE; and
 ``(ii) the sum of the adjusted gross income of the 
 parents is less than or equal to $37,000; or
 ``(B) the student's parents, or the student, 
 received a benefit at some time during the previous 24-
 month period under a means-tested Federal benefit 
 program;
 ``(2) in the case of an independent student without regard 
 to whether the student has dependents other than a spouse--
 ``(A)(i) the student (and the student's spouse, if 
 any) certifies that the student (and the student's 
 spouse, if any)--
 ``(I) is not required to file a Federal 
 income tax return; or
 ``(II) with respect to Internal Revenue 
 Service Form 1040, any of the following forms: 
 Schedule A, Schedule B, Schedule C, Schedule C-
 EZ, Schedule D, Schedule E, Schedule F, 
 Schedule H, Schedule J, and Schedule SE; and
 ``(ii) the sum of the adjusted gross income of the 
 student and spouse (if appropriate) is less than or 
 equal to $37,000; or
 ``(B) the student received a benefit at some time 
 during the previous 24-month period under a means-
 tested Federal benefit program; or
 ``(3) the applicant is a pathway one applicant under 
 section 483(a)(13).
 ``(b) Earned Income Credit.--An individual is not required to 
qualify or file for the earned income credit in order to be eligible 
under this section.
 ``(c) Adjustments.--The Secretary shall annually adjust the income 
level necessary to qualify an applicant for the zero expected family 
contribution. The income level shall be annually increased by the 
estimated percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, as defined in 
section 478(f), for the most recent calendar year ending prior to the 
beginning of an award year, and rounded to the nearest $1,000.
 ``(d) Means-tested Federal Benefit Program Defined.--For purposes 
of this title, a `means-tested Federal benefit program' means a 
mandatory spending program of the Federal Government, other than a 
program under this title, in which eligibility for the program's 
benefits, or the amount of such benefits, are determined on the basis 
of income or resources of the individual or family seeking the benefit, 
and may include such programs as--
 ``(1) the supplemental security income program under title 
 XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1381 et seq.);
 ``(2) the supplemental nutrition assistance program under 
 the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), a 
 nutrition assistance program carried out under section 19 of 
 such Act (7 U.S.C. 2028), and a supplemental nutrition 
 assistance program carried out under section 1841(c) of title 
 48 of the United States Code;
 ``(3) the program of block grants for States for temporary 
 assistance for needy families established under part A of title 
 IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 ``(4) the special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children established by section 17 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786);
 ``(5) the State Medicaid program under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); and
 ``(6) any other program identified by the Secretary.''.

SEC. 4509. AMENDMENTS TO DEFINITIONS IN NEED ANALYSIS.

 (a) Using Data From the Second Preceding Year.--Section 
480(a)(1)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1087vv(a)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``may'' in both places it 
appears and inserting ``shall''.
 (b) Changes to Untaxed Income and Benefits.--Section 480(b) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087vv(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), to read as follows:
 ``(1) The term `untaxed income and benefits' means--
 ``(A) child support received;
 ``(B) untaxed portion of pensions;
 ``(C) payments to individual retirement accounts 
 and Keogh accounts excluded from income for Federal 
 income tax purposes; and
 ``(D) cash support or any money paid on the 
 student's behalf, except, for dependent students, funds 
 provided by the student's parents.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (E);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of 
 subparagraph (F) and inserting a semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(G) worker's compensation;
 ``(H) veteran's benefits such as death pension, 
 dependency, or indemnity compensation, or veterans' 
 education benefits as defined in subsection (c);
 ``(I) interest on tax-free bonds;
 ``(J) housing, food, or other allowances (including 
 rent subsidies for low-income housing) for military, 
 clergy, and others (including cash payments and cash 
 value of benefits), or the value of on-base military 
 housing or the value of basic allowance for housing 
 determined under section 403(b) of title 37, United 
 States Code, received by the parents, in the case of a 
 dependent student, or the student or student's spouse, 
 in the case of an independent student; or
 ``(K) any other untaxed income and benefits, such 
 as Black Lung Benefits, Refugee Assistance, or railroad 
 retirement benefits, or benefits received through 
 participation in employment and training activities 
 under title I of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3111 et seq.).''.
 (c) Amendment to the Definition of Independent Student As It 
Relates to Foster and Homeless Youth.--Section 480(d)(1)(H) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087vv(d)(1)(H)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding clause (i)--
 (A) by striking ``during the school year in which 
 the application is submitted'';
 (B) by inserting ``age 23 or younger'' after 
 ``unaccompanied youth''; and
 (C) by striking ``terms are'' and inserting ``term 
 is'';
 (2) in clause (i), by inserting ``, or a designee of the 
 liaison'' after ``Act'';
 (3) in clause (ii), by striking ``a program funded under 
 the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act'' and inserting ``an 
 emergency or transitional shelter, street outreach program, 
 homeless youths drop-in center, or other program serving 
 homeless youths,''; and
 (4) in clause (iii), by striking ``program funded under 
 subtitle B of title IV of the McKinney-Vento Homeless 
 Assistance Act (relating to emergency shelter grants)'' and 
 inserting ``Federal TRIO program or a Gaining Early Awareness 
 and Readiness for Undergraduate program under chapter 1 or 2 of 
 subpart 2 of part A,''.
 (d) Streamlining the Determination and Verification Process for 
Foster and Homeless Youth.--Section 480(d) of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087vv(d)) is further amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(3) Simplifying the determination process for 
 unaccompanied youth.--
 ``(A) Verification.--A financial aid administrator 
 shall accept a determination of independence made by 
 any individual authorized to make such determinations 
 under clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of paragraph (1)(H) in 
 the absence of conflicting information. A documented 
 phone call with, or a written statement from, one of 
 the authorized individuals is sufficient verification 
 when needed. For purposes of this paragraph, a 
 financial aid administrator's disagreement with the 
 determination made by an authorized individual shall 
 not be considered conflicting information.
 ``(B) Determination of independence.--A financial 
 aid administrator shall make a determination of 
 independence under paragraph (1)(H) if a student does 
 not have, and cannot obtain, documentation from any of 
 the other designated authorities described in such 
 paragraph. Such a determination shall be--
 ``(i) based on the definitions outlined in 
 paragraph (1)(H);
 ``(ii) distinct from a determination of 
 independence under paragraph (1)(I);
 ``(iii) based on a documented interview 
 with the student; and
 ``(iv) limited to whether the student meets 
 the definitions in paragraph (1)(H) and not 
 about the reasons for the student's 
 homelessness.
 ``(C) Additional streamlining permitted.--Nothing 
 in this paragraph prohibits an institution from 
 implementing polices that--
 ``(i) streamline the determination of 
 independence under paragraph (1)(H); and
 ``(ii) improve a student's access to 
 financial aid because that student is an 
 unaccompanied youth.
 ``(4) Simplifying the verification process for foster care 
 youth.--
 ``(A) Verification of independence.--If an 
 institution requires documentation to verify that a 
 student is independent based on a status described in 
 paragraph (1)(B), a financial aid administrator shall 
 consider any of the following as adequate verification:
 ``(i) Submission of a court order or 
 official State documentation that the student 
 received Federal or State support in foster 
 care.
 ``(ii) A documented phone call with, a 
 written statement from, or verifiable data 
 match with--
 ``(I) a child welfare agency 
 authorized by a State or county;
 ``(II) a Tribal child welfare 
 authority;
 ``(III) an Independent Living case 
 worker;
 ``(IV) a public or private foster 
 care placing agency or foster care 
 facility or placement;
 ``(V) another program serving 
 orphans, foster care youth, or wards of 
 the court; or
 ``(VI) a probation officer.
 ``(iii) A documented phone call with, or a 
 written statement from, an attorney, a guardian 
 ad litem, or a Court Appointed Special 
 Advocate, documenting that person's 
 relationship to the student.
 ``(iv) A documented phone call with, or a 
 written statement from, a representative of a 
 Federal TRIO program or a Gaining Early 
 Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate 
 program under chapter 1 or 2 of subpart 2 of 
 part A.
 ``(v) Verification of the student's 
 eligibility for an education and training 
 voucher under the John H. Chafee Foster Care 
 Independence Program (42 U.S.C. 677).
 ``(vi) Documentation of foster care 
 provided pursuant to section 475(5)(I) of the 
 Social Security Act (45 U.S.C. 675(5)(I)).
 ``(vii) Submission of a copy of the 
 student's biological or adoptive parents' or 
 legal guardians'--
 ``(I) Certificates of Death; or
 ``(II) verifiable obituaries.
 ``(viii) An attestation from the student, 
 which includes a description of why the student 
 may qualify for a status described in paragraph 
 (1)(B), including the approximate dates that 
 the student was in foster care, dependent, or a 
 ward of the court, to the best of the student's 
 knowledge after making reasonable efforts to 
 provide any requested documentation.
 ``(B) Additional streamlining permitted.--Nothing 
 in this paragraph prohibits an institution from 
 implementing polices that streamline the determination 
 of independent status and improve a student's access to 
 financial aid because that student is an orphan, in 
 foster care, or a ward of the court, or was an orphan, 
 in foster care, or a ward of the court at any time 
 since such student was 13 years of age or older.
 ``(5) Timing; use of earlier determination.--
 ``(A) Timing.--A determination under subparagraph 
 (B) or (H) of paragraph (1) for a student--
 ``(i) shall be made as quickly as 
 practicable;
 ``(ii) may be made as early as the year 
 before the award year for which the student 
 initially submits an application; and
 ``(iii) shall be made no later than during 
 the award year for which the student initially 
 submits an application.
 ``(B) Use of earlier determination.--Any student 
 who is determined to be independent under subparagraph 
 (B) or (H) of paragraph (1) for a preceding award year 
 at an institution shall be presumed to be independent 
 for each subsequent award year at the same institution 
 unless--
 ``(i) the student informs the institution 
 that circumstances have changed; or
 ``(ii) the institution has specific 
 conflicting information about the student's 
 independence, and has informed the student of 
 this information and the opportunity to 
 challenge such information through a documented 
 interview or an impartial review by the 
 Borrower Advocate pursuant to section 
 141(f)(6)(C).
 ``(6) Retention of documents.--A financial aid 
 administrator shall retain all documents related to the 
 determination of independence under subparagraph (B) or (H) of 
 paragraph (1), including documented interviews, for the 
 duration of the student's enrollment at the institution and for 
 a minimum of 1 year after the student is no longer enrolled at 
 the institution.''.
 (e) Excludable Income.--Section 480(e) of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087vv(e)) is amended by striking paragraph (5) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(5) payments made and services provided under part E of 
 title IV of the Social Security Act to or on behalf of any 
 child or youth over whom the State agency has responsibility 
 for placement, care, or supervision, including the value of 
 vouchers for education and training and amounts expended for 
 room and board for youth who are not in foster care but are 
 receiving services under section 477 of such Act; and''.

 PART G--GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STUDENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS

SEC. 4601. DEFINITION OF ELIGIBLE PROGRAM.

 (a) Eligible Program.--Section 481(b) of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1088(b))--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A)(i), by striking ``profession'' and 
 inserting ``occupation'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by redesignating clause (iii) as clause 
 (vi); and
 (ii) by inserting after clause (ii) the 
 following:
 ``(iii) has a verified annual earnings rate among 
 individuals who completed the program, as determined under 
 subparagraph (D), that is not less than the average or median 
 annual earnings rate of individuals with only a high school 
 diploma (or the equivalent) based on the most recently 
 available data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the 
 Bureau of the Census with respect to--
 ``(I) such average or median earnings rate in the 
 United States; or
 ``(II) subject to subparagraph (E), such average or 
 median earnings rate in the State or local area in 
 which the institution offering the program is located;
 ``(iv) prepares students for gainful employment in a 
 recognized occupation;
 ``(v) has been in operation for not less than two 
 consecutive years; and''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C)(i) For each subsequent year for which a program seeks 
eligibility under this paragraph, the Secretary shall reevaluate 
whether the program continues to meet the requirements of clauses (i), 
(iii), (iv), and (vi) of subparagraph (A). A program that does not meet 
such requirements for two consecutive award years (or, in the case of a 
program that does not meet the requirements under subparagraph (A)(iv), 
for a period of time determined by the Secretary) shall be ineligible 
to participate in programs under this title--
 ``(I) for the period of two award years following the last 
 award year for which the program was eligible to participate in 
 such programs; and
 ``(II) for any subsequent award year, unless the program 
 reapplies for eligibility in accordance with clause (iii) and 
 the Secretary determines that the program meets the 
 requirements of such clauses.
 ``(ii) Not later than 60 days after receiving notification from the 
Secretary of the loss of eligibility under clause (i), a program may 
appeal a loss of eligibility to the Secretary. The Secretary may 
restore the eligibility of a program under this paragraph if the 
program demonstrates to the Secretary that extenuating circumstances 
led to the loss of eligibility.
 ``(iii) The Secretary shall issue a decision on any appeal 
submitted by a program under clause (ii) not later than 45 days after 
its submission.
 ``(iv) After the expiration of the two-year period described in 
clause (i)(I), a program that lost eligibility under clause (i) may 
reapply to the Secretary for a determination of eligibility under this 
paragraph.
 ``(D)(i) In this subsection, the term `verified annual earnings 
rate' means the mean or median annual earnings rate (whichever is 
higher) of individuals who completed a program calculated as of the 
date that is approximately one year after the date on which such 
individuals completed the program.
 ``(ii) For the first year for which a program seeks eligibility 
under this paragraph, the institution that offers such program shall--
 ``(I) determine the verified annual earnings rate using 
 data obtained on individuals who completed the program;
 ``(II) obtain an audit of such determination from an 
 independent auditor;
 ``(III) together with the auditor described in subclause 
 (II), certify the accuracy of the verified annual earnings rate 
 to the Secretary; and
 ``(IV) determine the completion rate for the program, as 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i), and certify to the Secretary 
 the accuracy of such determination.
 ``(iii) For each subsequent year for which a program seeks 
eligibility under this paragraph, the Secretary shall determine the 
verified annual earnings rate and completion rate for the program using 
data made available to the Secretary through the postsecondary student 
data system established under section 132(l) or a successor system 
(whichever includes the most recent data).
 ``(E)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), for purposes of 
calculating the average annual earnings rate of individuals with only a 
high school diploma (or the equivalent) under subparagraph (A)(ii) the 
Secretary shall apply the national average or median earnings rate in 
the United States.
 ``(ii) The Secretary may apply the average or median earnings rate 
in the State or local area in which the institution offering a program 
is located, in lieu of the national average earnings rate, if the 
institution provides sufficient justification to the Secretary.
 ``(F) Using the postsecondary student data system established under 
section 132(l) or a successor system to streamline reporting 
requirements and minimize reporting burdens, and in coordination with 
the National Center for Education Statistics and each institution of 
higher education offering an eligible program under this paragraph, the 
Secretary shall, on at least an annual basis, collect data with respect 
to each such eligible program, including the following:
 ``(i) The number and demographics of students who enroll in 
 the program.
 ``(ii) The number of credits attempted and accumulated 
 annually by students enrolled in the program.
 ``(iii) The share of such students who cease enrollment on 
 or before the completion of 60 percent of the payment period or 
 period of enrollment.
 ``(iv) The verified completion rate for the program, as 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i).
 ``(v) The mean and median annual earnings of graduates and 
 the verified annual earnings rate for the program, as described 
 in subparagraph (A)(ii).
 ``(vi) The number and demographics of students who complete 
 the program.
 ``(vii) The outcomes of the students who complete the 
 program, including--
 ``(I) the share of such students who continue 
 enrollment at the institution of higher education 
 offering the program;
 ``(II) the share of such students who transfer to 
 another institution of higher education;
 ``(III) the share of such students who complete a 
 subsequent certificate or degree program;
 ``(IV) the share of such students who secure 
 employment 6 months and 1 year, respectively--
 ``(aa) after completion of such program; or
 ``(bb) in the case of a program that 
 prepares students for a professional license or 
 certification exam, after acquiring such 
 license or certification; and
 ``(V) in the case of a program that prepares 
 students for a professional license or certification 
 exam, the share of such students who pass such exam.''; 
 and
 (3) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``or in addition to'' 
 after ``in lieu of''.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Education shall--
 (1) submit to the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a report on the 
 impact of eligible programs described in section 481(b)(2) of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1088(b)(2)), as 
 amended by this Act, based on the most recent data collected 
 under subparagraph (F) of such section; and
 (2) make the report described in paragraph (1) publicly 
 available on the website of the Department of Education.

SEC. 4602. DEFINITION OF THIRD PARTY SERVICER.

 Section 481(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) any eligible institution of higher education to 
 recruit students; or''.

SEC. 4603. FAFSA SIMPLIFICATION.

 Section 483 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1090) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``process'' and all that follows through the 
 end of clause (ii) and inserting ``process a 
 paper version of the forms described in this 
 subsection, in accordance with subparagraph 
 (B).'';
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (B);
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
 subparagraph (B); and
 (iv) in subparagraph (B), as so 
 redesignated, by striking ``subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking the 
 last sentence;
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (B), and 
 redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (H) as 
 subparagraphs (B) through (G), respectively;
 (iii) in subparagraph (D), as so 
 redesignated--
 (I) by striking ``The Secretary'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(ii) Scholarship granting 
 organizations.--
 ``(I) Authorization.--An 
 institution of higher education may, 
 with explicit written consent of an 
 applicant who has completed a form 
 developed under this section, provide 
 such information collected from such 
 form as is necessary to an organization 
 described in subclause (II) that is 
 designated by the applicant to assist 
 the applicant in applying for and 
 receiving financial assistance for any 
 component of the applicant's cost of 
 attendance at that institution.
 ``(II) Definition of 
 organization.--An organization 
 described in this subclause--
 ``(aa) means a scholarship 
 granting organization, 
 including a tribal organization 
 (defined in section 4 of the 
 Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 
 U.S.C. 5304))) or an 
 organization assisting an 
 applicant in applying for and 
 receiving Federal, State, 
 local, or tribal assistance; 
 and
 ``(bb) shall be subject to 
 the requirements of clause 
 (i).''; and
 (iv) in subparagraph (E), as so 
 redesignated, by striking ``subparagraph (G)'' 
 and inserting ``subparagraph (F)'';
 (C) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by striking ``academic year'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``award year'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 clause (iv); and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Single question regarding homeless status.--
 The Secretary shall ensure that, on each form developed 
 under this section for which the information is 
 applicable, there is a single, easily understood 
 screening question to identify an applicant for aid who 
 is--
 ``(i) an unaccompanied homeless child or 
 youth (as such term is defined in section 725 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act); 
 or
 ``(ii) an unaccompanied youth who is self-
 supporting and at risk of homelessness.
 ``(D) Incarcerated individuals.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 streamline the forms and processes for an 
 incarcerated individual (as defined in section 
 401(n)(4)) to apply for a Federal Pell Grant 
 under section 401, which--
 ``(I) shall be used to determine 
 the expected family contribution for 
 such individual as of the date of 
 enrollment in the course for which the 
 individual is applying for such Federal 
 Pell Grant; and
 ``(II) may include--
 ``(aa) flexibility in the 
 submission of any required 
 documentation required to 
 verify eligibility for a 
 Federal Pell Grant; and
 ``(bb) assistance in 
 rehabilitating loans under 
 section 428F.
 ``(ii) Report.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, the Secretary shall submit 
 to the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
 Senate, and make publicly available on the 
 website of the Department, a report on how the 
 forms and processes are being streamlined under 
 clause (i).'';
 (D) in paragraph (5)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``paragraphs (2)(B)(iii), (3)(B), and 
 (4)(A)(ii)'' and inserting ``paragraph 
 (4)(A)(ii)'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (B)--
 (I) by striking ``determine'' and 
 all that follows through ``which'' and 
 inserting ``determine which'';
 (II) by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a period; and
 (III) by striking clause (ii);
 (iii) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``Beginning'' and all that follows through ``of 
 the State-specific'' and inserting ``The 
 Secretary shall publish on an annual basis a 
 notice in the Federal Register requiring State 
 agencies to inform the Secretary of the State-
 specific''; and
 (iv) by striking subparagraphs (D) through 
 (F), and redesignating subparagraph (G) as 
 subparagraph (D); and
 (E) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(13) FAFSA pathways.--
 ``(A) Memorandum of understanding.--Not later than 
 the effective date of the College Affordability Act, 
 the Secretary shall seek to enter into a Memorandum of 
 Understanding with the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, under which any information 
 exchanged under an income and eligibility verification 
 system established pursuant to section 1137 of the 
 Social Security Act by State agencies administering a 
 program listed in paragraph (1), (4), or (5) of 
 subsection (b) of such section which may be of use in 
 establishing or verifying eligibility or benefit 
 amounts under such program shall be made available to 
 the Secretary of Education to assist in determining 
 whether the applicant (or, in the case of a dependent 
 applicant, whether the applicant or the applicant's 
 parents) received a benefit at some time during the 
 previous 24-month period under a means-tested Federal 
 benefit program, but subject to the requirements of 
 Federal law.
 ``(B) Requirement for all applicants and the 
 secretary.--For any award year for which an applicant 
 applies for financial assistance under this title 
 (except for any award year for which, pursuant to 
 paragraph (14), the applicant is not required to submit 
 a FAFSA)--
 ``(i) the applicant shall provide on the 
 form described in this subsection whether the 
 applicant received (or, in the case of a 
 dependent applicant, whether the applicant or 
 the parents of the applicant received) a 
 benefit at some time during the previous 24-
 month period under a means-tested Federal 
 benefit program; and
 ``(ii) the Secretary, to the extent 
 practicable and pursuant to the Memorandum of 
 Understanding entered into under subparagraph 
 (A), and without any further action by the 
 applicant, shall verify the applicant's (or, in 
 the case of a dependent applicant, the 
 applicant's or the applicant's parents') 
 receipt of such benefit.
 ``(C) Pathway one applicants.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to an 
 applicant who received (or, in the case of a 
 dependent applicant, an applicant who received 
 or whose parents received) a benefit at some 
 time during the previous 24-month period under 
 a means-tested Federal benefit program, the 
 applicant shall not be required to provide any 
 further income or asset information on the form 
 under this subsection.
 ``(ii) Designation.--For purposes of this 
 section and part F, an applicant described in 
 clause (i) shall be referred to as a `pathway 
 one applicant'.
 ``(D) Pathway two applicants.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to an 
 applicant who is not a pathway one applicant 
 and who is described in clause (ii), the 
 Secretary, to the extent practicable, shall use 
 the data retrieval tool under section 484(p) to 
 obtain any information for the applicant beyond 
 the information described in subparagraph (A) 
 for purposes of the form under this subsection.
 ``(ii) Requirements.--An applicant 
 described in this clause is an applicant who 
 certifies that--
 ``(I) the applicant is not required 
 to file or, in the case of a dependent 
 applicant, no parent of the applicant 
 is required to file--
 ``(aa) a Federal income tax 
 return; or
 ``(bb) with respect to 
 Internal Revenue Service Form 
 1040, any of the following 
 forms: Schedule A, Schedule B, 
 Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, 
 Schedule D, Schedule E, 
 Schedule F, Schedule H, 
 Schedule J, and Schedule SE; 
 and
 ``(II) the sum of the adjusted 
 gross income of the applicant or, in 
 the case of a dependent applicant, the 
 parents of the applicant, is less than 
 or equal to $60,000.
 ``(iii) Designation.--For purposes of this 
 section and part F, an applicant described in 
 clause (i) shall be referred to as a `pathway 
 two applicant'.
 ``(E) Pathway three applicants.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to an 
 applicant who is not a pathway one applicant or 
 a pathway two applicant, the Secretary, to the 
 extent practicable, shall use the data 
 retrieval tool under section 484(p) to obtain 
 any information for the applicant beyond the 
 information described in subparagraph (A) for 
 purposes of the form under this subsection.
 ``(ii) Designation.--For purposes of this 
 section and part F, an applicant described in 
 clause (i) shall be referred to as a `pathway 
 three applicant'.
 ``(F) Means-tested federal benefit program 
 defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
 `means-tested Federal benefit program' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 479(d).
 ``(14) One-time fafsa filing.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this section and subject to subparagraphs 
 (B) and (C), an applicant who submits a FAFSA for the 
 first time for an award year for the period required 
 for the completion of the first undergraduate 
 baccalaureate course of study being pursued by such 
 applicant and is eligible to receive a Federal Pell 
 Grant for such award year, for any succeeding award 
 year--
 ``(i) for which the applicant does not 
 submit a FAFSA and for which the applicant 
 submits a certification form described in 
 subparagraph (D) that does not indicate a 
 change in the dependency status of such 
 applicant, such applicant--
 ``(I) shall not be required to 
 submit a FAFSA to receive financial 
 assistance under this title; and
 ``(II) shall have an expected 
 family contribution for such year that 
 is equal to the expected family 
 contribution of the applicant 
 determined for the award year for which 
 the applicant submitted a FAFSA for 
 such period, except that an adjustment 
 may be made under section 479A that 
 results in a change in such expected 
 family contribution;
 ``(ii) for which the applicant submits a 
 certification form described in subparagraph 
 (D) that indicates a change in the dependency 
 status of the applicant, such applicant--
 ``(I) shall be required to submit a 
 FAFSA with respect to such award year 
 to receive financial assistance under 
 this title; and
 ``(II) shall have an expected 
 family contribution for such year that 
 is determined based on such FAFSA;
 ``(iii) for which the applicant submits a 
 FAFSA, such applicant--
 ``(I) shall have an expected family 
 contribution for such year that is 
 determined based on such FAFSA; and
 ``(II) shall be required to submit 
 a FAFSA for any other award year for 
 which the applicant seeks financial 
 assistance under this title; and
 ``(iv) for which the applicant does not 
 submit a certification form described in 
 subparagraph (D), such applicant shall submit a 
 FAFSA for such succeeding award year and any 
 other award year for which the applicant seeks 
 financial assistance under this title.
 ``(B) Adjustment of expected family contribution.--
 With respect to an applicant described in subparagraph 
 (A)(i) who receives an adjustment under section 479A 
 that results in a change to the expected family 
 contribution of the applicant, for any succeeding award 
 year after the award year for which the adjustment was 
 made, subclause (II) of such subparagraph shall be 
 applied to such applicant by substituting `expected 
 family contribution of the applicant as most recently 
 changed as a result of an adjustment under section 479A 
 for such applicant' for the `expected family 
 contribution of the applicant determined for the award 
 year for which the applicant submitted a FAFSA for such 
 period'.
 ``(C) Rule for certain students.--With respect to 
 an applicant who submits a FAFSA for award year 2021-
 2022 and enrolls in an institution of higher education 
 for such year, subparagraph (A) shall be applied--
 ``(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), 
 by substituting `award year 2021-2022' for `the 
 first time for an award year'; and
 ``(ii) in clause (i)(II), by substituting 
 `award year 2021-2022' for `the award year for 
 which the applicant submitted a FAFSA for such 
 period'.
 ``(D) Student certification form.--The Secretary, 
 in cooperation with representatives of agencies and 
 organizations involved in student financial assistance, 
 shall use behavioral science insights to produce, 
 distribute, and process free of charge a short and 
 simple consumer-tested certification form that uses 
 skip logic to bypass fields that are inapplicable to an 
 applicant. Such form shall not require an applicant to 
 provide data that the Secretary may otherwise obtain 
 with respect to the applicant (such as age or active 
 duty military status), and may only contain the data 
 elements required for purposes of subparagraph (A)(i)--
 ``(i) to confirm whether the applicant is--
 ``(I) a dependent student;
 ``(II) a single independent student 
 or a married independent student 
 without dependents (other than a 
 spouse); or
 ``(III) an independent student with 
 dependents other than a spouse;
 ``(ii) to allow the applicant to update the 
 contact information of such applicant or the 
 Federal School Code of the institution of 
 higher education in which the applicant is, or 
 will be enrolled, for the award year for which 
 the applicant submits such form; and
 ``(iii) to ask whether the applicant's need 
 and eligibility for financial assistance under 
 this title has not changed substantially since 
 the most recent of the following:
 ``(I) The applicant submitted a 
 FAFSA.
 ``(II) The applicant received an 
 adjustment under section 479A that 
 results in a change to the expected 
 family contribution of the applicant.
 ``(E) Definitions.--In this paragraph:
 ``(i) Dependency status.--The term 
 `dependency status' means the status of an 
 applicant as--
 ``(I) a dependent student;
 ``(II) a single independent student 
 or a married independent student 
 without dependents (other than a 
 spouse); or
 ``(III) an independent student with 
 dependents other than a spouse.
 ``(ii) Succeeding award year.--The term 
 `succeeding award year'--
 ``(I) when used with respect to an 
 applicant who submits a FAFSA for the 
 first time for an award year for the 
 period required for the completion of 
 the first undergraduate baccalaureate 
 course of study being pursued by such 
 applicant, means any award year for 
 such period that follows the award year 
 for which the applicant submits such 
 FAFSA; and
 ``(II) when used with respect to an 
 applicant described in subparagraph 
 (C), means any award year after award 
 year 2021-2022 for the period required 
 for the completion of the first 
 undergraduate baccalaureate course of 
 study being pursued by such applicant.
 ``(15) FAFSA in various languages.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) translate the form developed under this 
 subsection into not fewer than 11 foreign languages 
 based on the languages most often spoken by English 
 learner students and their parents, and make the 
 translated form available and accessible to applicants 
 in paper and electronic formats; and
 ``(B) ensure that the form developed under this 
 subsection is available in formats accessible to 
 individuals with disabilities.'';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking the last sentence;
 (3) in subsection (d)(3)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and EZ 
 FAFSA''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and EZ 
 FAFSA'';
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (3) by striking ``or, as 
 appropriate, an EZ FAFSA,''; and
 (B) in paragraph (5)(D), by striking ``or, as 
 appropriate, an EZ FAFSA,'';
 (5) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
 ``(f) Use of Internal Revenue Service Data Retrieval Tool To 
Populate FAFSA.--
 ``(1) Simplification efforts.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) make every effort to allow applicants to 
 utilize the data retrieval tool to transfer data 
 available from the Internal Revenue Service to reduce 
 the amount of original data entry by applicants and 
 strengthen the reliability of data used to calculate 
 expected family contributions, including through the 
 use of technology to--
 ``(i) allow an applicant to automatically 
 populate the electronic version of the forms 
 under this paragraph with data available from 
 the Internal Revenue Service; and
 ``(ii) direct an applicant to appropriate 
 questions on such forms based on the 
 applicant's answers to previous questions; and
 ``(B) allow taxpayers, regardless of filing status, 
 to utilize the data retrieval tool to its full 
 capacity.
 ``(2) Use of tax return in application process.--The 
 Secretary shall continue to examine whether data provided by 
 the Internal Revenue Service can be used to generate an 
 expected family contribution without additional action on the 
 part of the student and taxpayer.
 ``(3) Reports on fafsa simplification efforts.--Not less 
 than once every other year, the Secretary shall report to the 
 authorizing committees and the Committees on Appropriations of 
 the House of Representatives and the Senate on the progress of 
 the simplification efforts under this subsection.'';
 (6) by repealing subsection (g);
 (7) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (g); and
 (8) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Data Transparency on the Number of Applicants.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall annually publish 
 data on the number of individuals who apply for Federal student 
 aid pursuant to this section who are homeless individuals 
 described in section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11434a), including unaccompanied 
 youth and foster care youth.
 ``(2) Contents.--The data described in paragraph (1) with 
 respect to homeless individuals shall include, at a minimum, 
 for each application cycle--
 ``(A) the total number of all applicants who were 
 determined to be (or to be at risk of becoming) 
 unaccompanied homeless youth under section 
 480(d)(1)(H);
 ``(B) the number of applicants described in 
 subparagraph (A), disaggregated--
 ``(i) by State; and
 ``(ii) by the sources of determination as 
 described in clauses (i) through (iv) of 
 section 480(d)(1)(H); and
 ``(C) the number of undetermined requests for 
 homelessness consideration, including statuses that 
 remain unknown because no determination had been made 
 in response to the applicant's request for the 
 institution to consider the applicant's special 
 circumstance of being homeless.
 ``(i) Prohibition on Questions Relating to Drug Offenses.--The 
Secretary may not include on the forms developed under this subsection 
any data items relating to whether an applicant has a conviction of any 
offense under any Federal or State law involving the possession or sale 
of a controlled substance (as defined in section 102(6) of the 
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)).
 ``(j) FAFSA Verification.--
 ``(1) In general.--With respect to applicants who submit a 
 FAFSA for an award year and were determined using data provided 
 in such FAFSA to be eligible to receive a Federal Pell Grant 
 for such award year, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 authorizing committees, and make publicly available, a report 
 for such award year on--
 ``(A) the number and share of such applicants who 
 received a Federal Pell Grant for such award year;
 ``(B) the number and share of such applicants who 
 did not receive a Federal Pell Grant for such year;
 ``(C) the number and share of such applicants who 
 were selected by the Secretary for verification of the 
 data provided in the FAFSA;
 ``(D) to the extent practicable, the number and 
 share of applicants described in subparagraph (C) who 
 enrolled in an institution of higher education in a 
 year after such selection;
 ``(E) the number and share of applicants described 
 in subparagraph (C) who completed the verification 
 process;
 ``(F) of the applicants described in subparagraph 
 (E)--
 ``(i) the average of the expected family 
 contribution for all such applicants as 
 determined using data provided in the FAFSA;
 ``(ii) the average of the expected family 
 contribution difference for all such 
 applicants;
 ``(iii) the average of the expected family 
 contribution difference for all such applicants 
 whose expected family contribution as 
 determined using data provided in the 
 verification process was greater than the 
 expected family contribution as determined 
 using data provided in the FAFSA; and
 ``(iv) the average of the expected family 
 contribution difference for all such applicants 
 whose expected family contribution as 
 determined using data provided in the FAFSA was 
 greater than the expected family contribution 
 as determined using data provided in the 
 verification process;
 ``(G) of the applicants described in subparagraph 
 (E)--
 ``(i) the average Federal Pell Grant amount 
 for all such applicants as determined using 
 data provided in the FAFSA;
 ``(ii) the average of the Federal Pell 
 Grant difference for all such applicants;
 ``(iii) the average of the Federal Pell 
 Grant difference for all such applicants whose 
 Federal Pell Grant amount as determined using 
 data provided in the verification process was 
 greater than the Federal Pell Grant amount as 
 determined using data provided in the FAFSA;
 ``(iv) the average of the Federal Pell 
 Grant difference for all such applicants whose 
 Federal Pell Grant amount as determined using 
 data provided in the FAFSA was greater than the 
 Federal Pell Grant amount as determined using 
 data provided in the verification process; and
 ``(v) the number and share of such 
 applicants who were determined using the data 
 provided in the verification process to be 
 ineligible for a Federal Pell Grant;
 ``(H) the number and share of applicants described 
 in subparagraph (C) who received a Federal Pell Grant 
 for such award year; and
 ``(I) the number and share of applicants described 
 in subparagraph (C) who did not receive a Federal Pell 
 Grant for such award year.
 ``(2) Disaggregation.--The data provided in a report under 
 paragraph (1) shall be disaggregated--
 ``(A) by applicants who were pathway one applicants 
 for such year;
 ``(B) by applicants who were pathway two applicants 
 for such year;
 ``(C) by applicants who were pathway three 
 applicants for such year; and
 ``(D) with respect to applicants described in 
 subparagraphs (C) and (E), the verification tracking 
 groups of such applicants.
 ``(3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Expected family contribution difference.--The 
 term `expected family contribution difference' means, 
 with respect to an applicant who completed a 
 verification process with respect to the FAFSA, the 
 difference between--
 ``(i) the expected family contribution of 
 such applicant as determined using data 
 provided in the FAFSA; and
 ``(ii) the expected family contribution of 
 such applicant as determined using data 
 provided in the verification process.
 ``(B) Federal pell grant difference.--The term 
 `Federal Pell Grant difference' means, with respect to 
 an applicant who completed a verification process with 
 respect to the FAFSA, the difference between--
 ``(i) the amount of the Federal Pell Grant 
 of such applicant as determined using data 
 provided in the FAFSA; and
 ``(ii) the amount of the Federal Pell Grant 
 of such applicant as determined using data 
 provided in the verification process.
 ``(k) Financial Aid Offers.--
 ``(1) Requirements for offers.--
 ``(A) Secretarial requirements.--Not later than 18 
 months after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, the Secretary shall, based on the 
 consumer testing conducted under subparagraph (E), 
 publish requirements for financial aid offers that 
 shall--
 ``(i) include a requirement that financial 
 aid offers shall serve as the primary source 
 for Federal, State, and institutional financial 
 aid information provided by an institution of 
 higher education participating in any program 
 under this title to each prospective student 
 accepted for admission and each enrolled 
 student at such institution;
 ``(ii) include a requirement that such 
 offers include a standardized quick reference 
 box described in subparagraph (D);
 ``(iii) establish standardized terms and 
 definitions, including for the elements listed 
 in subparagraph (C), that shall be included in 
 each such offer;
 ``(iv) establish formatting requirements 
 with respect to the organization of the 
 elements listed in subparagraph (C)), which 
 shall include a requirement that prohibits such 
 offers from displaying loans in a manner that 
 indicates or implies that such loans reduce the 
 amount owed to the institution or reduce the 
 net price; and
 ``(v) specify the simple, plain-language, 
 and consumer-friendly information to be 
 included in each such offer with respect to the 
 financial aid being offered to a student, which 
 shall include--
 ``(I) an explanation of differences 
 among each such type of financial aid, 
 including clear explanations that--
 ``(aa) grants and 
 scholarships do not have to be 
 repaid;
 ``(bb) loans (including 
 loans made under part D and 
 private education loans (as 
 defined in section 140 of the 
 Truth in Lending Act)) must be 
 repaid with interest; and
 ``(cc) payments under 
 Federal-work study programs 
 under part C are contingent on 
 finding qualified employment 
 and are typically disbursed 
 incrementally in paychecks;
 ``(II) information encouraging 
 students to consider loans made under 
 part D before such private education 
 loans;
 ``(III) information clarifying that 
 students may--
 ``(aa) decline to accept a 
 loan made under part D; or
 ``(bb) accept an amount of 
 such loan that is less than the 
 amount of such loan included in 
 the financial aid offer; and
 ``(IV) in a case in which the 
 institution offers a student such a 
 loan in an amount that is less than the 
 maximum amount for which the student is 
 eligible, an explanation that the 
 student is eligible for additional 
 loans under part D.
 ``(B) Institutional requirements.--Beginning with 
 the award year that begins not less than 1 year after 
 the Secretary publishes requirements under subparagraph 
 (A), each institution of higher education described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i) shall provide a financial aid offer 
 to each student described in such subparagraph prior to 
 each academic year that--
 ``(i) shall comply with the requirements 
 published by the Secretary under subparagraph 
 (A); and
 ``(ii) may be supplemented by the 
 institution with additional, non-contradictory 
 information related to financial aid as long as 
 such supplementary information uses the 
 standardized terms and definitions described in 
 subparagraph (A)(iii).
 ``(C) Elements.--A financial aid offer provided by 
 an institution of higher education shall include the 
 following elements with respect to the academic year 
 for which the offer is being provided:
 ``(i) The cost of attendance, which shall 
 include separately calculated subtotals of--
 ``(I) an itemized list of estimated 
 direct costs owed to the institution; 
 and
 ``(II) an itemized list of 
 anticipated student expenses not 
 covered under subclause (I).
 ``(ii) Federal, State, and institutional 
 financial aid available to the student, which 
 shall include separately calculated subtotals 
 of--
 ``(I) grants and scholarships;
 ``(II) loans made under part D 
 (excluding Federal Direct Parent PLUS 
 Loans) and part E; and
 ``(III) Federal-work study programs 
 under part C and other on-campus 
 employment.
 ``(iii) Other options that may be available 
 to students to cover the cost of attendance 
 (including Federal Direct Parent PLUS Loans, 
 tuition payment plans, savings, and earnings 
 from other employment).
 ``(iv) The net price, which shall be 
 determined by calculating the difference 
 between--
 ``(I) the cost of attendance 
 described in clause (i); and
 ``(II) the grants and scholarships 
 described in clause (ii)(I).
 ``(v) Next step instructions, including--
 ``(I) the process and deadlines for 
 accepting the financial aid; and
 ``(II) information about where to 
 find additional information on the 
 financial aid offered.
 ``(vi) Any other information determined 
 necessary by the Secretary based on the 
 consumer testing conducted under subparagraph 
 (E), which may include the following:
 ``(I) An estimate of the net direct 
 cost, which shall be determined by 
 calculating the difference between--
 ``(aa) the direct costs 
 owed to the institution 
 described in clause (i)(I); and
 ``(bb) the grants and 
 scholarships described in 
 clause (ii)(I).
 ``(II) Information on average 
 student debt, loan repayment and 
 default rates, loan repayment options, 
 and graduation rates.
 ``(III) In the case of a 
 prospective student, the process and 
 deadlines for enrolling at the 
 institution.
 ``(IV) Information regarding the 
 enrollment period covered by the aid 
 offer, and whether the cost and aid 
 estimates are based on full-time or 
 part-time enrollment.
 ``(D) Standardized quick reference box.--A 
 financial aid offer provided by an institution of 
 higher education shall include a standardized quick 
 reference box to enable students to quickly and easily 
 compare key information on college costs and financial 
 aid--
 ``(i) that shall be included in an 
 identical fashion for each student receiving a 
 financial aid offer from the institution on the 
 first page of such offer;
 ``(ii) the contents and structure of which 
 shall be developed through consumer testing 
 conducted under paragraph (E); and
 ``(iii) that shall include not more than 8 
 elements, which, at a minimum, shall include--
 ``(I) the cost of attendance;
 ``(II) grants and scholarships; and
 ``(III) net price (as calculated 
 under subparagraph (C)(iv)).
 ``(E) Consumer testing.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(i) conduct consumer testing that shall 
 serve as the basis in determining the 
 requirements for financial aid offers published 
 under subparagraph (A), which shall include 
 students (including low-income students, 
 English learners, first generation college 
 students, veteran students, graduate students, 
 and undergraduate students (including 
 prospective students and returning students)), 
 students' families (including low-income 
 families, families of English learners, and 
 families with first generation college 
 students), institutions of higher education 
 (including representatives from two- and four-
 year institutions, public and private 
 institutions, and minority-serving 
 institutions), secondary school and 
 postsecondary counselors, financial aid 
 administrators, nonprofit college access 
 organizations, and nonprofit consumer groups; 
 and
 ``(ii) not later than 60 days after the 
 publication of the requirements under 
 subparagraph (A)--
 ``(I) issue a report on the 
 findings of the consumer testing under 
 this subparagraph; and
 ``(II) specify ways in which the 
 findings are reflected in such 
 requirements.
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `English learner' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 8101(20) of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801(20)), except that such term does not include 
 individuals described in subparagraph (B) of such 
 section;
 ``(B) the term `first generation college student' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 402A(h));
 ``(C) the term `low-income student' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 419N(b)(7); and
 ``(D) the term `minority-serving institution' means 
 an institution of higher education described in section 
 371(a).''.

SEC. 4604. STUDENT ELIGIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 484(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1091(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grants; loans; work assistance.--In order to receive 
 any grant, loan, or work assistance under this title, a student 
 must--
 ``(A) be enrolled or accepted for enrollment in a 
 degree, certificate, or other program (including a 
 program of study abroad approved for credit by the 
 eligible institution at which such student is enrolled) 
 leading to a recognized educational credential at an 
 institution of higher education that is an eligible 
 institution in accordance with the provisions of 
 section 487, except as provided in subsections (b)(3) 
 and (b)(4), and not be enrolled in an elementary or 
 secondary school;
 ``(B) if the student is presently enrolled at an 
 institution, be maintaining satisfactory progress in 
 the course of study the student is pursuing in 
 accordance with the provisions of subsection (c);
 ``(C) not owe a refund on grants previously 
 received at any institution under this title, or be in 
 default on any loan from a student loan fund at any 
 institution provided for in part E, or a loan made, 
 insured, or guaranteed by the Secretary under this 
 title for attendance at any institution;
 ``(D) file with the Secretary, as part of the 
 original financial aid application process, a 
 certification, which need not be notarized, but which 
 shall include--
 ``(i) a statement of educational purpose 
 stating that the money attributable to such 
 grant, loan, or loan guarantee will be used 
 solely for expenses related to attendance or 
 continued attendance at such institution; and
 ``(ii) such student's social security 
 number; and
 ``(E) if the student has been convicted of, or has 
 pled nolo contendere or guilty to, a crime involving 
 fraud in obtaining funds under this title, have 
 completed the repayment of such funds to the Secretary, 
 or to the holder in the case of a loan under this title 
 obtained by fraud.
 ``(2) Grants; loans; work assistance; services.--
 ``(A) In general.--In order to receive any grant, 
 loan, or work assistance under this title, or any 
 service provided pursuant to a program or project 
 funded under this title, a student must--
 ``(i) be a citizen, national, or permanent 
 resident of the United States;
 ``(ii) be able to provide evidence from the 
 Department of Homeland Security that he or she 
 is in the United States for other than a 
 temporary purpose with the intention of 
 becoming a citizen or permanent resident;
 ``(iii) have temporary protected status 
 under section 244 of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1254a); or
 ``(iv) be a Dreamer student, as defined in 
 subsection (q).
 ``(B) Exceptions.--Subparagraph (A) shall not be 
 construed to affect eligibility for participation in 
 projects funded under chapter 2 of subpart 2 of part A 
 or section 418A(b).''.
 (b) Ability to Benefit.--Section 484(d)(1) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1091(d)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); 
 and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following:
 ``(B) The student--
 ``(i) is enrolled at an institution of 
 higher education (as defined in section 101) in 
 a program described in subsection (a)(3) of 
 such section that--
 ``(I) prepares an individual to be 
 successful in any of a full range of 
 secondary and postsecondary education 
 options;
 ``(II) includes counseling to 
 support an individual in achieving the 
 individual's education and career 
 goals;
 ``(III) enables an individual to 
 attain a secondary school diploma or 
 its recognized equivalent; and
 ``(IV) helps an individual enter or 
 advance within a specific occupation or 
 occupational cluster, or to enter and 
 succeed in a graduate program; and
 ``(ii) is determined by such institution as 
 having the ability to benefit from the 
 education or training offered by the 
 institution of higher education upon 
 satisfactory completion of 6 credit hours or 
 the equivalent coursework that are applicable 
 toward a degree offered by the institution of 
 higher education.''.
 (c) Exception to Required Registration With Selective Service 
System.--Section 484 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1091) is further amended--
 (1) by repealing subsection (n); and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (o) through (q) as 
 subsections (n) through (p), respectively.
 (d) Definition of Dreamer Student.--Section 484 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1091), as amended by this section, is 
further amended by adding after subsection (p), as redesignated, the 
following:
 ``(q) Dreamer Student.--
 ``(1) In general.--In this section, the term `Dreamer 
 student' means an alien (as defined in section 101(a)(3) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(3))) who is 
 inadmissible to the United States or deportable from the United 
 States under the immigration laws (as defined in section 
 101(a)(17) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(a)(17))) and who--
 ``(A)(i) was younger than 16 years of age on the 
 date on which the alien initially entered the United 
 States; and
 ``(ii)(I) has earned a high school diploma, the 
 recognized equivalent of such diploma from a secondary 
 school, or a high school equivalency diploma in the 
 United States, or is scheduled to complete the 
 requirements for such a diploma or equivalent before 
 the next academic year begins;
 ``(II) is enrolled in an institution of higher 
 education pursuant to subsection (d); or
 ``(III) has served in the uniformed services, as 
 defined in section 101 of title 10, United States Code, 
 for not less than 4 years and, if discharged, received 
 an honorable discharge; or
 ``(B) would have been eligible, if the memorandum 
 were fully in effect since the date issued, for a grant 
 of deferred action pursuant to the directive in the 
 November 20, 2014, memorandum from the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security entitled `Exercising Prosecutorial 
 Discretion with Respect to Individuals Who Came to the 
 United States as Children and with Respect to Certain 
 Individuals Who Are the Parents of U.S. Citizens or 
 Permanent Residents' to establish a process for 
 exercising prosecutorial discretion through the use of 
 deferred action for individuals who, among other 
 qualifications, had a son or daughter who was a United 
 States citizen or lawful permanent resident on such 
 date.
 ``(2) Hardship exception.--The Secretary shall issue 
 regulations that direct when the Department shall waive the age 
 requirement of paragraph (1)(A)(i) for an individual to qualify 
 as a Dreamer student under paragraph (1), if the individual 
 demonstrates, through documentation presented to the Secretary 
 of substantial economic or personal hardship, that deprivation 
 of the requested benefit under this title would represent a 
 substantial hardship.''.
 (e) Repeal of Suspension of Financial Aid Eligibility for Drug-
related Offenses.--Subsection (r) of section 484 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1091(r)) is repealed.
 (f) Conforming Amendments.--The Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 102(a)(2)(A)(i)(I)(aa), by striking 
 ``484(a)(5)'' and inserting ``484(a)(2)'';
 (2) in section 419N(b)(7)(B)(ii), by striking ``484(a)(5)'' 
 and inserting ``484(a)(2)'';
 (3) in section 484(c), by striking ``subsection (a)(2)'' 
 each place it appears and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(B)'';
 (4) in section 484(g)--
 (A) by striking ``subsection (a)(5)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (a)(2)''; and
 (B) by striking ``Immigration and Naturalization 
 Service'' each place it appears in paragraph (4)(B)(i) 
 and inserting ``Department of Homeland Security'';
 (5) in section 484(h), by striking ``Immigration and 
 Naturalization Service'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``Department of Homeland Security'';
 (6) in section 484(o), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``subsection (a)(4)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(D)''; 
 and
 (7) in section 485(a)(1)(K), by striking ``484(a)(2)'' and 
 inserting ``484(a)(1)(B)''.

SEC. 4605. REASONABLE COLLECTION COSTS ON DEFAULTED LOANS.

 Section 484A(b)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1091a(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``collection costs;'' and inserting 
``collection costs that--
 ``(A) for purposes of the first collection efforts, 
 do not exceed 5 percent of the outstanding principal 
 and interest on such loan;
 ``(B) for purposes of the second collection 
 efforts, do not exceed 10 percent of the outstanding 
 balance of principal and interest on such loan;
 ``(C) for purposes of the third collection efforts, 
 do not exceed 15 percent of the outstanding balance of 
 principal and interest on such loan; and
 ``(D) for purposes of the fourth collection efforts 
 and any succeeding collection efforts, do not exceed 20 
 percent of the outstanding balance of principal and 
 interest on such loan;''.

SEC. 4606. STUDENT ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION FOR NUTRITION ASSISTANCE 
 PROGRAMS.

 (a) Information Dissemination Activities.--Section 485(a)(1) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (U), by striking the ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (2) in subparagraph (V), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(W) the most recent relevant student eligibility 
 guidance with respect to the nutrition assistance 
 programs established under--
 ``(i) the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program under the Food and Nutrition Act of 
 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.); and
 ``(ii) the special supplemental nutrition 
 program for women, infants, and children 
 established by section 17 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786);
 ``(X) the contact information for the State 
 agencies responsible for administration of the programs 
 specified in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (W); 
 and
 ``(Y) the food pantries and other food assistance 
 facilities and services available to students enrolled 
 in such institution.''.
 (b) College Navigator Website.--Not later than 30 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall 
make available and annually update on the College Navigator Website the 
most recent relevant student eligibility guidance with respect to the 
nutrition assistance programs established under--
 (1) the supplemental nutrition assistance program under the 
 Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.); and
 (2) the special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children established by section 17 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786).

SEC. 4607. EXIT COUNSELING.

 (a) Amendments to Exit Counseling for Borrowers.--Section 485(b) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A)--
 (A) in the matter preceding clause (i), striking 
 ``through financial aid offices or otherwise'' and 
 inserting ``through the use of an interactive program, 
 during an exit counseling session that is in-person or 
 online, or through the use of the online counseling 
 tool described in subsection (n)(1)(A)'';
 (B) by redesignating clauses (i) through (ix) as 
 clauses (iv) through (xii), respectively;
 (C) by inserting before clause (iv), as so 
 redesignated, the following:
 ``(i) a summary of the outstanding balance of principal and 
 interest due on the loans made to the borrower under part B, D, 
 or E;
 ``(ii) an explanation of the grace period preceding 
 repayment and the expected date that the borrower will enter 
 repayment;
 ``(iii) an explanation that the borrower has the option to 
 pay any interest that has accrued while the borrower was in 
 school or that may accrue during the grace period preceding 
 repayment or during an authorized period of deferment, prior to 
 the capitalization of the interest;'';
 (D) in clause (iv), as so redesignated--
 (i) by striking ``sample information 
 showing the average'' and inserting 
 ``information, based on the borrower's 
 outstanding balance described in clause (i), 
 showing the borrower's''; and
 (ii) by striking ``of each plan'' and 
 inserting ``of at least the fixed repayment 
 plan described in section 493E, the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f), and 
 any other repayment plan for which each loan 
 may be eligible'';
 (E) in clause (ix), as so redesignated--
 (i) by inserting ``decreased credit 
 score,'' after ``credit reports,''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``reduced ability to rent 
 or purchase a home or car, potential difficulty 
 in securing employment,'' after ``Federal 
 law,'';
 (F) in clause (x), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``consolidation loan under section 428C or a'';
 (G) in clauses (xi) and (xii), as so redesignated, 
 by striking ``and'' at the end; and
 (H) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(xiii) for each of the borrower's loans made under part 
 B, D, or E for which the borrower is receiving counseling under 
 this subsection, the contact information for the loan servicer 
 of the loan and a link to such servicer's website;
 ``(xiv) an explanation that an individual has a right to 
 annually request a disclosure of information collected by a 
 consumer reporting agency pursuant to section 612(a) of the 
 Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681j(a)); and
 ``(xv) an explanation that--
 ``(I) the borrower may be contacted during the 
 repayment period by third-party student debt relief 
 companies;
 ``(II) the borrower should use caution when dealing 
 with those companies; and
 ``(III) the services that those companies typically 
 provide are already offered to borrowers free of charge 
 through the Department or the borrower's servicer.'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)(B)--
 (A) by inserting ``online or'' before ``in 
 writing''; and
 (B) by adding before the period at the end the 
 following: ``, except that in the case of an 
 institution using the online counseling tool described 
 in subsection (n)(1)(A), the Secretary shall attempt to 
 provide such information to the student in the manner 
 described in subsection (n)(3)(C)''; and
 (3) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting ``, such as the 
 online counseling tool described in subsection (n)(1)(A),'' 
 after ``electronic means''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 485(d)(1) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(d)(1)) is amended by striking 
``including income-sensitive'' and all that follows through ``part D'' 
and inserting ``including, beginning on July 1, 2021, the income-based 
repayment plan under section 493C(f) and the fixed repayment plan 
described in section 493E''.

SEC. 4608. CLERY ACT AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime 
Statistics.--Section 485(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1092(f)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 inserting ``(including on a prominent location on the 
 institution's website)'' after ``publish'';
 (B) in subparagraph (E), strike ``crimes.'' and 
 insert ``crimes, including a statement of current 
 campus policies regarding required background checks 
 for employees and volunteers working with student 
 athletes, children, or youth participating in 
 university-sponsored programs held in campus 
 facilities.''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (F)--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (ii) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (iii) in clause (iii), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``;''; and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv) of harassment incidents that were 
 reported to campus security authorities or 
 local police agencies; and
 ``(v) of hazing incidents that were 
 reported to campus security authorities or 
 local police agencies.''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(K)(i) Each finding by the institution that, during the 
 most recent calendar year, and during the 2 preceding calendar 
 years for which data are available, a student organization 
 committed a violation of the institution's standards of conduct 
 relating to hazing, which--
 ``(I) shall include--
 ``(aa) the name of the student organization 
 that committed the violation;
 ``(bb) a general description of the 
 activities that led to the violation, the 
 charges, such findings by the institution, and 
 the sanctions placed on the organization; and
 ``(cc) the dates on which--
 ``(AA) the violation was alleged to 
 have occurred;
 ``(BB) the student organization was 
 charged with misconduct;
 ``(CC) the investigation was 
 initiated; and
 ``(DD) the investigation ended with 
 a finding that a violation occurred; 
 and
 ``(II) may not include--
 ``(aa) any information related to 
 allegations or investigations of hazing that do 
 not result in a formal finding of a violation 
 of the standards of conduct of the institution; 
 or
 ``(bb) any personally identifiable 
 information on any individual student or member 
 of a student organization.
 ``(ii) The anti-hazing policies (including the standards of 
 conduct with respect to hazing) of the institution, and the 
 changes, if any, that have been made in the preceding calendar 
 year with respect to such policies, and the justification for 
 such changes.
 ``(iii) In the case of an allegation that a multi-
 institution student organization was involved in a hazing 
 incident, each institution at which the students involved in 
 such allegation are enrolled (or were formerly enrolled), 
 including any student who was a victim in the alleged incident, 
 shall comply with the requirements of this subparagraph.'';
 (2) in paragraph (6)(A), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(vi) For purposes of reporting under this section, the 
 term `harassment'--
 ``(I) means unwelcome conduct, of a hostile, 
 intimidating, or offensive nature, based on a student's 
 actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex 
 (including sexual orientation, gender identity, 
 pregnancy, childbirth, a medical condition related to 
 pregnancy or childbirth, and sex stereotype), 
 disability, or national origin, that unreasonably 
 interferes with a student's ability to participate in a 
 program or activity at an institution of higher 
 education, including by creating an intimidating, 
 hostile, or offensive environment;
 ``(II) is not limited to physical acts, and 
 includes conduct that is verbal or nonverbal, direct or 
 indirect, undertaken in whole or in part through the 
 use of electronic messaging services, commercial mobile 
 services, electronic communications, or other 
 technology, or the placement or display of hostile or 
 offensive images or objects based on a protected trait; 
 and
 ``(III) includes sexual harassment, which is 
 unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, including--
 ``(aa) a sexual advance;
 ``(bb) a request for sexual favors;
 ``(cc) a sexual act, where such submission 
 is made either explicitly or implicitly a term 
 or condition of a program or activity at an 
 institution of higher education, regardless of 
 a student's submission to or rejection of such 
 sexual act;
 ``(dd) a sexual act, where such submission 
 or rejection is used as the basis for a 
 decision affecting a term or condition of a 
 program or activity at an institution of higher 
 education, regardless of a student's submission 
 to or rejection of such sexual act; or
 ``(ee) other conduct of a sexual nature.
 ``(vii) The term `hazing' means any intentional, knowing, 
 or reckless act committed by a student, or a former student, of 
 an institution of higher education, whether individually or in 
 concert with other persons, against another student, that--
 ``(I) was committed in connection with an 
 initiation into, an affiliation with, or the 
 maintenance of membership in, any student organization; 
 and
 ``(II) causes, or contributes to a substantial risk 
 of, physical injury, mental harm, or personal 
 degradation.
 ``(viii) The term `commercial mobile service' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 332(d) of the Communications 
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 332(d)).
 ``(ix) The term `electronic communication' means any 
 transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, or data of 
 any nature transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, 
 electromagnetic, photoelectronic, or photooptical system.
 ``(x) The term `electronic messaging services' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Communications 
 Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (47 U.S.C. 1001).
 ``(xi) The term `multi-institution student organization' 
 means a student organization that includes students from more 
 than one institution of higher education, including city-wide, 
 regional, State, and national chapters of student 
 organizations.
 ``(xii) The term `student organization' means an 
 organization that is officially recognized by or otherwise 
 affiliated with an institution of higher education and that has 
 a membership that is made up primarily of students enrolled at 
 such institution.'';
 (3) in paragraph (7), by inserting after the second 
 sentence the following: ``For harassment incidents, such 
 statistics shall be compiled in accordance with the definition 
 of that term in paragraph (6)(A)(vi). For hazing incidents, 
 such statistics shall be compiled in accordance with the 
 definition of that term in paragraph (6)(A)(vii).''; and
 (4) in paragraph (8)--
 (A) by adding ``sexual harassment,'' after ``sexual 
 assault,'' each place it appears;
 (B) in subparagraph (B) in subclause (iv)(I)(bb) by 
 striking ``an investigation'' and inserting ``a trauma-
 informed investigation''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(viii) Written notification of victims 
 about institutional policies regarding the 
 reimbursement of lost tuition and costs 
 associated with student loan interest accrual 
 related to domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, or stalking 
 incidents.''.
 (b) Statement of Policy Regarding Harassment.--Section 485(f) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(f)) is further 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (9) through (18) as 
 paragraphs (10) through (19), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following:
 ``(9)(A) Each institution of higher education participating in any 
program under this title, other than a foreign institution of higher 
education, shall, as part of the report described in paragraph (1)--
 ``(i) develop and distribute a statement of policy 
 regarding harassment, which shall include--
 ``(I) a prohibition of harassment, including 
 harassment of enrolled students by other students, 
 faculty, and staff--
 ``(aa) on campus;
 ``(bb) in or on a noncampus building or 
 property;
 ``(cc) on public property;
 ``(dd) in dormitories or other residential 
 facilities for students on campus;
 ``(ee) through the use of electronic mail 
 addresses issued by the institution of higher 
 education;
 ``(ff) through the use of computers and 
 communication networks, including any 
 telecommunications service, owned, operated, or 
 contracted for use by the institution of higher 
 education or its agents; and
 ``(gg) during an activity sponsored by the 
 institution of higher education or carried out 
 with the use of resources provided by the 
 institution of higher education;
 ``(II) a prohibition of such harassment that is 
 carried out in whole or in part through the use of 
 electronic messaging services, commercial mobile 
 services, electronic communications, or other 
 technology;
 ``(III) a description of the institution's programs 
 to combat harassment, which shall be aimed at the 
 prevention of harassment;
 ``(IV) a description of the procedures that a 
 student should follow if an incident of harassment 
 occurs; and
 ``(V) a description of the procedures that the 
 institution will follow once an incident of harassment 
 has been reported, including a statement of the 
 standard of evidence that will be used during any 
 institutional conduct proceeding arising from such a 
 report; and
 ``(ii) provide, on a prominent location on the 
 institution's website, a link to the webpage that contains the 
 information required under paragraph (1)(K), including 
 statement notifying the public--
 ``(I) of the availability of such information, 
 including findings, sanctions, and the implementation 
 of sanctions, except information protected under 
 section 444 of the General Education Provisions Act 
 (commonly known as the `Family Education Rights and 
 Privacy Act of 1974');
 ``(II) a description of how a member of the public 
 may obtain such information; and
 ``(III) a statement that the institution is 
 required to provide such information pursuant to 
 paragraph (1)(K).
 ``(B) The statement of policy described in subparagraph (A)(i) 
shall address the following areas:
 ``(i) Procedures for timely institutional action in cases 
 of alleged harassment, which shall include a clear statement 
 that the accuser and the accused shall be informed of the 
 outcome of any disciplinary proceedings in response to an 
 allegation of harassment.
 ``(ii) Possible sanctions to be imposed following the final 
 determination of an institutional disciplinary procedure 
 regarding harassment.
 ``(iii) Notification of existing counseling, mental health, 
 or student services for victims or perpetrators of harassment, 
 both on campus and in the community.
 ``(iv) Identification of a designated employee or office at 
 the institution that will be responsible for receiving and 
 tracking each report of harassment.''.
 (c) Civil Penalties.--Section 485(f) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(f)) is further amended--
 (1) in paragraph (14), as redesignated by subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``in the same amount and''; and
 (B) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``, expect that such section shall be 
 applied by substituting `$100,000' for `$60,000'''; and
 (2) in paragraph (17), as redesignated by subsection (b), 
 by adding ``sexual harassment,'' after ``sexual assault,''.

SEC. 4609. ONLINE SURVEY TOOL FOR CAMPUS SAFETY.

 Section 485(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092) 
is further amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (18) and (19) as so 
 redesignated as paragraphs (19) and (20), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (17) the following:
 ``(18) Online survey tool for campus safety.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, in 
 consultation with the Attorney General, Director of the 
 Centers for Disease Control, and the Secretary of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services and experts in 
 domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
 sexual harassment, and stalking, develop, design, and 
 make available through a secure and accessible online 
 portal, a standardized online survey tool regarding 
 student experiences with domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, and 
 stalking.
 ``(B) Development of survey tool.--In developing 
 the survey tool required under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) use best practices from peer-reviewed 
 research measuring domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, 
 and stalking;
 ``(ii) consult with the higher education 
 community, experts in survey research related 
 to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, and stalking, and 
 organizations engaged in the prevention of and 
 response to, and advocacy on behalf of victims 
 of, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, and stalking 
 regarding the development and design of such 
 survey tool and the methodology for 
 administration of such survey tool; and
 ``(iii) ensure that the survey tool is 
 readily accessible to and usable by individuals 
 with disabilities.
 ``(C) Elements.--
 ``(i) In general.--The survey tool 
 developed pursuant to this paragraph shall be 
 fair and unbiased, scientifically valid and 
 reliable, and meet the highest standards of 
 survey research.
 ``(ii) Survey questions.--Survey questions 
 included in the survey tool developed pursuant 
 to this paragraph shall--
 ``(I) be designed to gather 
 information on student experiences with 
 domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, and 
 stalking, including the experiences of 
 victims of such incidents;
 ``(II) use trauma-informed language 
 to prevent retraumatization; and
 ``(III) include the following:
 ``(aa) Questions designed 
 to determine the incidence and 
 prevalence of domestic 
 violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, and stalking.
 ``(bb) Questions regarding 
 whether students know about 
 institutional policies and 
 procedures related to domestic 
 violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, and stalking.
 ``(cc) Questions designed 
 to determine, if victims 
 reported domestic violence, 
 dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, or 
 stalking--

 ``(AA) to whom the 
 incident was reported 
 and what response the 
 victim may have 
 received;

 ``(BB) whether the 
 victim was informed of, 
 or referred to, 
 national, State, local, 
 or on-campus resources; 
 and

 ``(CC) whether the 
 entity to whom the 
 victim reported the 
 incident conducted an 
 investigation and the 
 duration and final 
 resolution of such an 
 investigation.

 ``(dd) Questions regarding 
 contextual factors, such as 
 whether force, incapacitation, 
 or coercion was involved.
 ``(ee) Questions to 
 determine whether an accused 
 individual was a student at the 
 institution.
 ``(ff) Questions to 
 determine whether a victim 
 reported an incident to State, 
 local, or campus law 
 enforcement.
 ``(gg) Questions to 
 determine why the victim chose 
 to report or not report an 
 incident to the institution or 
 State, local, or campus law 
 enforcement.
 ``(hh) Questions to 
 determine the impact of 
 domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, 
 sexual harassment, and stalking 
 on the victim's education, 
 including diminished grades, 
 dropped classes, leaves of 
 absence, and negative financial 
 consequences (such as costs 
 associated with loss in paid 
 tuition due to leaves of 
 absence, loss in scholarship 
 awards due to diminished 
 grades, and cost associated 
 with counseling, medical 
 services, or housing changes).
 ``(ii) Questions to 
 determine the impact and 
 effectiveness of prevention and 
 awareness programs and 
 complaints processes.
 ``(jj) Questions to 
 determine attitudes toward 
 sexual violence and harassment, 
 including the willingness of 
 individuals to intervene as a 
 bystander of sex-based 
 (including sexual orientation-
 based and gender identity-
 based), race-based, national 
 origin-based, and disability-
 based discrimination, 
 harassment, assault, domestic 
 violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, and stalking.
 ``(kk) Other questions, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(iii) Additional elements.--In addition 
 to the standardized questions developed by the 
 Secretary under clause (ii), an institution may 
 request additional information from students 
 that would increase the understanding of the 
 institution of school climate factors unique to 
 their campuses.
 ``(iv) Responses.--The responses to the 
 survey questions described in clause (ii) 
 shall--
 ``(I) be submitted confidentially;
 ``(II) not be included in crime 
 statistics; and
 ``(III) in the case of such 
 responses being included in a report, 
 shall not include personally 
 identifiable information.
 ``(D) Administration of survey.--
 ``(i) Federal administration.--The 
 Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney 
 General, Director of the Centers for Disease 
 Control, and Secretary of the Department of 
 Health and Human Services, shall develop a 
 mechanism by which institutions of higher 
 education may, with respect to the survey tool 
 developed pursuant to this paragraph--
 ``(I) administer such survey tool; 
 and
 ``(II) modify such survey tool to 
 include additional elements or 
 requirements, as determined by the 
 institution.
 ``(ii) Costs.--The Secretary may not 
 require an institution of higher education to 
 pay to modify the survey tool in accordance 
 with clause (ii)(II).
 ``(iii) Accessibility.--The Secretary shall 
 ensure that the survey tool is administered in 
 such a way as to be readily accessible to and 
 usable by individuals with disabilities.
 ``(iv) Institutional administration.--
 Beginning not later than one year after the 
 date on which the Secretary makes available to 
 institutions the mechanism described in clause 
 (i), and every 2 years thereafter, each 
 institution shall administer the survey tool 
 developed pursuant to this paragraph.
 ``(E) Completed surveys.--The Secretary shall 
 require each institution participating in any program 
 under this title to ensure, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, that an adequate, random, and 
 representative sample size of students (as determined 
 by the Secretary) enrolled at the institution complete 
 the survey tool developed pursuant to this paragraph.
 ``(F) Report.--Beginning not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act, the Secretary shall prepare a 
 biennial report on the information gained from the 
 standardized elements of the survey under this 
 paragraph and publish such report in an accessible 
 format on the website of the Department and submit such 
 report to Congress. The report shall include campus-
 level data for each school and attributed by name of 
 each campus in a manner that permits comparisons across 
 schools and campuses.
 ``(G) Publication.--Each institution shall publish, 
 in a manner that is readily accessible and usable by 
 individuals, including individuals with disabilities--
 ``(i) the campus-level results of the 
 standardized elements of the survey under this 
 paragraph on the website of the institution and 
 in the annual security report required under 
 paragraph 1 for the campuses affiliated with 
 the institution; and
 ``(ii) the campus-level results of the 
 additional elements modifying the survey by the 
 institution, if any, on the website of the 
 institution.
 ``(H) Violation.--Upon a determination pursuant to 
 section 487(c)(3)(B) that an institution of higher 
 education has violated or failed to carry out any 
 provision under this subsection, the Secretary shall 
 impose a civil penalty upon the institution in the same 
 amount and pursuant to the same procedures as a civil 
 penalty is imposed under section 487(c)(3)(B).''.

SEC. 4610. TRANSFER OF CREDIT POLICIES.

 Section 485(h)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1092(h)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by inserting ``on the website of the 
 institution and in at least one other relevant 
 publication (such as a course catalogue)'' after 
 ``publicly disclose''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, easy to find,'' after 
 ``readable''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting the following: ``, including a link to the 
 website of each institution of higher education on such list 
 and a link to or an explanation of the provisions of each such 
 articulation agreement; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) a list of transfer-related resources and 
 information not otherwise provided under subparagraphs 
 (A) and (B) that the institution provides (such as 
 deadlines, financial aid information, and relevant 
 staff contact information).''.

SEC. 4611. AMENDMENTS TO INSTITUTIONAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Notice to Students Concerning Drug Violations.--Subsection (k) 
of section 485 (20 U.S.C. 1092) is repealed.
 (b) Liaison for Homeless Individuals and Foster Care Youth.--
Section 485 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092) is 
amended by inserting after subsection (j) the following:
 ``(k) Each institution of higher education participating in any 
program under this title shall--
 ``(1) have designated an appropriate staff person as a 
 liaison to assist homeless individuals described in section 725 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 
 11434a) and foster care youth in accessing and completing 
 postsecondary education, including by ensuring that such 
 homeless individuals and foster care youth are connected to 
 applicable and available student support services, programs, 
 and community resources in areas such as financial aid, 
 academic advising, housing, food, public benefits, health care, 
 health insurance, mental health, child care, transportation 
 benefits, and mentoring;
 ``(2) post public notice about student financial assistance 
 and other assistance available to such homeless individuals and 
 foster care youth, including their eligibility as independent 
 students under subparagraphs (B) and (H) of sections 480(d)(1);
 ``(3) give priority for any institutionally owned or 
 operated housing facilities, including student housing 
 facilities that remain open for occupation during school breaks 
 or on a year-round basis, to--
 ``(A) homeless individuals described in section 725 
 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11434a);
 ``(B) youth who are unaccompanied, at risk of 
 homelessness, and self-supporting; and
 ``(C) foster care youth;
 ``(4) have developed a plan for how such homeless 
 individuals, youth who are unaccompanied, at risk of 
 homelessness, and self-supporting, and foster care youth can 
 access housing resources during and between academic terms, 
 through means that may include access to institutionally owned 
 or operated housing during breaks and a list of housing 
 resources in the community that provide short-term housing; and
 ``(5) include, in its application for admission, questions 
 (to be answered voluntarily) regarding the applicant's status 
 as a homeless individual or foster care youth, that--
 ``(A) can be answered by the applicant voluntarily 
 for the limited purpose of being provided information 
 about financial aid or any other available assistance;
 ``(B) explain the key terms in the question in a 
 manner children and youth can understand in order to 
 self-identify and declare eligibility as a homeless 
 individual or foster care youth; and
 ``(C) with consent of the applicant, may be shared 
 with the liaison after admission but prior to the 
 beginning of the next academic term.''.
 (c) Annual Financial Aid Counseling.--Section 485(l) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(l)) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(l) Annual Financial Aid Counseling.--
 ``(1) Annual disclosure required.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each eligible institution shall 
 ensure that each individual who receives a loan made 
 under part D (other than a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan or a loan made under section 460A and 460B) 
 receives comprehensive information on the terms and 
 conditions of such loan and the responsibilities the 
 individual has with respect to such loan. Such 
 information shall be provided, for each award year for 
 which the individual receives such loan, in a simple 
 and understandable manner--
 ``(i) during a counseling session conducted 
 in person;
 ``(ii) online, with the individual 
 acknowledging receipt of the information; or
 ``(iii) through the use of the online 
 counseling tool described in subsection 
 (n)(1)(B).
 ``(B) Use of interactive programs.--In the case of 
 institutions not using the online counseling tool 
 described in subsection (n)(1)(B), the Secretary shall 
 require such institutions to carry out the requirements 
 of subparagraph (A) through the use of interactive 
 programs, during an annual counseling session that is 
 in-person or online, that tests the individual's 
 understanding of the terms and conditions of the loan 
 awarded to the individual, using simple and 
 understandable language and clear formatting.
 ``(2) All individuals.--The information to be provided 
 under paragraph (1)(A) to each individual receiving counseling 
 under this subsection shall include the following:
 ``(A) An explanation of how the individual may 
 budget for typical educational expenses and a sample 
 budget based on the cost of attendance for the 
 institution.
 ``(B) An explanation that an individual has a right 
 to annually request a disclosure of information 
 collected by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 
 section 612(a) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1681j(a)).
 ``(C) An introduction to the financial management 
 resources provided by the Consumer Financial Protection 
 Bureau.
 ``(D) An explanation of how the student may seek 
 additional financial assistance from the institution's 
 financial aid office due to a change in the student's 
 financial circumstances, and the contact information 
 for such office.
 ``(3) Borrowers receiving loans made under part d (other 
 than parent plus loans).--The information to be provided under 
 paragraph (1)(A) to a borrower of a loan made under part D 
 (other than a Federal Direct PLUS Loan made on behalf of a 
 dependent student) shall include the following:
 ``(A) A notification that some students may qualify 
 for other financial aid and an explanation that the 
 borrower should consider accepting any grant, 
 scholarship, or State or Federal work-study jobs for 
 which the borrower is eligible prior to accepting 
 student loans.
 ``(B) To the extent practicable, the effect of 
 accepting the loan to be disbursed on the eligibility 
 of the borrower for other forms of student financial 
 assistance.
 ``(C) An explanation of the use of the student loan 
 contract referred to in section 432(m)(1)(D).
 ``(D) An explanation that the borrower is not 
 required to accept the full amount of the loan offered 
 to the borrower.
 ``(E) An explanation of the approved educational 
 expenses for which the borrower may use a loan made 
 under part D.
 ``(F) A recommendation to the borrower to exhaust 
 the borrower's Federal student loan options prior to 
 taking out private education loans, an explanation that 
 Federal student loans typically offer better terms and 
 conditions than private education loans, an explanation 
 that Federal student loans offer consumer protections 
 typically not available in the private education loan 
 market, an explanation of treatment of loans made under 
 part D and private education loans in bankruptcy, and 
 an explanation that if a borrower decides to take out a 
 private education loan--
 ``(i) the borrower has the ability to 
 select a private educational lender of the 
 borrower's choice;
 ``(ii) the proposed private education loan 
 may impact the borrower's potential eligibility 
 for other financial assistance, including 
 Federal financial assistance under this title; 
 and
 ``(iii) the borrower has a right--
 ``(I) to accept the terms of the 
 private education loan within 30 
 calendar days following the date on 
 which the application for such loan is 
 approved and the borrower receives the 
 required disclosure documents, pursuant 
 to section 128(e) of the Truth in 
 Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1638(e)); and
 ``(II) to cancel such loan within 3 
 business days of the date on which the 
 loan is consummated, pursuant to 
 section 128(e)(7) of such Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1638(e)(7)).
 ``(G) The interest rate for the loan, as of the 
 date of the counseling.
 ``(H) Information on how interest accrues and is 
 capitalized during periods when the interest is not 
 paid by either the borrower or the Secretary.
 ``(I) In the case of a Federal Direct PLUS Loan or 
 a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, the option 
 of the borrower to pay the interest while the borrower 
 is in school.
 ``(J) The definition of half-time enrollment at the 
 institution, during regular terms and summer school, if 
 applicable, and the consequences of not maintaining at 
 least half-time enrollment.
 ``(K) An explanation of the importance of 
 contacting the appropriate offices at the institution 
 of higher education if the borrower withdraws prior to 
 completing the borrower's program of study so that the 
 institution can provide exit counseling, including 
 information regarding the borrower's repayment options 
 and loan consolidation.
 ``(L) The obligation of the borrower to repay the 
 full amount of the loan, regardless of whether the 
 borrower completes or does not complete the program in 
 which the borrower is enrolled within the regular time 
 for program completion.
 ``(M) The likely consequences of default on the 
 loan, including adverse credit reports, delinquent debt 
 collection procedures under Federal law, and 
 litigation.
 ``(N) Notice of the institution's most recent 
 adjusted cohort default rate (calculated in accordance 
 with section 435(m)(1)(D)), an explanation of the 
 adjusted cohort default rate, the most recent national 
 average adjusted cohort default rate, and the most 
 recent national average adjusted cohort default rate 
 for the category of institution described in section 
 435(m)(4) to which the institution belongs.
 ``(O) Information on the National Student Loan Data 
 System and how the borrower can access the borrower's 
 records.
 ``(P) The contact information for the institution's 
 financial aid office or other appropriate office at the 
 institution the borrower may contact if the borrower 
 has any questions about the borrower's rights and 
 responsibilities or the terms and conditions of the 
 loan.
 ``(Q) For a first-time borrower, in addition to all 
 the information described in subparagraphs (A) through 
 (P)--
 ``(i) a statement of the anticipated 
 balance on the loan for which the borrower is 
 receiving counseling under this subsection;
 ``(ii) based on such anticipated balance, 
 the anticipated monthly payment amount under, 
 at minimum--
 ``(I) the fixed repayment plan 
 described in section 493E; and
 ``(II) the income-based repayment 
 plan under section 493C(f), as 
 determined using regionally available 
 data from the Bureau of Labor 
 Statistics of the average starting 
 salary for the occupation in which the 
 borrower has an interest in or intends 
 to be employed;
 ``(iii) an estimate of the projected 
 monthly payment amount under each repayment 
 plan described in clause (ii), based on the 
 average cumulative indebtedness at graduation 
 for borrowers of loans made under part D who 
 are in the same program of study as the 
 borrower and the expected increase in the cost 
 of attendance of such program; and
 ``(iv) information on the annual and 
 aggregate loan limits for Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loans and Federal Direct Unsubsidized 
 Stafford Loans as it pertains to the loan for 
 which the borrower is receiving counseling, and 
 a statement that such aggregate borrowing limit 
 may change based on the borrower's student 
 status (whether undergraduate or graduate) or 
 if there is a change in the borrower's 
 dependency status.
 ``(R) For a borrower with an outstanding balance of 
 principal or interest due on a loan made under this 
 title, in addition to all the information described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (P)--
 ``(i) information on each student loan that 
 the institution is aware that the student has 
 borrowed, including Federal loans, private 
 loans, and loans from the institution;
 ``(ii) the total amount of the outstanding 
 balance and interest accrued from the Federal 
 student loans described in clause (i);
 ``(iii) for each Federal loan described in 
 clause (i), the interest rate for the loan, as 
 of the date of the counseling, and a statement 
 that the interest rate on student loans may 
 vary based on when the loan was borrowed and 
 other factors;
 ``(iv) based on such outstanding balance 
 for the Federal student loans, the anticipated 
 monthly payment amount under the fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E, the 
 income-based repayment plan under section 
 493C(f), and any other repayment plan for which 
 each loan may be eligible, calculated using 
 regionally available data from the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics of the average starting salary 
 for the occupation the borrower intends to be 
 employed;
 ``(v) an estimate of the projected monthly 
 payment amount under each repayment plan 
 described in clause (iv), based on--
 ``(I) the outstanding balance 
 described in clause (ii);
 ``(II) the anticipated outstanding 
 balance on the loan for which the 
 student is receiving counseling under 
 this subsection; and
 ``(III) a projection for any other 
 loans made under part D that the 
 borrower is reasonably expected to 
 accept during the borrower's program of 
 study based on at least the average 
 cumulative indebtedness at graduation 
 for borrowers of loans made under part 
 D who are in the same program of study 
 as the borrower and the expected 
 increase in the cost of attendance of 
 such program;
 ``(vi) a statement that the outstanding 
 balance described in clause (ii), the interest 
 rate described in clause (iii), and the monthly 
 amount described in clause (iv) and clause (v) 
 does not include any amounts that the student 
 may be required to repay for private or 
 institutional loans; and
 ``(vii) the percentage of the total 
 aggregate borrowing limit that the student has 
 reached, as of the date of the counseling, for 
 Federal Direct Stafford Loans and Federal 
 Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans, and a 
 statement that such aggregate borrowing limit 
 may change based on the borrower's student 
 status (whether undergraduate or graduate) or 
 if there is a change in the borrower's 
 dependency status.
 ``(4) Borrowers receiving parent plus loans for dependent 
 students.--The information to be provided under paragraph 
 (1)(A) to a borrower of a Federal Direct PLUS Loan made on 
 behalf of a dependent student shall include the following:
 ``(A) A notification that some students may qualify 
 for other financial aid and an explanation that the 
 student for whom the borrower is taking out the loan 
 should consider accepting any grant, scholarship, or 
 State or Federal work-study jobs for which the borrower 
 is eligible prior to borrowing Parent PLUS Loans.
 ``(B) The information described in subparagraphs 
 (B) through (D) and (L) through (O) of paragraph (3).
 ``(C) The interest rate for the loan, as of the 
 date of the counseling.
 ``(D) The option of the borrower to pay the 
 interest on the loan while the loan is in deferment.
 ``(E) Debt management strategies that are designed 
 to facilitate the repayment of such indebtedness.
 ``(F) An explanation that the borrower has the 
 options to prepay each loan, pay each loan on a shorter 
 schedule, and change repayment plans.
 ``(G) For each Federal Direct PLUS Loan made on 
 behalf of a dependent student for which the borrower is 
 receiving counseling under this subsection, the contact 
 information for the loan servicer of the loan and a 
 link to such servicer's website.
 ``(H) For a first-time borrower of such loan--
 ``(i) a statement of the anticipated 
 balance on the loan for which the borrower is 
 receiving counseling under this subsection;
 ``(ii) based on such anticipated balance, 
 the anticipated monthly payment amount under 
 the fixed repayment plan described in section 
 493E, the income-based repayment plan under 
 section 493C(f), and any other repayment plan 
 for which each loan may be eligible; and
 ``(iii) an estimate of the projected 
 monthly payment amount under the fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E, the 
 income-based repayment plan under section 
 493C(f), and any other repayment plan for which 
 each loan may be eligible, based on the average 
 cumulative indebtedness of other borrowers of 
 Federal Direct PLUS Loans made on behalf of 
 dependent students who are in the same program 
 of study as the student on whose behalf the 
 borrower borrowed the loan and the expected 
 increase in the cost of attendance of such 
 program.
 ``(I) For a borrower with an outstanding balance of 
 principal or interest due on such loan--
 ``(i) a statement of the amount of such 
 outstanding balance;
 ``(ii) based on such outstanding balance, 
 the anticipated monthly payment amount under 
 the fixed repayment plan described in section 
 493E, the income-based repayment plan under 
 section 493C(f), and any other repayment plan 
 for which each loan may be eligible; and
 ``(iii) an estimate of the projected 
 monthly payment amount under the fixed and 
 income-based repayment plans, based on--
 ``(I) the anticipated outstanding 
 balance on the loan for which the 
 borrower is receiving counseling under 
 this subsection; and
 ``(II) a projection for any other 
 Federal Direct PLUS Loan made on behalf 
 of the dependent student that the 
 borrower is reasonably expected to 
 accept during the program of study of 
 such student based on at least the 
 average cumulative indebtedness of 
 other borrowers of Federal Direct PLUS 
 Loans made on behalf of dependent 
 students who are in the same program of 
 study as the student on whose behalf 
 the borrower borrowed the loan and the 
 expected increase in the cost of 
 attendance of such program.
 ``(5) Annual loan acceptance.--Prior to making the first 
 disbursement of a loan made under part D (other than a Federal 
 Direct Consolidation Loan or a loan made under section 460A and 
 460B) to a borrower for an award year, an eligible institution, 
 shall, as part of carrying out the counseling requirements of 
 this subsection for the loan, ensure that after receiving the 
 applicable counseling under paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) for 
 the loan the borrower accepts the loan for such award year by--
 ``(A) signing and returning to the institution the 
 student loan contract for the loan referred to in 
 section 432(m)(1)(D) that affirmatively states that the 
 borrower accepts the loan; or
 ``(B) electronically signing an electronic version 
 of the student loan contract described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 ``(6) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed to prohibit an eligible institution from providing 
 additional information and counseling services to recipients of 
 Federal student aid under this title, provided that any 
 additional information and counseling services for recipients 
 of Federal student aid shall not preclude or be considered a 
 condition for disbursement of such aid.''.
 (d) Online Counseling Tools.--Section 485 of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092), as amended by this section, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(n) Online Counseling Tools.--
 ``(1) In general.--Beginning not later than 18 months after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall maintain--
 ``(A) an online counseling tool that provides the 
 exit counseling required under subsection (b) and meets 
 the applicable requirements of this subsection; and
 ``(B) an online counseling tool that provides the 
 annual counseling required under subsection (l) and 
 meets the applicable requirements of this subsection.
 ``(2) Requirements of tools.--In developing and maintaining 
 the online counseling tools described in paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall ensure that each such tool is--
 ``(A) consumer tested, in consultation with other 
 relevant Federal agencies and including students (low-
 income students and student veterans, and students' 
 families) and borrowers, institutions of higher 
 education, secondary school and postsecondary 
 counselors, and nonprofit consumer groups, to ensure 
 that the tool is effective in helping individuals 
 understand their options, rights, and obligations with 
 respect to borrowing a loan made under part D; and
 ``(B) freely available to all eligible 
 institutions.
 ``(3) Record of counseling completion.--The Secretary 
 shall--
 ``(A) use each online counseling tool described in 
 paragraph (1) to keep a record of which individuals 
 have received counseling using the tool, and notify the 
 applicable institutions of the individual's completion 
 of such counseling;
 ``(B) in the case of a borrower who receives annual 
 counseling for a loan made under part D using the tool 
 described in paragraph (1)(B), notify the borrower by 
 when the borrower should accept, in a manner described 
 in subsection (l)(5), the loan for which the borrower 
 has received such counseling; and
 ``(C) in the case of a borrower described in 
 subsection (b)(1)(B) at an institution that uses the 
 online counseling tool described in paragraph (1)(A) of 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall attempt to provide 
 the information described in subsection (b)(1)(A) to 
 the borrower through such tool.''.
 (e) Disclosure of Religious Exemptions to Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972.--Section 485 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1092), as amended by this section, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(o) Disclosure of Religious Exemptions to Title IX of the 
Education Amendments of 1972.--Each institution of higher education 
participating in any program under this title that requests, receives, 
or exercises or intends to exercise a religious exemption to the 
requirements of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 
1681 et seq.) shall submit in writing to the Assistant Secretary for 
Civil Rights a statement by the highest ranking official of the 
institution, identifying the provisions of part 106 of title 34 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations that conflict with a specific tenet of the 
religious organization and shall publish on its website, in a prominent 
location, the following:
 ``(1) Request letter.--Each letter submitted by the 
 educational institution to the Department to request such an 
 exemption.
 ``(2) Exemption letter.--Each letter from the Department to 
 the educational institution that grants or denies such an 
 exemption.
 ``(3) Notice of request.--Notice that the educational 
 institution has requested an exemption under section 901(a)(3) 
 of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681(a)(3)).
 ``(4) Notice of exemption.--If applicable, notice that the 
 educational institution has received an exemption under section 
 901(a)(3) of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 
 1681(a)(3)).
 ``(5) Covered personal characteristics or behaviors.--A 
 list of the personal characteristics or behaviors to which each 
 requested or granted exemption applies.
 ``(6) Covered activities or programs.--A list of the 
 activities or programs to which each exemption applies.
 ``(7) Statement of rights.--The statement `Students 
 continue to have rights under title IX of the Education 
 Amendments of 1972. Any student who experiences discrimination 
 may contact the Office for Civil Rights at the United States 
 Department of Education at _____ or _____.', with the first 
 blank space being filled with a link to the website of the 
 Office for Civil Rights and the second blank space being filled 
 with the telephone number of the Office for Civil Rights.''.
 (f) Expectant and Parenting Students Policies.--Section 485 of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 18 U.S.C. 1092), as amended by this 
section, is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(p) Expectant and Parenting Students Policies.--Each institution 
of higher education participating in any program under this title shall 
develop and make available, including on the institution's website, a 
statement of policy concerning expectant and parenting students, which 
shall include, at a minimum--
 ``(1) the institution's policy regarding leaves of absence 
 related to pregnancy (and related medical conditions), and the 
 birth or adoption of a child, which shall include--
 ``(A) any policies related to the availability of 
 parental leave; and
 ``(B) options, including time requirements, for 
 making up missed work for students who take a leave of 
 absence;
 ``(2) information regarding lactation accommodations 
 available to students;
 ``(3) a description of the process for requesting 
 accommodations, and the type of accommodations available to 
 expectant and parenting students, including--
 ``(A) information on accommodations for pregnancy-
 related medical conditions; and
 ``(B) information on accommodations for students 
 who have parental responsibilities;
 ``(4) information regarding financial aid eligibility for 
 expectant and parenting students, including--
 ``(A) the availability of dependent care allowances 
 for a parenting student for the purposes of determining 
 the student's cost of attendance;
 ``(B) the ability to change dependency status, 
 including during an award year, following the birth of 
 a child;
 ``(C) the availability of and eligibility 
 requirements for any emergency financial aid programs 
 provided by the institution; and
 ``(D) an explanation of the effect that a leave of 
 absence may have on a student's demonstration of 
 satisfactory academic progress, including for the 
 purposes of eligibility to participate in financial aid 
 programs under this title;
 ``(5) information on available student support services, 
 programs, and community resources, such as academic advising, 
 child care (including child care subsidy and assistance 
 programs), housing (including housing subsidies and utility 
 assistance programs), food (including food assistance 
 programs), public benefits, health care, health insurance, 
 mental health, transportation benefits, mentoring, and other 
 services available for expectant and parenting students, both 
 on-campus and in the community, and under local, State, and 
 Federal law;
 ``(6) information regarding the availability of on-campus 
 housing that permits students to live with dependents;
 ``(7) information on the rights and protections that are 
 guaranteed to expectant and parenting students under applicable 
 Federal and State laws;
 ``(8) the institution's procedures for addressing 
 complaints under title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 
 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), including procedures for reporting 
 complaints under such title;
 ``(9) the institution's procedures for addressing 
 complaints alleging discrimination based on a pregnancy-related 
 disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
 (29 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) or the Americans with Disabilities Act 
 of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.), including procedures for 
 reporting complaints under such laws; and
 ``(10) the contact information for the institution's Office 
 of Accessibility, the institution's Title IX coordinator, and 
 any other relevant staff members who serve as a point of 
 contact for, or offer services available to, expectant and 
 parenting students.''.

SEC. 4612. PREVENTION OF IMPROPER ACCESS.

 Section 485B of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092b) 
is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (e) through (h) as 
 subsections (f) through (i), respectively;
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (5)(C), by striking ``and'' after 
 the semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (6)(C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) preventing access to the data system and any other 
 system used to administer a program under this title by any 
 person or entity for the purpose of assisting a student in 
 managing loan repayment or applying for any repayment plan, 
 consolidation loan, or other benefit authorized by this title, 
 unless such access meets the requirements described in 
 subsection (e).'';
 (3) by inserting after subsection (d) the following:
 ``(e) Requirements for Third-Party Data System Access.--
 ``(1) In general.--As provided in paragraph (7) of 
 subsection (d), an authorized person or entity described in 
 paragraph (2) may access the data system and any other system 
 used to administer a program under this title if that access--
 ``(A) is in compliance with terms of service, 
 information security standards, and a code of conduct 
 which shall be established by the Secretary and 
 published in the Federal Register;
 ``(B) is obtained using an access device (as 
 defined in section 1029(e)(1) of title 18, United 
 States Code) issued by the Secretary to the authorized 
 person or entity; and
 ``(C) is obtained without using any access device 
 (as defined in section 1029(e)(1) of title 18, United 
 States Code) issued by the Secretary to a student, 
 borrower, or parent.
 ``(2) Authorized person or entity.--An authorized person or 
 entity described in this paragraph means--
 ``(A) a guaranty agency, eligible lender, or 
 eligible institution, or a third-party organization 
 acting on behalf of a guaranty agency, eligible lender, 
 or eligible institution, that is in compliance with 
 applicable Federal law (including regulations and 
 guidance); or
 ``(B) a licensed attorney representing a student, 
 borrower, or parent, or another individual who works 
 for a Federal, State, local, or Tribal government or 
 agency, or for a nonprofit organization, providing 
 financial or student loan repayment counseling to a 
 student, borrower, or parent, if--
 ``(i) that attorney or other individual has 
 never engaged in unfair, deceptive, or abusive 
 practices, as determined by the Secretary;
 ``(ii) that attorney or other individual 
 does not work for an entity that has engaged in 
 unfair, deceptive, or abusive practices 
 (including an entity that is owned or operated 
 by a person or entity that engaged in such 
 practices), as determined by the Secretary;
 ``(iii) system access is provided only 
 through a separate point of entry; and
 ``(iv) the attorney or other individual has 
 consent from the relevant student, borrower, or 
 parent to access the system.''; and
 (4) in subsection (f)(1), as redesignated by paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``student and 
 parent'' and inserting ``student, borrower, and 
 parent'';
 (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively;
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the 
 following:
 ``(C) the reduction in improper data system access 
 as described in subsection (d)(7);''; and
 (D) by striking subparagraph (E), as redesignated 
 by subparagraph (B), and inserting the following:
 ``(E) any protocols, codes of conduct, terms of 
 service, or information security standards developed 
 under paragraphs (6) or (7) of subsection (d) during 
 the preceding fiscal year.''.

SEC. 4613. INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO CRIME STATISTICS FOR PROGRAMS OF 
 STUDY ABROAD.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended 
by inserting after section 485E (20 U.S.C. 1092f) the following:

``SEC. 485F. INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO CRIME STATISTICS FOR PROGRAMS 
 OF STUDY ABROAD.

 ``(a) In General.--Each institution participating in any program 
under this title, other than a foreign institution of higher education, 
shall develop and distribute a statement of policy with respect to 
students participating in a program of study abroad approved for credit 
by the institution concerning crime and harm that may occur while 
participating in such program of study abroad that, at a minimum, 
includes a biennial review by the institution of the programs of study 
abroad approved for credit by the institution to determine--
 ``(1) the effectiveness of the programs at protecting 
 students from crime and harm, and whether changes to the 
 programs are needed (based on the most recent guidance or other 
 assistance from the Secretary) and will be implemented;
 ``(2) for the 5 years preceding the date of the report, the 
 number (in the aggregate for all programs of study abroad 
 approved for credit by the institution) of--
 ``(A) deaths of program participants occurring 
 during program participation or during any other 
 activities during the study abroad period;
 ``(B) sexual assaults against program participants 
 occurring during program participation and reported to 
 the institution;
 ``(C) accidents and illnesses occurring during 
 program participation that resulted in hospitalization 
 and were reported to the institution; and
 ``(D) incidents involving program participants 
 during the program participation that resulted in 
 police involvement or a police report and were reported 
 to the institution; and
 ``(3) with respect to the incidents described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2), whether the 
 incidents occurred--
 ``(A) on campus;
 ``(B) in or on noncampus buildings or property;
 ``(C) on public property;
 ``(D) in dormitories or other residential 
 facilities for students on campus; or
 ``(E) at a location not described in items (A) 
 through (D) of this clause, without regard to whether 
 the institution owns or controls a building or property 
 at the location.
 ``(b) Other Duties.--An institution of higher education described 
in subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) provide each student who is interested in 
 participating in a program of study abroad approved for credit 
 by the institution, with an orientation session and advising 
 that includes--
 ``(A) a list of countries in which such programs of 
 study abroad are located;
 ``(B) all current travel information, including all 
 travel warnings and travel alerts, issued by the Bureau 
 of Consular Affairs of the Department of State for such 
 countries; and
 ``(C) the information described in paragraph (a), 
 provided specifically for each program of study abroad 
 approved for credit by the institution in which the 
 student is considering participation; and
 ``(2) provide each student who returns from such a program 
 of study abroad with a post-trip debriefing session, including 
 an exit interview that assists the institution in carrying out 
 subsection (a).
 ``(c) Limitations.--An institution of higher education shall not 
disaggregate or otherwise distinguish information for purposes of 
subsection (a) or (b) in a case in which the number of students in a 
category is insufficient to yield statistically reliable information or 
the results would reveal personally identifiable information about an 
individual student.
 ``(d) Review.--The Secretary shall periodically review a 
representative sample of the policies described in subsection (a) that 
have been adopted by institutions of higher education.
 ``(e) Definition.--For the purpose of this section, the definitions 
for `campus', `noncampus building or property', and `public property' 
shall have the same meaning as in section 485(f)(6).''.

SEC. 4614. REMEDIAL EDUCATION GRANTS.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended 
by inserting after section 486A (20 U.S.C. 1093a) the following:

``SEC. 486B. REMEDIAL EDUCATION GRANTS.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the funds appropriated under 
 subsection (k) (and not reserved under subsection (c)(4)), the 
 Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the Institute 
 of Education Sciences, shall award grants, on a competitive 
 basis, to eligible entities to improve remedial education in 
 higher education.
 ``(2) Duration.--A grant under this section shall be 
 awarded for a period of 5 years.
 ``(3) Minimum awards.--The total amount of funds provided 
 under each grant awarded under this section shall not be less 
 than $500,000.
 ``(b) Application.--An eligible entity that desires to receive a 
grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as 
the Secretary may require, which shall include the following:
 ``(1) A description of how the eligible entity will use the 
 grant funds to develop or improve a remedial education program 
 that includes evidence-based, effective strategies for 
 providing instruction to ensure that students are prepared for 
 courses at the postsecondary level.
 ``(2) An assurance that the eligible entity will use more 
 than two measures (such as a student's college entrance 
 examination score, grade point average, high school course 
 list, or a placement examination) to identify students in need 
 of remedial education who may be eligible to participate in the 
 remedial education program developed or improved under the 
 grant.
 ``(3) A description of how the eligible entity, in 
 developing or improving such a program, will consult with 
 stakeholders, including individuals with expertise in remedial 
 education, students enrolled in remedial education, and faculty 
 instructors for remedial education.
 ``(4) The eligible entity's plan for sustaining the program 
 after the grant period has ended.
 ``(5) The eligible entity's plan for monitoring and 
 evaluating the program, including how the eligible entity will 
 use the data collected under subsection (h) to continually 
 update and improve the program.
 ``(c) Consultation and Independent Evaluation.--
 ``(1) In general.--Before selecting eligible entities to 
 receive grants under this section for a fiscal year, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(A) ensure that the consultation required under 
 paragraph (3) is carried out; and
 ``(B) consider the results of the consultation in 
 selecting eligible entities to receive such grants.
 ``(2) Contract authority.--The Secretary, acting through 
 the Director, shall seek to enter into a contract with an 
 independent evaluator under which the evaluator will provide 
 the consultation and evaluation required under paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Consultation and independent evaluation required.--
 The independent evaluator shall carry out the following 
 activities:
 ``(A) Consultation.--For each fiscal year of the 
 grant program under this section, the independent 
 evaluator shall consult with, and provide advice to, 
 the Secretary regarding which eligible entities should 
 receive grants under this section for such fiscal year.
 ``(B) Evaluation.--Throughout the duration of the 
 grant program under this section, the independent 
 evaluator shall independently evaluate the impact of 
 the remedial education programs funded with the grants, 
 which shall include evaluation of--
 ``(i) the effectiveness of the remedial 
 education programs in increasing course and 
 degree completion at the postsecondary level; 
 and
 ``(ii) the outcomes of the remedial 
 education programs within and among models of 
 remedial education described in subsection (d).
 ``(4) Reservation.--The Secretary may reserve not more than 
 15 percent of the funds appropriated under subsection (k) for a 
 fiscal year to carry out this subsection for such fiscal year.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under 
this section shall use the grant to develop or improve a remedial 
education program through one or more of the following models:
 ``(1) Aligning course work.--Working with a local 
 educational agency or State educational agency that is part of 
 the eligible entity to develop or improve programs that provide 
 alignment between high school coursework and postsecondary 
 education, and that may include--
 ``(A) assessments in high school to measure student 
 readiness for courses at the postsecondary level; or
 ``(B) interventions in high school that improve 
 student competencies for courses at the postsecondary 
 level.
 ``(2) Accelerated course work.--Redesigning or improving 
 remedial education that--
 ``(A) allows students to enroll in more than one 
 sequential remedial education course or training in a 
 semester, or the equivalent;
 ``(B) condenses the time of the remedial education; 
 or
 ``(C) provides shortened, intensive courses or 
 training to improve competencies of students for 
 courses at the postsecondary level.
 ``(3) Modular instructional methods.--Developing or 
 improving remedial education that--
 ``(A) specifically targets the skills that students 
 need to move forward in courses at the postsecondary 
 level; and
 ``(B) may be used to develop new assessments, 
 redesign courses to provide targeted skill instruction, 
 or provide faculty professional development.
 ``(4) Co-requisite model.--Developing or improving remedial 
 education programs that allow a student to enroll in remedial 
 education (which may be provided through a modular 
 instructional method) while also enrolled in a course at the 
 postsecondary level.
 ``(5) Systemic reform to implement comprehensive, 
 integrated support programs.--Implementing and improving 
 comprehensive, integrated, evidence-based support programs 
 that--
 ``(A) enable students enrolled in remedial 
 education to complete a course of study leading to a 
 recognized educational credential within 150 percent of 
 the normal time for completion; and
 ``(B) may include financial supports, academic 
 tutoring or support, and advising that enable students 
 to find success in remedial education and courses at 
 the postsecondary level.
 ``(e) Considerations.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary, in consultation with the Director, shall--
 ``(1) ensure--
 ``(A) a minimum of 30 eligible entities are awarded 
 grants for each 5-year grant period;
 ``(B) an equitable geographic distribution of such 
 grants, including an equitable distribution between 
 urban and rural areas; and
 ``(C) that grants are used to develop or improve 
 remedial education programs--
 ``(i) under each model described in 
 subsection (d) to enable, to the extent 
 practicable, statistical comparisons of the 
 relative effectiveness of the models and the 
 programs within each model; and
 ``(ii) for a range of types and sizes of 
 institutions of higher education; and
 ``(2) give preference to eligible entities that primarily 
 serve low-income students.
 ``(f) Fiscal Requirements.--
 ``(1) Supplement not supplant.--A grant awarded under this 
 section shall be used to supplement, not supplant, funds that 
 would otherwise be used to carry out the activities described 
 in this section.
 ``(2) Matching funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), an 
 eligible entity that receives a grant under this 
 section shall provide, from non-Federal sources, an 
 amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the grant 
 for the cost of activities assisted under the grant.
 ``(B) Exceptions.--The requirements of subparagraph 
 (A) shall not apply to--
 ``(i) Tribal Colleges or Universities; or
 ``(ii) institutions of higher education 
 located in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
 Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, the Republic of the Marshall 
 Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, or 
 the Republic of Palau.
 ``(g) Experimental Authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this title, a student may be eligible to receive loans or grants 
under this title for up to 2 academic years for enrollment in a 
remedial education program under this section.
 ``(h) Data Collection, Reports, Evaluations, and Dissemination.--
 ``(1) Information.--
 ``(A) Student-level data.--Each eligible entity 
 that receives a grant under this section shall provide 
 to the Director and the Secretary, on an annual basis 
 for each year of the grant period and for 5 years after 
 such grant period, the student-level data with respect 
 to the students who are or were enrolled in a remedial 
 education program funded with the grant. The Director 
 and the Secretary shall share such data with the 
 independent evaluator to enable the evaluator, for each 
 such year, to determine the information described in 
 subparagraph (B) with respect to each such remedial 
 education program.
 ``(B) Aggregate student data.--The independent 
 evaluator shall determine, with respect to each 
 remedial education program for which an eligible entity 
 provides student-level data under subparagraph (A), the 
 following information:
 ``(i) The number of students who are or 
 were enrolled in such remedial education 
 program.
 ``(ii) The cost of such remedial education 
 program.
 ``(iii) The amount of grant or loan funds 
 under this title awarded to students for 
 enrollment in such remedial education program.
 ``(iv) The type of remedial education 
 offered under the program.
 ``(v) The length of time students spend in 
 such remedial education program, as measured by 
 semester, trimester, or clock hours.
 ``(vi) The number of students who complete 
 such remedial education program.
 ``(vii) Of the students who complete such 
 remedial education program--
 ``(I) the number and percentage of 
 such students who later enroll in 
 postsecondary-level courses at an 
 institution of higher education;
 ``(II) the number and percentage of 
 such students who receive a recognized 
 educational credential from an 
 institution of higher education;
 ``(III) the average length of time 
 required for a student described in 
 subclause (II) to complete the course 
 of study leading to such credential; 
 and
 ``(IV) the number and percentage of 
 students described in subclause (II) 
 who complete the course of study 
 leading to such credential within 150 
 percent of the normal time for 
 completion.
 ``(C) Disaggregation.--The information determined 
 under subparagraph (B) shall be disaggregated by race, 
 gender, socioeconomic status, Federal Pell Grant 
 eligibility status, status as a first generation 
 college student, veteran or active duty status, and 
 disability status.
 ``(2) Evaluation results.--Not later than six years after 
 the first grant is awarded under this section, the Director, in 
 consultation with the Secretary and using the information 
 determined under paragraph (1), shall submit to the authorizing 
 committees and make available on a publicly accessible website, 
 a report on the results of the multiyear, rigorous, and 
 independent evaluation of the impact of the remedial education 
 programs carried out by the independent evaluator. The report 
 shall include the results of such evaluation with respect to--
 ``(A) the effectiveness of the remedial education 
 programs in increasing course and degree completion at 
 the postsecondary level; and
 ``(B) the outcomes of the remedial education 
 programs within and among models of remedial education 
 described in subsection (d).
 ``(3) Reports and dissemination.--
 ``(A) Initial report.--Not later than one year 
 after the first grant is awarded under this section, 
 the Secretary, in consultation with the independent 
 evaluator, shall prepare and submit to the authorizing 
 committees a report on each remedial education program 
 funded under this section.
 ``(B) Subsequent report.--Not later than five years 
 after the last grant is awarded under this section, the 
 Secretary, in consultation with the independent 
 evaluator, shall prepare and submit to the authorizing 
 committees a report that includes--
 ``(i) a review of the activities and 
 program performance of each remedial education 
 program funded under this section; and
 ``(ii) guidance and recommendations on how 
 successful remedial education programs (as 
 determined, at a minimum, by the number and 
 percentage of remedial education students who 
 later complete a course of study at an 
 institution of higher education within 150 
 percent of the normal time for completion) can 
 be replicated.
 ``(C) Public availability.--The reports submitted 
 under subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be made available 
 on a publicly accessible website of the Department of 
 Education.
 ``(i) Data Privacy.--
 ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any person who 
 obtains or has access to personally identifiable information 
 pursuant to this section to knowingly disclose to any person 
 (except as authorized in this section or any Federal law) such 
 personally identifiable information.
 ``(2) Penalty.--Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall 
 be fined under title 18, United States Code.
 ``(3) Officer or employee of the united states.--If any 
 officer or employee of the United States violates paragraph 
 (1), the officer or employee shall be dismissed from office or 
 discharged from employment upon conviction for the violation.
 ``(4) Law enforcement.--Personally identifiable information 
 collected under this section shall not be used for any law 
 enforcement activity or any other activity that would result in 
 adverse action against any student, including debt collection 
 activity or enforcement of the immigration laws.
 ``(j) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Institute of Education Sciences.
 ``(2) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) an institution of higher education; or
 ``(B) a partnership between an institution of 
 higher education and at least 1 of the following:
 ``(i) A local educational agency.
 ``(ii) A State educational agency.
 ``(3) First generation college student.--The term `first 
 generation college student' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 402A(h).
 ``(4) Independent evaluator.--The term `independent 
 evaluator' means the independent evaluator with which the 
 Secretary enters into a contract under subsection (c)(2).
 ``(5) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 101.
 ``(6) Remedial education.--The term `remedial education'--
 ``(A) means education (such as courses or training) 
 offered at an institution of higher education that--
 ``(i) is below the postsecondary level; and
 ``(ii) is determined by the institution to 
 be necessary to help students be prepared for 
 the pursuit of a first undergraduate 
 baccalaureate degree, associate's degree, or 
 certificate or, in the case of courses in 
 English language instruction, to be necessary 
 to enable the student to utilize already 
 existing knowledge, training, or skills; and
 ``(B) includes developmental education that meets 
 the requirements of subparagraph (A).
 ``(7) Tribal college or university.--The term `Tribal 
 College or University' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 316(b).
 ``(k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $162,500,000 for fiscal year 
2021 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.

SEC. 4615. COMPETENCY-BASED EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is 
further amended by inserting after section 486B (as added by section 
4614 of this Act) the following:

``SEC. 486C. COMPETENCY-BASED EDUCATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

 ``(a) Demonstration Projects Authorized.--The Secretary shall 
select, in accordance with subsection (d), eligible entities to 
voluntarily carry out competency-based education demonstration projects 
for a duration of 5 years and receive waivers or other flexibility 
described in subsection (e) to carry out such projects.
 ``(b) Application.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible entity desiring to carry 
 out a demonstration project under this section shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary, at such time and in such manner 
 as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Outreach.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, prior to 
 any deadline to submit applications under paragraph 
 (1), conduct outreach to institutions, including those 
 described in subparagraph (B), to provide those 
 institutions with information on the opportunity to 
 apply to carry out a demonstration project under this 
 section.
 ``(B) Institutions.--The institutions described in 
 this subparagraph are the following:
 ``(i) Part B institutions (as defined in 
 section 322).
 ``(ii) Hispanic-serving institutions (as 
 defined in section 502).
 ``(iii) Tribal Colleges or Universities (as 
 defined in section 316).
 ``(iv) Alaska Native-serving institutions 
 (as defined in section 317(b)).
 ``(v) Native Hawaiian-serving institutions 
 (as defined in section 317(b)).
 ``(vi) Predominantly Black Institutions (as 
 defined in section 318).
 ``(vii) Asian American and Native American 
 Pacific Islander-serving institutions (as 
 defined in section 320(b)).
 ``(viii) Native American-serving, nontribal 
 institutions (as defined in section 319).
 ``(ix) Institutions predominately serving 
 adult learners.
 ``(x) Institutions serving students with 
 disabilities.
 ``(xi) Institutions located in rural areas.
 ``(3) Amendments.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible entity that has been 
 selected to carry out a demonstration project under 
 this section may submit to the Secretary amendments to 
 the eligible entity's approved application under 
 paragraph (1), at such time and in such manner as the 
 Secretary may require, which the Secretary shall 
 approve or deny within 30 days of receipt.
 ``(B) Expanding enrollment.--Notwithstanding the 
 assurance required with respect to maximum enrollment 
 under paragraph (4)(N)--
 ``(i) an eligible entity whose 
 demonstration project has been evaluated under 
 subsection (g)(2) not less than twice, may 
 submit to the Secretary an amendment to the 
 eligible entity's application under paragraph 
 (1) to increase enrollment in the project to 
 more than 3,000 students, but not more than 
 5,000 students, and which shall specify--
 ``(I) the proposed maximum 
 enrollment and annual enrollment growth 
 for the project;
 ``(II) how the eligible entity will 
 successfully carry out the project with 
 such maximum enrollment and enrollment 
 growth; and
 ``(III) any other amendments to the 
 eligible entity's application under 
 paragraph (1) that are related to such 
 maximum enrollment or enrollment 
 growth; and
 ``(ii) the Secretary shall determine 
 whether to approve or deny an amendment 
 submitted under clause (i) for a demonstration 
 project based on the project's evaluations 
 under subsection (g)(2).
 ``(4) Contents.--Each application under paragraph (1) shall 
 include--
 ``(A) a description of each competency-based 
 education program to be offered by the eligible entity 
 under the demonstration project;
 ``(B) a description of the alignment of the 
 proposed competency-based education program to the 
 institution's mission, and evidence of institutional 
 commitment to such program;
 ``(C) a description of how each program will work 
 with employers and local industry to assess and 
 incorporate competencies that are relevant in the labor 
 market and how the program aligns with employer needs;
 ``(D) a description of the proposed academic 
 design, academic and support services, delivery, 
 business, and financial models for the demonstration 
 project, including explanations and supporting 
 documents, including financial statements, and, any 
 revenue-sharing agreements with third-party servicers 
 or online program managers, of how each competency-
 based education program offered under the demonstration 
 project will--
 ``(i) result in the achievement of 
 competencies;
 ``(ii) differ from standard credit hour 
 approaches, in whole or in part;
 ``(iii) result in lower costs of a 
 certificate or degree; and
 ``(iv) result in shortened time to 
 completion of a certificate or degree;
 ``(E) a description of how each competency-based 
 education program offered under the demonstration 
 project will award academic credit to advance the 
 progress of a student toward completion of a 
 certificate or degree that is portable and used by in-
 demand employers for making employment decisions;
 ``(F) a description of how each credit-bearing 
 competency-based education program offered under the 
 demonstration project is aligned with a career pathway;
 ``(G) a description of the meaningful role of the 
 appropriate instructors of the eligible entity in the 
 development, design, implementation, delivery, and 
 evaluation of each such competency-based education 
 program;
 ``(H) a description of how each such competency-
 based education program will provide strong post-
 enrollment job placement, earnings, and loan repayment 
 outcomes;
 ``(I) a description of how the eligible entity will 
 facilitate transfer, postsecondary study, and employer 
 understanding by articulating a competency-based 
 transcript from a competency-based education program 
 offered under the demonstration project to a credit 
 hour transcript at another program at the eligible 
 entity and to other institutions of higher education;
 ``(J) a description of the statutory and regulatory 
 requirements described in subsection (e) for which the 
 eligible entity is seeking a waiver or other 
 flexibility, and why such waiver or flexibility is 
 necessary to carry out the demonstration project;
 ``(K) a description of indicators of a program's 
 effectiveness to inform how a third party will reliably 
 assess student learning for each competency-based 
 education program offered under the demonstration 
 project;
 ``(L) a description of how the eligible entity will 
 develop and evaluate the competencies and assessments 
 of student knowledge administered as part of the 
 demonstration project, including whether there is a 
 relationship between the competency unit and a 
 traditional credit or clock hour, the average time it 
 takes to earn a competency, how such competencies and 
 assessments are aligned with workforce needs and any 
 other considerations the institution made when it 
 developed its unit of competency;
 ``(M) a description of the proposal for determining 
 a student's Federal student aid eligibility under this 
 title for participating in the demonstration project, 
 the award and distribution of such aid, and the 
 safeguards to ensure that students are making 
 satisfactory progress that warrants the disbursement of 
 such aid;
 ``(N) an assurance that the demonstration project 
 at each eligible entity--
 ``(i) will enroll a minimum of 25 students 
 and a maximum of 3,000 students or, in the case 
 of an eligible entity with an application 
 amendment approved under paragraph (3)(B), the 
 maximum enrollment approved under such 
 paragraph;
 ``(ii) will identify and disseminate best 
 practices with respect to the demonstration 
 project to the Secretary and to other eligible 
 entities carrying out a demonstration project 
 under this section;
 ``(iii) operates under an agreement with 
 the accrediting agency or association of the 
 eligible entity to establish the standards 
 described in subsection (c); and
 ``(iv) uses available funds solely for 
 purposes of awarding academic credit to 
 eligible students based on the achievement of 
 competencies and for the related costs or fees 
 of demonstrating the achievement of 
 competencies;
 ``(O) a description of the population of students 
 to whom competency-based education under the 
 demonstration project will be offered, including 
 demographic information and prior educational 
 experience, disaggregated (as practicable) by students 
 who are Federal Pell Grant recipients, students of 
 color, Native students, students with disabilities, 
 students who are veterans or members of the Armed 
 Forces, adult learners, and first generation college 
 students, and how such eligible entity will, when 
 appropriate, address the specific needs of each such 
 population of students when carrying out the 
 demonstration project;
 ``(P) a description of outreach and communication 
 activities to students who may benefit under the 
 demonstration project, including those described in 
 subparagraph (O);
 ``(Q) a description of how the institution is 
 ensuring that students participating in the 
 demonstration project will not, on average, be eligible 
 for more or less Federal assistance under this title 
 than such students would have been eligible for under a 
 program measured in credit or clock hours;
 ``(R) the cost of attendance for each competency-
 based education program offered under the demonstration 
 project, disaggregated by each of the applicable costs 
 or allowances described in paragraphs (1) through (13) 
 of section 472, and the estimated amount of the cost of 
 attendance of each such program to be covered by need-
 based grant aid and merit-based grant aid from Federal, 
 State, institutional, and private sources;
 ``(S) a description of other competency-based 
 education programs the eligible entity offers or plans 
 to offer outside of the demonstration project;
 ``(T) a description of how the eligible entity will 
 use data to--
 ``(i) ensure that each competency-based 
 education program under the demonstration 
 project meets the benchmarks established in 
 accordance with subsection (c)(2)(E);
 ``(ii) confirm relevancy of competencies in 
 the labor market; and
 ``(iii) improve each such program; and
 ``(U) other such elements as the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(c) Recognition by Accrediting Agency or Association.--Unless a 
program has already been recognized as a direct assessment program by 
the accrediting agency or association of the eligible entity, in order 
to carry out a competency-based education program under a demonstration 
project under this section, an eligible entity shall include in its 
application under subsection (b), a letter from the accrediting agency 
or association of the eligible entity that describes how it will 
establish and enforce the following standards with respect to such 
competency-based education program:
 ``(1) Standards for determining whether the eligible entity 
 or the program requires students to demonstrate competencies 
 that are--
 ``(A) capable of being validly and reliably 
 assessed; and
 ``(B) appropriate in scope and rigor for the award 
 of the relevant certificate or degree.
 ``(2) Standards for determining whether the eligible entity 
 or the program demonstrate--
 ``(A) the administrative capacity and expertise 
 that will ensure--
 ``(i) the validity and reliability of 
 assessments of competencies; and
 ``(ii) good practices in assessment and 
 measurement;
 ``(B) sufficient educational content, activities, 
 and resources (including faculty support)--
 ``(i) to enable students to learn or 
 develop what is required to demonstrate or 
 attain mastery of competencies; and
 ``(ii) that are consistent with the 
 qualifications of graduates of traditional 
 programs;
 ``(C) that the quality of demonstration of 
 competence is judged at mastery for each competency 
 that is assessed for the award of a certificate or 
 degree;
 ``(D) a standard for the amount of learning that is 
 included in a unit of competency;
 ``(E) reasonable, clear, and actionable benchmarks 
 for graduation rates and the employment and earnings of 
 graduates, including job placements in a field for 
 which the program prepares students, debt-to-earnings 
 ratios, loan repayment rates, and student satisfaction;
 ``(F) regular evaluation of whether the program 
 meets the benchmarks under subparagraph (E), and 
 address what may be the cause with identified 
 interventions; and
 ``(G) that students may not receive a subsequent 
 disbursement until they have completed the anticipated 
 number of credits for the payment period.
 ``(3) Standards for determining when to deny, withdraw, 
 suspend, or terminate the accreditation of the program if the 
 benchmarks under paragraph (2)(E) are not achieved after 4 
 consecutive title IV payment periods, including standards for 
 providing sufficient opportunity--
 ``(A) for the eligible entity or program to provide 
 a written response regarding the failure to achieve 
 such benchmarks be considered by the agency or 
 association in the manner described in section 
 496(a)(6)(B); and
 ``(B) for the eligible entity or program to appeal 
 any adverse action under this subparagraph before an 
 appeals panel that meets the requirements of section 
 496(a)(6)(C).
 ``(d) Selection.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary 
 shall select not more than 100 eligible entities to carry out a 
 demonstration project under this section under which at least 1 
 competency-based education program is offered at each eligible 
 entity.
 ``(2) Considerations.--In selecting eligible entities under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) consider the number and quality of 
 applications received;
 ``(B) consider an eligible entity's--
 ``(i) ability to successfully execute the 
 demonstration project as described in the 
 eligible entity's application under subsection 
 (b);
 ``(ii) commitment and ability to 
 effectively finance the demonstration project;
 ``(iii) ability to provide administrative 
 capability and the expertise to evaluate 
 student progress based on measures other than 
 credit hours or clock hours;
 ``(iv) history of compliance with the 
 requirements of this Act;
 ``(v) commitment to work with the Director 
 and the Secretary to evaluate the demonstration 
 project and the impact of the demonstration 
 project under subsection (g)(2);
 ``(vi) commitment and ability to assess 
 student learning through a third party;
 ``(vii) commitment of the accrediting 
 agency or association of the eligible entity to 
 establish and enforce the standards described 
 in subsection (c); and
 ``(viii) commitment to collaboration with 
 an employer advisory group or specific 
 employers to determine how the demonstration 
 project will meet employer needs;
 ``(C) ensure the selection of a diverse group of 
 eligible entities with respect to size, mission, 
 student population, and geographic distribution;
 ``(D) not limit the types of programs of study or 
 courses of study approved for participation in a 
 demonstration project; and
 ``(E) not select an eligible entity--
 ``(i) that, for 1 of the preceding 2 fiscal 
 years--
 ``(I) had an adjusted cohort 
 default rate (defined in section 
 435(m)) that is 20 percent or greater;
 ``(II) failed to meet the 
 requirement under section 487(a)(24); 
 or
 ``(III) was--
 ``(aa) under probation or 
 an equivalent status from the 
 accrediting agency or 
 association of the eligible 
 entity;
 ``(bb) under sanction from 
 the authorization agency of the 
 State in which the eligible 
 entity is located; or
 ``(cc) under public 
 investigation or facing a 
 pending lawsuit from a State or 
 Federal agency;
 ``(ii) if the Department has concerns with 
 the entity's compliance based on program 
 reviews or audits; or
 ``(iii) if the eligible entity fails to 
 meet the financial responsibility standards 
 prescribed by the Secretary in accordance with 
 section 498(c) or is placed on a reimbursement 
 payment method by the Secretary.
 ``(e) Waivers and Other Flexibility.--
 ``(1) In general.--With respect to any eligible entity 
 selected to carry out a demonstration project under this 
 section, the Secretary may--
 ``(A) waive any requirements of the provisions of 
 law (including any regulations promulgated under such 
 provisions) listed in paragraph (2) for which the 
 eligible entity has provided a reason for waiving under 
 subsection (b)(4)(J); or
 ``(B) provide other flexibility, but not waive, any 
 requirements of the provisions of law (including any 
 regulations promulgated under such provisions) listed 
 in paragraph (3) for which the eligible entity has 
 provided a reason with which the Secretary agrees for 
 such flexibility under subsection (b)(4)(J).
 ``(2) Provisions eligible for waivers.--The Secretary may 
 waive the following under paragraph (1)(A):
 ``(A) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 
 102(a)(3).
 ``(B) Section 484(l)(1).
 ``(3) Provisions eligible for flexibility.--The Secretary 
 may provide the flexibility described in paragraph (1)(B) with 
 respect to the requirements under provisions in title I, part F 
 of this title, or this part, that inhibit the operation of a 
 competency-based education program, relating to the following:
 ``(A) Documenting attendance.
 ``(B) Weekly academic activity.
 ``(C) Minimum weeks of instructional time.
 ``(D) Requirements for credit hour or clock hour 
 equivalencies if an institution proposes a measure 
 clearly defined in its application that accounts for 
 the academic intensity of study.
 ``(E) Requirements for regular and substantive 
 interaction with the instructor.
 ``(F) Definitions of the terms `academic year', 
 `full-time student', `part-time student', `term' 
 (including `standard term', `non-term', and `non-
 standard term'), `satisfactory academic progress', 
 `educational activity', `program of study', and 
 `payment period'.
 ``(G) Methods of disbursing student financial aid 
 by institutions of higher education selected, as of the 
 date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, as 
 experimental sites under section 487A to carry out 
 competency-based education programs.
 ``(H) Restrictions regarding concurrent student 
 enrollment in Direct Assessment and non-Direct 
 Assessment programs.
 ``(4) Measurement of activity or academic work.--An 
 institution granted flexibility under paragraph (3) related to 
 requirements for credit hour or clock hour equivalencies shall 
 include a measurement of activity or academic `work' by 
 students as considered comparable to the standard practice for 
 measuring credit or clock hours for these areas.
 ``(f) Notification.--Not later than 9 months after the date of 
enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary shall make 
available to the authorizing committees and the public a list of 
eligible entities selected to carry out a demonstration project under 
this section, which shall include for each such eligible entity--
 ``(1) the specific waiver or other flexibility from 
 statutory or regulatory requirements offered under subsection 
 (e); and
 ``(2) a description of the competency-based education 
 programs, and its associated accreditation standards, to be 
 offered under the project.
 ``(g) Information and Evaluation.--
 ``(1) Information.--
 ``(A) Student-level data.--Each eligible entity 
 that carries out a demonstration project under this 
 section shall provide to the Director the student-level 
 data for the students enrolled in a program described 
 in subparagraph (C)(i)(I), the student-level data for 
 the students enrolled in a program described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i)(II), and the student-level data for 
 students enrolled in a program described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i)(III) to enable the Director--
 ``(i) to determine the aggregate 
 information described in subparagraph (B) with 
 respect to each such program; and
 ``(ii) to the extent practicable, to 
 compare the programs using a rigorous 
 evaluation, such as propensity score matching.
 ``(B) Aggregate information.--For purposes of the 
 evaluation under paragraph (2), the Director shall use 
 the student-level data provided under subparagraph (A) 
 by an eligible entity to determine the following 
 information with respect to each program described in 
 subparagraph (C)(i) offered at such eligible entity:
 ``(i) The average number of credit hours 
 students earned prior to enrollment in the 
 program, if applicable.
 ``(ii) The number and percentage of 
 students enrolled in a competency-based 
 education program that are also enrolled in 
 programs of study or courses of study offered 
 in credit hours or clock hours, disaggregated 
 by student status as a first-year, second-year, 
 third-year, fourth-year, or other student.
 ``(iii) The average period of time between 
 the enrollment of a student in the program and 
 the first assessment of student knowledge of 
 such student.
 ``(iv) The average time to 25 percent, 50 
 percent, 75 percent, 100 percent, 150 percent, 
 and 200 percent completion of a certificate or 
 degree.
 ``(v) The number and percentage of students 
 who begin in a certain cohort and complete a 
 certificate or degree.
 ``(vi) The number and percentage of 
 students who begin in a certain cohort and 
 withdraw without completing a certificate or 
 degree.
 ``(vii) The number and percentage of 
 students who begin in a certain cohort who 
 reach 25 percent, 50 percent, 75 percent, and 
 100 percent completion of a certificate or 
 degree.
 ``(viii) The number and percentage of 
 students who begin in a certain cohort who re-
 enroll in a second period.
 ``(ix) The median number of competencies 
 completed per period.
 ``(x) The average number of attempts it 
 takes students to pass all assessments of 
 student knowledge during the period of 
 enrollment in the program.
 ``(xi) The percentage of summative 
 assessments of student competence that students 
 passed on the first attempt during the period 
 of enrollment in the program.
 ``(xii) The percentage of summative 
 assessments of student competence that students 
 passed on the second attempt and the average 
 period of time between the first and second 
 attempts during the period of enrollment in the 
 program.
 ``(xiii) The average number of competencies 
 a student acquired and demonstrated while 
 enrolled in a program and the period of time 
 during which the student acquired such 
 competencies.
 ``(xiv) The number and percentage of 
 students completing the program who find 
 employment that lasts not less than 6 months 
 within 6 months of graduation, disaggregated by 
 number and percentage of such students finding 
 employment in a field related to the program.
 ``(xv) Student job placement rates 1, 2, 
 and 3 years after graduating from the program, 
 if available.
 ``(xvi) The median student earnings 1, 2, 
 and 3 years after graduating from the program, 
 if available.
 ``(xvii) The number and percentage of 
 students completing the program who continue 
 their education.
 ``(xviii) Such other information as the 
 Director may reasonably require.
 ``(C) Disaggregation.--The information determined 
 under subparagraph (B) shall be disaggregated as 
 follows, provided that the disaggregation of the 
 information does not identify any individual student:
 ``(i) For each eligible entity that carries 
 out a demonstration project under this section, 
 disaggregation by--
 ``(I) the students enrolled in each 
 competency-based education program 
 under the project;
 ``(II) the students enrolled in 
 each competency-based education program 
 not being carried out under the 
 project, if the eligible entity has a 
 competency-based education program not 
 being carried out under the project; 
 and
 ``(III) the students enrolled in a 
 program not described in subclause (I) 
 or (II).
 ``(ii) For each group of students described 
 in clause (i), disaggregation by prior 
 postsecondary experience, age group, race, 
 gender, disability status, students who are 
 Veterans or servicemembers, first generation 
 college students, full-time and part-time 
 enrollment, and status as a recipient of a 
 Federal Pell Grant.
 ``(D) Council.--The Director shall provide to the 
 Competency-Based Education Council any information 
 described in subparagraph (A) or (B) (other than 
 personally identifiable information) that may be 
 necessary for the Council to carry out its duties under 
 section 4616(e) of the College Affordability Act.
 ``(2) Evaluation.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Director, in consultation 
 with the Secretary and using the information determined 
 under paragraph (1), shall annually evaluate each 
 eligible entity carrying out a demonstration project 
 under this section. Each evaluation shall be 
 disaggregated in accordance with subparagraph (B) and 
 include--
 ``(i) the extent to which the eligible 
 entity has met the elements of its application 
 under subsection (b)(4);
 ``(ii) whether the demonstration project 
 led to reduced cost, including as reflected by 
 median debt levels, or time to completion of a 
 certificate or degree, and the amount of cost 
 or time reduced for such completion;
 ``(iii) obstacles related to student 
 financial assistance for competency-based 
 education;
 ``(iv) the extent to which statutory or 
 regulatory requirements not waived or for which 
 flexibility is not provided under subsection 
 (e) presented difficulties or unintended 
 consequences for students or eligible entities;
 ``(v) a description of the waivers or 
 flexibility provided under subsection (e) that 
 were most beneficial to students or eligible 
 entities, and an explanation of such benefits;
 ``(vi) the percentage of students who 
 received each of the following--
 ``(I) a grant under this title;
 ``(II) a loan under this title;
 ``(III) a State grant;
 ``(IV) a State loan;
 ``(V) an institutional grant;
 ``(VI) an institutional loan;
 ``(VII) a private loan; and
 ``(VIII) an employer grant or 
 subsidy;
 ``(vii) median annual total cost and net 
 cost to the student of the program;
 ``(viii) median total cost and net cost of 
 the credential and associated examination or 
 licensure calculated upon completion;
 ``(ix) median outstanding balance of 
 principal and interest on loans made under this 
 title that students have upon graduation;
 ``(x) the median 3-year adjusted cohort 
 default rate as defined under section 435(m);
 ``(xi) the median 1-year and 3-year 
 repayment rate of loans made under this title;
 ``(xii) the median student earnings 1, 3, 
 and 4 years after graduation;
 ``(xiii) a description of the curricular 
 infrastructure, including assessments of 
 student knowledge and the corresponding 
 competencies;
 ``(xiv) a description of the role of 
 faculty and faculty involvement; and
 ``(xv) outcomes of the assessments of 
 student competency.
 ``(B) Disaggregation.--The data collected under 
 clauses (vi) through (xii) shall be disaggregated by 
 each group of students described in paragraph (1)(C).
 ``(3) Annual report.--The Director, in consultation with 
 the Secretary, shall annually provide to the authorizing 
 committees a report on--
 ``(A) the evaluations required under paragraph (2);
 ``(B) the number and types of students receiving 
 assistance under this title for competency-based 
 education programs offered under projects under this 
 section;
 ``(C) any proposed statutory or regulatory changes 
 designed to support and enhance the expansion of 
 competency-based education programs, which may be 
 independent of or combined with traditional credit hour 
 or clock hour projects;
 ``(D) the most effective means of delivering 
 competency-based education programs through projects 
 under this section; and
 ``(E) the appropriate level and distribution 
 methodology of Federal assistance under this title for 
 students enrolled in a competency-based education 
 program.
 ``(h) Coordination.--An eligible entity or the Director shall 
consult with the Secretary of Education or the Secretary of the 
Treasury to obtain the employment, earnings, and loan information that 
may be necessary for purposes of subsection (c)(2)(F) or subsection 
(g), respectively.
 ``(i) Oversight.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall, at least twice annually--
 ``(1) assure compliance of eligible entities with the 
 requirements of this title (other than the provisions of law 
 and regulations that are waived under subsection (e));
 ``(2) provide technical assistance;
 ``(3) monitor fluctuations in the student population 
 enrolled in the eligible entities carrying out the 
 demonstration projects under this section;
 ``(4) consult with appropriate accrediting agencies or 
 associations and appropriate State regulatory authorities for 
 additional ways of improving the delivery of competency-based 
 education programs; and
 ``(5) collect and disseminate to eligible entities carrying 
 out a demonstration project under this section, best practices 
 with respect to such projects.
 ``(j) Data Privacy.--
 ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any person who 
 obtains or has access to personally identifiable information 
 pursuant to this section to knowingly disclose to any person 
 (except as authorized in this section or any Federal law) such 
 personally identifiable information.
 ``(2) Penalty.--Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall 
 be fined under title 18, United States Code.
 ``(3) Officer or employee of the united states.--If any 
 officer or employee of the United States violates paragraph 
 (1), the officer or employee shall be dismissed from office or 
 discharged from employment upon conviction for the violation.
 ``(4) Law enforcement.--Personally identifiable information 
 collected under this section shall not be used for any law 
 enforcement activity or any other activity that would result in 
 adverse action against any student, including debt collection 
 activity or enforcement of the immigration laws.
 ``(k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $5,000,000 to the Department to carry out the project 
under this section.
 ``(l) Definitions.--For the purpose of this section:
 ``(1) Career pathway.--The term `career pathway' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation 
 and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(2) Competency.--The term `competency' means the 
 knowledge, skill, and abilities demonstrated for a particular 
 program of study.
 ``(3) Competency-based education program.--The term 
 `competency-based education program' means a postsecondary 
 program that provides competency-based education for which the 
 accrediting agency or association of the institution of higher 
 education offering such program has established or will 
 establish the standards described in subsection (c) and, in 
 accordance with such standards--
 ``(A) measures academic progress and credential 
 attainment by the assessment of student learning in 
 lieu of, or in addition to, credit or clock hours;
 ``(B) measures and assesses such academic progress 
 and attainment in terms of a student's mastery of 
 competencies by identifying what students know and the 
 skills mastered through rigorous assessment;
 ``(C) determines and reports to the Secretary the 
 number of credit or clock hours that would be needed 
 for the attainment of a similar level of knowledge, 
 skills, and characteristics in a standard credit or 
 clock hour program;
 ``(D) provides the educational content, activities, 
 support, and resources necessary to enable students to 
 develop and attain the competencies that are required 
 to demonstrate mastery of such competencies, including 
 a system for monitoring a student's engagement and 
 progress in each competency, in which faculty are 
 responsible for providing proactive academic 
 assistance, when needed, on the basis of such 
 monitoring;
 ``(E) upon a student's demonstration or mastery of 
 a set of competencies identified and required by the 
 institution, leads to or results in the awarding of a 
 certificate or degree;
 ``(F) ensures that funds received under this title 
 may be used only for learning that results from 
 instruction provided or overseen by the institution and 
 not for the portion of the program of which the student 
 has demonstrated mastery prior to enrollment in the 
 program or tests of learning that are not associated 
 with educational activities overseen by the 
 institution;
 ``(G) is organized in a manner that an institution 
 can determine, based on the method of measurement 
 selected by the institution, and approved by the 
 accreditor as described in subsection (c), what 
 constitutes a full-time, three-quarter time, half-time, 
 and less than half-time workload for the purposes of 
 awarding and administering assistance under this title, 
 or assistance provided under another provision of 
 Federal law to attend an institution of higher 
 education; and
 ``(H) may use a disaggregated faculty model in 
 which the educational responsibilities for an academic 
 course are divided among a number of individuals, each 
 performing specific tasks essential to instruction, 
 including curriculum design, content delivery, and 
 student assessment.
 ``(4) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Institute of Education Sciences.
 ``(5) Dual or concurrent enrollment program.--The term 
 `dual or concurrent enrollment program' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(6) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
 institution of higher education, which may be an institution of 
 higher education that offers a dual or concurrent enrollment 
 program.
 ``(7) First generation college student.--The term `first 
 generation college student' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 402A(h)(3).
 ``(8) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 102, except that such term does not include 
 institutions described in section 102(a)(1)(C).''.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section or the 
amendments made by this section shall be construed to alter the 
authority of the Secretary of Education to establish experimental sites 
under any other provision of law.

SEC. 4616. COMPETENCY-BASED EDUCATION COUNCIL.

 (a) Establishment of a Committee on Competency-Based Education.--
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, there 
shall be established the Competency-Based Education Council (referred 
to in this section as the ``Council'').
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) Composition.--The Council shall be composed of--
 (A) 3 individuals appointed by the Secretary of 
 Education;
 (B) 2 individuals appointed by the Director of the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection;
 (C) not less than 8 and not more than 13 
 individuals appointed by the Comptroller General of the 
 United States, representing--
 (i) experts in competency-based education;
 (ii) faculty members in competency-based 
 education programs;
 (iii) faculty members in non-competency 
 based education programs;
 (iv) administrators at institutions that 
 offer competency-based education programs;
 (v) individuals currently enrolled in or 
 graduated from a competency-based education 
 program;
 (vi) accrediting agencies or associations 
 that recognize competency-based education 
 programs;
 (vii) experts from State educational 
 agencies; and
 (viii) business and industry 
 representatives; and
 (D) 4 members appointed by--
 (i) the Majority Leader of the Senate;
 (ii) the Minority Leader of the Senate;
 (iii) the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (iv) the Minority Leader of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) Chairperson.--The Council shall select a Chairperson 
 from among its members.
 (3) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Council shall not affect 
 the powers of the Council and shall be filled in the same 
 manner as an initial appointment.
 (c) Meetings.--The Council shall hold, at the call of the 
Chairperson, not less than 6 meetings before completing the study 
required under subsection (e) and the report required under subsection 
(f).
 (d) Personnel Matters.--
 (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Council 
 shall serve without compensation in addition to any such 
 compensation received for the member's service as an officer or 
 employee of the United States, if applicable.
 (2) Travel expenses.--The members of the Council shall be 
 allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter 1 of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business 
 in the performance of services for the Council.
 (e) Duties of the Council.--
 (1) Study.--The Council shall conduct a study on the 
 ongoing innovation and development of competency-based 
 education programs.
 (2) Recommendations.--Based on the findings of the study 
 under paragraph (1), and the annual evaluations of the 
 demonstration projects under section 486C of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965, as added by section 4615 of this Act, 
 the Council shall develop recommendations for the authorization 
 of competency-based education under the Higher Education Act of 
 1965, including recommendations that--
 (A) provide or update standard definitions, if 
 needed, for relevant terms, including--
 (i) competency-based education;
 (ii) competency-based education program 
 including quality indicators, that include 
 appropriate student outcome metrics, for such 
 programs; and
 (iii) any other relevant definitions agreed 
 upon; and
 (B) address--
 (i) the amount of learning in a competency 
 unit;
 (ii) the transfer of competency-based 
 education credits to other institutions or 
 programs;
 (iii) the minimum amount of time in an 
 academic year for competency-based education 
 programs, for financial aid purposes;
 (iv) considerations for accreditation 
 agencies before recognizing competency-based 
 education programs;
 (v) address the role of faculty and faculty 
 involvement in competency-based education 
 programs;
 (vi) additional resources that may be 
 needed for adequate oversight of competency-
 based education programs; and
 (vii) the responsiveness of competencies to 
 the labor market and employers.
 (f) Reports.--
 (1) Interim reports.--Not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter until the 
 final report is submitted under paragraph (2), the Council 
 shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of Education and 
 Congress, and make available to the public, a report that 
 provides ongoing feedback to the annual evaluations of the 
 demonstration projects under section 486C(g)(2) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965, as added by section 4615 of this Act, 
 including a discussion of implementation challenges programs 
 face, and the items listed in subsection (e)(2)(B).
 (2) Final report.--Not later than 6 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Council shall prepare and submit to 
 the Secretary of Education and Congress, and make available to 
 the public, a report containing the findings of the study under 
 subsection (e)(1) and the recommendations developed under 
 subsection (e)(2).

SEC. 4617. WRITTEN ARRANGEMENTS TO PROVIDE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 486C (as added by 
section 4615 of this Act) the following:

``SEC. 486D. WRITTEN ARRANGEMENTS TO PROVIDE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) Written Arrangements Between Eligible Institutions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if 
 an eligible institution enters into a written arrangement with 
 another eligible institution, or with a consortium of eligible 
 institutions, under which the other eligible institution or 
 consortium provides part of the educational program to students 
 enrolled in the first institution, the Secretary shall consider 
 that educational program to be an eligible program if the 
 educational program offered by the institution that grants the 
 degree or certificate otherwise satisfies the requirements for 
 eligibility under this title.
 ``(2) Common ownership or control.--If the written 
 arrangement described in paragraph (1) is between two or more 
 eligible institutions that are owned or controlled by the same 
 individual, partnership, or corporation, the Secretary shall 
 consider the educational program to be an eligible program if--
 ``(A) the educational program offered by the 
 institution that grants the degree or certificate 
 otherwise satisfies the requirements for eligibility 
 under this title; and
 ``(B) the institution that grants the degree or 
 certificate provides more than 50 percent of the 
 educational program.
 ``(b) Written Arrangements for Study-abroad.--Under a study abroad 
program, if an eligible institution enters into a written arrangement 
under which an institution in another country, or an organization 
acting on behalf of an institution in another country, provides part of 
the educational program of students enrolled in the eligible 
institution, the Secretary considers that educational program to be an 
eligible program if it otherwise satisfies the requirements of 
paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection (c).
 ``(c) Written Arrangements Between an Eligible Institution and an 
Ineligible Institution or Organization.--If an eligible institution 
enters into a written arrangement with an institution or organization 
that is not an eligible institution under which the ineligible 
institution or organization provides part of the educational program of 
students enrolled in the eligible institution, the Secretary shall 
consider that educational program to be an eligible program if--
 ``(1) the ineligible institution or organization has not--
 ``(A) had its eligibility to participate in the 
 programs under this title terminated by the Secretary;
 ``(B) voluntarily withdrawn from participation 
 programs under this title under a termination, show-
 cause, suspension, or similar type proceeding initiated 
 by the institution's State licensing agency, 
 accrediting agency, guarantor, or by the Secretary;
 ``(C) had its certification to participate in 
 programs under this title revoked by the Secretary;
 ``(D) had its application for re-certification to 
 participate in programs under this title denied by the 
 Secretary; or
 ``(E) had its application for certification to 
 participate in programs under this title denied by the 
 Secretary;
 ``(2) the ineligible institution or organization does not 
 have any role in the admission of students into the educational 
 program;
 ``(3) the educational program offered by the institution 
 that grants the degree or certificate otherwise satisfies the 
 requirements for eligibility under this title; and
 ``(4)(A) the ineligible institution or organization 
 provides 25 percent or less of the educational program; or
 ``(B)(i) the ineligible institution or organization 
 provides more than 25 percent but less than 50 percent of the 
 educational program;
 ``(ii) the eligible institution and the ineligible 
 institution or organization are not owned or controlled by the 
 same individual, partnership, or corporation;
 ``(iii) the eligible institution's accrediting agency, or 
 if the institution is a public postsecondary vocational 
 educational institution, the State agency determined by the 
 Secretary to be a reliable authority as to the quality of 
 public postsecondary vocational education pursuant to section 
 487(c)(4), has specifically determined that the institution's 
 arrangement meets the agency's standards for the contracting 
 out of educational services; and
 ``(iv) the eligible institution provides to the Secretary 
 the institution's expenditures on instruction, student 
 services, marketing, recruitment, advertising, and lobbying 
 made available under section 132(i)(1)(AA) with respect to the 
 portion of the educational program covered by the written 
 arrangement.
 ``(d) Administration of Title IV Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--If an institution enters into a written 
 arrangement as described in subsection (a), subsection (b), or 
 subsection (c), except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 institution at which the student is enrolled as a regular 
 student shall determine the student's eligibility for funds 
 under this title, and shall calculate and disburse those funds 
 to that student.
 ``(2) Special rule for arrangements between eligible 
 institutions.--In the case of a written arrangement between 
 eligible institutions, the institutions may agree in writing to 
 have any eligible institution in the written arrangement 
 calculate and disburse funds under this title to the student 
 and the Secretary shall not consider that institution to be a 
 third party servicer for that arrangement.
 ``(3) Calculation and disbursement.--The institution that 
 calculates and disburses a student's funds under paragraph (1) 
 or paragraph (2) must--
 ``(A) take into account all the hours in which the 
 student enrolls at each institution that apply to the 
 student's degree or certificate when determining the 
 student's enrollment status and cost of attendance; and
 ``(B) maintain all records regarding the student's 
 eligibility for and receipt of funds under this title.
 ``(e) Information Made Available to Students.--If an institution 
enters into a written arrangement described in subsection (a), 
subsection (b), or subsection (c), the institution shall provide 
directly to enrolled and prospective students, and make available on a 
publicly accessible website of the institution, a description of 
written arrangements the institution has entered into in accordance 
with this section, including information on--
 ``(1) the portion of the educational program that the 
 institution that grants the degree or certificate is not 
 providing;
 ``(2) the name and location of the other institutions or 
 organizations that are providing the portion of the educational 
 program that the institution that grants the degree or 
 certificate is not providing;
 ``(3) the method of delivery of the portion of the 
 educational program that the institution that grants the degree 
 or certificate is not providing; and
 ``(4) estimated additional costs students may incur as the 
 result of enrolling in an educational program that is provided, 
 in part, under the written arrangement.''.

SEC. 4618. IMPROVEMENTS TO PROGRAM PARTICIPATION AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Alcohol and Substance Misuse Prevention.--Section 487(a)(10) of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)(10)) is amended by 
striking ``a drug abuse prevention program'' and inserting ``an alcohol 
and substance misuse prevention program in accordance with section 
120''.
 (b) Adjusted Cohort Default Rate.--Section 487(a)(14) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Beginning on the date on which the final adjusted 
 cohort default rates are published by the Secretary for fiscal 
 year 2018 under section 435(m), subparagraph (C) shall be 
 applied by substituting `adjusted cohort default rate in excess 
 of 5 percent' for `cohort default rate in excess of 10 percent' 
 each place it appears.''.
 (c) Postsecondary Data.--Paragraph (17) of section 487(a) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(17) The institution of higher education (or the assigned 
 agent of such institution) shall collect and submit data to the 
 Commissioner for Education Statistics in a timely manner in 
 accordance with--
 ``(A) section 132(l);
 ``(B) nonstudent-related surveys within the 
 Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS); 
 and
 ``(C) any other Federal postsecondary data 
 collection effort.''.
 (d) Access to Housing for Foster Youth.--Section 487(a)(19) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)(19)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The institution will not'' and inserting 
 the following: ``The institution--
 ``(A) will not'';
 (2) by inserting ``housing facilities,'' after 
 ``libraries,'';
 (3) by striking ``institution.'' and inserting 
 ``institution; and''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) will provide a means for students to access 
 institutionally owned or operated housing if a student 
 is temporarily unable to meet financial obligations 
 related to housing, including deposits, due to delayed 
 disbursement of vouchers for education and training 
 made available under section 477 of part E of title IV 
 of the Social Security Act or delays attributable to 
 the institution.''.
 (e) Distribution of Voter Registration Forms.--
 Section 487(a)(23)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)(23)(A)) is amended by striking ``, if 
 located in a State to which section 4(b) of the National Voter 
 Registration Act of 1993 (42 U.S.C. 1973gg-2(b)) does not 
 apply,''.
 (f) Proprietary Institutions.--
 (1) 85/15 rule.--
 (A) Amendment.--Section 487(a)(24) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)(24)) is 
 amended by striking ``not less than ten percent of such 
 institution's revenues from sources other than funds 
 provided under this title'' and inserting ``not less 
 than 15 percent of such institution's revenues from 
 sources other than Federal education assistance 
 funds''.
 (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by this 
 paragraph shall take effect on July 1, 2022.
 (2) Repeals.--
 (A) In general.--Subsections (a)(24) and (d)(2) of 
 section 487 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1094) are repealed.
 (B) Effective date.--The repeals made by this 
 paragraph shall take effect on July 1, 2023.
 (g) Written Arrangements With Other Institutions.--Section 487(a) 
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(30) In the case of an institution that enters into a 
 written arrangement with an organization or another institution 
 to provide part of an educational program, the institution will 
 comply with the applicable requirements of section 486D.''.

SEC. 4619. COMPLIANCE WITH THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.

 Section 487(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1094(a)), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(31) The institution will--
 ``(A) designate at least one employee to coordinate 
 compliance with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), including any 
 investigation of any complaint alleging--
 ``(i) noncompliance with such title; and
 ``(ii) any actions prohibited by such 
 title;
 ``(B) annually submit a report to the Secretary 
 that includes all complaints described in subparagraph 
 (A) with respect to such institution;
 ``(C) make the report under subparagraph (B) 
 publicly available on the internet website of the 
 institution; and
 ``(D) notify students and employees of--
 ``(i) the name, office address, and 
 telephone number of each employee designated 
 under subparagraph (A);
 ``(ii) the report under subparagraph (B);
 ``(iii) the enforcement policies of the 
 institution with respect to such title; and
 ``(iv) the procedure for reporting and 
 investigating complaints under such title.''.

SEC. 4620. SUBMISSION OF DATA WITH RESPECT TO STUDENTS WITH 
 DISABILITIES.

 Section 487(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1094(a)), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(32) The institution will submit, for inclusion in the 
 postsecondary student data system established under section 
 132(l), the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System of 
 the Department, or any other Federal postsecondary institution 
 data collection effort, key data related to undergraduate and 
 graduate students enrolled at the institution who are formally 
 registered as students with disabilities with the institution's 
 office of accessibility, including the total number of students 
 with disabilities enrolled, the number of students accessing or 
 receiving accommodation, the percentage of students with 
 disabilities of all undergraduate students, and the total 
 number of undergraduate certificates or degrees awarded to 
 students with disabilities. An institution shall not be 
 required to submit the information described in the preceding 
 sentence if the number of such students would reveal personally 
 identifiable information about an individual student.''.

SEC. 4621. EDUCATION PROGRAM ON HAZING.

 (a) Educational Program on Hazing.--Section 487(a) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)), as amended by the preceding 
sections, is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(33) The institution will provide students with an 
 educational program on hazing (as that term is defined in 
 section 485(f)(6)(A)(vii)), which shall include information on 
 hazing awareness, hazing prevention, and the institution's 
 policies on hazing.''.

SEC. 4622. CHANGES TO PROGRAM PARTICIPATION AGREEMENTS TO STRENGTHEN 
 CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Prohibition on Loss of Access to Transcripts for Loan 
Default.--Section 487(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1094(a)) is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(34)(A) The institution will not prohibit a student from 
 accessing the student's transcripts, degree scrolls, or other 
 certifications of coursework or educational attainments at the 
 institution because the student is in default on the repayment 
 of a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this title.
 ``(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term `student' 
 includes former students.''.
 (b) Prohibition on Limitations on Ability of Students To Pursue 
Claims Against Certain Institutions of Higher Education.--Section 
487(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)) is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(35) No agreement between the institution and any student 
 will contain any limitation or restriction (including a 
 limitation or restriction on any available choice of applicable 
 law, a jury trial, or venue) on the ability of the student to 
 pursue a claim, individually or with others, against an 
 institution in court.''.

SEC. 4623. MISREPRESENTATION AND SUBSTANTIAL MISREPRESENTATION DEFINED.

 Section 487(c)(3) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1094(c)(3)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking ``$25,000'' and 
 inserting ``$60,000''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) In this paragraph:
 ``(i) The term `misleading' means having the likelihood or 
 tendency to mislead under the circumstances.
 ``(ii) The term `misrepresentation'--
 ``(I) means any false, erroneous, or misleading 
 statement an institution, one of its representatives, 
 or a third-party servicer (as defined in section 
 481(c)) makes directly or indirectly to a student, 
 prospective student or any member of the public, or an 
 accrediting agency, a State agency, or to the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(II) includes any statement that omits 
 information in such a way as to make the statement 
 false, erroneous, or misleading.
 ``(iii) The term `statement' means any communication made 
 in writing, visually, orally, or through other means.
 ``(iv) The term `substantial misrepresentation' means any 
 misrepresentation on which the person to whom such 
 misrepresentation was made could reasonably be expected to 
 rely, or has reasonably relied, to that person's detriment.''.

SEC. 4624. REVENUE REQUIREMENT.

 (a) Amendments.--Section 487(d) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1094(d)) is amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Title IV'' and 
 inserting ``Federal Education Assistance Funds'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)(iii)--
 (i) in subclause (II), by striking ``or'';
 (ii) in subclause (III), by adding ``or'' 
 at the end; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(IV) provides industry-related 
 skills training pursuant to a contract 
 with an entity that is an independent 
 third-party (such as an employer), 
 except that revenues from such skills 
 training shall not exceed 5 percent of 
 the institution's revenues for the 
 purposes of the calculation under this 
 paragraph, if the institution--
 ``(aa) does not offer more 
 than 50 percent of the 
 institution's courses 
 exclusively through distance 
 education;
 ``(bb) ensures that less 
 than 50 percent of students 
 enrolled at the institution are 
 enrolled exclusively in courses 
 offered through distance 
 education; and
 ``(cc) was providing such 
 skills training pursuant to 
 such contract before the date 
 of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act;'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C), in the matter preceding 
 clause (i), by striking ``funds for a program under 
 this title'' and inserting ``Federal education 
 assistance funds''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (D)(ii), by inserting 
 ``(including any financing or credit instrument of 
 which the institution was a holder or guarantor)'' 
 after ``proprietary institution of higher education'';
 (3) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``college 
 navigator'' and inserting ``department of education''; 
 and
 (B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``on the College Navigator'' and inserting 
 ``on a Department of Education''; and
 (4) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 inserting ``and make publicly available'' after 
 ``committees''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``sources 
 under this title'' and inserting ``Federal education 
 assistance funds''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on July 1, 2022.

SEC. 4625. TEACH-OUT PLANS.

 Section 487(f)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1094(f)(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Teach-out plan defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 `teach-out plan' means a written plan that provides for the 
 equitable treatment of students if an institution of higher 
 education ceases to operate before all students have completed 
 their program of study that--
 ``(A) shall include--
 ``(i) a process to maintain a complete list 
 of such students and the estimated date of 
 completion of each such student's program of 
 study; and
 ``(ii) a record retention plan that 
 includes--
 ``(I) a plan to provide each 
 student with the transcript of such 
 student, at no cost to such student, 
 regardless of whether such student 
 chooses to participate in a teach-out 
 or transfer; and
 ``(II) the policies and procedures 
 required under subparagraphs (B) and 
 (C) of section 495(a)(6); and
 ``(B) may include--
 ``(i) if required by the institution's 
 accrediting agency or association, an agreement 
 between institutions for such a teach-out plan; 
 and
 ``(ii) such other information as the 
 Secretary may require.''.

SEC. 4626. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAMS.

 Section 487A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094a) 
is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 487A. EXPERIMENTATION WITH STATUTORY AND REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY.

 ``(a) Experimental Sites.--The Secretary is authorized to 
periodically select a limited number of institutions for voluntary 
participation as experimental sites to test the effectiveness of 
approaches to statutory and regulatory flexibility that--
 ``(1) to the extent appropriate, may lead to a reduction of 
 regulatory burden on institutions of higher education or the 
 Department of Education, except that the Secretary shall not 
 waive any requirement of this title for any institution 
 participating as an experimental site that would reduce the 
 protections or the information provided to a student under this 
 Act; and
 ``(2) aim to increase student success, as determined in 
 accordance with subsection (g).
 ``(b) Continuing and Discontinuing Experiments and Experimental 
Sites.--The Secretary may continue any experiment or the voluntary 
participation of any experimental site in existence as of the date of 
enactment of the College Affordability Act, unless the Secretary 
determines that such experiment or site has not been successful in 
increasing student success as determined in accordance with subsection 
(g). Any experiment or experimental site approved by the Secretary 
prior to the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act that 
has not been successful in increasing student success shall be 
discontinued before the first day of the first award year beginning 
after such date.
 ``(c) Waivers.--The Secretary is authorized to waive, for any 
institution participating as an experimental site under subsection (a), 
any requirements in this title, including requirements related to the 
award process and disbursement of student financial aid (such as 
innovative delivery systems for modular or compressed courses, or other 
innovative systems), verification of student financial aid application 
data, entrance and exit interviews, or other management procedures or 
processes as determined in the negotiated rulemaking process under 
section 492, or regulations prescribed under this title, that will bias 
the results of the experiment, except that the Secretary shall not 
waive any provisions with respect to award rules (other than an award 
rule related to an experiment in modular or compressed schedules), 
grant and loan maximum award amounts, and need analysis requirements 
unless the waiver of such provisions is authorized by another provision 
under this title.
 ``(d) Evaluation Plan Required.--Before notifying institutions of 
the intent of the Secretary to carry out an experiment under this 
section, the Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the 
Institute of Education Sciences, shall develop an evaluation plan for 
the experiment. The evaluation plan shall include the following:
 ``(1) Identification of the methodology to be used for 
 collecting data on the experiment which shall include, to the 
 extent practicable, a methodology that allows for the 
 disaggregation of data by age, race, gender, disability status, 
 status as a veteran or member of the Armed Forces, status as a 
 first generation college student, and status as a recipient of 
 a Federal Pell Grant under section 401.
 ``(2) Identification of the rigorous evaluation methods to 
 be used for determining the impact of the experiment, which 
 shall include, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) a randomized controlled design; and
 ``(B) an assessment of whether the experiment has a 
 differential impact on any group described in paragraph 
 (1).
 ``(3) A schedule for conducting the experiment in 
 accordance with the duration limit specified in subsection (f).
 ``(4) An estimate of the cost of conducting the experiment, 
 to the extent practicable.
 ``(5) An estimate of the size of the study sample (such as 
 the number of participating students or institutions) needed to 
 determine if the experiment has statistically significant 
 effects.
 ``(e) Limitation Pending Notice to Congress.--
 ``(1) Limitation.--The Secretary may not carry out an 
 experiment at an experimental site under this section until a 
 period of 60 days has elapsed following the date on which the 
 Secretary submits to the authorizing committees the notice 
 described in paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Notice to congress.--The notice described in this 
 paragraph is a written notice that includes--
 ``(A) a description of the experiment proposed to 
 be carried out by the Secretary, including the 
 rationale for the proposed experiment;
 ``(B) the policy-relevant questions the Secretary 
 intends to evaluate through the experiment and an 
 explanation of how the design of the experiment will 
 allow the Secretary to best answer those questions;
 ``(C) a list of the specific statutory and 
 regulatory requirements that the Secretary intends to 
 waive with respect to an institution participating as 
 an experimental site and the legal authority for such 
 waivers;
 ``(D) an explanation of how the statutory and 
 regulatory flexibility provided to an institution 
 participating as an experimental site is expected to 
 increase student success, as required under subsection 
 (a); and
 ``(E) a copy of the evaluation plan developed under 
 subsection (d).
 ``(f) Duration.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 duration of an experiment under this section shall not exceed a 
 period of four years beginning with the first award year for 
 which Federal financial aid is disbursed to students 
 participating in the experiment.
 ``(2) Extension.--The Secretary may extend an experiment 
 for up to two years beyond the four-year period specified in 
 paragraph (1) on a case-by-case basis.
 ``(g) Determination of Success.--For the purposes of subsection 
(a), the Secretary shall make a determination of success regarding an 
institution's participation as an experimental site based on--
 ``(1) whether, and to what extent, student outcomes improve 
 as a direct result of the experiment;
 ``(2) whether the experimental site improves the delivery 
 of services to, or otherwise benefitted, students; and
 ``(3) the extent to which the experiment reduces 
 administrative burdens on institutions participating as 
 experimental sites, as documented in the Secretary's annual 
 report under subsection (h)(3), without harming students.
 ``(h) Outcomes Reporting.--
 ``(1) Data submission.--Each institution participating as 
 an experimental site shall submit to the Secretary, on a 
 periodic basis to be determined by the Secretary, data on 
 outcomes relating to the experiment carried out at the site.
 ``(2) Review and evaluation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary shall review and rigorously evaluate the 
 activities of each institution participating as an 
 experimental site.
 ``(B) Evaluation methodology.--To the extent 
 practicable, the evaluation under subparagraph (A) 
 shall be based on data collected in accordance with the 
 data collection methodology specified in the evaluation 
 plan for the experiment under subsection (d)(1).
 ``(3) Annual report.--On an annual basis, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the authorizing committees a report based on 
 the review and evaluation carried out under paragraph (2). Each 
 report shall include, with respect to each experiment carried 
 out by the Secretary during the period covered by the report, 
 the following:
 ``(A) A summary of the status of the experiment.
 ``(B) A list identifying each institution 
 participating as an experimental site.
 ``(C) The specific statutory or regulatory waivers 
 granted to each institution participating as an 
 experimental site.
 ``(D) In a case in which data on the experiment is 
 not collected in accordance with the methodology 
 specified in the evaluation plan under subsection 
 (d)(1)--
 ``(i) the reasons that such methodology was 
 not used to collect data on the experiment; and
 ``(ii) a description of the alternative 
 data collection methodology used for the 
 experiment.
 ``(E) An evaluation of the quality of data yielded 
 by the experiment.
 ``(F) A summary and analysis of the findings, to 
 date, of the experiment.
 ``(G) An assessment of whether the experiment has 
 had a differential impact on any group listed in 
 subsection (d)(1).
 ``(H) An explanation of any current or foreseen 
 barriers to conducting the experiment.
 ``(I) In the case of an experiment for which the 
 Secretary determines there is sufficient value in 
 continuing the experiment past the duration limit 
 specified in subsection (f)(1), adequate documentation 
 to justify such continuation.
 ``(4) Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 conclusion of each experiment, the Secretary shall submit to 
 the authorizing committees a report that includes the 
 following:
 ``(A) A summary of the data yielded by the 
 experiment, including, to the extent practicable, data 
 on the results of the experiment disaggregated by age, 
 race, gender, disability status, status as a veteran or 
 member of the Armed Forces, status as a first 
 generation college student, and status as a recipient 
 of a Federal Pell Grant under section 401.
 ``(B) The conclusions reached regarding each 
 experiment conducted.
 ``(C) Recommendations, based on the results of the 
 experiment--
 ``(i) to improve and streamline relevant 
 statutes, including this Act; and
 ``(ii) for improvements to relevant 
 regulations.
 ``(D) An explanation of any changes to regulations 
 that the Secretary intends to make as a result of the 
 experiment.
 ``(5) Public availability.--Each report submitted under 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) shall be made available on a publicly 
 accessible website of the Department of Education.
 ``(i) Fast-track Process to Comply With Information Collection 
Requirements.--The requirements of section 3507 of title 44, United 
States Code, shall not apply to the collection of information by the 
Department of Education on experiments carried out in accordance with 
this section.''.

SEC. 4627. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.

 Section 489(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1096(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence, by striking ``or under part E 
 of this title''; and
 (2) in the third sentence--
 (A) by inserting ``and'' after ``subpart 3 of part 
 A,''; and
 (B) by striking ``compensation of students,'' and 
 all that follows through the period and inserting 
 ``compensation of students.''.

SEC. 4628. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR MISUSE OF ACCESS DEVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 490 (20 U.S.C. 1097) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(e) Access to Department of Education Information Technology 
Systems for Fraud, Commercial Advantage, or Private Financial Gain.--
Any person who knowingly uses an access device, as defined in section 
1029(e)(1) of title 18, United States Code, issued to another person or 
obtained by fraud or false statement to access Department information 
technology systems for purposes of obtaining commercial advantage or 
private financial gain, or in furtherance of any criminal or tortious 
act in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States or of 
any State, shall be fined not more than $20,000, imprisoned for not 
more than 5 years, or both.''.
 (b) Guidance.--The Secretary shall issue guidance regarding the use 
of access devices in a manner that complies with this section, and the 
amendments made by this section.
 (c) Effective Date of Penalties.--The penalties described in 
section 490(e) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1097), as 
added by subsection (a), shall take effect the day after the date on 
which the Secretary issues guidance regarding the use of access 
devices, as described in subsection (b).

SEC. 4629. REGIONAL MEETINGS AND NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING.

 Section 492 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1098a) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``students, 
 institutions of higher education, State student grant agencies, 
 guaranty agencies, lenders, secondary markets, loan servicers, 
 guaranty agency servicers, and collection agencies'' and 
 inserting ``students and borrowers, consumer representatives, 
 institutions of higher education, and contractors responsible 
 for carrying out student financial assistance programs under 
 this title''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``both 
 representatives of such groups from Washington, D.C., 
 and industry participants'' and inserting 
 ``representatives that are broadly representative of 
 constituencies in different sectors and geographic 
 locations''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Negotiated rulemaking process.--In carrying out a 
 negotiated rulemaking process required under this section, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(A) to the extent practicable, comply with 
 requests from the participants in such negotiated 
 rulemaking process for data;
 ``(B) make publicly available issue papers and the 
 proposed regulations described in paragraph (1) in a 
 timely manner that allows for public review;
 ``(C) make video recordings of each negotiated 
 rulemaking session publicly available through 
 simultaneous transmission;
 ``(D) archive the video recordings described in 
 subparagraph (C) in a publicly available manner; and
 ``(E) make publicly available the transcripts of 
 each such negotiated rulemaking session.''.

SEC. 4630. INCOME-BASED REPAYMENT PLAN.

 (a) Options to Enter Into the New Fixed Repayment Plan and Income-
based Repayment Plan.--Section 493C(b) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1098e) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)(B)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (iv); 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(vi) has made payments under the income-
 based repayment plan under section 493C(f); or
 ``(vii) has made payments under the fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E;'';
 (2) by amending paragraph (8) to read as follows:
 ``(8) a borrower who is repaying a loan made under part B 
 or D pursuant to income-based repayment may elect, at any time, 
 to terminate repayment pursuant to income-based repayment and 
 repay such loan under the income-based repayment plan under 
 section 493C(f) or the fixed repayment plan described in 
 section 493E;'';
 (3) in paragraph (9), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) a borrower who is repaying a loan made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under part B or D pursuant to this section may repay 
 such loan in full at any time without penalty.''.
 (b) Automatic Recertification of Income for Income-Driven Repayment 
Plans.--Section 493C(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1098e(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Secretary shall establish'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish'';
 (2) by striking ``The Secretary shall consider'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(2) Procedures for eligibility.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) consider''; and
 (3) by striking ``428C(b)(1)(E).'' and inserting the 
 following: ``428C(b)(1)(E); and
 ``(B) beginning as soon as the Secretary determines 
 practicable after the Secretary finalizes the 
 procedures required under section 9004 of the College 
 Affordability Act, but not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of such Act, carry out, with respect 
 to borrowers of any covered loan (as defined in section 
 455(d)(10)), including such borrowers who select, or 
 for whom the Secretary selects under paragraph (8)(C) 
 or (9)(C) of subsection (d), or section 428(m)(1), the 
 income-based repayment plan under subsection (f), 
 procedures for income-based repayment plans under this 
 section that are equivalent to the procedures carried 
 out under section 455(e)(9) with respect to income 
 contingent repayment plans.''.
 (c) Income-Based Repayment.--Section 493C of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1098e) is further amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(f) Income-based Repayment for New Loans on and After July 1, 
2021, and for Borrowers Who Enter Income-based Repayment After June 30, 
2021.--
 ``(1) In general.--The income-based repayment plan under 
 this subsection shall be carried out in accordance with this 
 section, except as otherwise specified in this subsection--
 ``(A) with respect to any loan made under part D on 
 or after July 1, 2021, if such borrower elects such 
 income-based repayment plan for the loan; and
 ``(B) with respect to any loan made, insured, or 
 guaranteed under part B or D on or before June 30, 
 2021, if such borrower elects to repay the loan under 
 such income-based repayment plan on or after July 1, 
 2021.
 ``(2) Special terms.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of this section, with respect to a loan described under 
 paragraph (1), the following terms shall apply to the income-
 based repayment plan under this subsection:
 ``(A)(i) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(B), the 
 repayment amount under this subsection shall be an 
 amount equal to 10 percent of the result obtained by 
 calculating, on at least an annual basis, the amount by 
 which the adjusted gross income of the borrower 
 (subject to clause (ii)) exceeds the applicable 
 percentage of the poverty line in accordance with 
 clause (iii).
 ``(ii)(I) Subject to subclause (II), in the case of 
 a married borrower (regardless of tax filing status), 
 clause (i) shall be applied by substituting `the 
 adjusted gross income of the borrower and the 
 borrower's spouse' for `the adjusted gross income of 
 the borrower'.
 ``(II) Subclause (I) shall not be applicable to any 
 borrower who is married and who certifies to the 
 Secretary through a form approved by the Secretary that 
 the borrower is--
 ``(aa) separated from the spouse of the 
 borrower; or
 ``(bb) unable to reasonably access the 
 income information the spouse of such borrower.
 ``(iii) For purposes of clause (i), the term 
 `applicable percentage' means 250 percent of the 
 poverty line applicable to the borrower's family size 
 (as determined under section 673(2) of the Community 
 Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)))--
 ``(I) reduced by 10 percentage points for 
 each $1,000 by which the borrower's adjusted 
 gross income (in the case of a single borrower) 
 exceeds $80,000; and
 ``(II) reduced by 10 percentage points for 
 each $2,000 by which the borrower's adjusted 
 gross income (in the case of a married borrower 
 (regardless of filing status)), exceeds 
 $160,000.
 ``(B) Subsection (b)(7)(B) shall apply by 
 substituting `20 years' for `25 years'.
 ``(C) A borrower of such a loan may elect, and 
 remain enrolled in, the income-based repayment plan 
 under this subsection regardless of--
 ``(i) whether such borrower has a partial 
 financial hardship; and
 ``(ii) the income level of the borrower.
 ``(D) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of 
 subsection (b)(6), a borrower's monthly payment--
 ``(i) shall be equal to the repayment 
 amount determined under subparagraph (A) 
 divided by 12; and
 ``(ii) may exceed the monthly repayment 
 amount under a standard 10-year repayment plan 
 or a fixed repayment plan described in section 
 493E.
 ``(E) Subparagraph (B) of subsection (b)(3) shall 
 not apply.
 ``(F) Subsection (d) shall not apply.
 ``(G) In the case of a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan made on or after the date of enactment of the 
 College Affordability Act that is being repaid under 
 this subsection, any monthly payment made pursuant to 
 any repayment plan listed in subsection (b)(7)(B) on a 
 loan for which the liability has been discharged by the 
 proceeds of such consolidation loan shall be treated as 
 a monthly payment under this subsection on the portion 
 of such consolidation loan that is attributable to such 
 discharged loan, except that in the case of a 
 subsequent consolidation loan, for purposes of this 
 clause--
 ``(i) any monthly payment made on the first 
 consolidation loan or any other loan for which 
 the liability has been discharged by such 
 subsequent consolidation loan shall be 
 applicable; and
 ``(ii) any monthly payment made on a loan 
 for which the liability has been discharged by 
 such first consolidation loan shall not be 
 applicable.
 ``(3) Additional special terms for certain borrowers.--A 
 borrower described in paragraph (1)(B)--
 ``(A) may--
 ``(i) choose to continue repayment pursuant 
 to the repayment plan in which the borrower is 
 enrolled on June 30, 2021; or
 ``(ii) make a one-time election to--
 ``(I) terminate repayment pursuant 
 to the repayment plan described in 
 clause (i) and enter the income-based 
 repayment plan under this subsection; 
 or
 ``(II) terminate repayment pursuant 
 to the repayment plan described in 
 clause (i) and enter a fixed repayment 
 plan described in section 493E; and
 ``(B) who makes an election under subparagraph 
 (A)(ii), shall not repay a loan described in paragraph 
 (1)(B) under a repayment plan that is not an income-
 based repayment plan under this subsection or a fixed 
 repayment plan described in section 493E.
 ``(4) Written, electronic, or verbal enrollment in income-
 based repayment.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and 
 implement a process that is consistent with any 
 procedures (including verification procedures) 
 established under subsection (c), which enables a 
 covered borrower of a loan made under part D who 
 desires to elect to repay such loan under income-based 
 repayment under this subsection to make such election 
 through written, electronic, or verbal notice to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(B) Covered borrower defined.--In this paragraph, 
 the term `covered borrower' means a borrower of a loan 
 made under part D who--
 ``(i) is enrolled in the fixed repayment 
 plan under section 493E; or
 ``(ii) has not yet selected a repayment 
 plan.
 ``(g) Special Rule for Refinanced Loans.--
 ``(1) Refinanced federal direct and ffel loans.--In 
 calculating the period of time during which a borrower of a 
 loan that is refinanced under section 460A has made monthly 
 payments for purposes of subsection (b)(7), the Secretary shall 
 include each month in which a monthly payment was made for the 
 original loan or the refinanced loan, if such monthly payment 
 otherwise meet the requirements of this section.
 ``(2) Federal direct refinanced private loans.--In 
 calculating the period of time during which a borrower of a 
 Federal Direct Refinanced Private Loan under section 460B has 
 made monthly payments for purposes of subsection (b)(7), the 
 Secretary shall include only payments--
 ``(A) that are made after the date of the issuance 
 of the Federal Direct Refinanced Private Loan; and
 ``(B) that otherwise meet the requirements of this 
 section.''.

SEC. 4631. FIXED REPAYMENT PLAN.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.) is further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 493E. FIXED REPAYMENT PLAN.

 ``(a) In General.--A borrower of a loan made under this part on or 
after July 1, 2021, and a borrower who is in repayment on a loan made, 
insured, or guaranteed under part B or part D before July 1, 2021, may 
elect to repay such loan under the fixed repayment plan described in 
this section.
 ``(b) Fixed Repayment Plan.--Under the fixed repayment plan, a 
borrower whose total outstanding amount of principal and interest on 
such a loan (as of the day before entering repayment on such loan)--
 ``(1) is equal to or less than $20,000, shall repay such 
 loan with a fixed monthly repayment amount paid over a period 
 of 10 years;
 ``(2) is more than $20,000 and less than $30,000, shall 
 repay such loan with a fixed monthly repayment amount paid over 
 a period of--
 ``(A) 15 years; or
 ``(B) the period described in paragraph (1), if the 
 borrower elects such period;
 ``(3) is equal to or greater than $30,000, and less than 
 $40,000, shall repay such loan with a fixed monthly repayment 
 amount paid over a period of--
 ``(A) 20 years; or
 ``(B) the period described in paragraph (1) or (2), 
 if the borrower elects such period; and
 ``(4) is equal to or greater than $40,000, shall repay such 
 loan with a fixed monthly repayment amount paid over a period 
 of--
 ``(A) 25 years; or
 ``(B) the period described in any of paragraphs (1) 
 through (3), if the borrower elects such period.
 ``(c) Treatment of Certain Consolidation Loans.--In the case of a 
Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made on or after the date of 
enactment of the College Affordability Act that is being repaid under 
this section, any monthly payment made pursuant to any repayment plan 
listed in section 493C(b)(7)(B) on a loan for which the liability has 
been discharged by the proceeds of such consolidation loan shall be 
treated as a monthly payment under this section on the portion of such 
consolidation loan that is attributable to such discharged loan, except 
that in the case of a subsequent consolidation loan, for purposes of 
this subsection--
 ``(1) any monthly payment made on the first consolidation 
 loan or any other loan for which the liability has been 
 discharged by such subsequent consolidation loan shall be 
 applicable; and
 ``(2) any monthly payment made on a loan for which the 
 liability has been discharged by such first consolidation loan 
 shall not be applicable.''.

SEC. 4632. REQUIRING A COMMON MANUAL FOR LOAN SERVICERS.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.), as amended by this part, is further amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 493F. REQUIRING A COMMON MANUAL FOR LOAN SERVICERS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of the College Affordability Act, the Secretary shall develop 
a manual of common procedures and policies for entities with which the 
Secretary enters into contracts for the origination, servicing, and 
collection of covered loans, to standardize procedures to ensure 
consistency of quality and practice across such entities, and a minimum 
standard of quality and practice, to ensure that borrowers, including 
individuals pursuing public service loan forgiveness under section 
455(m) and teachers, are well served.
 ``(b) Updates.--The Secretary shall update the manual under 
subsection (a) as frequently as may be necessary, but not less 
frequently than once every 5 years.
 ``(c) Covered Loans Defined.--The term `covered loans' means--
 ``(1) loans sold or assigned to the Secretary under part B;
 ``(2) loans made or purchased under part D; and
 ``(3) loans referred, transferred, or assigned to the 
 Secretary under part E.''.

SEC. 4633. REMOVAL OF RECORD OF DEFAULT.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 493G. REMOVAL OF RECORD OF DEFAULT.

 ``(a) In General.--Upon repaying in full the amount due on a 
defaulted loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this title, the 
Secretary, guaranty agency, or other holder of the loan shall request 
any consumer reporting agency to which the Secretary, guaranty agency, 
or holder, as applicable, reported the default of the loan, to remove 
any adverse item of information relating to such loan from the 
borrower's credit history.
 ``(b) Retroactive Application.--With respect to a borrower that, 
prior to the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, repaid 
in full the amount due on a defaulted loan made, insured, or guaranteed 
under this title, the Secretary, guaranty agency, or holder that 
reported the default of the loan to a consumer reporting agency shall 
request that such consumer reporting agency remove any adverse item of 
information relating to such loan from the borrower's credit history, 
upon receiving a request from the borrower for such removal.''.

SEC. 4634. AMENDMENTS TO TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF BORROWER DEFENSES.

 (a) In General.--Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 493H. BORROWER DEFENSES.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of State or 
Federal law, a defense to repayment of a loan under this title 
includes--
 ``(1) a substantial misrepresentation;
 ``(2) an act or omission that would give rise to a cause of 
 action against an institution of higher education under 
 applicable State law, to the extent that such act or omission 
 relates to--
 ``(A) a loan received by a borrower under this 
 title; or
 ``(B) educational services for which such a loan 
 was received; or
 ``(3) such further acts or omissions that the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate in accordance with subsection (b).
 ``(b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall specify in regulations 
which further acts or omissions of an institution of higher education a 
borrower may assert as a defense to repayment of a loan made under this 
title.
 ``(c) Secretarial Determination.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall determine whether a 
 borrower is entitled to relief under this section based on all 
 evidence available to the Secretary.
 ``(2) Evidentiary standard.--A borrower shall be entitled 
 to relief under this section if a preponderance of the evidence 
 available to the Secretary demonstrates that the borrower is 
 entitled to such relief.
 ``(3) Independent determination.--A determination under 
 paragraph (1) shall be independent of any action that the 
 Secretary may take to recoup funds from the institution of 
 higher education implicated by the borrower defense claim.
 ``(d) Procedures for Review and Resolution of Claims.--
 ``(1) Procedures required.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures for the fair and expeditious review and resolution 
 of borrower defense claims brought under this section. In 
 establishing such procedures, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) provide a fair process for the review and 
 resolution of borrower defense claims, which shall 
 include procedures for the consideration of borrower 
 defense claims on behalf of groups of similarly 
 situated borrowers without requiring each borrower in 
 the group to submit a separate claim;
 ``(B) review a borrower defense claim at any time 
 without regard to the repayment status of any loan 
 subject to such claim;
 ``(C) allow a legal representative to bring a 
 borrower defense claim--
 ``(i) on behalf of an individual borrower; 
 or
 ``(ii) on behalf of a group of similarly 
 situated borrowers; and
 ``(D) specify a fixed timeframe for the resolution 
 of borrower defense claims, except that--
 ``(i) such timeframe shall not exceed a 12-
 month period beginning on the day on which a 
 borrower submits such a claim under this 
 section; and
 ``(ii) a borrower defense claim that was 
 submitted to the Secretary before the date of 
 enactment of the College Affordability Act that 
 has not been resolved as of such date of 
 enactment, shall be resolved not later than 12 
 months after such date of enactment.
 ``(2) Deferment during pendency of claims.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
 loan made under this title that is subject to a pending 
 borrower defense claim shall be placed in deferment 
 status, during which periodic installments of principal 
 need not be paid and interest shall not accrue (or 
 shall be paid by the Secretary), without regard to 
 whether such loan is in default.
 ``(B) Opt out.--The borrower of a loan subject to 
 deferment under subparagraph (A) may opt out of such 
 deferment at any time during the pendency of the 
 borrower defense claim.
 ``(C) Suspension of credit reporting and 
 collection.--The Secretary shall suspend all adverse 
 credit reporting and collection activity, including 
 offsets and garnishments, with respect to any loan in 
 default that is subject to a deferment under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(f) Terms of Relief.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary determines under 
 subsection (c) that a borrower is entitled to relief, the 
 Secretary shall, subject to paragraph (2)--
 ``(A) cancel or repay all or a portion of the 
 balance of interest and principal due on any loan 
 subject to the claim for relief; and
 ``(B) return to the borrower an amount not in 
 excess of the total amount of payments made on the loan 
 by the borrower.
 ``(2) Cancellation of debt and return of payments.--
 ``(A) Substantial misrepresentation claims.--If the 
 Secretary determines that a borrower is entitled to 
 relief based on a claim of substantial 
 misrepresentation, the Secretary shall--
 ``(i) cancel or repay the full balance of 
 interest and principal due on any loan subject 
 to the claim; and
 ``(ii) return to the borrower an amount 
 equal to the total amount of payments made on 
 the loan by the borrower.
 ``(B) Other claims.--If the Secretary determines 
 that a borrower is entitled to relief based on a claim 
 other than substantial misrepresentation, there shall 
 be a presumption that the Secretary will cancel or 
 repay the full balance of principal and interest due on 
 the loan and return the full amount of payments made by 
 the borrower as described in subparagraph (A). If the 
 Secretary determines that full cancellation or 
 repayment of the debt and return of all funds paid on 
 the loan is not appropriate in a particular case, the 
 Secretary shall provide the borrower with a written 
 explanation as to why partial cancellation or 
 repayment, or the partial return of funds is 
 appropriate.
 ``(g) Appeals.--Upon a determination by the Secretary to deny a 
borrower defense claim under this section, the borrower may file an 
appeal with the Department. The Secretary shall develop and implement a 
standardized process for the treatment of appeals under this 
subsection.
 ``(h) Refiling of Claims.--A borrower whose claim was denied under 
this section may refile the claim for good cause, which may include--
 ``(1) the availability of substantial evidence that was not 
 available to the Secretary at the time the initial claim was 
 denied;
 ``(2) the emergence of facts or circumstances that may have 
 substantially altered the Secretary's original treatment of the 
 initial claim; and
 ``(3) such other factors as may be determined by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(i) Designation of Personnel.--The Secretary shall designate 
qualified personnel within the Department whose principal 
responsibility shall be the processing of borrower defense claims 
submitted under his section.
 ``(j) Availability of Information to Borrowers.--
 ``(1) Borrower requests for information.--At the request of 
 a borrower, the Secretary shall identify and provide to the 
 borrower or the legal representative of the borrower any 
 records the Secretary is considering as part of the borrower's 
 claim.
 ``(2) Status of claim.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 process under which each borrower with a claim pending under 
 this section shall be notified of the status of the pending 
 claim not fewer than once every 90 days.
 ``(3) Information from institutions.--The Secretary may 
 request documents and other information relating to a borrower 
 defense claim from an institution of higher education. An 
 institution that receives a request for information from the 
 Secretary under this subsection shall provide the information 
 to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and in such manner 
 as the Secretary may direct.
 ``(k) Quarterly Reports.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not less than once every fiscal quarter, 
 the Secretary shall submit to the authorizing committees a 
 report that includes the following:
 ``(A) The total number of claims submitted to the 
 Secretary pursuant to this subsection in the fiscal 
 quarter covered by the report and in all previous 
 fiscal quarters.
 ``(B) Of the claims described in subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) the number of claims that remain 
 pending;
 ``(ii) the number of claims that were 
 denied by the Secretary, and the total dollar 
 amount of such claims; and
 ``(iii) the number of claims that were 
 approved by the Secretary, and the total dollar 
 amount of such claims.
 ``(2) Disaggregation.--The information described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) shall be 
 disaggregated by State and institution of higher education 
 (except that such disaggregation shall not be required in a 
 case in which the results would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual borrower).
 ``(3) Public availability.--The information included in 
 each report submitted under paragraph (A) shall be made 
 available on a publicly accessible website of the Department.
 ``(l) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `legal representative' means a licensed 
 attorney working on behalf of a borrower or a group of 
 borrowers, including--
 ``(A) a State attorney general; and
 ``(B) an attorney employed by a State agency, a 
 Federal agency, or a nonprofit organization that is 
 qualified to provide legal representation to borrowers.
 ``(2) The term `substantial misrepresentation' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 487(c)(3)(C).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (h) of section 455 of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e) is repealed.

SEC. 4635. ON-TIME REPAYMENT RATES.

 Part G of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1088 et seq.), as amended by the preceding sections, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 493I. ON-TIME REPAYMENT RATES.

 ``(a) Calculation of On-time Repayment Rates.--
 ``(1) On-time repayment rate defined.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `on-time repayment 
 rate' means for any fiscal year in which 30 or more 
 current and former students at an institution have been 
 in repayment for 3 years on any covered loan received 
 for attendance at the institution, the percentage of 
 such current and former students who have paid at least 
 90 percent of the monthly payments on such loan during 
 such 3-year repayment period.
 ``(B) Small cohorts.--For any fiscal year in which 
 fewer than 30 of an institution's current and former 
 students have been in repayment for 3 years, the term 
 `on-time repayment rate' means the percentage of such 
 current and former students who entered their 3rd year 
 of repayment on any covered loan received for 
 attendance at the institution in any of the 3 most 
 recent fiscal years and who have paid at least 90 
 percent of the monthly payments on such loan during 
 such 3-year repayment period.
 ``(2) Additional requirements for rate determination.--
 ``(A) Multiple institutions.--In the case of a 
 student who has attended and borrowed a covered loan 
 for attendance at more than one institution, the 
 student (and such student's subsequent repayment or 
 monthly payment on such loan) is attributed to each 
 institution for attendance at which the student 
 received such loan for which the student entered the 
 3rd year of repayment in the fiscal year for which the 
 on-time repayment rate is being determined.
 ``(B) Treatment of consolidation loans.--For 
 purposes of determining whether a student is in 
 repayment (or has paid a monthly payment) on a loan 
 under section 428C or a Federal Direct Consolidation 
 Loan, only the portion of such loan that is used to 
 repay a covered loan received for attendance at the 
 institution whose on-time repayment rate is being 
 determined shall be considered for purposes of such 
 rate.
 ``(3) Determination of when monthly payment is paid.--For 
 purposes of determining the on-time repayment rate of an 
 institution, a student shall be considered to have paid a 
 monthly payment on a covered loan if one of the following 
 applies:
 ``(A) The amount of such monthly payment has been 
 paid not later than 30 days after the date on which 
 such monthly payment is due, except that a monthly 
 payment by the institution, such institution's owner, 
 agent, contractor, employee, or any other entity or 
 individual affiliated with such institution made on 
 behalf of a student who is not employed by the 
 institution shall not be considered a paid monthly 
 payment on such loan.
 ``(B) The monthly payment amount due on such loan 
 is equal to zero.
 ``(C) The full amount due on the loan has been 
 repaid or the liability on the loan has been otherwise 
 discharged under this Act.
 ``(D) The student is in a period of deferment, 
 other than--
 ``(i) a deferment due to an economic 
 hardship described section 427(a)(2)(C)(iii), 
 428(b)(1)(M)(iv), or 455(f)(2)(D); or
 ``(ii) a deferment due to unemployment 
 described in section 427(a)(2)(C)(ii), 
 428(b)(1)(M)(ii), or 455(f)(2)(B)).
 ``(E) The student is in one of the following 
 periods of forbearance (as applicable to loans made, 
 insured, or guaranteed under part B or this title):
 ``(i) Medical or dental internship or 
 residency forbearance under subclause (I) of 
 section 428(c)(3)(A)(i).
 ``(ii) National service forbearance under 
 subclause (III) of section 428(c)(3)(A)(i).
 ``(iii) Forbearance for active duty service 
 in the Armed Forces under subclause (IV) of 
 section 428(c)(3)(A)(i).
 ``(iv) Forbearance for National Guard Duty 
 under section 428(c)(3)(B).
 ``(v) Forbearance due to military 
 mobilization or other local or national 
 emergency as authorized by the Secretary under 
 section 685.205(b)(8) of title 34, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date 
 of enactment of the College Affordability Act).
 ``(vi) Teacher loan forgiveness forbearance 
 under section 682.213(e) or 685.205(a)(5) of 
 title 34, Code of Federal Regulations (as in 
 effect on the date of enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act).
 ``(4) Participation rate.--
 ``(A) In general.--An institution that demonstrates 
 to the Secretary that the institution's participation 
 rate is equal to or less than 20 percent for any of the 
 3 most recent fiscal years for which data is available 
 shall not be subject to subsection (b).
 ``(B) Determination.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term `participation rate' means the 
 percentage of the institution's regular students, 
 enrolled on at least a half-time basis, who received a 
 covered loan for a 12-month period ending during the 6 
 months immediately preceding the fiscal year for which 
 the cohort of borrowers used to calculate the 
 institution's on-time loan repayment rate is 
 determined.
 ``(C) Data.--An institution shall provide the 
 Secretary with sufficient data to determine the 
 institution's participation rate within 30 days after 
 receiving an initial notification of the institution's 
 draft on-time repayment rate.
 ``(D) Notification.--Prior to publication of a 
 final on-time repayment rate for an institution that 
 provides the data described in subparagraph (C), the 
 Secretary shall notify the institution of the 
 institution's compliance or noncompliance with 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(b) Determination of Eligibility Based on Repayment Rates and 
Instructional Spending Amounts.--
 ``(1) Ineligibility.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (C) and (D), beginning on the date that 
 is one year after the date on which the final on-time 
 repayment rates are published by the Secretary for not 
 less than 3 fiscal years, an institution shall not be 
 eligible to participate in a program under this title 
 for the fiscal year for which the determination under 
 this subparagraph is made and for the two succeeding 
 fiscal years, if the Secretary determines the following 
 with respect to such institution--
 ``(i) the on-time repayment rate of such 
 institution is less than any threshold on-time 
 repayment rate specified under subparagraph (B) 
 for period determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary for such threshold rate; and
 ``(ii) with respect to any of the 3 most 
 recent institutional fiscal years for which the 
 institution submits to the Secretary 
 disclosures on the expenditures of the 
 institution on instruction for purposes of 
 section 132(i)(1)(AA), the amount expended by 
 such institution on instruction for such fiscal 
 year is less than 1/3 of the institution's 
 revenues derived from tuition and fees.
 ``(B) Threshold rates.--For purposes of 
 determinations under subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary 
 shall specify 1 or more threshold on-time repayment 
 rates, which rates--
 ``(i) shall require that a significant 
 percentage of students who have been in 
 repayment for 3 years on a covered loan 
 received for attendance at an institution of 
 higher education have paid at least 90 percent 
 of the monthly payments on such covered loan 
 during such 3-year repayment period; and
 ``(ii) may be applicable with respect to a 
 period of 1 or more fiscal years, as determined 
 appropriate for such a rate.
 ``(C) Exceptions for certain categories of 
 educational programs.--
 ``(i) Exceptions for certain categories of 
 educational programs.--With respect to an 
 institution that loses eligibility to 
 participate in a program under this title in 
 accordance with paragraph (1), such institution 
 may request and be granted an exception to such 
 loss of eligibility for a category of 
 educational programs at such institution by 
 demonstrating to the Secretary that the on-time 
 loan repayment rate for such category of 
 educational programs is greater than the 
 threshold percentage specified under paragraph 
 (1)(B) for each fiscal year of the period on 
 which such loss of eligibility for the 
 institution is based.
 ``(ii) Determinations.--In determining the 
 on-time loan repayment rate for a category of 
 educational programs, subsection (a)(1) shall 
 be applied--
 ``(I) in subparagraph (A), by 
 substituting `received for enrollment 
 in the category of educational programs 
 for which such rate is being 
 determined' for `received for 
 attendance at the institution'; and
 ``(II) as if the following were 
 added at the end of such paragraph:
 ```(C) Multiple categories of educational 
 programs.--In the case of a student who has received a 
 covered loan for enrollment in more than one category 
 of educational programs, the student (and such 
 student's subsequent repayment or monthly payment on 
 such covered loan) is attributed to the last category 
 of educational programs in which such student was 
 enrolled.'.
 ``(D) Appeals.--Not later than 60 days of receiving 
 notification from the Secretary of the loss of 
 eligibility under subparagraph (A), the institution may 
 appeal the loss of its eligibility under subsection 
 (c).
 ``(2) Repayment management plan requirement for certain 
 institutions.--
 ``(A) In general.--Beginning on the date that is 
 one year after the date on which the final on-time 
 repayment rates are published by the Secretary for not 
 less than 3 fiscal years, an institution shall be 
 subject to the requirements of subparagraph (B), if the 
 Secretary determines the following with respect to such 
 institution--
 ``(i) the on-time repayment rate of such 
 institution is less than any threshold on-time 
 repayment rate specified under paragraph (1)(B) 
 for period determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary for such threshold rate; and
 ``(ii) for each of the 3 most recent 
 institutional fiscal years for which the 
 institution submits to the Secretary 
 disclosures on the expenditures of the 
 institution on instruction for purposes of 
 section 132(i)(1)(AA), the amount expended by 
 the institution for instructional spending is 
 greater than or equal to an amount equal to 1/3 
 of the amount of revenue derived from tuition 
 and fees.
 ``(B) Repayment management plan.--An institution 
 subject to the requirements of this subparagraph, 
 shall--
 ``(i) not later than 6 months after the 
 determination under subparagraph (A), submit to 
 the Secretary a repayment management plan which 
 the Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, 
 after consideration of the institution's 
 history, resources, expenditures, and targets 
 for improving on-time repayment, determines--
 ``(I) is acceptable and is in the 
 best interests of students; and
 ``(II) provides reasonable 
 assurance that the institution will 
 have an on-time repayment rate that 
 exceeds the on-time threshold referred 
 to in subparagraph (A)(i) after a 
 reasonable period;
 ``(ii) engage an independent third-party to 
 provide technical assistance in implementing 
 such repayment management plan; and
 ``(iii) provide to the Secretary, on an 
 annual basis or at such other intervals as the 
 Secretary may require, evidence of on-time 
 repayment rate improvement and successful 
 implementation of such repayment management 
 plan.
 ``(c) Appeals.--
 ``(1) Secretarial requirements.--The Secretary shall issue 
 a decision on any appeal submitted by an institution under 
 subsection (b)(1)(D) not later than 45 days after its 
 submission. Such decision may permit the institution to 
 continue to participate in a program under this title if--
 ``(A) the institution demonstrates to the 
 satisfaction of the Secretary that the Secretary's 
 calculation of its on-time repayment rate is not 
 accurate, and that recalculation would increase its on-
 time repayment rate above the applicable threshold 
 percentage specified in subsection (b)(1)(B) for the 
 period on which the determination of the institution's 
 ineligibility under subsection (b)(1)(A) was based;
 ``(B) the institution demonstrates to the 
 satisfaction of the Secretary that there has been 
 improper loan servicing, which, if remedied, would 
 increase its on-time repayment rate above the 
 applicable threshold percentage specified in subsection 
 (b)(1)(B) for the period on which the determination of 
 the institution's ineligibility under subsection 
 (b)(1)(A) was based;
 ``(C) there are, in the judgment of the Secretary, 
 exceptional mitigating circumstances that would make 
 the application of this section inequitable;
 ``(D) for each of the 3 most recent fiscal years 
 for which the institution submits to the Secretary 
 disclosures on expenditures for purposes of section 
 132(i)(1)(AA), the sum of the expenditures on 
 instruction and student services of the institution is 
 equal to an amount greater than or equal to 50 percent 
 of the institution's revenues derived from tuition and 
 fees, and the institution complies with the 
 requirements of subsection (b)(2)(B).
 ``(2) Institutional requirements.--If an institution 
 continues to participate in a program under this title, and the 
 institution's appeal of the loss of eligibility is 
 unsuccessful, the institution shall be required to pay to the 
 Secretary an amount equal to the amount of interest, special 
 allowance, reinsurance, and any related payments made by the 
 Secretary (or which the Secretary is obligated to make) with 
 respect to covered loans to students attending, or planning to 
 attend, that institution during the pendency of such appeal. 
 During such appeal, the Secretary may permit the institution to 
 continue to participate in a program under this title.
 ``(d) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations 
designed to prevent an institution from evading the application to that 
institution of a on-time repayment rate determination under this 
section through the use of such measures as branching, consolidation, 
change of ownership or control, or any similar device.
 ``(e) Publication.--The Secretary shall publish not less often than 
once every fiscal year (by September 30 of each year) a report--
 ``(1) for each category of institution, and for each 
 institution for which an on-time repayment rate is determined 
 under this section--
 ``(A) with respect to the preceding fiscal year--
 ``(i) the on-time repayment rate for such 
 institution;
 ``(ii) the on-time repayment rate for each 
 category of educational programs; and
 ``(iii) the number of students on which the 
 rates described in clauses (i) and (ii) are 
 based; and
 ``(B) for each of the 3 most recent fiscal years 
 for which the institution submits to the Secretary 
 disclosures on expenditures for purposes of section 
 132(i)(1)(AA)--
 ``(i) the amount of the institution's 
 expenditures on instruction;
 ``(ii) the amount of revenue derived from 
 tuition and fees by the institution; and
 ``(iii) the quotient of the amount 
 described in clause (i) divided by the amount 
 described in clause (ii), expressed as a 
 percentage; and
 ``(2) each on-time repayment rate used for calculating each 
 of the threshold rates under subsection (b)(1)(B) for the 
 period determined appropriate by the Secretary for such 
 threshold rate under such subsection.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Category of educational programs.--The term `category 
 of educational programs' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 435(a)(9)(E).
 ``(2) Category of institution.--The term `category of 
 institution' includes--
 ``(A) four-year public institutions;
 ``(B) four-year private nonprofit institutions;
 ``(C) four-year proprietary institutions;
 ``(D) two-year public institutions;
 ``(E) two-year private nonprofit institutions;
 ``(F) two-year proprietary institutions;
 ``(G) less-than-two year public institutions;
 ``(H) less-than-two year private nonprofit 
 institutions; and
 ``(I) less-than-two year proprietary institutions.
 ``(3) Covered loan.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `covered loan' means a 
 loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B or D 
 (other than an excepted PLUS Loan or an excepted 
 consolidation Loan).
 ``(B) Excepted plus loan; excepted consolidation 
 loan.--The terms `excepted PLUS Loan' and `excepted 
 consolidation Loan' have the meanings given such terms 
 in section 493C(a).
 ``(4) Student services.--The term `student services' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 498E(a)(2).''.

 PART H--PROGRAM INTEGRITY

 Subpart 1--State Role

SEC. 4701. STATE RESPONSIBILITIES.

 Section 495(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1099a(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by inserting ``and the accrediting agency or 
 association involved'' after ``Secretary'';
 (B) by striking ``revokes a license'' and inserting 
 ``takes a negative action, or revokes a license,''; and
 (C) by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) evaluate each institution of higher education located 
 in the State or seeking authorization to operate in the State 
 to determine if such institution of higher education meets the 
 applicable standards of the State relating to--
 ``(A) facilities, equipment, and supplies; and
 ``(B) measures of program length and other factors 
 relevant for a student or graduate to receive a 
 professional license from the State;
 ``(5) certify to the Secretary that the State shall--
 ``(A) accept student complaints from--
 ``(i) all students attending an institution 
 of higher education located in the State; and
 ``(ii) all students who are residents of 
 the State and attend an institution of higher 
 education not located in the State through 
 correspondence or distance education; and
 ``(B) report to the Secretary and accrediting 
 bodies--
 ``(i) relevant student complaints received 
 by the State, including multiple student 
 complaints that present consistent allegations 
 with respect to an institution of higher 
 education in the State; and
 ``(ii) such other complaints the Secretary 
 determines necessary; and
 ``(6) establish policies and procedures to anticipate and 
 respond to the closure of an institution of higher education, 
 which shall include--
 ``(A) the maintenance of sufficient cash reserves 
 (or an equivalent alternative) in accordance with 
 regulations issued pursuant to section 498(c)(6)(A) to 
 ensure repayment of any required refunds;
 ``(B) a plan to address ensuring custodial record-
 keeping of institutional records and student 
 transcripts in the case of such a closure;
 ``(C) the maintenance of contact information 
 adequate to ensure communication directly between the 
 State and each student in the case of such a closure; 
 and
 ``(D) in the case of an institution of higher 
 education located in the State, to develop a process to 
 identify when a campus of such institution of higher 
 education closes in any State.''.

 Subpart 2--Accrediting Agency Recognition

SEC. 4711. ACCREDITING AGENCY RECOGNITION OF ELIGIBLE JOB TRAINING 
 PROGRAMS.

 Section 496(a)(4) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1099b(a)(4)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) if such agency or association has or seeks to 
 include within its scope of recognition the evaluation 
 of the quality of institutions of higher education 
 participating in the job training Federal Pell Grant 
 program under section 401(k), such agency or 
 association shall, in addition to meeting the other 
 requirements of this subpart, demonstrate to the 
 Secretary that, with respect to such eligible job 
 training program--
 ``(i) the agency or association's standards 
 include a process for determining if the 
 institution has the capability to effectively 
 provide an eligible job training program; and
 ``(ii) the agency or association requires a 
 demonstration that the program--
 ``(I) has identified each 
 recognized postsecondary credential 
 offered and the corresponding industry 
 or sector partnership that actively 
 recognizes each credential in the State 
 or local area in which the job training 
 program is provided; and
 ``(II) provides the academic 
 content and amount of instructional 
 time that is sufficient to--
 ``(aa) meet the hiring 
 requirements of potential 
 employers; and
 ``(bb) satisfy any 
 applicable educational 
 prerequisite requirement for 
 professional license or 
 certification, so that a 
 student who completes the 
 program and seeks employment is 
 qualified to take any licensure 
 or certification examination 
 needed to practice or find 
 employment in such sectors or 
 occupations; and''.

SEC. 4712. ACCREDITING AGENCY RECOGNITION OF INSTITUTIONS ENROLLING 
 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

 Section 496(a)(4) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1099b(a)(4)) is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) if such agency or association accredits or 
 seeks to accredit institutions of higher education that 
 seek to award Federal Pell Grants under section 401(n) 
 to incarcerated individuals for a course of study at 
 such institution, such agency or association shall, in 
 addition to meeting the other requirements of this 
 subpart, demonstrate to the Secretary that--
 ``(i) the agency or association's standards 
 include a process for determining if the 
 institution has the capability to effectively 
 offer such a course of study to incarcerated 
 individuals; and
 ``(ii) the agency or association requires a 
 demonstration that--
 ``(I) such course of study is 
 taught by faculty with experience and 
 credentials comparable to the 
 experience and credentials of faculty 
 who teach courses of study available to 
 non-incarcerated students enrolled at 
 the institution;
 ``(II) academic credits earned by 
 incarcerated individuals for completion 
 of a course of study are treated by the 
 institution as the equivalent to 
 credits earned by non-incarcerated 
 students for an equivalent course;
 ``(III) the institution provides 
 sufficient educational content and 
 resources to students enrolled in such 
 a course of study that are, to the 
 extent practicable, consistent with the 
 educational content and resources 
 available to non-incarcerated students; 
 and
 ``(IV) the institution has the 
 capacity, staffing, and expertise to 
 provide incarcerated individuals with 
 the support and advising services 
 necessary to select and successfully 
 participate in such a course of study 
 and, to the extent practicable, with 
 support upon reentry (including career 
 and academic advising);''.

SEC. 4713. REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCREDITING AGENCY RECOGNITION.

 (a) Working Group; Rulemaking.--
 (1) Working group.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of the Act, the Secretary of 
 Education shall establish a working group comprised of 
 individuals specified in subparagraph (B), to establish 
 a common glossary of measures (and a definition for 
 each such measure)--
 (i) that, for purposes of section 
 496(a)(5)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099b(a)(5)(A))--
 (I) accrediting agencies or 
 associations may use to assess each of 
 the outcomes described in subparagraph 
 (C);
 (II) shall not restrict accrediting 
 agencies or associations from 
 establishing, in accordance with such 
 section 496(a)(5)(A), other measures to 
 assess such outcomes;
 (III) shall not include performance 
 benchmarks or other thresholds with 
 respect to such measures; and
 (IV) provides accrediting agencies 
 or associations described in 
 subparagraphs (A)(i) and (C)(ii) of 
 section 496(a)(2) (20 U.S.C. 
 1099b(a)(2)) with enough flexibility 
 for adequate assessment of such 
 outcomes; and
 (ii) that may include measures (and 
 definitions for such measures) set forth under 
 the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data 
 Survey, the postsecondary data system 
 established under section 132(l), or a 
 successor system;
 (iii) to which future working groups which 
 meet the requirements of this paragraph may add 
 additional measures; and
 (iv) that the Secretary of Education shall 
 not have the authority to approve.
 (B) Composition.--The working group established 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be of sufficient size to 
 ensure that a full range of relevant accrediting 
 agencies and institutions are represented on the panel 
 and shall include, at a minimum, the following members:
 (i) Representatives of national, regional, 
 and specialized accrediting agencies and 
 associations that shall be nominated for 
 inclusion on the panel by such representatives.
 (ii) Representatives of diverse 
 postsecondary institutions, which shall include 
 representation between 2-year and 4-year 
 institutions of higher education, and from 
 public, nonprofit, and proprietary institutions 
 of higher education, including minority-serving 
 institutions.
 (iii) The Commissioner of the National 
 Center for Education Statistics or the 
 Commissioner's representative.
 (iv) Student advocate representatives 
 familiar with the accreditation process.
 (C) Outcomes.--The outcomes described in this 
 subparagraph are as follows:
 (i) Completion (which may include measures 
 such as graduation rates and rates of 
 transfer).
 (ii) Progress toward completion (which may 
 include measures such as retention rates and 
 credit accumulation).
 (iii) Workforce participation (which may 
 include measures such as rates of licensure and 
 job placement).
 (2) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall 
 initiate a negotiated rule-making--
 (A) to develop procedures for identifying the 
 representative member institutions an accrediting 
 agency or association shall use to demonstrate to the 
 Secretary, for purposes of the Secretary's review and 
 evaluation of the performance of such agency or 
 association under section 496(n)(1) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099b(n)(1)), as 
 amended by this section, that such accrediting agency 
 or association--
 (i) consistently applies and enforces 
 standards; and
 (ii) effectively evaluates the quality of 
 education or training offered by the 
 institutions of higher education accredited by 
 such agency or association; and
 (B) for purposes of section 496 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099b), as amended by 
 this section, to--
 (i) establish definitions for the terms 
 related to sanctions, adverse actions, and any 
 other action that an accrediting agency or 
 association may take with respect to an 
 institution of higher education under such 
 section (including monitoring, notice, warning, 
 probation, show cause, denial, withdrawal, 
 suspension, revocation, accreditation, and 
 preaccreditation); and
 (ii) in a case in which any action defined 
 in clause (i) is taken by an accrediting agency 
 or association with respect to an institution 
 of higher education, establish notice and 
 disclosure requirements for such agency or 
 association and institution of higher education 
 with respect to the public (including 
 students), as long as such requirements are 
 consistent with the requirements of subsections 
 (a)(7) and (c)(7) of section 496 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099b).
 (b) Amendments.--Section 496 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1099b) is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (3)(A), by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: ``, and any 
 institution described in clauses (i) through (v) of 
 subsection (b)(1)(B)'';
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking subparagraphs (A) 
 through (J) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) success with respect to student achievement 
 in relation to the institution's mission (except that 
 the agencies and associations described in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(ii) shall not be subject to this subparagraph), 
 which--
 ``(i) shall be assessed using at least 1 
 measure selected by the agency or association 
 from the glossary of measures established and 
 defined under section 4713(a)(1) of the College 
 Affordability Act, or established by the agency 
 or association, for each of the following 
 outcomes--
 ``(I) completion;
 ``(II) progress toward completion; 
 and
 ``(III) workforce participation;
 ``(ii) may be assessed using different 
 measures selected or established under clause 
 (i) for different institutions;
 ``(iii) for each measure selected or 
 established under clause (i), shall be assessed 
 using a single performance benchmark 
 established by the agency or association, 
 except that an accrediting agency or 
 association may establish a different 
 performance benchmark for such a measure for 
 each category of educational programs (as 
 defined in section 435(a)(9)(E)); and
 ``(iv) in the case of an institution 
 defined in section 101(a), may include 
 consideration of--
 ``(I) the historical significance 
 of the institution; and
 ``(II) whether the institution is 
 one of the only physical locations at 
 which postsecondary education is 
 provided in the geographic area;
 ``(B) student achievement outcomes, disaggregated 
 by the elements required in the postsecondary student 
 data system under subclauses (I) through (X) of section 
 132(l)(2)(C)(ii) to facilitate institutional 
 improvement and yield statistically reliable 
 information that does not reveal personally 
 identifiable information about an individual student;
 ``(C) credentials, including consideration of the 
 non-monetary value accruing to students pursuing such 
 credentials;
 ``(D) curricula, including--
 ``(i) other than for the agencies and 
 associations described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii), 
 program length;
 ``(ii) course sequencing; and
 ``(iii) objectives related to 
 credentialing;
 ``(E) faculty;
 ``(F) student support services;
 ``(G) recruiting and admissions practices, academic 
 calendars, catalogues, publications, and grading; and
 ``(H) fiscal and administrative capacity (which 
 shall include the institution's governance) as 
 appropriate to the specified scale of operations;'';
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (7) through (9), respectively; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
 ``(6) such agency or association shall make available on a 
 publicly accessible website, up-to-date information on--
 ``(A) the institutions that are subject to the 
 jurisdiction of such agency or association;
 ``(B) the measures used to assess each of the 
 outcomes described in subclauses (I) through (III) of 
 paragraph (5)(A)(i);
 ``(C) the performance benchmark established for 
 each measure selected by the agency or association 
 under paragraph (5)(A), the rationale for the 
 establishment of such performance benchmark, and how 
 such benchmarks are factored into the accreditation 
 process;
 ``(D) the process such agency or association 
 follows when an institution subject to the jurisdiction 
 of such agency or association does not meet an 
 accreditation standard under section 496(a)(5); and
 ``(E) any sanction or adverse action taken with 
 respect to an institution and the reason for such 
 sanction or adverse action;'';
 (E) in paragraph (8), as so redesignated, by 
 striking ``30 days'' and inserting ``10 days'';
 (F) by amending paragraph (9), as so redesignated, 
 to read as follows:
 ``(9) such agency or association shall--
 ``(A) make available on its public website, and to 
 the Secretary, and the State licensing or authorizing 
 agency, a summary (including the decision and rationale 
 for such decision) of any review resulting in a final 
 accrediting decision involving denial, termination, or 
 suspension of accreditation, together with the comments 
 of the affected institution; and
 ``(B) ensure that each institution that is the 
 subject of a final accrediting decision described in 
 subparagraph (A) makes available on its public website 
 the summary described in subparagraph (A) (including 
 the decision and rationale for such decision) with 
 respect to such institution and the institution's 
 comments; and''.
 (G) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) such agency or association shall--
 ``(A) ensure that any substantive change to the 
 educational mission or a program of an institution 
 after the agency or association has accredited or 
 preaccredited the institution does not adversely affect 
 the capacity of the institution to continue to meet the 
 standards of such agency or association;
 ``(B) require such an institution to obtain the 
 approval of such agency or association with respect to 
 such substantive change before the agency or 
 association includes the change in the scope of 
 accreditation or preaccreditation previously granted to 
 the institution by such agency or association; and
 ``(C) make public and report to the Secretary any 
 decision made under subparagraph (B) and the rationale 
 of such decision.'';
 (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
 ``(b) Separate and Independent Defined.--For the purpose of 
subsection (a)(3), the term `separate and independent' means that--
 ``(1) the members of the postsecondary education governing 
 body and any other decision-making body of the accrediting 
 agency or association are not--
 ``(A) elected or selected by the board or chief 
 executive officer of any related, associated, or 
 affiliated trade association or membership 
 organization; or
 ``(B) individuals (such as executives and owners of 
 an institution) who exercise substantial control over 
 an institution--
 ``(i) that is required to provide the 
 Secretary with satisfactory evidence of its 
 financial responsibility in accordance with 
 paragraph (3)(A) of section 498(c) because the 
 institution fails to meet criteria under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of such section, except 
 that this clause shall not be applicable to an 
 institution until the Secretary has completed 
 the rulemaking required under section 4721(b) 
 of the College Affordability Act;
 ``(ii) that is on a reimbursement payment 
 method pursuant to section 487(c)(1)(B);
 ``(iii) against which the Secretary is 
 initiating or carrying out an emergency action 
 in accordance with section 487(c)(1)(G);
 ``(iv) against which the Secretary is 
 limiting, suspending, or terminating the 
 institution's participation in any program 
 under this title in accordance with section 
 487(c)(1)(F); or
 ``(v) that is on probation or show cause, 
 or that is not accredited by an accrediting 
 agency or association;
 ``(2) among the membership of the board of the accrediting 
 agency or association there shall be 1 public member for each 4 
 members of the board, with a minimum of 1 such public member, 
 and guidelines are established for such members to avoid 
 conflicts of interest, including guidelines ensuring that each 
 such public member--
 ``(A) is selected to serve on such board in the 
 same manner that other board members are selected for 
 such service;
 ``(B) has not served on such board as a non-public 
 member in the preceding 10 years;
 ``(C) is not (or has not been in the preceding 5-
 year period) a full-time employee of, or a member of 
 the governing board, an owner, or shareholder of, or 
 consultant to, an institution or program that--
 ``(i) is accredited or preaccredited by the 
 agency or association; or
 ``(ii) has applied for accreditation or 
 preaccreditation from such agency or 
 association;
 ``(D) is not a member of any trade association or 
 membership organization related to, affiliated with, or 
 associated with the agency or association or an 
 institution that is accredited by such agency or 
 association; and
 ``(E) is not a spouse, parent, child, or sibling of 
 an individual identified in subparagraph (C) or (D);
 ``(3) dues to the accrediting agency or association are 
 paid separately from any dues paid to any related, associated, 
 or affiliated trade association or membership organization; and
 ``(4) the budget of the accrediting agency or association 
 is developed and determined by the accrediting agency or 
 association without review or resort to consultation with any 
 other entity or organization.'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), strike ``those regarding 
 distance education'' and inserting ``regarding distance 
 education and the history and mission of the 
 institutions reviewed'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``and decline'' after 
 ``the growth''; and
 (ii) by inserting before the semicolon at 
 the end the following: ``or decline''; and
 (C) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows:
 ``(3) requires an institution to submit for approval to the 
 accrediting agency or association a teach-out plan (as defined 
 in section 487(f)(2)) and which shall meet the requirements of 
 such agency or association) upon the occurrence of any of the 
 following events:
 ``(A) the Secretary notifies the agency or 
 association that the Secretary has determined under 
 section 498(c) that the institution does not have the 
 financial responsibility required by this title, except 
 that this subparagraph shall not be applicable to an 
 institution until the Secretary has completed the 
 rulemaking required under section 4721(b) of the 
 College Affordability Act;
 ``(B) the Secretary notifies the agency of a 
 determination by the institution's independent auditor 
 expressing doubt with the institution's ability to 
 operate as a going concern or indicating an adverse 
 opinion or finding of material weakness related to 
 financial stability, except that this subparagraph 
 shall not apply with respect to a public institution;
 ``(C) the agency or association acts to place an 
 institution on probation, show cause, or equivalent 
 status; or
 ``(D) the Secretary notifies the agency that the 
 institution is participating in title IV under a 
 provisional program participation agreement;'';
 (D) by amending paragraph (6) to read as follows:
 ``(6) requires that teach-out agreements among institutions 
 are subject to approval by the accrediting agency or 
 association consistent with standards promulgated by such 
 agency or association, and that such an agreement shall be 
 required and subject to such approval upon the occurrence of 
 any of the following events:
 ``(A) the Secretary notifies the agency or 
 association that--
 ``(i) the Secretary has placed the 
 institution on the reimbursement payment method 
 pursuant to section 487(c)(1)(B); and
 ``(ii) the institution fails to meet 
 criteria prescribed by the Secretary regarding 
 ratios that demonstrate financial 
 responsibility as described in section 
 498(c)(2);
 ``(B) the Secretary notifies the accrediting agency 
 or association that the Secretary has initiated--
 ``(i) an emergency action against the 
 institution pursuant to section 487(c)(1)(G); 
 or
 ``(ii) an action under section 487(c)(1)(F) 
 to limit, suspend, or terminate the 
 participation of the institution in any program 
 under this title;
 ``(C) the accrediting agency or association acts to 
 withdraw, terminate, or suspend the accreditation of 
 the institution;
 ``(D) the institution notifies the accrediting 
 agency or association that the institution intends to 
 cease operations;
 ``(E) the institution notifies the accrediting 
 agency or association that the institution intends to 
 close a location that provides one hundred percent of 
 at least one program; or
 ``(F) pursuant to section 495, the State notifies 
 the accrediting agency or association that an 
 institution's license or legal authorization to operate 
 within the State has been or will be revoked;'';
 (E) in paragraph (7), by inserting ``not later than 
 10 days after taking an action described in this 
 paragraph,'' before ``makes available'';
 (F) in paragraph (9), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (G) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) responds to complaints received with respect to an 
 institution during the period which the accrediting agency or 
 association accredits such institution not later than 30 days 
 after receiving the complaint (including complaints shared with 
 the agency or association by the Secretary or a State agency 
 under section 495), monitors and assesses an institution's 
 record of student complaints during such period, and submits 
 the complaints relevant to the Secretary and to the State 
 agency involved.'';
 (4) in subsection (m), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Secretary from 
 implementing a process of recognition under this section which 
 differs for the accrediting agencies or associations described 
 in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii) for the purposes of participation 
 in programs (other than the programs under this Act) 
 administered by the Department or other Federal agencies if 
 such differentiation would be beneficial to taxpayers and the 
 performance of such agencies or associations.''; and
 (5) in subsection (n)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the second sentence of the matter 
 preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting before 
 the period the following: ``, which shall 
 include information on at least one institution 
 of higher education representing each of the 
 sectors subject to the jurisdiction of the 
 accrediting agency or association (including 
 public, nonprofit, and proprietary, as 
 applicable) of the representative member 
 institutions''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by inserting 
 before the semicolon the following: ``, and for 
 purposes of facilitating such third-party 
 information, the Secretary shall make publicly 
 available the application of the accrediting 
 agency or association seeking recognition by 
 the Secretary upon publishing in the Federal 
 Register the solicitation for such third-party 
 information''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) In the case in which an official of the Department (other 
than the Secretary) makes a decision on the recognition of an 
accrediting agency or association that differs from the recommendation 
made by the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and 
Integrity on such recognition, without regard to whether any appeals 
process with respect to such decision has been concluded, the official 
shall submit to the authorizing committees the rationale and evidence 
for such decision.
 ``(6) During the first 90-day period of each fiscal year, the 
Secretary shall submit to the authorizing committees the following 
information with respect to the preceding fiscal year--
 ``(A) information about each accrediting agency that the 
 Secretary reviews and evaluates under this subsection;
 ``(B) the recommendation of the National Advisory Committee 
 on Institutional Quality and Integrity about whether to 
 recognize such accrediting agency or association and the 
 rationale for such recommendation;
 ``(C) in the case in which an official of the Department 
 (other than the Secretary) makes a decision on the recognition 
 of such accrediting agency or association (without regard to 
 whether any appeals process with respect to such decision has 
 been concluded), such decision and the rationale for such 
 decision; and
 ``(D) the final decision of the Secretary on the 
 recognition of such accrediting agency or association and the 
 rationale for such final decision.''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(r) Evaluation of Quality and Achievement Measures.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall direct the National 
 Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity to--
 ``(A) regularly evaluate the effectiveness of the 
 measures selected and the performance benchmarks 
 established by accrediting agencies and associations 
 under subsection (a)(5)(A); and
 ``(B) compare similarly situated accrediting 
 agencies or associations, whose similarity may not be 
 determined solely by the educational sector to which 
 the institutions being evaluated belong, based on the 
 measures and performance benchmarks used in subsection 
 (a)(5)(A) by such agencies and associations.
 ``(2) Revising performance benchmarks.--The Secretary may 
 require an accrediting agency or association to review and 
 revise a performance benchmark established by such agency or 
 association if the Secretary determines that such performance 
 benchmark is too low for the measure for which such benchmark 
 is established.
 ``(3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection 
 shall be construed to give the Secretary that authority to 
 require the use of a specific performance benchmark by an 
 accrediting agency or association for purposes of subsection 
 (a)(5)(A).
 ``(s) Report on Recognized Institutional Accreditors Required.--Not 
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of the College 
Affordability Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall publish 
a report that includes with respect to each accrediting agency or 
association recognized under this section by the Secretary, the 
following:
 ``(1) The number of institutions of higher education 
 evaluated by such accrediting agency or association in each 
 educational sector.
 ``(2) The number of locations of such institutions of 
 higher education.
 ``(3) The number of students enrolled at such institutions 
 of higher education.
 ``(4) The number of students receiving a Federal Pell Grant 
 at such institutions of higher education in the preceding year.
 ``(5) The total amount of Federal student aid received by 
 students enrolled at such institutions of higher education in 
 the preceding year.
 ``(6) The graduation rates of such institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(7) The median earnings of students 10 years after 
 enrollment.
 ``(8) The number of institutions placed on a reimbursement 
 payment method pursuant to section 487(c)(1)(B).
 ``(t) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prohibit an institution of higher education from seeking 
accreditation, in a manner consistent with the requirements of 
subsections (h), (i), and (l)(2), from an accrediting agency or 
association that is accrediting a branch campus of such institution in 
the State in which the institution is located.''.

 Subpart 3--Program Review and Data

SEC. 4721. ELIGIBILITY AND CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES.

 (a) Financial Responsibility Standards.--Section 498 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099c) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) includes an addendum under which an institution of 
 higher education shall report a change in circumstances 
 described in subparagraph (A)(ii) or clauses (ii) or (iii) of 
 subparagraph (B) of subsection (c)(8), not later than 30 days 
 after the date on which such change in circumstance occurs.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and'' ; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) the institution is not an institution described in 
 paragraph (7)(B).'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and 
 (D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively; 
 and
 (ii) by inserting after subparagraph (B) 
 the following:
 ``(C) such institution has a rating of investment grade or 
 above from a recognized credit rating agency;''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) Prohibited financial responsibility determinations.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may not determine 
 that an institution has the financial responsibility 
 required by this title if such institution is an 
 institution described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Specified institution.--An institution 
 described in this subparagraph is--
 ``(i) a private non-profit institution of 
 higher education or a proprietary institution 
 of higher education (as defined in section 
 102(b)) that--
 ``(I) is required by the 
 accrediting agency of such institution 
 to submit a teach-out plan under 
 section 487(f);
 ``(II) with respect to the 
 preceding 2 fiscal years, has an 
 adjusted cohort default rate (as 
 determined under section 435(m)) of 20 
 percent or greater, unless the 
 institution files a challenge, request 
 for adjustment, or appeal under section 
 435(a) with respect to such rates for 
 one or both of such fiscal years; or
 ``(III) is subject to a number of 
 pending or approved borrower relief 
 claims under section 493H from 
 borrowers that equals or exceeds, with 
 respect to the prior academic year, 
 half of the enrollment of full-time 
 equivalent students at such 
 institution;
 ``(ii) a proprietary institution of higher 
 education (as defined in section 102(b)) that--
 ``(I) is publicly traded; and
 ``(II)(aa) is sanctioned by the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission;
 ``(bb) fails to file a 
 required annual or quarterly 
 report with the Securities and 
 Exchange Commission; or
 ``(cc) the stock of which 
 is delisted; or
 ``(iii) a proprietary institution of higher 
 education (as defined in section 102(b))--
 ``(I) that derived, for any award 
 year beginning on or after July 1, 
 2022, more than 85 percent of the 
 revenue of the institution from Federal 
 education assistance funds; or
 ``(II) fails to meet criteria 
 prescribed by the Secretary regarding 
 ratios that demonstrate financial 
 responsibility, and has any withdrawal 
 of owner's equity from the institution 
 by any means, including by declaring a 
 dividend.
 ``(8) Change in circumstances.--
 ``(A) Required redetermination.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of a private 
 non-profit institution of higher education or a 
 proprietary institution of higher education (as 
 defined in section 102(b)) that submits an 
 addendum described in clause (ii) or (iii) to 
 the Secretary, the Secretary shall, not later 
 than 30 days after such addendum is submitted, 
 redetermine whether such institution meets the 
 requirements of this subsection.
 ``(ii) Specified circumstances.--An 
 institution of higher education shall submit an 
 addendum under subsection (b)(6) if, with 
 respect to such institution of higher 
 education, one of the following occurs:
 ``(I) The institution is required 
 to pay any material debt, as determined 
 by the Secretary, or incur any material 
 liability, as determined by the 
 Secretary, arising from a final 
 judgment in a judicial proceeding, an 
 administrative proceeding or 
 determination, or settlement.
 ``(II) The institution is involved 
 in a lawsuit that is brought on or 
 after the date of the enactment of 
 College Affordability Act by a Federal 
 or State authority for financial relief 
 on claims related to the making of 
 loans under part D of title IV.
 ``(III) Such other circumstance the 
 Secretary determines necessary.
 ``(iii) Gainful employment determination by 
 secretary.--An institution of higher education 
 shall submit an addendum under subsection 
 (b)(6) if the Secretary makes a determination 
 that such institution has programs that could 
 become ineligible under gainful employment (as 
 defined in section 104) in the next award year.
 ``(B) Permissible redetermination.--
 ``(i) Redetermination.--In the case of an 
 institution that submits an addendum under 
 clause (ii), the Secretary may, not later than 
 30 days after such addendum is submitted, 
 redetermine whether such institution meets the 
 requirements of this subsection.
 ``(ii) Specified circumstances.--The 
 Secretary shall require an institution to 
 submit an addendum under subsection (b)(6) if 
 the Secretary makes a determination--
 ``(I) that the Secretary will 
 likely receive a significant number of 
 borrower relief claims under section 
 493H as the result of a lawsuit, 
 settlement, or judgement against the 
 institution; or
 ``(II) that the institution 
 experienced one of the following:
 ``(aa) A significant 
 fluctuation in enrollments 
 between consecutive award years 
 or a period of award years.
 ``(bb) A citation by a 
 State licensing or authorizing 
 agency for failing State or 
 agency requirements.
 ``(cc) High annual drop out 
 rates.
 ``(dd) Pending borrower 
 relief claims under section 
 493H.
 ``(C) Financial circumstances materials.--If the 
 institution's financial circumstances materially change 
 after the institution submits an addendum under 
 subsection (b)(6), such institution shall submit to the 
 Secretary such certified financial statements and other 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(9) Transparency.--Beginning not later than 90 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this paragraph, and not less than 
 once every 120 days thereafter, the Secretary shall make 
 publicly available on the website of the Department the 
 following:
 ``(A) The ratios used to demonstrate financial 
 responsibility under this section.
 ``(B) Each reports made to the Secretary under this 
 section.
 ``(C) Each audited financial statement submitted to 
 the Secretary by an institution of higher education 
 under this section.
 ``(D) Each certified financial statement submitted 
 to the Secretary under paragraph (8)(C).''; and
 (3) in subsection (i)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (F), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(G) the transfer of ownership as a result of a court-
 ordered receivership.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--Not 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Education shall carry out a negotiated rulemaking 
to update the criteria used under section 498(c)(2) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099c) to make a determination of the 
ability of an institution of higher education to meet the standards 
under such section in accordance with the amendments made by this 
section.
 (c) Audits.--Not later than 2 years after the criteria used under 
section 498(c)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099c) 
is updated under subsection (b), and every 2 years thereafter, the 
Inspector General of Department of Education shall conduct audits of 
such criteria to ensure that the criteria meets generally accepted 
accounting principles.

SEC. 4722. PROGRAM REVIEW AND DATA.

 Section 498A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099c-
1) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking subparagraph (A) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(A) institutions with an adjusted cohort default 
 rate for loans under part D in excess of 18 percent or 
 which places such institutions in the highest 25 
 percent of such institutions;'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) through (e) as 
 subsections (d) through (f), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Undercover Operations.--In carrying out paragraphs (1) and 
(2) of subsection (a) and any other relevant provisions of this 
subpart, the Secretary--
 ``(1) shall conduct undercover and secret shopper 
 operations for the purpose of encouraging the ethical treatment 
 of students and prospective students and detecting fraud and 
 abuse in the Federal student aid programs, including--
 ``(A) violations described in section 487(c)(3);
 ``(B) violations of section 487(a)(20); and
 ``(C) violations by any entity with which the 
 institution has contracted for student recruitment or 
 admission activity;
 ``(2) shall develop written guidelines for the conduct of 
 activities under paragraph (1) in accordance with commonly-
 accepted Federal practices for undercover operations and in 
 consultation with other relevant agencies, including the 
 Department of Justice, Federal Trade Commission, Consumer 
 Financial Protection Bureau, and the Department of Education's 
 Office of Inspector General; and
 ``(3) shall provide an annual report on the results of 
 activities under paragraph (1) to the authorizing committees, 
 and thereafter shall make the report available to the 
 public.''.

 Subpart 4--Strengthening Institutional Quality

SEC. 4731. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONAL QUALITY.

 Part H of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1099a et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 4--Strengthening Institutional Quality

``SEC. 498C. ASSISTANCE TO PROGRESS PERIOD INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide grants and technical 
assistance to covered progress period institutions in accordance with 
this section.
 ``(b) Authorized Activities.--Grants and assistance provided under 
this section shall be used to improve student achievement (as described 
in section 496(a)(5)(A)) at covered progress period institutions.
 ``(c) Duration.--Grants and assistance may be provided under this 
section for a period of not less than one year and not more than three 
years.
 ``(d) Conditions.--
 ``(1) Benchmarks.--
 ``(A) In general.--To continue to receive support 
 under this section after the first year in which such 
 support is provided, an institution must show progress, 
 as determined by the Secretary, toward meeting the 
 standards for student achievement established by the 
 relevant accrediting agency or association pursuant to 
 section 496(a)(5)(A).
 ``(B) Considerations.--In determining the progress 
 of an institution under subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
 may take into consideration extenuating circumstances 
 that may have contributed to the poor performance of 
 the institution in the first year of the review period.
 ``(2) Deadline for compliance.--An institution that does 
 not achieve an adjusted cohort default rate of less than 10 
 percent after receiving support under this section for three 
 consecutive years shall be ineligible to receive further 
 support under this section.
 ``(3) Prohibition.--An institution shall be ineligible to 
 receive further support under this section if, while the 
 institution was receiving such support, the total enrollment of 
 low-income students (as such term is defined in section 
 419N(b)(7)) at the institution decreased by 10 percent or more.
 ``(e) Covered Progress Period Institution.--In this section, the 
term `covered progress period institution' means--
 ``(1) a public institution of higher education that is 
 determined to be in progress period status;
 ``(2) a part B institution (as defined in section 322) that 
 is determined to be in progress period status; or
 ``(3) a private, nonprofit institution of higher 
 education--
 ``(A) that is determined to be in progress period 
 status; and
 ``(B) at which not less than 45 percent of the 
 total student enrollment consists of low-income 
 students (as such term is defined in section 
 419N(b)(7)).
 ``(f) Funding.--
 ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated, 
 and there are appropriated, such funds as the Secretary, using 
 the formula described in paragraph (2), determines necessary to 
 meet the needs of all eligible institutions under this 
 subsection, except that such funds shall not exceed 
 $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal 
 year. Such funds shall be available until expended.
 ``(2) Formula.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish 
 through negotiated rulemaking a formula to determine the--
 ``(A) proportional amount of institutional need 
 under this section; and
 ``(B) total amount of institutional need under this 
 section.
 ``(3) Special rule.--Such formula must at minimum take into 
 consideration the severity of the problem, size of the 
 institution, institutional resources, historical underfunding, 
 and the number of low-income students (as such term is defined 
 in section 419N(b)(7)) being served.

``SEC. 498D. RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN EXPENDITURES.

 ``(a) Establishing Definitions.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of each survey conducted 
 under the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act and this 
 Act, the Secretary shall define the following terms:
 ``(A) Marketing.
 ``(B) Recruitment.
 ``(C) Advertising.
 ``(D) Lobbying.
 ``(E) Student services.
 ``(2) Exclusion of certain activities.--In defining the 
 term `student services' under paragraph (1)(E), the Secretary 
 shall ensure that such term does not include marketing, 
 recruitment, advertising, or lobbying.
 ``(b) Limitation on Expenditures.--In a case in which the Secretary 
determines with respect to an institution of higher education 
participating in any program under this title that, for any of the 3 
most recent institutional fiscal years after the promulgation of 
regulations by the Secretary defining the terms in subsection (a)(1) 
for which the institution submits to the Secretary disclosures on the 
expenditures of the institution on instruction for purposes of section 
132(i)(1)(AA), the amount expended by such institution on instruction 
for such fiscal year is less than an amount equal to \1/3\ of 
institution's revenues derived from tuition and fees--
 ``(1) for any institutional fiscal year after such 
 determination is made, the sum of the amount expended by the 
 institution on marketing, recruitment, advertising, and 
 lobbying may not exceed the amount of the institution's 
 revenues derived from sources other than Federal education 
 assistance funds; and
 ``(2) in a case in which the institution fails to meet the 
 requirements of paragraph (1) for 2 consecutive institutional 
 fiscal years, the institution shall be ineligible to 
 participate in the programs authorized by this title for a 
 period of not less than two institutional fiscal years.
 ``(c) Publication on Website.--The Secretary shall, on an annual 
basis, publicly disclose on the Department's website, information with 
respect to any institution of higher education that is subject to the 
requirements of subsection (b)(1), including--
 ``(1) the quotient of the amount that the institution 
 expends on instruction divided by the institution's revenues 
 derived from tuition and fees, expressed as a percentage;
 ``(2) the sum of such institution's expenditures on 
 advertising, recruiting, marketing, and lobbying;
 ``(3) the amount of such institution's revenues received 
 from sources outside of Federal education assistance funds; and
 ``(4) the difference between paragraphs (2) and (3).

``SEC. 498E. INSTITUTIONAL DISCLOSURE SYSTEM.

 ``(a) Departmental Disclosure.--The Secretary shall make available, 
on a publicly accessible website of the Department of Education, a list 
of institutions of higher education that--
 ``(1) have failed to meet the requirements for 
 accreditation by an agency or association recognized by the 
 Secretary pursuant to section 496(a); or
 ``(2) have failed to meet the requirements for 
 participation in programs under this title.
 ``(b) Institutional Disclosure.--
 ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to participate in 
 programs under this title, an institution of higher education 
 shall, using the template developed by the Secretary under 
 subsection (c), disclose the accreditation status of the 
 institution on a publicly accessible website of the 
 institution.
 ``(2) Updates.--Any change in the accreditation status of 
 an institution of higher education shall be disclosed in 
 accordance with paragraph (1) not later than 30 days after such 
 change occurs.
 ``(c) Template.--The Secretary shall develop a template that shall 
be used by institutions of higher education to make the disclosures 
required under subsection (b). The Secretary shall ensure that the 
template--
 ``(1) clearly identifies the information to be disclosed; 
 and
 ``(2) is in a format that is easily understood by 
 consumers.''.

 PART I--AMERICA'S COLLEGE PROMISE FEDERAL-STATE PARTNERSHIP

SEC. 4801. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``PART J--AMERICA'S COLLEGE PROMISE FEDERAL-STATE PARTNERSHIP

 ``Subpart 1--State and Indian Tribe Grants for Community Colleges

``SEC. 499A. IN GENERAL.

 ``From amounts appropriated under section 499G for any fiscal year, 
the Secretary shall award grants to eligible States and Indian tribes 
to pay the Federal share of expenditures needed to carry out the 
activities and services described in section 499E.

``SEC. 499B. FEDERAL SHARE; NON-FEDERAL SHARE.

 ``(a) Federal Share.--
 ``(1) Formula.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Federal share 
 of a grant under this subpart shall be based on a formula, 
 determined by the Secretary, that--
 ``(A) accounts for the State or Indian tribe's 
 share of eligible students;
 ``(B) accounts for the ratio between a State or 
 Indian tribe's funding per full-time equivalent (FTE) 
 student at public colleges and universities and the 
 average net price at State public four-year colleges 
 and universities, in such a way as to reward States 
 that keep net prices for students low while maintaining 
 their investment in higher education; and
 ``(C) provides, for each eligible student in the 
 State or Indian tribe, a per-student amount that is at 
 least 75 percent of--
 ``(i) for the 2021-2022 award year, the 
 average resident community college tuition and 
 fees per student in all States for the most 
 recent year for which data are available; and
 ``(ii) for each subsequent award year, the 
 amount determined under this subparagraph for 
 the preceding award year, increased by the 
 lesser of--
 ``(I) a percentage equal to the 
 estimated percentage increase in the 
 Consumer Price Index (as determined by 
 the Secretary) since the date of such 
 determination; or
 ``(II) 3 percent.
 ``(2) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In any case in 
 which not less than 75 percent of the students at the community 
 colleges operated or controlled by an Indian tribe are low-
 income students, the amount of the Federal share for such 
 Indian tribe shall be not less than 95 percent of the total 
 amount needed to waive tuition and fees for all eligible 
 students enrolled in such community colleges.
 ``(b) State or Tribal Share.--
 ``(1) Formula.--
 ``(A) In general.--The State or tribal share of a 
 grant under this subpart for each fiscal year shall be 
 the amount needed to pay 25 percent of the average 
 community college resident tuition and fees per student 
 in all States in the 2021-2022 award year for all 
 eligible students in the State or Indian tribe, 
 respectively, for such fiscal year, except as provided 
 in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In the 
 case of an Indian tribe described in subsection (a)(2), 
 the amount of such Indian tribe's tribal share shall 
 not exceed 5 percent of the total amount needed to 
 waive tuition and fees for all eligible students 
 enrolled in such community colleges.
 ``(2) Need-based aid.--A State or Indian tribe may include, 
 as part of the State or tribal share, any need-based financial 
 aid that--
 ``(A) is provided from State or tribal funds to an 
 eligible student; and
 ``(B) may be used by such student to pay costs of 
 attendance other than tuition and fees.
 ``(3) No in-kind contributions.--A State or Indian tribe 
 shall not include in-kind contributions for purposes of the 
 State or tribal share described in paragraph (1).
 ``(c) Determining Number of Eligible Students.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall develop 
 and implement a process for accurately estimating the number of 
 eligible students in a State or Indian tribe for purposes of 
 subsection (a) and (b).
 ``(2) Initial determination.--For the first year for which 
 grants are awarded under this subpart, the number of eligible 
 students in a State or Indian tribe shall be considered to be 
 equal to the number of eligible students that were in the State 
 or tribe for the preceding school year.
 ``(d) Adjustment of Grant Amount.--Not later than 180 days after 
the date on which a State or Indian tribe receives a grant under this 
subpart, the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) in consultation with the State or tribe concerned, 
 determine whether the actual number of eligible students in the 
 State or Tribe for the year covered by the grant is greater 
 than the estimated number of such students that was used to 
 determine the amount of the grant; and
 ``(2) if it is determined under paragraph (1) that the 
 actual number of eligible students in the State or Tribe is 
 higher than such estimate, issue a supplementary grant payment 
 to the State or tribe in an amount that ensures that the total 
 amount of the grant funds received by the State or tribe under 
 this subpart for the year covered by the grant accurately 
 reflects the higher number of eligible students.

``SEC. 499C. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) Submission.--In order to receive a grant under this subpart, 
a State or tribe shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each application under subsection (a) shall 
include, at a minimum--
 ``(1) an estimate of the number of eligible students in the 
 State or Indian tribe and the cost of waiving community college 
 resident tuition and fees for all eligible students for each 
 fiscal year covered by the grant;
 ``(2) an assurance that all community colleges in the State 
 or under the jurisdiction of the Indian tribe, respectively, 
 will waive resident tuition and fees for eligible students in 
 accordance with section 499D(a);
 ``(3) a description of the promising and evidence-based 
 institutional reforms and innovative practices to improve 
 student outcomes, including transfer and completion rates, that 
 have been or will be adopted by the participating community 
 colleges, such as--
 ``(A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising, 
 especially for low-income, first-generation, and adult 
 students, and other students belonging to racial and 
 other groups that are underrepresented in higher 
 education;
 ``(B) the provision of direct support services such 
 as--
 ``(i) childcare, transportation, emergency 
 financial assistance, and mental health and 
 substance use disorder treatment;
 ``(ii) assistance in obtaining health 
 insurance coverage;
 ``(iii) assistance securing affordable 
 housing;
 ``(iv) efforts to address food insecurity 
 and campus hunger; and
 ``(v) efforts to facilitate student 
 participation in means-tested Federal benefit 
 programs (as defined in section 479(d));
 ``(C) providing accelerated learning opportunities, 
 such as dual or concurrent enrollment programs, 
 including early college high school programs;
 ``(D) strengthening and reforming remedial and 
 developmental education, especially for low-income, 
 first-generation, and adult students, and other 
 students belonging to racial and other groups that are 
 underrepresented in higher education, including through 
 the use of multiple measures (such as a student's 
 college entrance examination score, grade point 
 average, high school course list, or a placement 
 examination) to identify students in need of remedial 
 education; or
 ``(E) utilizing career pathways, including through 
 building capacity for career and technical education as 
 defined in section 3(5) of the Carl D. Perkins Career 
 and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2302(5)) 
 and programs of study as defined in section 3(41) of 
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 2302(41)), or degree pathways;
 ``(4) a description of how the State or Indian tribe will 
 ensure that programs leading to a recognized postsecondary 
 credential meet the quality criteria established by the State 
 under section 123(a) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3153(a)) or other quality criteria 
 determined appropriate by the State or Indian tribe;
 ``(5) an assurance that all participating community 
 colleges in the State or under the authority of the Indian 
 tribe have entered into program participation agreements under 
 section 487;
 ``(6) an assurance that the State or Indian tribe will, to 
 the extent practicable, assist eligible students in obtaining 
 information about and accessing means-tested Federal benefit 
 programs (as defined in section 479(d)) for which such students 
 may be eligible;
 ``(7) an assurance that, for each year of the grant, the 
 State or Indian tribe will notify each eligible student of the 
 student's remaining eligibility for assistance under this 
 subpart; and
 ``(8) if the application is submitted by a State--
 ``(A) an assurance that the State will, to the 
 extent practicable, consider changes to State law that 
 will enable more community college students to be 
 eligible for means-tested Federal benefit programs (as 
 defined in section 479(d));
 ``(B) an assurance that the State will meet the 
 requirements of section 499D(b)(1) relating to the 
 alignment of secondary and postsecondary education; and
 ``(C) an assurance that the State will meet the 
 requirements of section 499D(b)(2) relating to the 
 improvement of transfer pathways between institutions 
 of higher education.

``SEC. 499D. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) General Requirements for States and Indian Tribes.--As a 
condition of receiving a grant under this subpart a State or Indian 
tribe shall meet the following requirements:
 ``(1) For each year of the grant the total amount of 
 community college resident tuition and fees charged to an 
 eligible student in the State or Indian tribe shall be $0.
 ``(2) For each year of the grant no amount of financial 
 assistance for which an eligible student qualifies may be 
 applied to such tuition or fees.
 ``(b) State Requirements.--As a condition of receiving a grant 
under this subpart a State shall meet the following requirements:
 ``(1) Alignment of k-12 and higher education.--
 ``(A) In general.--The State shall--
 ``(i) submit a plan to align the 
 requirements for receiving a regular high 
 school diploma from public high schools in the 
 State with the requirements for entering 
 credit-bearing coursework at participating 
 community colleges in such State; and
 ``(ii) not later than three years after the 
 date on which the State first receives a grant 
 under this subpart, certify to the Secretary 
 that such alignment has been achieved.
 ``(B) Failure to certify.-- If a State does not 
 provide the certification required under subparagraph 
 (A) by the date specified in such subparagraph, the 
 State shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and 
 in such manner as the Secretary may require--
 ``(i) a written explanation for the delay 
 in making the certification; and
 ``(ii) a plan that will enable the State to 
 make the certification by not later than 5 
 years after the date on which the State first 
 received a grant under this subpart.
 ``(2) Transfer pathways.--
 ``(A) In general.--The State shall--
 ``(i) submit a plan, developed in 
 collaboration with faculty from institutions of 
 higher education in the State, to improve 
 transfer pathways between institutions of 
 higher education in the State, including by 
 ensuring that associate degrees awarded by 
 public institutions in the State are fully 
 transferable to, and credited as, the first 2 
 years of related baccalaureate programs at 
 public institutions of higher education in such 
 State; and
 ``(ii) not later than 3 years after the 
 date on which the State first receives a grant 
 under this subpart, certify to the Secretary 
 that an associate degree in an academic major 
 in the arts or sciences that is awarded by a 
 public institution of higher education in the 
 State on or after the date that is not later 
 than 3 years after the date on which the State 
 first receives a grant under this subpart shall 
 be fully transferrable to, and credited as, the 
 first 2 years of a related baccalaureate 
 program at a public institution of higher 
 education in such State.
 ``(B) Failure to certify.-- If a State does not 
 provide the certification required under subparagraph 
 (A) by the date specified in such subparagraph, the 
 State shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and 
 in such manner as the Secretary may require--
 ``(i) a written explanation for the delay 
 in making the certification; and
 ``(ii) a plan that will enable the State to 
 make the certification by not later than 5 
 years after the date on which the State first 
 received a grant under this subpart.
 ``(3) Applicability.--The Secretary may not apply the 
 requirements under this subsection to an Indian tribe.

``SEC. 499E. ALLOWABLE USES OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), a State or 
Indian tribe shall use a grant under this subpart only to provide funds 
to participating community colleges to enable such community colleges 
to waive resident tuition and fees for eligible students as required 
under section 499D(a).
 ``(b) Additional Uses.--If a State or Indian tribe demonstrates to 
the Secretary that it has grant funds remaining after meeting the 
demand for activities described in subsection (a), the State or Indian 
tribe may use those funds to carry out one or more of the following:
 ``(1) Enhancing the quality of public higher education to 
 improve student outcomes, including transfer and completion 
 rates, which may include investing in the academic workforce.
 ``(2) Expanding the scope and capacity of high-quality 
 academic and occupational skills training programs at community 
 colleges, which may include collaboration with one or more 
 industry or sector partnership (as defined in section 3 of the 
 Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3201)).
 ``(3) Improving postsecondary education readiness in the 
 State or Indian tribe, including through outreach and early 
 intervention.
 ``(4) Expanding access to dual or concurrent enrollment 
 programs, including early college high school programs.
 ``(5) Improving affordability at 4-year public institutions 
 of higher education.
 ``(c) Use of Funds for Administrative Purposes.--A State or Indian 
tribe that receives a grant under this subpart may not use any funds 
provided under this subpart for administrative purposes relating to the 
grant under this subpart.
 ``(d) Maintenance of Effort.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a 
grant under this subpart is entitled to receive its full allotment of 
funds under this subpart for a fiscal year only if, for each year of 
the grant, the State or Indian tribe provides--
 ``(1) financial support for public higher education at a 
 level equal to or exceeding the average amount provided per 
 full-time equivalent student for public institutions of higher 
 education for the three consecutive preceding fiscal years. In 
 making the calculation under this subsection, the State or 
 Indian tribe shall--
 ``(A) exclude capital expenses and research and 
 development costs; and
 ``(B) include need-based financial aid for students 
 who attend public institutions of higher education;
 ``(2) financial support for operational expenses for 
 public, four-year colleges and universities at a level equal to 
 or exceeding the average amount provided for the three 
 consecutive preceding State or Indian tribe fiscal years; and
 ``(3) financial support for need-based financial aid at a 
 level equal to or exceeding the average amount provided for the 
 three consecutive preceding State or Indian tribe fiscal years.
 ``(e) Annual Report.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a grant 
under this subpart shall submit an annual report to the Secretary 
describing the uses of grant funds under this subpart, the progress 
made in fulfilling the requirements of the grant, and rates of 
transfer, graduation, and attainment of recognized postsecondary 
credentials at participating community colleges, including such rates 
disaggregated by race, income, and age, and including any other 
information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(f) Reporting by Secretary.--The Secretary annually shall--
 ``(1) compile and analyze the information described in 
 subsection (e); and
 ``(2) prepare and submit a report to the Committee on 
 Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Education and Labor of the House of 
 Representatives containing the analysis described in paragraph 
 (1) and an identification of State and Indian tribe best 
 practices for achieving the purpose of this subpart.
 ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to eligible States and Indian tribes concerning best 
practices regarding the promising and evidence-based institutional 
reforms and innovative practices to improve student outcomes and shall 
disseminate such best practices among the States and Indian tribes.
 ``(h) Continuation of Funding.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a 
 grant under this subpart for a fiscal year may continue to 
 receive funding under this subpart for future fiscal years 
 conditioned on the availability of budget authority and on 
 meeting the requirements of the grant, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Discontinuation.--The Secretary may discontinue 
 funding of the Federal share of a grant under this subpart if 
 the State or Indian tribe has violated the terms of the grant 
 or is not making adequate progress in implementing the reforms 
 described in the application submitted under section 499C.
 ``(i) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this 
subpart shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, other Federal, 
State, and local funds that would otherwise be expended to carry out 
activities under this section.

``SEC. 499F. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subpart:
 ``(1) Career pathway.--The term `career pathway' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation 
 and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(2) Community college.--The term `community college' 
 means a public institution of higher education at which the 
 highest degree that is predominantly awarded to students is an 
 associate's degree, including 2-year tribally controlled 
 colleges under section 316 and public 2-year State institutions 
 of higher education.
 ``(3) Dual or concurrent enrollment program.--The term 
 `dual or concurrent enrollment program' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 ``(4) Early college high school.--The term `early college 
 high school' has the meaning given the term in section 8101 of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801).
 ``(5) Eligible student.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `eligible student' 
 means a student who--
 ``(i) attends the community college on not 
 less than a half-time basis;
 ``(ii) is maintaining satisfactory progress 
 (as defined in section 484(c)) in the student's 
 course of study;
 ``(iii) is enrolled in an eligible program 
 (as defined in section 481(b)); and
 ``(iv) either--
 ``(I) qualifies for in-State 
 resident community college tuition, as 
 determined by the State or Indian 
 tribe; or
 ``(II) would qualify for such in-
 State resident community college 
 tuition, but for the immigration status 
 of such student.
 ``(B) Special rule.--An otherwise eligible student 
 shall lose eligibility 3 calendar years after first 
 receiving benefits under this subpart.
 ``(6) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 ``(7) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(8) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning as 
 described in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(9) State.--The term `State' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 103.

``SEC. 499G. APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) Authorization and Appropriations.--For the purpose of making 
grants under this subpart there are authorized to be appropriated, and 
there are appropriated--
 ``(1) $1,569,700,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 ``(2) $3,472,880,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 ``(3) $4,431,950,000 for fiscal year 2023;
 ``(4) $6,204,030,000 for fiscal year 2024;
 ``(5) $8,119,870,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 ``(6) $9,297,430,000 for fiscal year 2026;
 ``(7) $11,708,890,000 for fiscal year 2027;
 ``(8) $14,971,330,000 for fiscal year 2028;
 ``(9) $15,619,910,000 for fiscal year 2029; and
 ``(10) $16,296,080,000 for fiscal year 2030 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(b) Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) shall 
remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 ``(c) Insufficient Funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
subsection (a) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
participating State and Indian tribe a grant under this subpart that is 
equal to the minimum amount of the Federal share described in section 
499B, the Secretary may ratably reduce the amount of each such grant or 
take other actions necessary to ensure an equitable distribution of 
such amount.''.

SEC. 4802. STUDENT SUCCESS FUND.

 Part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.), as added by section 4801, is further amended by adding 
at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 2--Student Success Fund

``SEC. 499H. IN GENERAL.

 ``From amounts appropriated under section 499N for any fiscal year, 
the Secretary shall carry out a grant program (to be known as the 
Student Success Fund) to make grants to eligible entities to carry out 
the activities and services described in section 499L.

``SEC. 499I. ALLOCATION.

 ``(a) Federal Share Allocation.--The Federal share of a grant under 
this subpart shall be determined using the formula determined under 
section 499B(1).
 ``(b) Matching Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an 
 eligible entity participating in the program under this subpart 
 shall provide, from non-Federal sources, in cash or in-kind--
 ``(A) in each of the first, second, third, and 
 fourth year of participation in the program, an amount 
 equal to 25 percent of the amount such entity received 
 under subsection (a) with respect to such year;
 ``(B) in each of the fifth and sixth year of 
 participation in the program, an amount equal to 50 
 percent of the amount such entity received under 
 subsection (a) with respect to such year;
 ``(C) in each of the seventh and eighth year of 
 participation in the program, an amount equal to 75 
 percent of the amount such entity received under 
 subsection (a) with respect to such year; and
 ``(D) in each ninth year and each subsequent year 
 thereafter of participation in the program, an amount 
 equal to 100 percent of the amount such entity received 
 under subsection (a) with respect to such year.
 ``(2) Exception for certain indian tribes.--The Secretary 
 may waive the matching fund requirements under paragraph (1) in 
 the case of an eligible entity that is an Indian tribe if at 
 least 75 percent of the students at the institutions of higher 
 education operated or controlled by such Indian tribe are low-
 income students.
 ``(3) Reallotment.--If an eligible entity returns to the 
 Secretary any portion of the sums allocated to such eligible 
 entity under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary 
 shall reallot such excess as part of the available appropriated 
 amount for the succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(c) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Grant funds awarded under this 
subpart shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, other Federal, 
State, and local funds that would otherwise be expended to carry out 
activities assisted under this subpart.
 ``(d) Limitation.--An eligible entity may only participate in the 
program under this subpart in a year in which such entity receives a 
grant under subpart 1.

``SEC. 499J. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--To be eligible to participate in the program 
under this subpart, an eligible entity shall submit an application to 
the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require, including--
 ``(1) a plan that includes--
 ``(A) the amount of funds requested by the eligible 
 entity under this subpart and the intended use of such 
 funds;
 ``(B) how the eligibility entity will use the 
 requested funds to implement promising and evidence-
 based institutional reforms and innovative practices to 
 improve student outcomes, including those identified by 
 such entity under section 499C(b)(3), and including 
 annual implementation benchmarks that the entity will 
 use to track progress in implementing such reforms and 
 practices;
 ``(C) how the eligible entity will meet its 
 matching fund requirements under section 499I(b);
 ``(D) if the eligible entity is a State, how such 
 eligible entity will prioritize spending on the public 
 institutions of higher education specified in paragraph 
 (2)(B); and
 ``(E) the improvements the eligible entity 
 anticipates in student outcomes, including improvements 
 in transfer rates or completion rates, or both.
 ``(2) if the eligible entity is a State, an analysis that 
 includes--
 ``(A) with respect to each public institution of 
 higher education of the eligible entity--
 ``(i) the total per-student funding;
 ``(ii) the amount of per-student funding 
 from State-appropriated funds;
 ``(iii) the student demographics 
 (including, data on race, income, disability 
 status, and remediation); and
 ``(iv) transfer and completion rates, 
 including such rates among low-income students, 
 students of color, students with disabilities, 
 and students in need of remediation; and
 ``(B) an analysis of whether, of the public 
 institutions of higher education of the eligible 
 entity, the public institutions of higher education 
 that received less funding on a per-student basis 
 described in clause (i) or (ii), or both, of 
 subparagraph (A), are serving disproportionately high 
 shares of low-income students, students of color, 
 students with disabilities, or students in need of 
 remediation.
 ``(b) Approval.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after receiving 
 a plan under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) approve the plan; or
 ``(B) require revisions to such plan.
 ``(2) Revisions required.--An eligible entity shall make 
 such revisions as required by the Secretary under paragraph 
 (1)(B).
 ``(c) Publication.--The Secretary shall make each plan approved 
under subsection (b)(1)(A) and each plan revised under subsection 
(b)(2) available to the public on the website of the Department.

``SEC. 499K. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) General Requirements.--
 ``(1) Report on demonstrated progress.--For the third year 
 in which an eligible entity participates in the program under 
 this subpart, and every 2 years thereafter, the eligible entity 
 shall submit a report to the Secretary, in such manner and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may require, that 
 includes--
 ``(A) the progress in meeting the annual 
 implementation benchmarks included in the application 
 of such eligible entity under section 499J(a)(1)(B);
 ``(B) the progress in improving the student 
 outcomes identified by the entity under section 
 499(J)(a)(1)(E); and
 ``(C) with respect to the 2 years after such report 
 is submitted--
 ``(i) a plan for the use of funds under 
 this subpart; and
 ``(ii) the amount of funds requested by the 
 eligible entity under this subpart .
 ``(2) Approval.--Not later than 180 days after receiving a 
 plan under paragraph (1)(C)(i), the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) approve the plan; or
 ``(B) require revisions to such plan.
 ``(3) Revisions required.--An eligible entity shall make 
 such revisions as required by the Secretary under paragraph 
 (2)(B).
 ``(b) Failure to Meet Requirements.-- If an eligible entity does 
not meet the annual implementation benchmarks included in the 
application of such eligible entity under section 499J(a)(1)(B), as 
required to be reported under subsection (a)(1)(A), such eligible 
entity shall submit to the Secretary, at such time and in such manner 
as the Secretary may require--
 ``(1) a written explanation for the delay in meeting such 
 requirements; and
 ``(2) a plan that will enable such eligible entity to meet 
 such requirements not later than 1 year after the date on which 
 the eligible entity submitted the written explanation under 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(c) Publication.--The Secretary shall make each plan approved 
under subsection (a)(2)(A), each plan revised under subsection (a)(3), 
and each plan submitted under subsection (b)(2) available to the public 
on the website of the Department.

``SEC. 499L. ALLOWABLE USES OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), an 
eligible entity shall use a grant under this subpart only to allocate 
funds in accordance with the plan submitted for such year under section 
499J(a)(1).
 ``(b) Use of Funds for Administrative Purposes.--An eligible entity 
that receives a grant under this subpart may use not more than 10 
percent of such grant for administrative purposes relating to the grant 
under this subpart.

``SEC. 499M. ELIGIBLE ENTITY DEFINED.

 ``In this subpart, the term `eligible entity' means a State or 
Indian tribe that received a grant under subpart 1 for the fiscal year 
in which such State or Indian tribe receives a grant under this 
subpart.

``SEC. 499N. APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) Authorization and Appropriations.--For the purpose of making 
grants under this subpart there are authorized to be appropriated and 
there are appropriated $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each 
succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(b) Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) shall 
remain available to the Secretary until expended.''.

SEC. 4803. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES 
 AND UNIVERSITIES, TRIBAL COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, AND 
 MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS.

 Part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.), as added and amended by this part, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 3--Grants to Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 
 Tribal Colleges and Universities, and Minority-Serving Institutions

``SEC. 499O. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR HISTORICALLY BLACK 
 COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 499S(a) 
for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to participating 
4-year historically black colleges or universities that meet the 
requirements of subsection (b) to--
 ``(1) encourage students to enroll and successfully 
 complete a bachelor's degree at participating institutions;
 ``(2) provide incentives to community college students to 
 transfer to participating institutions through strong transfer 
 pathways to complete a bachelor's degree program; and
 ``(3) support participating institutions to better serve 
 new and existing students by engaging in reforms and 
 innovations designed to improve completion rates and other 
 student outcomes.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under the 
program under this section, an institution shall be a historically 
black college or university that--
 ``(1) has a student body of which not less than 35 percent 
 are low-income students;
 ``(2) commits to maintaining or adopting and implementing 
 promising and evidence-based institutional reforms and 
 innovative practices to improve the completion rates and other 
 student outcomes, such as--
 ``(A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising, 
 especially for low-income, first-generation, and adult 
 students, and other students belonging to racial and 
 other groups that are underrepresented in higher 
 education;
 ``(B) providing direct support services such as--
 ``(i) childcare, transportation, emergency 
 financial assistance, and mental health and 
 substance use disorder treatment;
 ``(ii) assistance in obtaining health 
 insurance coverage;
 ``(iii) assistance securing affordable 
 housing;
 ``(iv) efforts to address food insecurity 
 and campus hunger; and
 ``(v) efforts to facilitate student 
 participation in means-tested Federal benefit 
 programs (as defined in section 479(d));
 ``(C) providing accelerated learning opportunities 
 and degree pathways, such as dual enrollment and 
 pathways to graduate and professional degree programs;
 ``(D) partnering with employers, industry, not-for-
 profit associations, and other groups to provide 
 opportunities to advance learning outside the 
 classroom, including work-based learning opportunities 
 such as internships or apprenticeships or programs 
 designed to improve inter-cultural development and 
 personal growth, such as foreign exchange and study 
 abroad programs; or
 ``(E) strengthening remedial education, especially 
 for low-income, first-generation, and adult students, 
 and other students belonging to racial and other groups 
 that are underrepresented in higher education, 
 including through the use of multiple measures (such as 
 a student's college entrance examination score, grade 
 point average, high school course list, or a placement 
 examination) to identify students in need of remedial 
 education;
 ``(3) sets performance goals for improving student outcomes 
 for the duration of the grant; and
 ``(4) if receiving a grant for transfer students, has 
 articulation agreements with community colleges at the 
 national, State, or local level to ensure that community 
 college credits can fully transfer to the participating 
 institution.
 ``(c) Grant Amount.--
 ``(1) Initial amount.--For the first year that an eligible 
 institution participates in the grant program under this 
 section and subject to paragraph (3), such eligible institution 
 shall receive a grant in an amount based on the product of--
 ``(A) the actual cost of tuition and fees at the 
 eligible institution in such year (referred to in this 
 section as the per-student rebate); and
 ``(B) the number of eligible students enrolled in 
 the eligible institution for the preceding year.
 ``(2) Subsequent increases.--For each succeeding year after 
 the first year of the grant program under this section, each 
 participating eligible institution shall receive a grant in the 
 amount determined under paragraph (1) for such year, except 
 that in no case shall the amount of the per-student rebate for 
 an eligible institution increase by more than 3 percent as 
 compared to the amount of such rebate for the preceding year.
 ``(3) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Maximum per-student rebate.--No eligible 
 institution participating in the grant program under 
 this section shall receive a per-student rebate amount 
 for any year that is greater than the national average 
 of annual tuition and fees at public 4-year 
 institutions of higher education for such year, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) First-year tuition and fees.--During the 
 first year of participation in the grant program under 
 this section, no eligible institution may increase 
 tuition and fees at a rate greater than any annual 
 increase at the eligible institution in the previous 5 
 years.
 ``(d) Application.--An eligible institution that desires a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--Funds awarded under this section to a 
participating eligible institution shall be used to waive or 
significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students in an 
amount of not more than up to the annual per-student rebate amount for 
each student, for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible 
student enrolls in the participating eligible institution.
 ``(f) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under section 
499S to carry out this section shall be used to supplement, and not 
supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
expended to carry out activities under this section.

``SEC. 499P. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR TRIBAL COLLEGES AND 
 UNIVERSITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 499S(a) 
for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to participating 
4-year Tribal Colleges or Universities that meet the requirements of 
subsection (b) to--
 ``(1) encourage students to enroll and successfully 
 complete a bachelor's degree at participating institutions;
 ``(2) provide incentives to community college students to 
 transfer to participating institutions through strong transfer 
 pathways to complete a bachelor's degree program; and
 ``(3) support participating institutions to better serve 
 new and existing students by engaging in reforms and 
 innovations designed to improve completion rates and other 
 student outcomes.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under the 
program under this section, an institution shall be a Tribal College or 
University that--
 ``(1) has a student body of which not less than 35 percent 
 are low-income students;
 ``(2) commits to maintaining or adopting and implementing 
 promising and evidence-based institutional reforms and 
 innovative practices to improve the completion rates and other 
 student outcomes, such as--
 ``(A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising, 
 especially for low-income, first-generation, and adult 
 students, and other students belonging to racial and 
 other groups that are underrepresented in higher 
 education;
 ``(B) providing direct support services such as--
 ``(i) childcare, transportation, emergency 
 financial assistance, and mental health and 
 substance use disorder treatment;
 ``(ii) assistance in obtaining health 
 insurance coverage;
 ``(iii) assistance securing affordable 
 housing;
 ``(iv) efforts to address food insecurity 
 and campus hunger; and
 ``(v) efforts to facilitate student 
 participation in means-tested Federal benefit 
 programs (as defined in section 479(d));
 ``(C) providing accelerated learning opportunities 
 and degree pathways, such as dual enrollment and 
 pathways to graduate and professional degree programs;
 ``(D) partnering with employers, industry, not-for-
 profit associations, and other groups to provide 
 opportunities to advance learning outside the 
 classroom, including work-based learning opportunities 
 such as internships or apprenticeships or programs 
 designed to improve inter-cultural development and 
 personal growth, such as foreign exchange and study 
 abroad programs; or
 ``(E) strengthening remedial education, especially 
 for low-income, first-generation, and adult students, 
 and other students belonging to racial and other groups 
 that are underrepresented in higher education, 
 including through the use of multiple measures (such as 
 a student's college entrance examination score, grade 
 point average, high school course list, or a placement 
 examination) to identify students in need of remedial 
 education;
 ``(3) sets performance goals for improving student outcomes 
 for the duration of the grant; and
 ``(4) if receiving a grant for transfer students, has 
 articulation agreements with community colleges at the 
 national, State, or local level to ensure that community 
 college credits can fully transfer to the participating 
 institution.
 ``(c) Grant Amount.--
 ``(1) Initial amount.--For the first year that an eligible 
 institution participates in the grant program under this 
 section and subject to paragraph (3), such eligible institution 
 shall receive a grant in an amount based on the product of--
 ``(A) the actual cost of tuition and fees at the 
 eligible institution in such year (referred to in this 
 section as the per-student rebate); and
 ``(B) the number of eligible students enrolled in 
 the eligible institution for the preceding year.
 ``(2) Subsequent increases.--For each succeeding year after 
 the first year of the grant program under this section, each 
 participating eligible institution shall receive a grant in the 
 amount determined under paragraph (1) for such year, except 
 that in no case shall the amount of the per-student rebate for 
 an eligible institution increase by more than 3 percent as 
 compared to the amount of such rebate for the preceding year.
 ``(3) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Maximum per-student rebate.--No eligible 
 institution participating in the grant program under 
 this section shall receive a per-student rebate amount 
 for any year that is greater than the national average 
 of annual tuition and fees at public 4-year 
 institutions of higher education for such year, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) First-year tuition and fees.--During the 
 first year of participation in the grant program under 
 this section, no eligible institution may increase 
 tuition and fees at a rate greater than any annual 
 increase at the eligible institution in the previous 5 
 years.
 ``(d) Application.--An eligible institution that desires a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--Funds awarded under this section to a 
participating eligible institution shall be used to waive or 
significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students in an 
amount of not more than up to the annual per-student rebate amount for 
each student, for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible 
student enrolls in the participating eligible institution.
 ``(f) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under section 
499S to carry out this section shall be used to supplement, and not 
supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
expended to carry out activities under this section.

``SEC. 499Q. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR HISPANIC-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS, ASIAN AMERICAN AND NATIVE AMERICAN PACIFIC 
 ISLANDER-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, ALASKA NATIVE-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS, NATIVE HAWAIIAN-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, 
 PREDOMINANTLY BLACK INSTITUTIONS, AND NATIVE AMERICAN-
 SERVING NONTRIBAL INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 499S(a) 
for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to participating 
4-year minority-serving institutions to--
 ``(1) encourage students to enroll and successfully 
 complete a bachelor's degree at participating institutions;
 ``(2) provide incentives to community college students to 
 transfer to participating institutions through strong transfer 
 pathways to complete a bachelor's degree program; and
 ``(3) support participating institutions to better serve 
 new and existing students by engaging in reforms and 
 innovations designed to improve completion rates and other 
 student outcomes.
 ``(b) Institutional Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate and 
receive a grant under this section, an institution shall be a minority-
serving institution that--
 ``(1) has a student body of which not less than 35 percent 
 are low-income students;
 ``(2) commits to maintaining or adopting and implementing 
 promising and evidence-based institutional reforms and 
 innovative practices to improve the completion rates and other 
 student outcomes, such as--
 ``(A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising, 
 especially for low-income, first-generation, and adult 
 students, and other students belonging to racial and 
 other groups that are historically underrepresented in 
 higher education;
 ``(B) providing direct support services such as--
 ``(i) childcare, transportation, emergency 
 financial assistance, and mental health and 
 substance use disorder treatment;
 ``(ii) assistance in obtaining health 
 insurance coverage;
 ``(iii) assistance securing affordable 
 housing;
 ``(iv) efforts to address food insecurity 
 and campus hunger; and
 ``(v) efforts to facilitate student 
 participation in means-tested Federal benefit 
 programs (as defined in section 479(d));
 ``(C) providing accelerated learning opportunities 
 and degree pathways, such as dual enrollment and 
 pathways to graduate and professional degree programs;
 ``(D) partnering with employers, industry, not-for-
 profit associations, and other groups to provide 
 opportunities to advance learning outside the 
 classroom, including work-based learning opportunities 
 such as internships or apprenticeships or programs 
 designed to improve inter-cultural development and 
 personal growth, such as foreign exchange and study 
 abroad programs; or
 ``(E) strengthening remedial education, especially 
 for low-income, first-generation, and adult students, 
 and other students belonging to racial and other groups 
 that are underrepresented in higher education, 
 including through the use of multiple measures (such as 
 a student's college entrance examination score, grade 
 point average, high school course list, or a placement 
 examination) to identify students in need of remedial 
 education;
 ``(3) sets performance goals for improving student outcomes 
 for the duration of the grant; and
 ``(4) if receiving a grant for transfer students, has 
 articulation agreements with community colleges at the 
 national, State, or local levels to ensure that community 
 college credits can fully transfer to the participating 
 institution.
 ``(c) Grant Amount.--
 ``(1) Initial amount.--For the first year that an eligible 
 institution participates in the grant program under this 
 section and subject to paragraph (3), such participating 
 eligible institution shall receive a grant in an amount based 
 on the product of--
 ``(A) the actual cost of tuition and fees at the 
 eligible institution in such year (referred to in this 
 section as the per-student rebate); and
 ``(B) the number of eligible students enrolled in 
 the eligible institution for the preceding year.
 ``(2) Subsequent increases.--For each succeeding year after 
 the first year of the grant program under this section, each 
 participating eligible institution shall receive a grant in the 
 amount determined under paragraph (1) for such year, except 
 that in no case shall the amount of the per-student rebate 
 increase by more than 3 percent as compared to the amount of 
 such rebate for the preceding year.
 ``(3) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Maximum per-student rebate.--No eligible 
 institution participating in the grant program under 
 this section shall receive a per-student rebate amount 
 for a grant year greater than the national average of 
 public four-year institutional tuition and fees, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) First-year tuition and fees.--During the 
 first year of participation in the grant program under 
 this section, no eligible institution may increase 
 tuition and fees at a rate greater than any annual 
 increase made by the institution in the previous 5 
 years.
 ``(d) Application.--An eligible institution shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such a manner, and 
containing such information as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--Funds awarded under this section to a 
participating eligible institution shall be used to waive or 
significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students in an 
amount of not more than up to the annual per-student rebate amount for 
each student, for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible 
student enrolls in the participating eligible institution.
 ``(f) Supplement, Not Supplant.--Funds made available under section 
499S to carry out this section shall be used to supplement, and not 
supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
expended to carry out activities under this section.

``SEC. 499R. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subpart:
 ``(1) Eligible student.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `eligible student' 
 means a student, regardless of age, who--
 ``(i)(I) enrolls in a historically black 
 college or university, Tribal College or 
 University, or minority-serving institution; or
 ``(II) transfers from a community college 
 into a historically black college or 
 university, Tribal College or University, or 
 minority-serving institution;
 ``(ii) attends the historically black 
 college or university, Tribal College or 
 University, or minority-serving institution, on 
 at least a half-time basis;
 ``(iii) maintains satisfactory academic 
 progress; and
 ``(iv) is a low-income student.
 ``(B) Special rules.--
 ``(i) First 3 years.--An otherwise eligible 
 student shall lose eligibility 3 calendar years 
 after first receiving benefits under this 
 title.
 ``(ii) Special rule for certain students.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (A)(i), an 
 otherwise eligible student whose parent or 
 guardian was denied a Federal Direct PLUS loan 
 under part D after November 1, 2011, and before 
 March 29, 2015, and who subsequently withdrew 
 from a historically black college or 
 university, Tribal College or University, or 
 minority-serving institution, and has not yet 
 completed a program of study at such 
 historically black college or university or 
 minority-serving institution, shall be eligible 
 to participate under sections 499O, 499P, or 
 499Q in order to complete such program of 
 study, subject to all other requirements of 
 sections 499O, 499P, or 499Q (as the case may 
 be).
 ``(2) Historically black college or university.--The term 
 `historically black college or university' means a part B 
 institution described in section 322(2).
 ``(3) Low-income student.--The term `low-income student'--
 ``(A) shall include any student eligible for a 
 Federal Pell Grant under section 401; and
 ``(B) may include a student ineligible for a 
 Federal Pell Grant under section 401 who is determined 
 by the institution to be a low-income student based on 
 an analysis of the student's ability to afford the cost 
 of attendance at the institution.
 ``(4) Minority-serving institution.--The term `minority-
 serving institution' means any public or not-for-profit 
 institution of higher education--
 ``(A) described in paragraph (2) and paragraphs (4) 
 through (7) of section 371(a); and
 ``(B) designated as a minority-serving institution 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(5) Tribal college or university.--The term `Tribal 
 College or University' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 316.

``SEC. 499S. APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) Authorization and Appropriations for HBCU, TCU, and MSI 
Grants.--For the purpose of carrying out sections 499O, 499P, and 499Q 
there are authorized to be appropriated, and there are appropriated--
 ``(1) $63,250,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 ``(2) $206,990,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 ``(3) $1,232,760,000 for fiscal year 2023;
 ``(4) $1,282,210,000 for fiscal year 2024;
 ``(5) $1,333,950,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 ``(6) $1,386,850,000 for fiscal year 2026;
 ``(7) $1,408,700,000 for fiscal year 2027;
 ``(8) $1,501,850,000 for fiscal year 2028;
 ``(9) $1,562,800,000 for fiscal year 2029; and
 ``(10) $1,626,040,000 for fiscal year 2030 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(b) Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) are to 
remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 ``(c) Insufficient Funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
subsection (a) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
participating institution in the grant programs under sections 499O, 
499P, and 499Q a grant under this part equal to 100 percent of the 
grant amount determined under section 499O(c), 499P(c), or 499Q(c), as 
appropriate, the Secretary may ratably reduce the amount of each such 
grant or take other actions necessary to ensure an equitable 
distribution of such amount.''.

SEC. 4804. UNMET NEED FOR FEDERAL PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS.

 Part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.), as added and amended by this part, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 4--Additional College Affordability Grants

``SEC. 499T. UNMET NEED FOR FEDERAL PELL GRANT RECIPIENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grant program.--Subject to paragraph (2), from 
 amounts appropriated under subsection (f) for any fiscal year, 
 the Secretary may award grants to eligible States and Indian 
 tribes described in paragraph (3) to pay the Federal share of 
 expenditures needed to carry out the activities and services 
 described in subsection (d).
 ``(2) Limitation.--The Secretary may not make grants under 
 paragraph (1) in fiscal year unless all grants eligible to be 
 made under subpart 1 have been made for such fiscal year.
 ``(3) Eligibility.--A State or Indian tribe may only be 
 eligible for a grant under this section in a fiscal year if 
 such State or Indian tribe received a grant under subpart 1 for 
 such fiscal year.
 ``(b) Federal Share; Non-Federal Share.--
 ``(1) Federal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--Subject to paragraph (2), the 
 Federal share of a grant under this section shall be 
 based on a formula, determined by the Secretary, that--
 ``(i) accounts for the State or Indian 
 tribe's share of Pell Grant recipients;
 ``(ii) provides, for each Pell Grant 
 recipient in the State or Indian tribe, a per-
 student amount that is at least 75 percent of--
 ``(I) for the first award year for 
 which grants are made under this 
 section, the average unmet need of Pell 
 Grant recipients in all States for the 
 most recent year for which data are 
 available; and
 ``(II) for each subsequent award 
 year, the amount determined under this 
 subparagraph for the preceding award 
 year, increased by the lesser of--
 ``(aa) a percentage equal 
 to the estimated percentage 
 increase in the Consumer Price 
 Index (as determined by the 
 Secretary) since the date of 
 such determination; or
 ``(bb) 3 percent.
 ``(B) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In any 
 case in which not less than 75 percent of the students 
 at the institutions of higher education operated or 
 controlled by an Indian tribe are low-income students, 
 the amount of the Federal share for such Indian tribe 
 shall be not less than 95 percent of the total amount 
 needed to waive tuition and fees for all Pell Grant 
 recipients enrolled in such institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(2) State or tribal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--
 ``(i) In general.--The State or tribal 
 share of a grant under this section for each 
 fiscal year shall be the amount needed to pay 
 25 percent of the average unmet need of Pell 
 Grant recipients in all States in the first 
 award year for which grants are made under this 
 section for all Pell Grant recipients in the 
 State or Indian tribe, respectively, for such 
 fiscal year, except as provided in clause (ii).
 ``(ii) Exception for certain indian 
 tribes.--In the case of an Indian tribe 
 described in paragraph (1)(B), the amount of 
 such Indian tribe's tribal share shall not 
 exceed 5 percent of the total amount needed to 
 pay the average unmet need for all Pell Grant 
 recipients enrolled in the institutions of 
 higher education described in such paragraph.
 ``(B) Need-based aid.--A State or Indian tribe may 
 include, as part of the State or tribal share, any 
 need-based financial aid that--
 ``(i) is provided from State or tribal 
 funds to a Pell Grant recipient; and
 ``(ii) may be used by such student to pay 
 costs of attendance other than tuition and 
 fees.
 ``(3) Determining number of pell grant recipients.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and 
 implement a process for accurately estimating the 
 number of Pell Grant recipients in a State or Indian 
 tribe for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2).
 ``(B) Initial determination.--For the first year 
 for which grants are awarded under this section, the 
 number of Pell Grant recipients in a State or Indian 
 tribe shall be considered to be equal to the number of 
 Pell Grant recipients that were in the State or tribe 
 for the preceding school year.
 ``(4) Adjustment of grant amount.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date on which a State or Indian tribe receives a 
 grant under this section, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) in consultation with the State or tribe 
 concerned, determine whether the actual number of Pell 
 Grant recipients in the State or Tribe for the year 
 covered by the grant is greater than the estimated 
 number of such students that was used to determine the 
 amount of the grant; and
 ``(B) if it is determined under paragraph (1) that 
 the actual number of Pell Grant recipients in the State 
 or Tribe is higher than such estimate, issue a 
 supplementary grant payment to the State or tribe in an 
 amount that ensures that the total amount of the grant 
 funds received by the State or tribe under this section 
 for the year covered by the grant accurately reflects 
 the higher number of Pell Grant recipients.
 ``(c) Applications.--In order to receive a grant under this 
section, a State or tribe shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Allowable Uses of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State or Indian tribe shall use a 
 grant under this section only to provide to each Pell Grant 
 recipient a grant that equals the unmet need of such recipient.
 ``(2) Annual report.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a 
 grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary describing the uses of grant funds under this 
 section, the progress made in fulfilling the requirements of 
 the grant, and rates of transfer, graduation, and attainment of 
 recognized postsecondary credentials at institutions of higher 
 education in the State or Indian tribe, including such rates 
 disaggregated by race, income, and age, and including any other 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(3) Reporting by the secretary.--The Secretary annually 
 shall--
 ``(A) compile and analyze the information described 
 in paragraph (2); and
 ``(B) prepare and submit a report to the Committee 
 on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House 
 of Representatives containing the analysis described in 
 subparagraph (A) and an identification of State and 
 Indian tribe best practices for achieving the purpose 
 of this section.
 ``(4) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to eligible States and Indian tribes 
 concerning best practices regarding the promising and evidence-
 based institutional reforms and innovative practices to improve 
 student outcomes and shall disseminate such best practices 
 among the States and Indian tribes.
 ``(5) Continuation of funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State or Indian tribe 
 receiving a grant under this section for a fiscal year 
 may continue to receive funding under this section for 
 future fiscal years conditioned on the availability of 
 budget authority and on meeting the requirements of the 
 grant, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Discontinuation.--The Secretary may 
 discontinue funding of the Federal share of a grant 
 under this section if the State or Indian tribe has 
 violated the terms of the grant.
 ``(6) Supplement, not supplant.--Funds made available under 
 this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, 
 other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
 expended to carry out activities under this section.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 ``(2) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(3) Pell grant recipient.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `Pell Grant recipient' 
 means a student who--
 ``(i) attends a public institution of 
 higher education on not less than a half-time 
 basis;
 ``(ii) is a recipient of a Federal Pell 
 Grant under subpart 1 of part A of title IV of 
 this Act;
 ``(iii) is maintaining satisfactory 
 progress (as defined in section 484(c)) in the 
 student's course of study;
 ``(iv) is enrolled in an eligible program 
 (as defined in section 481(b)); and
 ``(v) either--
 ``(I) qualifies for in-State 
 resident institution of higher 
 education tuition, as determined by the 
 State or Indian tribe; or
 ``(II) would qualify for such in-
 State tuition, but for the immigration 
 status of such student.
 ``(B) Special rule.--An otherwise Pell Grant 
 recipient shall lose eligibility under this section--
 ``(i) after 3 years of receiving benefits 
 under this section for enrollment at a 
 community college (as defined in section 499F); 
 and
 ``(ii) after 6 years of receiving benefits 
 under this section for enrollment in a 4-year 
 institution of higher education.
 ``(4) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning as 
 described in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(5) State.--The term `State' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 103.
 ``(6) Unmet need.--The term `unmet need' means, with 
 respect to a Pell Grant recipient, the amount determined by 
 calculating the difference between--
 ``(A) the institution's cost of attendance (as 
 defined in section 472) for the year for which the 
 determination is made; and
 ``(B) the sum of--
 ``(i) the total amount of need-based grant 
 aid and merit-based grant aid, from Federal, 
 State, and institutional sources, provided to 
 such Pell Grant recipient for the year for 
 which the determination is made; and
 ``(ii) the expected family contribution for 
 such Pell Grant recipient for the year for 
 which the determination is made.
 ``(f) Appropriations.--
 ``(1) Authorization and appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 making grants under this section there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
 section for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(2) Availability.--Funds appropriated under paragraph (1) 
 shall remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 ``(3) Insufficient funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
 paragraph (1) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
 participating State and Indian tribe a grant under this section 
 that is equal to the minimum amount of the Federal share 
 described in subsection (b), the Secretary may ratably reduce 
 the amount of each such grant or take other actions necessary 
 to ensure an equitable distribution of such amount.
 ``(4) Transfer availability.--The Secretary is authorized, 
 subject to the availability of appropriations, to transfer 
 amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 1 
 for a fiscal year to make grants under this section if all 
 grants eligible to be made under such subpart have been made 
 for such fiscal year.''.

SEC. 4805. UNMET NEED FOR STUDENTS.

 Subpart 4 of part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.), as added and amended by this part, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 499U. UNMET NEED FOR STUDENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grant program.--Subject to paragraph (2), from 
 amounts appropriated under subsection (f) for any fiscal year, 
 the Secretary may award grants to eligible States and Indian 
 tribes described in paragraph (3) to pay the Federal share of 
 expenditures needed to carry out the activities and services 
 described in subsection (d).
 ``(2) Limitation.--The Secretary may not make grants under 
 paragraph (1) in fiscal year unless--
 ``(A) all grants eligible to be made under subpart 
 1 have been made for such fiscal year; and
 ``(B) all grants eligible to be made under section 
 499T have been made for such fiscal year.
 ``(3) Eligibility.--A State or Indian tribe may only be 
 eligible for a grant under this section in a fiscal year if 
 such State or Indian tribe received--
 ``(A) a grant under subpart 1 for such fiscal year; 
 and
 ``(B) a grant under 499T for such fiscal year.
 ``(b) Federal Share; Non-Federal Share.--
 ``(1) Federal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--Subject to paragraph (2), the 
 Federal share of a grant under this section shall be 
 based on a formula, determined by the Secretary, that--
 ``(i) accounts for the State or Indian 
 tribe's share of eligible students;
 ``(ii) provides, for each eligible student 
 in the State or Indian tribe, a per-student 
 amount that is at least 75 percent of--
 ``(I) for the first award year for 
 which grants are made under this 
 section, the average unmet need of 
 eligible students in all States for the 
 most recent year for which data are 
 available; and
 ``(II) for each subsequent award 
 year, the amount determined under this 
 subparagraph for the preceding award 
 year, increased by the lesser of--
 ``(aa) a percentage equal 
 to the estimated percentage 
 increase in the Consumer Price 
 Index (as determined by the 
 Secretary) since the date of 
 such determination; or
 ``(bb) 3 percent.
 ``(B) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In any 
 case in which not less than 75 percent of the students 
 at the institutions of higher education operated or 
 controlled by an Indian tribe are low-income students, 
 the amount of the Federal share for such Indian tribe 
 shall be not less than 95 percent of the total amount 
 needed to waive tuition and fees for all eligible 
 students enrolled in such institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(2) State or tribal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--
 ``(i) In general.--The State or tribal 
 share of a grant under this section for each 
 fiscal year shall be the amount needed to pay 
 25 percent of the average unmet need of 
 eligible students in all States in the first 
 award year for which grants are made under this 
 section for all eligible students in the State 
 or Indian tribe, respectively, for such fiscal 
 year, except as provided in clause (ii).
 ``(ii) Exception for certain indian 
 tribes.--In the case of an Indian tribe 
 described in paragraph (1)(B), the amount of 
 such Indian tribe's tribal share shall not 
 exceed 5 percent of the total amount needed to 
 pay the average unmet need for all eligible 
 students enrolled in the institutions of higher 
 education described in such subparagraph.
 ``(B) Need-based aid.--A State or Indian tribe may 
 include, as part of the State or tribal share, any 
 need-based financial aid that--
 ``(i) is provided from State or tribal 
 funds to an eligible student; and
 ``(ii) may be used by such student to pay 
 costs of attendance other than tuition and 
 fees.
 ``(3) Determining number of eligible students.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and 
 implement a process for accurately estimating the 
 number of eligible students in a State or Indian tribe 
 for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2).
 ``(B) Initial determination.--For the first year 
 for which grants are awarded under this section, the 
 number of eligible students in a State or Indian tribe 
 shall be considered to be equal to the number of 
 eligible students that were in the State or tribe for 
 the preceding school year.
 ``(4) Adjustment of grant amount.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date on which a State or Indian tribe receives a 
 grant under this section, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) in consultation with the State or tribe 
 concerned, determine whether the actual number of 
 eligible students in the State or Tribe for the year 
 covered by the grant is greater than the estimated 
 number of such students that was used to determine the 
 amount of the grant; and
 ``(B) if it is determined under paragraph (1) that 
 the actual number of eligible students in the State or 
 Tribe is higher than such estimate, issue a 
 supplementary grant payment to the State or tribe in an 
 amount that ensures that the total amount of the grant 
 funds received by the State or tribe under this section 
 for the year covered by the grant accurately reflects 
 the higher number of eligible students.
 ``(c) Applications.--In order to receive a grant under this 
section, a State or tribe shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Allowable Uses of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State or Indian tribe shall use a 
 grant under this section only to provide to each eligible 
 student a grant that equals the unmet need of such recipient.
 ``(2) Annual report.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a 
 grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary describing the uses of grant funds under this 
 section, the progress made in fulfilling the requirements of 
 the grant, and rates of transfer, graduation, and attainment of 
 recognized postsecondary credentials at institutions of higher 
 education in the State or Indian tribe, including such rates 
 disaggregated by race, income, and age, and including any other 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(3) Reporting by the secretary.--The Secretary annually 
 shall--
 ``(A) compile and analyze the information described 
 in paragraph (2); and
 ``(B) prepare and submit a report to the Committee 
 on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House 
 of Representatives containing the analysis described in 
 subparagraph (A) and an identification of State and 
 Indian tribe best practices for achieving the purpose 
 of this section.
 ``(4) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to eligible States and Indian tribes 
 concerning best practices regarding the promising and evidence-
 based institutional reforms and innovative practices to improve 
 student outcomes and shall disseminate such best practices 
 among the States and Indian tribes.
 ``(5) Continuation of funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State or Indian tribe 
 receiving a grant under this section for a fiscal year 
 may continue to receive funding under this section for 
 future fiscal years conditioned on the availability of 
 budget authority and on meeting the requirements of the 
 grant, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Discontinuation.--The Secretary may 
 discontinue funding of the Federal share of a grant 
 under this section if the State or Indian tribe has 
 violated the terms of the grant.
 ``(6) Supplement, not supplant.--Funds made available under 
 this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, 
 other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
 expended to carry out activities under this section.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible student.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `eligible student' 
 means a student who--
 ``(i) attends a public institution of 
 higher education on not less than a half-time 
 basis;
 ``(ii) is not a recipient of a Federal Pell 
 Grant under subpart 1 of part A of title IV of 
 this Act;
 ``(iii) is maintaining satisfactory 
 progress (as defined in section 484(c)) in the 
 student's course of study;
 ``(iv) is enrolled in an eligible program 
 (as defined in section 481(b)); and
 ``(v) either--
 ``(I) qualifies for in-State 
 resident institution of higher 
 education tuition, as determined by the 
 State or Indian tribe; or
 ``(II) would qualify for such in-
 State tuition, but for the immigration 
 status of such student.
 ``(B) Special rule.--An otherwise eligible student 
 shall lose eligibility under this section--
 ``(i) after 3 years of receiving benefits 
 under this section for enrollment at a 
 community college (as defined in section 499F); 
 and
 ``(ii) after 6 years of receiving benefits 
 under this section for enrollment in a 4-year 
 institution of higher education.
 ``(2) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(4) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning as 
 described in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(5) State.--The term `State' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 103.
 ``(6) Unmet need.--The term `unmet need' means, with 
 respect to an eligible student, the amount determined by 
 calculating the difference between--
 ``(A) the institution's cost of attendance (as 
 defined in section 472) for the year for which the 
 determination is made; and
 ``(B) the sum of--
 ``(i) the total amount of need-based grant 
 aid and merit-based grant aid, from Federal, 
 State, and institutional sources, provided to 
 such eligible student for the year for which 
 the determination is made; and
 ``(ii) the expected family contribution for 
 such eligible student for the year for which 
 the determination is made.
 ``(f) Appropriations.--
 ``(1) Authorization and appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 making grants under this section there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
 section for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(2) Availability.--Funds appropriated under paragraph (1) 
 shall remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 ``(3) Insufficient funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
 paragraph (1) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
 participating State and Indian tribe a grant under this section 
 that is equal to the minimum amount of the Federal share 
 described in subsection (b), the Secretary may ratably reduce 
 the amount of each such grant or take other actions necessary 
 to ensure an equitable distribution of such amount.
 ``(4) Transfer availability.--The Secretary is authorized, 
 subject to the availability of appropriations, to transfer 
 amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 1 or 
 to carry out section 499T for a fiscal year to make grants 
 under this section if--
 ``(A) all grants eligible to be made under such 
 subpart have been made for such fiscal year; and
 ``(B) all grants eligible to be made under such 
 section have been made for such fiscal year.''.

SEC. 4806. TUITION WAIVERS.

 Subpart 4 of part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.), as added and amended by this part, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 499V. TUITION WAIVERS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Grant program.--Subject to paragraph (2), from 
 amounts appropriated under subsection (g) for any fiscal year, 
 the Secretary may award grants to eligible States and Indian 
 tribes to pay the Federal share of expenditures needed to carry 
 out the activities and services described in subsection (d).
 ``(2) Limitation.--The Secretary may not make grants under 
 paragraph (1) in fiscal year unless--
 ``(A) all grants eligible to be made under subpart 
 1 have been made for such fiscal year;
 ``(B) all grants eligible to be made under 499T 
 have been made for such fiscal year; and
 ``(C) all grants eligible to be made under 499U 
 have been made for such fiscal year.
 ``(3) Eligibility.--A State or Indian tribe may only be 
 eligible for a grant under this section in a fiscal year if 
 such State or Indian tribe received--
 ``(A) a grant under subpart 1 for such fiscal year;
 ``(B) a grant under section 499T for such fiscal 
 year; and
 ``(C) a grant under 499U for such fiscal year.
 ``(b) Federal Share; Non-Federal Share.--
 ``(1) Federal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--Subject to paragraph (2), the 
 Federal share of a grant under this section shall be 
 based on a formula, determined by the Secretary, that--
 ``(i) accounts for the State or Indian 
 tribe's share of eligible students;
 ``(ii) provides, for each eligible student 
 in the State or Indian tribe, a per-student 
 amount that is at least 75 percent of--
 ``(I) for the first award year for 
 which grants are made under this 
 section, the average resident public 4-
 year institutions of higher education 
 tuition and fees per student in all 
 States for the most recent year for 
 which data are available; and
 ``(II) for each subsequent award 
 year, the amount determined under this 
 subparagraph for the preceding award 
 year, increased by the lesser of--
 ``(aa) a percentage equal 
 to the estimated percentage 
 increase in the Consumer Price 
 Index (as determined by the 
 Secretary) since the date of 
 such determination; or
 ``(bb) 3 percent.
 ``(B) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In any 
 case in which not less than 75 percent of the students 
 at the institutions of higher education operated or 
 controlled by an Indian tribe are low-income students, 
 the amount of the Federal share for such Indian tribe 
 shall be not less than 95 percent of the total amount 
 needed to waive tuition and fees for all eligible 
 students enrolled in such institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(2) State or tribal share.--
 ``(A) Formula.--
 ``(i) In general.--The State or tribal 
 share of a grant under this section for each 
 fiscal year shall be the amount needed to pay 
 25 percent of the average resident public 4-
 year institutions of higher education tuition 
 and fees for eligible students in all States in 
 first award year for which grants are made 
 under this section for all eligible students in 
 the State or Indian tribe, respectively, for 
 such fiscal year, except as provided in clause 
 (ii).
 ``(ii) Exception for certain indian 
 tribes.--In the case of an Indian tribe 
 described in paragraph (1)(B), the amount of 
 such Indian tribe's tribal share shall not 
 exceed 5 percent of the total amount needed to 
 waive tuition and fees for all eligible 
 students enrolled in the institutions of higher 
 education described in such paragraph.
 ``(B) Need-based aid.--A State or Indian tribe may 
 include, as part of the State or tribal share, any 
 need-based financial aid that--
 ``(i) is provided from State or tribal 
 funds to an eligible student; and
 ``(ii) may be used by such student to pay 
 costs of attendance other than tuition and 
 fees.
 ``(3) Determining number of eligible students.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and 
 implement a process for accurately estimating the 
 number of eligible students in a State or Indian tribe 
 for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2).
 ``(B) Initial determination.--For the first year 
 for which grants are awarded under this section, the 
 number of eligible students in a State or Indian tribe 
 shall be considered to be equal to the number of 
 eligible students that were in the State or tribe for 
 the preceding school year.
 ``(4) Adjustment of grant amount.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date on which a State or Indian tribe receives a 
 grant under this section, the Secretary shall--
 ``(A) in consultation with the State or tribe 
 concerned, determine whether the actual number of 
 eligible students in the State or Tribe for the year 
 covered by the grant is greater than the estimated 
 number of such students that was used to determine the 
 amount of the grant; and
 ``(B) if it is determined under paragraph (1) that 
 the actual number of eligible students in the State or 
 Tribe is higher than such estimate, issue a 
 supplementary grant payment to the State or tribe in an 
 amount that ensures that the total amount of the grant 
 funds received by the State or tribe under this section 
 for the year covered by the grant accurately reflects 
 the higher number of eligible students.
 ``(c) Applications.--In order to receive a grant under this 
section, a State or tribe shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require.
 ``(d) General Requirements.--As a condition of receiving a grant 
under this subpart a State or Indian tribe shall meet the following 
requirements:
 ``(1) For each year of the grant the total amount of public 
 4-year institution of higher education resident tuition and 
 fees charged to an eligible student in the State or Indian 
 tribe shall be $0.
 ``(2) For each year of the grant no amount of financial 
 assistance for which an eligible student qualifies may be 
 applied to such tuition or fees.
 ``(e) Allowable Uses of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State or Indian tribe shall use a 
 grant under this section only to provide funds to participating 
 public 4-year institutions to enable such public 4-year 
 institutions to waive resident tuition and fees for eligible 
 students as required under subsection (d).
 ``(2) Annual report.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a 
 grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary describing the uses of grant funds under this 
 section, the progress made in fulfilling the requirements of 
 the grant, and rates of transfer, graduation, and attainment of 
 recognized postsecondary credentials at institutions of higher 
 education in the State or Indian tribe, including such rates 
 disaggregated by race, income, and age, and including any other 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(3) Reporting by the secretary.--The Secretary annually 
 shall--
 ``(A) compile and analyze the information described 
 in paragraph (2); and
 ``(B) prepare and submit a report to the Committee 
 on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House 
 of Representatives containing the analysis described in 
 subparagraph (A) and an identification of State and 
 Indian tribe best practices for achieving the purpose 
 of this section.
 ``(4) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 technical assistance to eligible States and Indian tribes 
 concerning best practices regarding the promising and evidence-
 based institutional reforms and innovative practices to improve 
 student outcomes and shall disseminate such best practices 
 among the States and Indian tribes.
 ``(5) Continuation of funding.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State or Indian tribe 
 receiving a grant under this section for a fiscal year 
 may continue to receive funding under this section for 
 future fiscal years conditioned on the availability of 
 budget authority and on meeting the requirements of the 
 grant, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Discontinuation.--The Secretary may 
 discontinue funding of the Federal share of a grant 
 under this section if the State or Indian tribe has 
 violated the terms of the grant.
 ``(6) Supplement, not supplant.--Funds made available under 
 this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, 
 other Federal, State, and local funds that would otherwise be 
 expended to carry out activities under this section.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible student.--
 ``(A) Definition.--The term `eligible student' 
 means a student who--
 ``(i) attends a public institution of 
 higher education on not less than a half-time 
 basis;
 ``(ii) is maintaining satisfactory progress 
 (as defined in section 484(c)) in the student's 
 course of study;
 ``(iii) is enrolled in an eligible program 
 (as defined in section 481(b)); and
 ``(iv) either--
 ``(I) qualifies for in-State 
 resident institution of higher 
 education tuition, as determined by the 
 State or Indian tribe; or
 ``(II) would qualify for such in-
 State tuition, but for the immigration 
 status of such student.
 ``(B) Special rule.--An otherwise eligible student 
 shall lose eligibility under this section after 6 years 
 of receiving benefits under this section.
 ``(2) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(4) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning as 
 described in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 ``(5) State.--The term `State' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 103.
 ``(g) Appropriations.--
 ``(1) Authorization and appropriations.--For the purpose of 
 making grants under this section there are authorized to be 
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
 section for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(2) Availability.--Funds appropriated under paragraph (1) 
 shall remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 ``(3) Insufficient funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
 paragraph (1) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
 participating State and Indian tribe a grant under this section 
 that is equal to the minimum amount of the Federal share 
 described in subsection (b), the Secretary may ratably reduce 
 the amount of each such grant or take other actions necessary 
 to ensure an equitable distribution of such amount.
 ``(4) Transfer availability.--The Secretary is authorized, 
 subject to the availability of appropriations, to transfer 
 amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 1, 
 to carry out 499T, and to carry out 499U for a fiscal year to 
 make grants under this section if--
 ``(A) all grants eligible to be made under such 
 subpart have been made for such fiscal year;
 ``(B) all grants eligible to be made under 499T 
 have been made for such year; and
 ``(C) all grants eligible to be made under 499U 
 have been made for such fiscal year.''.

SEC. 4807. EXPANSION FOR PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS.

 Subpart 4 of part J of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.), as added and amended by this part, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 499W. EXPANSION FOR PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary may establish a program under 
which--
 ``(1) a State that participates in section 499T may elect 
 to carry out the grant programs under such section to students 
 who--
 ``(A) meet the requirements under clauses (ii) 
 through (iv) of subparagraph (A) and subparagraph (B) 
 of subsection (e)(3) of such section; and
 ``(B) attend a nonprofit private institution of 
 higher education in such State on not less than a half 
 time basis; and
 ``(2) a State that participates in section 499U may elect 
 to carry out the grant programs under such section to students 
 who--
 ``(A) meet the requirements under clauses (ii) 
 through (iv) of subparagraph (A) and subparagraph (B) 
 of subsection (e)(1) of such section; and
 ``(B) attend a nonprofit private institution of 
 higher education in such State on not less than a half 
 time basis.
 ``(b) Program Requirements.--The Secretary shall set eligibility 
standards for nonprofit private institutions of higher education which 
shall, at a minimum, include--
 ``(1) benchmarks for the enrollment of low-income students;
 ``(2) a requirement that any nonprofit private institution 
 of higher education that participates in a grant program 
 pursuant to this section may not reduce the funding for 
 institutional need-based aid; or
 ``(3) a requirement that grant amounts for students at such 
 institutions of higher education shall not exceed grants for 
 students with similar levels of financial need (as measured by 
 expected family contribution) at public institutions of higher 
 education.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of making 
grants under this section there are authorized to be appropriated such 
sums as may be necessary to carry out this section for fiscal year 2021 
and each succeeding fiscal year.''.

 TITLE V--DEVELOPING INSTITUTIONS

SEC. 5001. HISPANIC-SERVING INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Authorized Activities.--Section 503(b) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1101b(b)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (16) as paragraph (17); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following:
 ``(16) Promoting opportunities for international education, 
 including through the development of partnerships with 
 institutions of higher education outside the United States.''.
 (b) Endowment Funding Limitations.--Section 503(c) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1101b(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``non-Federal funds'' and inserting 
 ``non-Federal funds (which may include gifts to the 
 endowment fund restricted for a specific purpose)''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``equal to or greater than'' and 
 inserting ``equal to 50 percent of''; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Scholarships.--An eligible institution that uses 
 grant funds provided under this title to establish or increase 
 an endowment fund may use the interest proceeds from such 
 endowment to provide scholarships to students for the purposes 
 of attending such institution.''.

SEC. 5002. PROMOTING POSTBACCALAUREATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR HISPANIC 
 AMERICANS.

 (a) Program Authority.--Section 512 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1102a) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) Minimum Grants Awarded.--Of the funds appropriated to carry 
out this part for a fiscal year, the Secretary--
 ``(1) shall--
 ``(A) use not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 513(b); and
 ``(B) use not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 513(c); and
 ``(2) may use any funds remaining (after using the funds in 
 accordance with paragraph (1)) to award grants to carry out 
 activities described in subsection (b) or (c) of section 
 513.''.
 (b) Authorized Activities.--Section 513 of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1102b) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 513. AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--Grants awarded under this part shall be 
 used for--
 ``(A) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (b); or
 ``(B) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Prohibition.--A grant awarded under this part may not 
 be used for activities under both subsections (b) and (c).
 ``(b) Promoting Postbaccalaureate Opportunities for Hispanic 
Americans Activities.--Grants awarded under this part may be used for 
one or more of the following activities promoting postbaccalaureate 
opportunities for Hispanic Americans:
 ``(1) Purchase, rental, or lease of scientific or 
 laboratory equipment for educational purposes, including 
 instructional and research purposes.
 ``(2) Construction, maintenance, renovation, and 
 improvement of classrooms, libraries, laboratories, and other 
 instructional facilities, including purchase or rental of 
 telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(3) Purchase of library books, periodicals, technical and 
 other scientific journals, microfilm, microfiche, and other 
 educational materials, including telecommunications program 
 materials.
 ``(4) Support for low-income postbaccalaureate students 
 including outreach, academic support services, mentoring, 
 scholarships, fellowships, and other financial assistance to 
 permit the enrollment of such students in postbaccalaureate 
 certificate and postbaccalaureate degree granting programs.
 ``(5) Creating or improving facilities for Internet or 
 other distance education technologies, including purchase or 
 rental of telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(6) Collaboration with other institutions of higher 
 education to expand postbaccalaureate certificate and 
 postbaccalaureate degree offerings.
 ``(7) Other activities proposed in the application 
 submitted pursuant to section 514 that--
 ``(A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of 
 this part; and
 ``(B) are approved by the Secretary as part of the 
 review and acceptance of such application.
 ``(c) Faculty Development Activities.--Grants awarded under this 
part may be used for one or more of the following activities for 
faculty development:
 ``(1) Support of faculty exchanges, faculty development, 
 faculty research, curriculum development, and academic 
 instruction.
 ``(2) Financial support to graduate students planning to 
 pursue academic careers who desire to become faculty at 
 Hispanic-serving institutions.
 ``(3) Career services in preparing for an academic career 
 and identifying opportunities.
 ``(4) Developing partnerships between Hispanic-serving 
 institutions to help graduate students and hiring institutions 
 connect with each other.
 ``(5) Faculty recruitment efforts with an emphasis on 
 graduates from Hispanic-serving institutions and other 
 minority-serving institutions.
 ``(6) Recruitment and retention incentives to allow 
 Hispanic-serving institutions to make competitive offers to 
 potential faculty, including use of funds for student loan 
 repayment.
 ``(7) Research support specifically for early career 
 faculty.''.

SEC. 5003. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 Section 528(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1103g(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$175,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$350,000,000'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``$100,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$115,000,000'';
 (3) by striking ``2009'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``2021''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Reservation for technical assistance.--From the 
 amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) to carry out part A 
 for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 0.75 percent to 
 carry out technical assistance and administrative training for 
 staff and faculty at Hispanic-serving institutions under such 
 part.''.

 TITLE VI--INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS

SEC. 6001. INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION.

 (a) Graduate and Undergraduate Language and Area Centers and 
Programs.--Section 602(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1122(b)(2)(B)(ii)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (III), by striking ``or'';
 (2) in subclause (IV), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(V) the beginning, intermediate, or 
 advanced study of a foreign language related to 
 the area of specialization.''.
 (b) International Research and Innovation.--Section 605 of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1125) is amended to read as 
follows:

``SEC. 605. INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH AND INNOVATION.

 ``(a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to support 
essential international and foreign language education research and 
innovation projects with the goal of assessing and strengthening 
international education capacity, coordination, delivery, and outcomes 
to meet national needs.
 ``(b) Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--From the amount provided to carry out 
 this section, the Secretary shall carry out the following 
 activities:
 ``(A) Conduct research and studies that contribute 
 to the purpose described in subsection (a), which shall 
 include research to provide a systematic understanding 
 of the United States' international and foreign 
 language education capacity, structures, and 
 effectiveness in meeting growing demands by education, 
 government, and the private sector (including business 
 and other professions).
 ``(B) Create innovative paradigms or enhance or 
 scale up proven strategies and practices that address 
 systemic challenges to developing and delivering 
 international and foreign language education resources 
 and expertise across educational disciplines, 
 institutions, employers, and other stakeholders.
 ``(C) Develop and manage a national standardized 
 database that--
 ``(i) includes the strengths, gaps, and 
 trends in the United States' international and 
 foreign language education capacity; and
 ``(ii) documents the outcomes of programs 
 funded under this title for every grant cycle.
 ``(2) Grants or contracts.--The Secretary shall carry out 
 activities to achieve the outcomes described in paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) directly; or
 ``(B) through grants awarded under subsection (d) 
 or (e).
 ``(c) Eligible Entity Defined.--In this section, the term `eligible 
entity' means--
 ``(1) an institution of higher education;
 ``(2) a public or private nonprofit library;
 ``(3) a nonprofit educational organization;
 ``(4) an entity that--
 ``(A) received a grant under this title for a 
 preceding fiscal year; or
 ``(B) is receiving a grant under this title as of 
 the date of application for a grant under this section; 
 or
 ``(5) a partnership of two or more entities described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (4).
 ``(d) Research Grants.--
 ``(1) Program authorized.--For any fiscal year for which 
 the Secretary carries out activities under subsection (b)(1) 
 through research grants under this subsection, the Secretary 
 shall award such grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible 
 entities.
 ``(2) Required activities.--An eligible entity that 
 receives a grant under this subsection shall use the grant 
 funds for the systematic development, collection, analysis, 
 publication, and dissemination of data, and other information 
 resources in a manner that is easily understandable, made 
 publicly available, and that contributes to achieving the 
 purposes of subsection (a) and carries out at least one 
 activity under subsection (b)(1).
 ``(3) Discretionary activities.--An eligible entity that 
 receives a grant under this subsection may use the grant to 
 carry out the following activities:
 ``(A) Assess and document international and foreign 
 language education capacity and supply through studies 
 or surveys that--
 ``(i) determine the number of foreign 
 language courses, programs, and enrollments at 
 all levels of education and in all languages, 
 including a determination of gaps in those 
 deemed critical to the national interest;
 ``(ii) measure the number and types of 
 degrees or certificates awarded in area 
 studies, global studies, foreign language 
 studies, and international business and 
 professional studies, including identification 
 of gaps in those deemed critical to the 
 national interest;
 ``(iii) measure the number of foreign 
 language, area or international studies 
 faculty, including international business 
 faculty, and elementary school and secondary 
 school foreign language teachers by language, 
 degree, and world area; or
 ``(iv) measure the number of undergraduate 
 and graduate students engaging in long- or 
 short-term education or internship abroad 
 programs as part of their curriculum, including 
 countries of destination.
 ``(B) Assess the demands for, and outcomes of, 
 international and foreign language education and their 
 alignment, through studies, surveys, and conferences 
 to--
 ``(i) determine demands for increased or 
 improved instruction in foreign language, area 
 or global studies, or other international 
 fields, and the demand for employees with such 
 skills and knowledge in the education, 
 government, and private sectors (including 
 business and other professions);
 ``(ii) assess the employment or utilization 
 of graduates of programs supported under this 
 title by educational, governmental, and private 
 sector organizations (including business and 
 other professions); or
 ``(iii) assess standardized outcomes and 
 effectiveness and benchmarking of programs 
 supported under this title.
 ``(C) Develop and publish specialized materials for 
 use in foreign language, area, global, or other 
 international studies, including in international 
 business or other professional education or technical 
 training, as appropriate.
 ``(D) Conduct studies or surveys that identify and 
 document systemic challenges and changes needed in 
 higher education and elementary school and secondary 
 school systems to make international and foreign 
 language education available to all students as part of 
 the basic curriculum, including challenges in current 
 evaluation standards, entrance and graduation 
 requirements, program accreditation, student degree 
 requirements, or teacher and faculty legal workplace 
 barriers to education and research abroad.
 ``(E) With respect to underrepresented institutions 
 of higher education (including minority-serving 
 institutions or community colleges), carry out studies 
 or surveys that identify and document--
 ``(i) current systemic challenges and 
 changes incentives, and partnerships needed to 
 comprehensively and sustainably 
 internationalize educational programming; or
 ``(ii) short- and long-term outcomes of 
 successful internationalization strategies and 
 funding models.
 ``(F) Evaluate the extent to which programs 
 assisted under this title--
 ``(i) reflect diverse perspectives and a 
 wide range of views; and
 ``(ii) generate debate on world regions and 
 international affairs
 ``(e) Innovation Grants.--
 ``(1) Program authorized.--For any fiscal year for which 
 the Secretary carries out activities to achieve the outcomes 
 described in subsection (b)(1) through innovation grants under 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall award such grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible entities.
 ``(2) Uses of funds.--An eligible entity that receives an 
 innovation grant under this subsection shall use the grant 
 funds to fund projects consistent with this section, which may 
 include one or more of the following:
 ``(A) Innovative paradigms to improve 
 communication, sharing, and delivery of resources that 
 further the purposes described in subsection (a) 
 including the following:
 ``(i) Networking structures and systems to 
 more effectively match graduates possessing 
 international and foreign language education 
 skills with employment needs.
 ``(ii) Sharing international specialist 
 expertise across institutions of higher 
 education or in the workforce to pursue 
 specialization or learning opportunities not 
 available at any single institution of higher 
 education, such as shared courses for studying 
 less commonly taught languages, world areas or 
 regions, international business or other 
 professional areas, or specialized research 
 topics of national strategic interest.
 ``(iii) Producing, collecting, organizing, 
 preserving, and widely disseminating 
 international and foreign language education 
 expertise, resources, courses, and other 
 information through the use of electronic 
 technologies and other techniques.
 ``(iv) Collaborative initiatives to 
 identify, capture, and provide consistent 
 access to, and creation of, digital global 
 library resources that are beyond the capacity 
 of any single eligible entity receiving a grant 
 under this section or any single institution of 
 higher education, including the professional 
 development of library staff.
 ``(v) Utilization of technology to create 
 open-source resources in international, area, 
 global, and foreign language studies that are 
 adaptable to multiple educational settings and 
 promote interdisciplinary partnerships between 
 technologists, curriculum designers, 
 international and foreign language education 
 experts, language teachers, and librarians.
 ``(B) Innovative curriculum, teaching, and learning 
 strategies, including the following:
 ``(i) New initiatives for collaborations of 
 disciplinary programs with foreign language, 
 area, global, and international studies, and 
 education abroad programs that address the 
 internationalization of such disciplinary 
 studies with the purpose of producing globally 
 competent graduates.
 ``(ii) Innovative collaborations between 
 established centers of international and 
 foreign language education excellence and 
 underrepresented institutions and populations 
 seeking to further their goals for 
 strengthening international, area, global, and 
 foreign language studies, including at 
 minority-serving institutions or community 
 colleges.
 ``(iii) Teaching and learning 
 collaborations among foreign language, area, 
 global, or other international studies with 
 diaspora communities, including heritage 
 students.
 ``(iv) New approaches and methods to 
 teaching emerging global issues, cross-regional 
 interactions, and underrepresented regions or 
 countries, such as project- and team-based 
 learning.
 ``(C) Innovative assessment and outcome tools and 
 techniques that further the purposes described in 
 subsection (a), including the following:
 ``(i) International and foreign language 
 education assessment techniques that are 
 coupled with outcome-focused training modules, 
 such as certificates or badges, immersion 
 learning, or e-portfolio systems.
 ``(ii) Effective and easily accessible 
 methods of assessing professionally useful 
 levels of proficiency in foreign languages or 
 competencies in area, culture, and global 
 knowledge or other international fields in 
 programs under this title, which may include 
 use of open access online and other cost-
 effective tools for students and educators at 
 all educational levels and in the workplace.
 ``(f) Application.--Each eligible entity desiring a grant under 
this section shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary shall 
require, including--
 ``(1) a description of each proposed project the eligible 
 entity plans to carry out under this section and how such 
 project meets the purposes described in subsection (a);
 ``(2) if applicable, a demonstration of why the entity 
 needs a waiver or reduction of the matching requirement under 
 subsection (g); and
 ``(3) an assurance that each such proposed project will be 
 self-sustainable after the grant term is completed.
 ``(g) Matching Requirement.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Federal share of the total cost for 
 carrying out a project supported by a grant under this section 
 shall be no more than 66.66 percent of the cost of the project.
 ``(2) Non-federal share contributions.--The non-Federal 
 share of such cost may be provided either in-kind or in cash, 
 from institutional and non-institutional funds, including 
 contributions from State or private sector corporations, 
 nonprofits, or foundations.
 ``(3) Special rule.--The Secretary may waive or reduce the 
 share required under paragraph (1) for eligible entities that--
 ``(A) are minority-serving institutions or are 
 community colleges; or
 ``(B) demonstrate need in an application for such a 
 waiver or reduction under subsection (f)(2).
 ``(h) Database and Reporting.--The Secretary shall directly, or 
through grants or contracts with an eligible grant recipient--
 ``(1) establish, curate, maintain, and update at least 
 every grant cycle, a publically available website which shall 
 showcase the results of this section and serve as a user-
 friendly repository of the information, resources, and best 
 practices generated through activities conducted under this 
 section; and
 ``(2) prepare, publish, and disseminate to Congress and the 
 public at least once every 5 years, a report that summarizes 
 key findings and policy issues from the activities conducted 
 under this section, including as such activities relate to 
 international and foreign language education and outcomes.''.
 (c) Discontinuation of Foreign Information Access Program.--Part A 
of title VI of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1121 et 
seq.) is further amended by striking sections 606 and 610, and 
redesignating sections 607, 608, and 609 as sections 606, 607, and 608, 
respectively.

SEC. 6002. GLOBAL BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Findings; Purpose.--Section 611 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1130) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) the future welfare of the United States will depend 
 substantially on increasing international and global skills in 
 business, educational, and other professional communities and 
 creating an awareness among the American public of the 
 internationalization of our economy and numerous other 
 professional areas important to the national interest;'';
 (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) concerted efforts are necessary to engage business 
 and other professional education and technical training 
 programs, language, area, and global study programs, 
 professional international affairs education programs, public 
 and private sector organizations, and United States' business 
 community in a mutually productive relationship which benefits 
 the Nation's future economic and security interests;'';
 (C) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and the 
 international'' and inserting ``and other professional 
 fields and the international and global''; and
 (D) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by inserting ``, as well as other 
 professional organizations'' after 
 ``departments of commerce''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or other professions'' 
 after ``business''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``and economic enterprise'' 
 and inserting ``, economic enterprise, and 
 security''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``and other 
 professional'' before ``personnel''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``to prosper in 
 an international'' and inserting ``and other 
 professional fields to prosper in a global''.
 (b) Professional and Technical Education for Global 
Competitiveness.--Section 613 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1130a) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 613. PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION FOR GLOBAL 
 COMPETITIVENESS.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to support 
innovative strategies that provide undergraduate and graduate students 
with the global professional competencies, perspectives, and skills 
needed to strengthen and enrich global engagement and competitiveness 
in a wide variety of professional and technical fields important to the 
national interest.
 ``(b) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall make grants to, or 
enter into contracts with eligible entities to pay the Federal share of 
the cost of programs designed to--
 ``(1) establish an interdisciplinary global focus in the 
 undergraduate and graduate curricula of business, science, 
 technology, engineering, and other professional education and 
 technical training programs to be determined by the Secretary 
 based on national needs;
 ``(2) produce graduates with proficiencies in both the 
 global aspects of their professional education or technical 
 training fields and international, cross-cultural, and foreign 
 language skills; and
 ``(3) provide appropriate services to or partnerships with 
 the corporate, government, and nonprofit communities in order 
 to expand knowledge and capacity for global engagement and 
 competitiveness and provide internship or employment 
 opportunities for students and graduates with international 
 skills.
 ``(c) Mandatory Activities.--An eligible entity that receives a 
grant under this section shall use the grant to carry out the 
following:
 ``(1) With respect to undergraduate or graduate 
 professional education and technical training curricula, 
 incorporating--
 ``(A) foreign language programs that lead to 
 proficiency, including immersion opportunities;
 ``(B) international, area, or global studies 
 programs;
 ``(C) education, internships, or other innovative 
 or technological linkages abroad; and
 ``(D) global business, economic, and trade studies, 
 where appropriate.
 ``(2) Innovating and improving international, global, and 
 foreign language education curricula to serve the needs of 
 business and other professional and nonprofit communities, 
 including development of new programs for nontraditional, mid-
 career, or part-time students.
 ``(3) Establishing education or internship abroad programs, 
 domestic globally focused internships, or other innovative 
 approaches to enable undergraduate or graduate students in 
 professional education or technical training to develop foreign 
 language skills and knowledge of foreign cultures, societies, 
 and global dimensions of their professional fields.
 ``(4) Developing collaborations between institutions of 
 higher education and corporations or nonprofit organizations in 
 order to strengthen engagement and competitiveness in global 
 business, trade, or other global professional activities.
 ``(d) Discretionary Activities.--An eligible entity that receives a 
grant under this section may use the grant to carry out the following:
 ``(1) Developing specialized teaching materials and 
 courses, including foreign language and area or global studies 
 materials, and innovative technological delivery systems 
 appropriate for professionally oriented students.
 ``(2) Establishing student fellowships or other innovative 
 support opportunities, including for underrepresented 
 populations, first generation college students (defined in 
 section 402A(h)), and heritage learners, for education and 
 training in global professional development activities.
 ``(3) Developing opportunities or fellowships for faculty 
 or junior faculty of professional education or technical 
 training (including the faculty of minority-serving 
 institutions or community colleges) to acquire or strengthen 
 international and global skills and perspectives.
 ``(4) Creating institutes that take place over academic 
 breaks, like the summer, including through technological means, 
 and cover foreign language, world area, global, or other 
 international studies in learning areas of global business, 
 science, technology, engineering, or other professional 
 education and training fields.
 ``(5) Internationalizing curricula at minority-serving 
 institutions or community colleges to further the purposes of 
 this section.
 ``(6) Establishing international linkages or partnerships 
 with institutions of higher education, corporations, or 
 organizations that contribute to the objectives of this 
 section.
 ``(7) Developing programs to inform the public of 
 increasing global interdependence in professional education and 
 technical training fields.
 ``(8) Establishing trade education programs through 
 agreements with regional, national, global, bilateral, or 
 multilateral trade centers, councils, or associations.
 ``(e) Application.--Each eligible entity desiring a grant under 
this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, 
in such manner, and including such information as the Secretary may 
reasonably require, including assurances that--
 ``(1) each proposed project will be self-sustainable after 
 the grant term is completed;
 ``(2) the institution of higher education will use the 
 assistance provided under this section to supplement and not 
 supplant activities described in subsection (c) or (d) that are 
 conducted by the institution of higher education;
 ``(3) in the case of eligible entities that are consortia 
 of institutions of higher education, or partnership described 
 in subsection (g)(1)(C), a copy of their partnership agreement 
 that demonstrates compliance with subsection (c) will be 
 provided to the Secretary;
 ``(4) the activities funded by the grant will reflect 
 diverse perspectives and a wide range of views of world regions 
 and international affairs where applicable; and
 ``(5) if applicable, a demonstration of why the eligible 
 entity needs a waiver or reduction of the matching requirement 
 under subsection (f).
 ``(f) Matching Requirement.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Federal share of the total cost for 
 carrying out a program supported by a grant under this section 
 shall be not more than 50 percent of the total cost of the 
 project.
 ``(2) Non-federal share contributions.--The non-Federal 
 share of such cost may be provided either in-kind or in cash, 
 from institutional and non-institutional funds, including 
 contributions from State and private sector corporations, 
 nonprofits, or foundations.
 ``(3) Special rule.--The Secretary may waive or reduce the 
 share required under paragraph (1) for eligible entities that--
 ``(A) are minority-serving institutions or are 
 community colleges; or
 ``(B) have submitted a grant application as 
 required by subsection (e) that demonstrates a need for 
 such a waiver or reduction.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) an institution of higher education;
 ``(B) a consortia of such institutions; or
 ``(C) a partnership between--
 ``(i) an institution of higher education or 
 a consortia of such institutions; and
 ``(ii) at least one corporate or nonprofit 
 entity.
 ``(2) Professional education and technical training.--The 
 term `professional education and technical training' means a 
 program at an institution of higher education that offers 
 undergraduate, graduate, or postgraduate level education in a 
 professional or technical field that is determined by the 
 Secretary as meeting a national need for global or 
 international competency (which may include business, science, 
 technology, engineering, law, health, energy, environment, 
 agriculture, transportation, or education).
 ``(h) Funding Rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
title, funds made available to the Secretary for a fiscal year may not 
be obligated or expended to carry out this section unless the funds 
appropriated for such fiscal year to carry out this title exceeds 
$65,103,000.''.
 (c) Discontinuation of Certain Authorizations of Appropriations.--
Part B of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1130 et seq.) is 
further amended by striking section 614.

SEC. 6003. REPEAL OF ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL 
 PUBLIC POLICY.

 Part C of title VI of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.) is repealed.

SEC. 6004. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 631(a) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1132(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(11) the term `community college' has the meaning given 
 the term `junior or community college' in section 312(f);
 ``(12) the term `heritage student' means a postsecondary 
 student who--
 ``(A) was born in the United States to immigrant 
 parents or immigrated to the United States at an early 
 age;
 ``(B) is proficient in English, but raised in a 
 family primarily speaking 1 or more languages of the 
 country of origin; and
 ``(C) maintains a close affinity with the family's 
 culture and language of origin; and
 ``(13) the term `minority-serving institution' means an 
 institution of higher education that is eligible to receive a 
 grant under part A or B of title III or title V.''.
 (b) Minority-Serving Institutions.--Part D of title VI of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1132 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by striking section 637;
 (2) by redesignating section 638 as section 637; and
 (3) by inserting after section 637, as so redesignated, the 
 following:

``SEC. 638. PRIORITY TO MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) Priority.--In seeking applications and awarding grants under 
this title, the Secretary, may give priority to--
 ``(1) minority-serving institutions; or
 ``(2) institutions of higher education that apply for such 
 grants that propose significant and sustained collaborative 
 activities with one or more minority-serving institutions.
 ``(b) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to minority-serving institutions to ensure maximum 
distribution of grants to eligible minority-serving institutions and 
among each category of such institutions.''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--Part D of title VI of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1132 et seq.) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 639. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), there are authorized 
to be appropriated to carry out this title $125,000,000 for fiscal year 
2021 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(b) Adjustment for Inflation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount authorized to be appropriated 
 under subsection (a) for fiscal year 2022 and each of the 4 
 succeeding fiscal years shall be deemed increased by a 
 percentage equal to the annual adjustment percentage.
 ``(2) Definition.--In this subsection, the term `annual 
 adjustment percentage' as applied to a fiscal year, means the 
 estimated percentage change in the Consumer Price Index (as 
 determined by the Secretary, using the definition in section 
 478(f)) for the most recent calendar year ending prior to the 
 beginning of that fiscal year.''.

 TITLE VII--GRADUATE AND POSTSECONDARY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS

SEC. 7001. GRADUATE ASSISTANCE IN AREAS OF NATIONAL NEED.

 Section 716 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1135e) 
is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2021''.

SEC. 7002. GRADUATE EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) HBCU.--Section 723 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1136a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(S) Each institution not listed under 
 subparagraphs (A) through (R) that is eligible to 
 receive funds under part B of title III and that offers 
 a qualified masters degree program.'';
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking ``or 724'' and inserting 
 ``or 724, or subpart 5 or 6 of this part''; and
 (3) in subsection (f)(3)--
 (A) by striking ``any amount in excess of 
 $9,000,000'' and inserting ``after the application of 
 paragraph (2), the remaining amount''; and
 (B) by striking ``(R)'' and inserting ``(S)''.
 (b) Predominantly Black Institutions.--Section 724 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1136b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(F) Each institution not listed in subparagraph 
 (A) through (E) that is eligible to receive funds under 
 section 318 and that offers a qualified masters degree 
 program.'';
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking ``or 723'' and inserting 
 ``or 723, or subpart 5 or 6''; and
 (3) in subsection (f)(3), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``any amount in excess of 
 $2,500,000'' and inserting ``after the application of 
 paragraph (2), any remaining amount''; and
 (B) by striking ``(E)'' and inserting ``(F)''.
 (c) Enhancing Support for Asian American and Native American 
Pacific Islander-serving Institutions and Tribal Colleges and 
Universities.--Part A of title VII of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1134 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 731--
 (A) by striking ``1 through 4'' each place it 
 appears (including in the section heading) and 
 inserting ``1 through 6''; and
 (B) by striking ``subpart 1, 2, 3, or 4'' and 
 inserting ``subparts 1 through 6'';
 (2) by redesignating subpart 5 as subpart 7;
 (3) by redesignating section 731 as section 735; and
 (4) by inserting after subpart 4 the following:

 ``Subpart 5--Graduate Opportunities at Asian American and Native 
 American Pacific Islander Serving Institutions

``SEC. 726. GRANT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to the availability of funds 
appropriated to carry out this subpart, the Secretary shall award 
grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible institutions to enable the 
eligible institutions to carry out the activities described in section 
727.
 ``(b) Award of Grant Funds.--Of the funds appropriated to carry out 
this subpart for a fiscal year, the Secretary--
 ``(1) shall reserve--
 ``(A) not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 727(b); and
 ``(B) not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 727(c); and
 ``(2) may use the amount of funds remaining after the 
 reservation required under paragraph (1) to award grants to 
 carry out the activities described in subsections (b) and (c) 
 of section 727.
 ``(c) Duration.--Grants under this subpart shall be awarded for a 
period not to exceed five years.
 ``(d) Limitation on Number of Awards.--The Secretary may not award 
more than one grant under this subpart in any fiscal year to any Asian 
American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving institutions.
 ``(e) Application.--Any eligible institution may apply for a grant 
under this subpart by submitting an application to the Secretary at 
such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require. Such 
application shall demonstrate how the grant funds will be used to 
improve postbaccalaureate education opportunities for Asian American 
and Native American Pacific Islander and low-income students.
 ``(f) Interaction With Other Grant Programs.--No institution that 
is eligible for and receives an award under section 326, 512, 723, or 
724, or subpart 6 of this part for a fiscal year shall be eligible to 
apply for a grant, or receive grant funds, under this subpart for the 
same fiscal year.
 ``(g) Eligible Institution Defined.--For the purposes of this 
subpart, an `eligible institution' means an institution of higher 
education that--
 ``(1) is an Asian-American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution (as defined in section 320); and
 ``(2) offers a postbaccalaureate certificate or 
 postbaccalaureate degree granting program.

``SEC. 727. USE OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Activities.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subpart shall use such funds to carry out--
 ``(A) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (b); or
 ``(B) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Requirement.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subpart may not use such funds for activities 
 under both subsections (b) and (c).
 ``(b) Graduate Program Activities.--Grants awarded under this 
subpart may be used for one or more of the following activities 
promoting postbaccaulaureate opportunities for Asian American and 
Native American Pacific Islander students:
 ``(1) Purchase, rental, or lease of scientific or 
 laboratory equipment for educational purposes, including 
 instructional and research purposes.
 ``(2) Construction, maintenance, renovation, and 
 improvement of classrooms, libraries, laboratories, and other 
 instructional facilities, including purchase or rental of 
 telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(3) Purchase of library books, periodicals, technical and 
 other scientific journals, microfilm, microfiche, and other 
 educational materials, including telecommunications program 
 materials.
 ``(4) Support for low-income postbaccalaureate students 
 including outreach, academic support services and mentoring, 
 scholarships, fellowships, and other financial assistance to 
 permit the enrollment of such students in postbaccalaureate 
 certificate and postbaccalaureate degree granting programs.
 ``(5) Creating or improving facilities for Internet or 
 other distance education technologies, including purchase or 
 rental of telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(6) Collaboration with other institutions of higher 
 education to expand postbaccalaureate certificate and 
 postbaccalaureate degree offerings.
 ``(7) Other activities proposed in the application 
 submitted pursuant to section 726 that--
 ``(A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of 
 this subpart; and
 ``(B) are approved by the Secretary as part of the 
 review and acceptance of such application.
 ``(c) Faculty Development Activities.--Grants awarded under this 
subpart may be used for one or more of the following activities for 
faculty development:
 ``(1) Support of faculty exchanges, faculty development, 
 faculty research, curriculum development, and academic 
 instruction.
 ``(2) Financial support to graduate students planning to 
 pursue academic careers who desire to become faculty at Asian 
 American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving 
 institutions.
 ``(3) Career services in preparing for an academic career 
 and identifying opportunities.
 ``(4) Developing partnerships between Asian American and 
 Native American Pacific Islander-serving institutions to 
 facilitate connections between graduate students and hiring 
 institutions.
 ``(5) Faculty recruitment efforts with an emphasis on 
 graduates from Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institutions and other minority-serving 
 institutions.
 ``(6) Recruitment and retention incentives to allow Asian 
 American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving 
 institutions to make competitive offers to potential faculty, 
 including use of funds for student loan repayment.
 ``(7) Research support for early career faculty.
 ``(8) Other activities proposed in the application 
 submitted pursuant to section 726 that--
 ``(A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of 
 this subpart; and
 ``(B) are approved by the Secretary as part of the 
 review and acceptance of such application.

``SEC. 728. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart 
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal 
years.

``Subpart 6--Graduate Opportunities at Tribal Colleges and Universities

``SEC. 729. GRANT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to the availability of funds 
appropriated to carry out this subpart, the Secretary shall award 
grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible institutions to enable the 
eligible institutions to carry out the activities described in section 
730.
 ``(b) Award of Grant Funds.--Of the funds appropriated to carry out 
this subpart for a fiscal year, the Secretary--
 ``(1) shall reserve--
 ``(A) not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 730(b); and
 ``(B) not less than one-third of such funds to 
 award grants to carry out the activities described in 
 section 730(c); and
 ``(2) may use the amount of funds remaining after the 
 reservation required under paragraph (1) to award grants to 
 carry out the activities described in subsections (b) and (c) 
 of section 730.
 ``(c) Duration.--Grants under this part shall be awarded for a 
period not to exceed five years.
 ``(d) Limitation on Number of Awards.--The Secretary may not award 
more than one grant under this subpart in any fiscal year to any Tribal 
College and University.
 ``(e) Application.--Any eligible institution may apply for a grant 
under this subpart by submitting an application to the Secretary at 
such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require. Such 
application shall demonstrate how the grant funds will be used to 
improve postbaccalaureate education opportunities for American Indian 
and Alaska Native students.
 ``(f) Interaction With Other Grant Programs.--No institution that 
is eligible for and receives an award under section 326, 512, 723, or 
724, or subpart 5 of this part for a fiscal year shall be eligible to 
apply for a grant, or receive grant funds, under this section for the 
same fiscal year.
 ``(g) Eligible Institution Defined.--For the purposes of this 
subpart, an `eligible institution' means an institution of higher 
education that--
 ``(1) is a Tribal College or University (as defined in 
 section 316); and
 ``(2) offers a postbaccalaureate certificate or 
 postbaccalaureate degree granting program.

``SEC. 730. USE OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Activities.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subpart shall use such funds to carry out--
 ``(A) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (b); or
 ``(B) one or more of the activities described in 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Requirement.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subpart may not use such funds for activities 
 under both subsections (b) and (c).
 ``(b) Graduate Program Activities.--Grants awarded under this 
subpart may be used for one or more of the following activities 
promoting postbaccalaureate opportunities for American Indian and 
Alaska Native students:
 ``(1) Purchase, rental, or lease of scientific or 
 laboratory equipment for educational purposes, including 
 instructional and research purposes.
 ``(2) Construction, maintenance, renovation, and 
 improvement of classrooms, libraries, laboratories, and other 
 instructional facilities, including purchase or rental of 
 telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(3) Purchase of library books, periodicals, technical and 
 other scientific journals, microfilm, microfiche, and other 
 educational materials, including telecommunications program 
 materials.
 ``(4) Support for American Indian and Alaska Native 
 postbaccalaureate students including outreach, academic support 
 services and mentoring, scholarships, fellowships, and other 
 financial assistance to permit the enrollment of such students 
 in postbaccalaureate certificate and postbaccalaureate degree 
 granting programs.
 ``(5) Creating or improving facilities for Internet or 
 other distance education technologies, including purchase or 
 rental of telecommunications technology equipment or services.
 ``(6) Collaboration with other institutions of higher 
 education to expand postbaccalaureate certificate and 
 postbaccalaureate degree offerings.
 ``(7) Other activities proposed in the application 
 submitted pursuant to section 729 that--
 ``(A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of 
 this subpart; and
 ``(B) are approved by the Secretary as part of the 
 review and acceptance of such application.
 ``(c) Faculty Development Activities.--Grants awarded under this 
subpart may be used for one or more of the following activities for 
faculty development:
 ``(1) Support of faculty exchanges, faculty development, 
 faculty research, curriculum development, and academic 
 instruction.
 ``(2) Financial support to graduate students planning to 
 pursue academic careers who desire to become faculty at Tribal 
 Colleges and Universities.
 ``(3) Career services in preparing for an academic career 
 and identifying opportunities.
 ``(4) Developing partnerships between Tribal Colleges and 
 Universities to facilitate connections between graduate 
 students and hiring institutions.
 ``(5) Faculty recruitment efforts with an emphasis on 
 graduates from Tribal Colleges and Universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions.
 ``(6) Recruitment and retention incentives to allow Tribal 
 Colleges and Universities to make competitive offers to 
 potential faculty, including use of funds for student loan 
 repayment.
 ``(7) Research support for early career faculty.
 ``(8) Other activities proposed in the application 
 submitted pursuant to section 729 that--
 ``(A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of 
 this subpart; and
 ``(B) are approved by the Secretary as part of the 
 review and acceptance of such application.

``SEC. 731. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart 
$5,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal 
years.''.

SEC. 7003. FUND FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION.

 Section 745 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1138d) 
is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2021''.

SEC. 7004. MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS INNOVATION FUND.

 Title VII of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1133 et 
seq.) is amended by inserting after part B the following:

 ``PART C--FUNDING INNOVATIONS AT MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS

``SEC. 751. PURPOSE.

 ``It is the purpose of this part to assist minority-serving 
institutions in planning, developing, implementing, validating, and 
replicating innovations that provide solutions to persistent challenges 
in enabling economically and educationally disadvantaged students to 
enroll in, persist through, and graduate from college, including 
innovations designed to--
 ``(1) increase the successful recruitment at minority-
 serving institutions of--
 ``(A) students from low-income families of all 
 races;
 ``(B) students who begin college when over 21 years 
 of age; and
 ``(C) military-affiliated students;
 ``(2) increase the rate at which students enrolled in 
 minority-serving institutions make adequate or accelerated 
 progress toward graduation, and successfully graduate from such 
 institutions;
 ``(3) increase the number of students pursuing and 
 completing degrees in science, technology, engineering, and 
 mathematics at minority-serving institutions and pursuing 
 graduate work in such fields, including through the 
 establishment of innovation ecosystems on the campuses of such 
 institutions;
 ``(4) redesign course offerings and other instructional 
 strategies at minority-serving institutions to improve student 
 outcomes and reduce postsecondary education costs;
 ``(5) enhance the quality and number of traditional and 
 alternative route teacher preparation programs offered by 
 minority-serving institutions;
 ``(6) expand the effective use of technology at minority-
 serving institutions; and
 ``(7) strengthen postgraduate employment outcomes for 
 students enrolled in minority-serving institutions.

``SEC. 752. DEFINITION.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) a minority-serving institution; or
 ``(B) a consortium of a minority-serving 
 institution and--
 ``(i) one or more other institutions of 
 higher education;
 ``(ii) a private nonprofit organization;
 ``(iii) a local educational agency;
 ``(iv) a high school that--
 ``(I) receives funding under part A 
 of title I of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6311 et seq.); and
 ``(II) has been identified for 
 comprehensive support and improvement 
 under section 1111(c)(4)(D)(i) of such 
 Act (20 U.S.C. 6311(c)(4)(D)(i)); or
 ``(v) any combination of the entities 
 described in clauses (i) through (iv).
 ``(2) Minority serving institution.--The term `minority 
 serving institution' means an institution of higher education 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7) of 
 section 371(a).

``SEC. 753. GRANTS AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), with 
the funds made available for this part under section 757, the Secretary 
shall make planning and implementation grants, as described in 
subsections (b) and (c), to eligible entities to enable such entities 
to plan for the implementation of, in the case of a planning grant, and 
implement, in the case of an implementation grant, innovations 
described in section 751 and to support the planning, development, 
implementation, validation, scaling up, and replication of such 
innovations.
 ``(b) Planning Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 with the funds made available under section 757 for a fiscal 
 year, the Secretary shall use not more than 5 percent or 
 $42,500,000 (whichever is greater) to award planning grants to 
 enable eligible entities to plan, design, and develop 
 innovations described in section 751.
 ``(2) Type of institution.--Planning grants shall be 
 awarded to minority-serving institutions in proportion to the 
 allocations made in subparagraphs (A) through (G) of section 
 757(1).
 ``(3) Order of consideration.--Subject to paragraph (2) and 
 the priority described in section 755(a), planning grants shall 
 be awarded to eligible entities satisfying the application 
 requirements under section 754 in the order in which received 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(4) Duration.--A planning grant authorized under this 
 subsection shall be for the duration of 1 year.
 ``(5) Grant amounts.--Each planning grant authorized under 
 this subsection shall be in an amount that is not more than 
 $150,000.
 ``(c) Implementation Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--With funds made available for this part 
 under section 757, the Secretary shall award implementation 
 grants on a competitive basis to enable eligible entities to 
 further develop, pilot, field-test, implement, document, 
 validate, and, as applicable, scale up and replicate, 
 innovations described in section 751.
 ``(2) Duration.--An implementation grant authorized under 
 this subsection shall be for a duration of 5 years, except that 
 the Secretary may not continue providing funds under the grant 
 after year 3 of the grant period unless the eligible entity 
 demonstrates that the entity has achieved satisfactory progress 
 toward carrying out the educational innovations, activities, 
 and projects described in their application pursuant to section 
 754(d), as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Grant amount.--Each implementation grant authorized 
 under this subsection shall be in an amount sufficient to 
 enable the eligible entity to achieve the purposes of its 
 proposed activities and projects, but shall not exceed 
 $10,000,000.
 ``(d) Special Rules for Consortiums.--
 ``(1) Fiscal agent.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an eligible 
 entity applying for a grant under this part as a 
 consortium, each member of the consortium shall agree 
 on 1 such member of such eligibility entity to serve as 
 a fiscal agent of such entity.
 ``(B) Responsibilities.--The fiscal agent of an 
 eligible entity, as described in subparagraph (A), 
 shall act on behalf of such entity in performing the 
 financial duties of such entity under this part.
 ``(C) Written agreement.--The agreement described 
 in subparagraph (A) shall be in writing and signed by 
 each member of the consortium.
 ``(2) Subgrants.--In the case of an eligible entity 
 applying for a grant under this part as a consortium, the 
 fiscal agent for such entity (as described in paragraph (1)) 
 may use the funds provided by the grant to make subgrants to 
 members of the consortium.

``SEC. 754. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--An eligible entity desiring to receive a grant 
under this part shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may reasonably require.
 ``(b) Consortium Entities.--An application under this section which 
is submitted by an eligible entity applying as a consortium shall 
include the written agreement described in section 753(d)(1)(C).
 ``(c) Planning Grants.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
application requirements under this section for a planning grant 
authorized under section 753(b) include, in addition to the requirement 
in subsection (b) (if applicable), only those minimal requirements that 
are necessary to review the proposed process of an eligible entity for 
the planning, design, and development of one or more of the innovations 
described in section 751.
 ``(d) Implementation Grants.--An application under this section for 
an innovation grant authorized under section 753(c) shall include, in 
addition to the requirement under subsection (b) (if applicable), 
descriptions of--
 ``(1) each innovation described in section 751 that the 
 eligible entity would implement using the funds made available 
 by such grant, including, as applicable, a description of the 
 evidence base supporting such innovation;
 ``(2) how each such innovation will address the purpose of 
 this part, as described in section 751, and how each such 
 innovation will further the institutional or organizational 
 mission of the minority-serving institution that is part of the 
 eligible entity;
 ``(3) the specific activities that the eligible entity will 
 carry out with funds made available by such grant, including, 
 in the case of an eligible entity applying as a consortium, a 
 description of the activities that each member of the 
 consortium will carry out and a description of the capacity of 
 each such member to carry out those activities;
 ``(4) the performance measures that the eligible entity 
 will use to track its progress in implementing each such 
 innovation, including a description of how the entity will 
 implement those performance measures and use information on 
 performance to make adjustments and improvements to its 
 implementation activities, as needed, over the course of the 
 grant period;
 ``(5) how the eligible entity will provide for an 
 independent evaluation of the implementation and impact of the 
 projects funded by such grant, including--
 ``(A) an interim report (evaluating the progress 
 made in the first 3 years of the grant); and
 ``(B) a final report (completed at the end of the 
 grant period); and
 ``(6) the plan of the eligible entity for continuing each 
 proposed innovation after the grant has ended.

``SEC. 755. PRIORITY.

 ``(a) Planning Grants.--In awarding planning grants under this 
part, the Secretary shall give priority to applications that were 
submitted with respect to the prior award year, but did not receive a 
planning grant due to insufficient funds.
 ``(b) Implementation Grants.--In awarding implementation grants 
under this part, the Secretary shall give--
 ``(1) first priority to applications for programs at 
 minority-serving institutions that have not previously received 
 an implementation grant under this part; and
 ``(2) second priority to applications that address issues 
 of major national need, including--
 ``(A) innovative partnerships between minority-
 serving institutions and local educational agencies 
 that are designed to increase the enrollment of 
 historically underrepresented populations in higher 
 education;
 ``(B) educational innovations designed to increase 
 the rate of postsecondary degree attainment for 
 populations within minority groups that have low 
 relative rates of postsecondary degree attainment;
 ``(C) educational innovations that support programs 
 and initiatives at minority-serving institutions to 
 enhance undergraduate and graduate programs in science, 
 technology, engineering, and mathematics;
 ``(D) innovative partnerships between minority-
 serving institutions and other organizations to 
 establish innovation ecosystems in support of economic 
 development, entrepreneurship, and the 
 commercialization of technology supported by research 
 funded through this grant;
 ``(E) educational innovations that enhance the 
 quality and number of traditional and alternative route 
 teacher preparation programs at minority-serving 
 institutions to enable teachers to be highly effective 
 in the classroom and to enable such programs to meet 
 the demands for diversity and accountability in teacher 
 education; and
 ``(F) educational innovations that strengthen 
 postgraduate employment outcomes of minority-serving 
 institutions through the implementation of 
 comprehensive and strategic career pathways for 
 students.

``SEC. 756. USES OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) Planning Grants.--An eligible entity receiving a planning 
grant under section 753(b) shall use funds made available by such grant 
to conduct an institutional planning process that includes--
 ``(1) an assessment of the needs of the minority-serving 
 institution;
 ``(2) research on educational innovations described in 
 section 751 that will meet the needs described in paragraph 
 (1);
 ``(3) the selection of one or more such educational 
 innovations for implementation;
 ``(4) an assessment of the capacity of the minority-serving 
 institution to implement such educational innovation; and
 ``(5) activities to further develop such capacity.
 ``(b) Implementation Grants.--An eligible entity receiving an 
implementation grant under section 753(c) shall use the funds made 
available by such grant to further develop, pilot, field-test, 
implement, document, validate, and, as applicable, scale up, and 
replicate innovations described in section 751, such as innovations 
designed to--
 ``(1) create a college-bound culture at secondary schools 
 (including efforts targeting high-achieving students from low-
 income families) through activities undertaken in partnership 
 with local educational agencies and nonprofit organizations, 
 such as--
 ``(A) activities that promote postsecondary school 
 awareness, including recruitment, organizing campus 
 visits, and providing assistance with entrance and 
 financial aid application completion; and
 ``(B) postsecondary school preparation efforts such 
 as--
 ``(i) aligning high school coursework and 
 high school graduation requirements with the 
 requirements for entrance into credit-bearing 
 coursework at 4-year institutions of higher 
 education;
 ``(ii) early identification and support for 
 students at risk of not graduating from high 
 school, or at risk of requiring remediation 
 upon enrolling in postsecondary education; and
 ``(iii) dual-enrollment programs;
 ``(2) improve student achievement, such as through 
 activities designed to increase the number or percentage of 
 students who successfully complete developmental or remedial 
 coursework (which may be accomplished through the evidence-
 based redesign of such coursework) and pursue and succeed in 
 postsecondary studies;
 ``(3) increase the number of minority males who attain a 
 postsecondary degree, such as through evidence-based 
 interventions that integrate academic advising with social and 
 cultural supports and assistance with job placement;
 ``(4) increase the number or percentage of students who 
 make satisfactory or accelerated progress toward graduation 
 from postsecondary school and the number or percentage who 
 graduate from postsecondary school on time, such as through the 
 provision of comprehensive academic and nonacademic student 
 support services.
 ``(5) activities to promote a positive climate on campuses 
 of institutions of higher education and to increase the sense 
 of belonging among eligible students, including through first 
 year support programs such as mentoring and peer networks and 
 advisories;
 ``(6) increase the number or percentage of students, 
 particularly students who are members of historically 
 underrepresented populations, who enroll in science, 
 technology, engineering, and mathematics courses, graduate with 
 degrees in such fields, and pursue advanced studies in such 
 fields;
 ``(7) develop partnerships between minority-serving 
 institutions and other organizations to establish innovation 
 ecosystems in support of economic development, 
 entrepreneurship, and the commercialization of technology 
 supported by funded research;
 ``(8) implement evidence-based improvements to courses, 
 particularly high-enrollment courses, to improve student 
 outcomes and reduce education costs for students, including 
 costs of remedial courses;
 ``(9) enhance the quality and number of traditional and 
 alternative route teacher and school leader preparation 
 programs at minority-serving institutions that enable graduates 
 to be profession-ready and highly effective in the classroom 
 and to enable such programs to meet the demands for diversity 
 and accountability in educator preparation;
 ``(10) expand the effective use of technology in higher 
 education, such as through collaboration between institutions 
 on implementing technology-enabled delivery models (including 
 hybrid models) or through the use of open educational resources 
 and digital content;
 ``(11) strengthen postgraduate employment outcomes through 
 the implementation of comprehensive and strategic career 
 pathways for students, which may include aligning curricula 
 with workforce needs, experiential learning, integration of 
 career services, and developing partnerships with employers and 
 business organizations; and
 ``(12) provide a continuum of solutions by incorporating 
 activities that address multiple objectives described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (11).

``SEC. 757. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out activities 
under this part $850,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 
succeeding fiscal years, to be allocated as follows:
 ``(1) for institutions described in paragraph (1) of 
 section 371(a), $224,987,083;
 ``(2) for institutions described in paragraph (2) of 
 section 371(a), $214,446,428;
 ``(3) for institutions described in paragraph (3) of 
 section 371(a), $78,056,743;
 ``(4) for institutions described in paragraph (4) of 
 section 371(a), $20,662,079;
 ``(5) for institutions described in paragraph (5) of 
 section 371(a), $130,859,834;
 ``(6) for institutions described in paragraph (6) of 
 section 371(a), $122,305,533; and
 ``(7) for institutions described in paragraph (7) of 
 section 371(a), $58,682,300.''.

SEC. 7005. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 760 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1140) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 760. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Comprehensive transition and postsecondary program 
 for students with intellectual disabilities.--The term 
 `comprehensive transition and postsecondary program for 
 students with intellectual disabilities' means a program that 
 leads to a degree, certificate, or recognized postsecondary 
 credential issued by an institution of higher education that 
 meets each of the following requirements:
 ``(A) Is offered by an institution of higher 
 education.
 ``(B) Is designed to support students with 
 intellectual disabilities who are seeking to continue 
 academic, career and technical, and independent living 
 instruction at an institution of higher education in 
 order to prepare for gainful employment and competitive 
 integrated employment.
 ``(C) Includes student advising and a program of 
 study.
 ``(D) Requires students with intellectual 
 disabilities to participate on not less than a half-
 time basis as determined by the institution, with such 
 participation focusing on academic and career 
 development components and occurring through one or 
 more of the following activities:
 ``(i) Regular enrollment in credit-bearing 
 courses with students without disabilities that 
 are offered by the institution.
 ``(ii) Auditing or participating in courses 
 with students without disabilities that are 
 offered by the institution and for which the 
 student does not receive regular academic 
 credit.
 ``(iii) Enrollment in noncredit-bearing, 
 nondegree courses with students without 
 disabilities.
 ``(iv) Participation in internships, 
 registered apprenticeships, or work-based 
 experiences in competitive integrated settings 
 for a semester, or multiple semesters.
 ``(E) Requires students with intellectual 
 disabilities to be socially and academically integrated 
 with students without disabilities to the maximum 
 extent practicable.
 ``(F) Does not require the work components (ii) to 
 occur each semester.
 ``(2) Disability.--The term `disability' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12102).
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 101.
 ``(4) Office of accessibility.--The term `Office of 
 Accessibility' has the meaning given to the office of 
 disability services of the institution or equivalent office.
 ``(5) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 `recognized postsecondary credential' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity 
 Act.
 ``(6) Student with an intellectual disability.--The term 
 `student with an intellectual disability' means a student--
 ``(A) with a cognitive impairment, characterized by 
 significant limitations in--
 ``(i) intellectual and cognitive 
 functioning; and
 ``(ii) adaptive behavior as expressed in 
 conceptual, social, and practical adaptive 
 skills;
 ``(B) who is currently, or was formerly, eligible 
 for a free appropriate public education under the 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1400 et seq.); and
 ``(C) or, in the case of a student who has not 
 currently or formerly been found eligible for a free 
 appropriate education under the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act, or a student who has not 
 previously been found eligible as a student with an 
 intellectual disability under IDEA, documentation 
 establishing that the student has an intellectual 
 disability, such as--
 ``(i) a documented comprehensive and 
 individualized psycho-educational evaluation 
 and diagnosis of an intellectual disability by 
 a psychologist or other qualified professional; 
 or
 ``(ii) a record of the disability from a 
 local or State educational agency, or 
 government agency, such as the Social Security 
 Administration or a vocational rehabilitation 
 agency, that identifies the intellectual 
 disability.''.

SEC. 7006. SUPPORTING POSTSECONDARY FACULTY, STAFF, AND ADMINISTRATORS 
 IN PROVIDING ACCESSIBLE EDUCATION.

 (a) Grants.--Section 762 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1140b) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 762. GRANTS AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) Competitive Grants Authorized to Support Postsecondary 
Faculty, Staff, and Administrators in Providing an Accessible 
Education.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 
 765C, the Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, 
 to institutions of higher education to enable the institutions 
 to carry out the activities under subsection (b).
 ``(2) Awards for professional development and technical 
 assistance.--Not less than 5 grants shall be awarded to 
 institutions of higher education that provide professional 
 development and technical assistance in order to improve access 
 to, and completion of, postsecondary education for students, 
 including students with disabilities.
 ``(b) Duration; Activities.--
 ``(1) Duration.--A grant under this section shall be 
 awarded for a period of 5 years.
 ``(2) Authorized activities.--A grant awarded under this 
 section shall be used to carry out one or more of the following 
 activities:
 ``(A) Teaching methods and strategies.--The 
 development and implementation of training to provide 
 innovative, effective, and evidence-based teaching 
 methods and strategies, consistent with the principles 
 of universal design for learning, to provide 
 postsecondary faculty, staff, and administrators with 
 the skills and supports necessary to teach and meet the 
 academic and programmatic needs of students (including 
 students with disabilities) in order to improve the 
 retention of such students in, and the completion by 
 such students of, postsecondary education. Such methods 
 and strategies may include in-service training, 
 professional development, customized and general 
 technical assistance, workshops, summer institutes, 
 distance learning, and training in the use of assistive 
 and educational technology.
 ``(B) Implementing accommodations.--The development 
 and implementation of training to provide postsecondary 
 faculty, staff, and administrators methods and 
 strategies of providing appropriate accommodations 
 consistent with the principles of universal design for 
 learning for students with disabilities, including 
 descriptions of legal obligations of the institution of 
 higher education to provide such accommodations.
 ``(C) Effective transition practices.--The 
 development and implementation of innovative, 
 effective, and evidence-based teaching methods and 
 strategies to provide postsecondary faculty, staff, and 
 administrators with the skills and supports necessary 
 to ensure the successful and smooth transition of 
 students with disabilities from secondary school to 
 postsecondary education. The teaching methods and 
 strategies may include supporting students in the 
 development of self-advocacy skills to improve 
 transition to, and completion of, postsecondary 
 education.
 ``(D) Distance learning.--The development and 
 implementation of training to provide innovative, 
 effective, and evidence-based teaching methods and 
 strategies to enable postsecondary faculty, staff, and 
 administrators to provide accessible distance education 
 programs or classes that would enhance the access of 
 students (including students with disabilities) to 
 postsecondary education, including the use of 
 accessible curricula and electronic communication for 
 instruction and advising that meet the requirements of 
 section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
 U.S.C. 794d).
 ``(E) Career pathway guidance.--The development and 
 implementation of effective and evidence-based teaching 
 methods and strategies to provide postsecondary 
 faculty, staff, and administrators with the ability to 
 advise students with disabilities with respect to their 
 chosen career pathway, which shall include at least one 
 of the following:
 ``(i) Supporting internships, 
 apprenticeships, or work-based learning 
 opportunities.
 ``(ii) Counseling on coursework to meet the 
 recognized educational credential or recognized 
 postsecondary credential appropriate for the 
 field chosen.
 ``(iii) Developing self-advocacy skills to 
 advocate for appropriate accommodations once in 
 the workplace.
 ``(iv) Support with selecting a career 
 pathway that leads to competitive, integrated 
 employment.
 ``(3) Mandatory evaluation and dissemination.--An 
 institution of higher education awarded a grant under this 
 section shall evaluate and disseminate to other institutions of 
 higher education the information obtained through the 
 activities described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) of 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(c) Considerations in Making Awards.--In awarding grants, 
contracts, or cooperative agreements under this section, the Secretary 
shall consider the following:
 ``(1) Geographic distribution.--Providing an equitable 
 geographic distribution of such awards.
 ``(2) Rural and urban areas.--Distributing such awards to 
 urban and rural areas.
 ``(3) Range and type of institution.--Ensuring that the 
 activities to be assisted are developed for a range of types 
 and sizes of institutions of higher education.
 ``(d) Reports.--
 ``(1) Initial report.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall prepare and submit to the authorizing 
 committees, and make available to the public, a report on all 
 projects awarded grants under this part, including a review of 
 the activities and program performance of such projects based 
 on existing information as of the date of the report.
 ``(2) Subsequent report.--Not later than five years after 
 the date of the first award of a grant under this section after 
 the date of enactment of the College Affordability Act, the 
 Secretary shall prepare and submit to the authorizing 
 committees, and make available to the public, a report that--
 ``(A) reviews the activities and program 
 performance of the projects authorized under subsection 
 (b); and
 ``(B) provides guidance and recommendations on how 
 effective projects can be replicated.''.
 (b) Applications.--Section 763 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1140c) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 763. APPLICATIONS.

 ``Each institution of higher education desiring to receive a grant 
under section 762 shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the 
Secretary may require. Each application shall include--
 ``(1) a description of the activities authorized under 
 section 762(b) that the institution proposes to carry out, and 
 how such institution plans to conduct such activities in order 
 to further the purposes of this subpart;
 ``(2) a description of how the institution consulted with a 
 broad range of people including students with disabilities and 
 individuals with expertise in disability supports or special 
 education within the institution to develop activities for 
 which assistance is sought;
 ``(3) a description of how the institution will coordinate 
 and collaborate with the office of accessibility; and
 ``(4) a description of the extent to which the institution 
 will work to replicate the research-based and best practices of 
 institutions of higher education with demonstrated 
 effectiveness in serving students with disabilities.''.

SEC. 7007. OFFICE OF ACCESSIBILITY.

 Subpart 1 of part D of title VII of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1140a et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 765 as section 765C;
 (2) by inserting after section 764 the following:

``SEC. 765A. OFFICE OF ACCESSIBILITY.

 ``(a) Establishment.--Each institution of higher education shall 
establish an office of accessibility to develop and implement policies 
to support students who enter postsecondary education with disabilities 
and students who acquire a disability while enrolled in an institution 
of higher education.
 ``(b) Duties.--Each office of accessibility shall--
 ``(1) inform students, during student orientation, about 
 services provided at the institution of higher education, and 
 continually update such information through the accessibility 
 office's website and other communications to improve 
 accessibility of such services;
 ``(2) provide information to students regarding 
 accommodations and modifications provided by the institution of 
 higher education with respect to internships, practicums, work-
 based learning, apprenticeships, or other work-related 
 environments that--
 ``(A) the student may engage in through courses; or
 ``(B) are necessary for completion of a recognized 
 educational credential or recognized postsecondary 
 credential;
 ``(3) provide information to students regarding their legal 
 rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 
 12101 et seq.) and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (29 
 U.S.C. 794); and
 ``(4) in order to provide appropriate accommodations to 
 students with disabilities, carry out the following:
 ``(A) Adopt policies that, at a minimum, make any 
 of the following documentation submitted by an 
 individual sufficient to establish that such individual 
 is an individual with a disability:
 ``(i) Documentation that the individual has 
 had an individualized education program (in 
 this clause referred to as an `IEP') in 
 accordance with section 614(d) of the 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 
 U.S.C. 1414(d)), including an IEP that may not 
 be current on the date of the determination 
 that the individual has a disability. The 
 office of accessibility may ask for additional 
 documentation from an individual who had an IEP 
 but who was subsequently evaluated and 
 determined to be ineligible for services under 
 the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
 (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.), including an 
 individual determined to be ineligible during 
 elementary school.
 ``(ii) Documentation describing services or 
 accommodations provided to the individual 
 pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
 Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) (commonly referred 
 to as a `Section 504 plan').
 ``(iii) A plan or record of service for the 
 individual from a private school, a local 
 educational agency, a State educational agency, 
 or an institution of higher education provided 
 in accordance with the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et 
 seq.).
 ``(iv) A record or evaluation from a 
 relevant licensed professional finding that the 
 individual has a disability.
 ``(v) A plan or record of disability from 
 another institution of higher education.
 ``(vi) Documentation of a disability due to 
 service in the uniformed services, as defined 
 in section 484C(a).
 ``(B) Adopt policies that are transparent and 
 explicit regarding the process by which the institution 
 determines eligibility for accommodations.
 ``(C) Disseminate the information described in 
 subparagraph (B) to students, parents, and faculty--
 ``(i) in an accessible format;
 ``(ii) during student orientation; and
 ``(iii) by making such information readily 
 available on a public website of the 
 institution.
 ``(D) Provide accommodations to students with 
 mental health disabilities, and students with 
 disabilities associated with pregnancy.
 ``(E) Provide outreach and consult with students in 
 inclusive higher education.

``SEC. 765B. COMPETITIVE GRANT FOR INNOVATION AND ACCESSIBILITY.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 
 765C, the Secretary may award grants on a competitive basis to 
 institutions of higher education to enable the institutions to 
 carry out the activities described under subsection (c).
 ``(2) Duration.--A grant under this section shall be 
 awarded for a period of 5 years.
 ``(3) Consideration in making awards.--In awarding grants 
 under this section, the Secretary shall consider the following:
 ``(A) Providing an equitable geographic 
 distribution of such awards.
 ``(B) Ensuring that the activities to be assisted 
 are developed for a range of types and sizes of 
 institutions of higher education.
 ``(b) Application.--Each institution of higher education desiring 
to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to 
the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
information as the Secretary may require. Each application shall 
include--
 ``(1) a description of how the institution will carry out 
 the activities under subsection (c);
 ``(2) a description of the consultation the institution has 
 had with a broad range of people within the institution, 
 including students with disabilities and individuals with 
 expertise in disability supports or special education, in 
 developing the information under paragraph (1);
 ``(3) a plan for the sustainability of the program after 
 the end of the grant period; and
 ``(4) a written business plan for revenue and expenditures 
 to be provided to the Department under subsection (d).
 ``(c) Activities.--A grant awarded under this section shall be used 
to--
 ``(1) develop and implement across the institution of 
 higher education, a universal design for learning framework for 
 course design and instructional materials to improve campus-
 wide accessibility to instruction, materials, and the learning 
 environment; or
 ``(2) develop or improve distance education courses 
 consistent with the principles of universal design for learning 
 to improve accessibility of instruction and materials.
 ``(d) Reports.--
 ``(1) Grant recipient reports.--An institution of higher 
 education awarded a grant under this section shall evaluate and 
 disseminate to other institutions of higher education, the 
 information obtained through the activities described in 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Initial report by secretary.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary 
 shall prepare and submit to the authorizing committees, and 
 make available to the public, a report on all projects awarded 
 grants under this section, including a review of the activities 
 and program performance of such projects based on existing 
 information as of the date of the report.
 ``(3) Final report by secretary.--Not later than 6 years 
 after the date of the first award of a grant under this 
 section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the 
 authorizing committees, and make available to the public, a 
 report that--
 ``(A) reviews the activities and program 
 performance of the projects authorized under this 
 section; and
 ``(B) provides guidance and recommendations on how 
 effective projects can be replicated.''; and
 (3) by amending section 765C, as so redesignated, by 
 striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2021''.

SEC. 7008. POSTSECONDARY PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS WITH INTELLECTUAL 
 DISABILITIES.

 (a) Purpose.--Section 766 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1140f) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 766. PURPOSE.

 ``It is the purpose of this subpart to support inclusive programs 
that promote the successful transition of students with intellectual 
disabilities into higher education and the earning of a recognized 
educational credential or recognized postsecondary credential issued by 
the institution of higher education.''.
 (b) Programs for Students With Intellectual Disabilities.--Section 
767 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1140g) is amended to 
read as follows:

``SEC. 767. INCLUSIVE HIGHER EDUCATION PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS WITH 
 INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 
 769(a), the Secretary shall annually award grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to institutions of higher education (or 
 consortia of three or more institutions of higher education), 
 to enable such institutions or consortia to create or expand a 
 comprehensive transition and postsecondary education program 
 for students with intellectual disabilities.
 ``(2) Eligibility and appropriations limits.--
 ``(A) Relation to other grants.--An institution of 
 higher education that received a grant under this 
 section before the date of the enactment of the College 
 Affordability Act may not receive an additional grant 
 under this section unless--
 ``(i) the institution receives a grant as 
 part of a consortium of three or more 
 institutions of higher education; or
 ``(ii) the grant term of such preceding 
 grant has ended.
 ``(B) Limitation on amounts.--
 ``(i) Institution of higher education.--A 
 grant under this section made to an institution 
 of higher education may not be in an amount 
 greater than $300,000.
 ``(ii) Consortium.--A grant under this 
 section made to a consortia of institutions of 
 higher education may not be in an amount 
 greater than $500,000.
 ``(3) Administration.--The program under this section shall 
 be administered by the office in the Department that 
 administers other postsecondary education programs in 
 collaboration with the Office of Postsecondary Education and 
 the Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services of 
 the Department of Education.
 ``(4) Duration of grants.--A grant under this section shall 
 be awarded for a period of 5 years.
 ``(b) Application.--An institution of higher education or a 
consortium desiring a grant under this section shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(c) Award Basis.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Secretary shall--
 ``(1) provide for an equitable geographic distribution of 
 such grants;
 ``(2) to the extent possible, provide for an equitable 
 distribution of such grants between 4-year institutions of 
 higher education and 2-year institutions of higher education, 
 including community colleges;
 ``(3) provide grant funds for high-quality, inclusive 
 higher education programs for students with intellectual 
 disabilities, herein after referred to as inclusive higher 
 education programs, that will serve areas that are underserved 
 by programs of this type;
 ``(4) in the case of an institution of higher education 
 that provides institutionally owned or operated housing for 
 students attending the institution, award grants only to such 
 institutions that integrate students with intellectual 
 disabilities into the housing offered to students without 
 disabilities or to institutions that provide such integrated 
 housing through providing supports to students directly or 
 through partnerships with other organizations;
 ``(5) provide grant funds to encourage involvement of 
 students attending institutions of higher education in the 
 fields of special education, general education, vocational 
 rehabilitation, assistive technology, or related fields in the 
 program;
 ``(6) select applications that--
 ``(A) demonstrate an existing comprehensive 
 transition and postsecondary education program for 
 students with intellectual disabilities that is title 
 IV eligible; or
 ``(B) agree to establish such a program; and
 ``(7) give preference to applications submitted under 
 subsection (b) that agree to incorporate into the inclusive 
 higher education program for students with intellectual 
 disabilities carried out under the grant one or more of the 
 following elements:
 ``(A) The formation of a partnership with any 
 relevant agency serving students with intellectual 
 disabilities, such as a vocational rehabilitation 
 agency.
 ``(B) Applications that represent geographically 
 underserved States.
 ``(d) Use of Funds; Requirements.--An institution of higher 
education or consortium receiving a grant under this section shall--
 ``(1) use the grant funds to establish an inclusive higher 
 education program for students with intellectual disabilities 
 that--
 ``(A) serves students with intellectual 
 disabilities;
 ``(B) provides individual supports and services for 
 the academic and social inclusion of students with 
 intellectual disabilities in academic courses, 
 extracurricular activities, and other aspects of the 
 regular postsecondary program, including access to 
 health and mental health services, offices of 
 accessibility, and graduation ceremonies;
 ``(C) with respect to the students with 
 intellectual disabilities participating in the program, 
 provides a focus on--
 ``(i) academic and career development;
 ``(ii) socialization and inclusion with the 
 general student population;
 ``(iii) independent living skills, 
 including self-advocacy skills; and
 ``(iv) integrated work experiences and 
 career skills that lead to competitive 
 integrated employment;
 ``(D) integrates person-centered planning in the 
 development of the course of study for each student 
 with an intellectual disability participating in the 
 program;
 ``(E) plans for the sustainability of the program 
 after the end of the grant period, with a written 
 business plan for revenue and expenditures to be 
 provided to the Department by the end of year 3; and
 ``(F) awards a degree, certificate, or recognized 
 postsecondary credential for students with intellectual 
 disabilities upon the completion of the program;
 ``(2) in the case of an institution of higher education 
 that provides institutionally owned or operated housing for 
 students attending the institution or integrated housing 
 through providing supports to students directly or through 
 partnerships with other organizations, provide for the 
 integration of students with intellectual disabilities into 
 housing offered to students without disabilities;
 ``(3) participate with the coordinating center established 
 under section 777(b) in the evaluation of the program, 
 including by regularly submitting data on experiences and 
 outcomes of individual students participating in the program; 
 and
 ``(4) partner with one or more local educational agencies 
 to support students with intellectual disabilities 
 participating in the program who are eligible for special 
 education and related services under the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.), including 
 the use of funds available under part B of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1411 et seq.) to support the participation of such students in 
 the program.
 ``(e) Matching Requirement.--An institution of higher education (or 
consortium) that receives a grant under this section shall provide 
matching funds toward the cost of the inclusive higher education 
program for students with intellectual disabilities carried out under 
the grant. Such matching funds may be provided in cash or in-kind, and 
shall be in an amount of not less than 25 percent of the amount of such 
costs.
 ``(f) Data Collection and Transmission.--
 ``(1) In general.--An institution or consortium receiving a 
 grant under this section shall collect and transmit to the 
 coordinating center established under section 777(b) on an 
 annual basis for each student who is enrolled in the program, 
 student-level information related to the experiences and 
 outcomes of students who participate in the inclusive higher 
 education program for students with intellectual disabilities.
 ``(2) Longitudinal data.--Each grantee shall collect 
 longitudinal outcome data from each student participating in 
 the program and transmit such data to the coordinating center 
 established under section 777(b). Such longitudinal data shall 
 be collected for every student each year for 5 years after the 
 student graduates from, or otherwise exits, the program.
 ``(3) Data to be collected.--The program-level information 
 and data and student-level information and data to be collected 
 under this subsection shall include--
 ``(A) the number and type of postsecondary 
 education courses taken and completed by the student;
 ``(B) academic outcomes;
 ``(C) competitive, integrated employment outcomes;
 ``(D) independent living outcomes; and
 ``(E) social outcomes, including community 
 integration.
 ``(4) Disaggregation.--The information determined under 
 paragraph (3) shall be disaggregated by race, gender, 
 socioeconomic status, Federal Pell Grant eligibility status, 
 status as a first generation college student, and veteran or 
 active duty status.
 ``(g) Report.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the first 
grant awarded under this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
disseminate a report to the authorizing committees and to the public 
that--
 ``(1) reviews the activities of the inclusive higher 
 education programs for students with intellectual disabilities 
 funded under this section; and
 ``(2) provides guidance and recommendations on how 
 effective programs can be replicated.''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 769(a) of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1140i) is amended by striking ``2009'' 
and inserting ``2021''.

SEC. 7009. NATIONAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER AND NATIONAL 
 COORDINATING CENTER FOR INCLUSION OF STUDENTS WITH 
 INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 777 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1140q) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 777. NATIONAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER AND NATIONAL 
 COORDINATING CENTER FOR INCLUSION OF STUDENTS WITH 
 INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES.

 ``(a) National Technical Assistance Center.--
 ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under 
 paragraph (5), the Secretary shall award a grant to, or enter 
 into a contract or cooperative agreement with, an eligible 
 entity to provide for the establishment and support of a 
 National Technical Assistance Center. The National Technical 
 Assistance Center shall carry out the duties set forth in 
 paragraph (4).
 ``(2) Administration.--The program under this section shall 
 be administered by the office in the Department that 
 administers other postsecondary education programs in 
 consultation with the Office of Special Education and 
 Rehabilitative Services.
 ``(3) Eligible entity.--In this subpart, the term `eligible 
 entity' means an institution of higher education, a nonprofit 
 organization, or partnership of two or more such institutions 
 or organizations, with demonstrated expertise in--
 ``(A) transitioning students with disabilities from 
 secondary school to postsecondary education;
 ``(B) supporting students with disabilities in 
 postsecondary education;
 ``(C) technical knowledge necessary for the 
 dissemination of information in accessible formats; and
 ``(D) working with diverse types of institutions of 
 higher education, including community colleges.
 ``(4) Duties.--The duties of the National Technical 
 Assistance Center shall include the following:
 ``(A) Assistance to students and families.--The 
 National Technical Assistance Center shall provide 
 information and technical assistance to students with 
 disabilities and the families of students with 
 disabilities to support students across the broad 
 spectrum of disabilities, including--
 ``(i) information to assist individuals 
 with disabilities who are prospective students 
 of an institution of higher education in 
 planning for postsecondary education while the 
 students are in secondary school;
 ``(ii) information and technical assistance 
 provided to individualized education program 
 teams (as defined in section 614(d)(1) of the 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) 
 for secondary school students with 
 disabilities, and to early outreach and student 
 services programs, including programs 
 authorized under subparts 2, 4, and 5 of part A 
 of title IV, to support students across a broad 
 spectrum of disabilities with the successful 
 transition to postsecondary education;
 ``(iii) research-based supports, services, 
 and accommodations which are available in 
 postsecondary settings, including services 
 provided by other agencies such as vocational 
 rehabilitation;
 ``(iv) information on student mentoring and 
 networking opportunities for students with 
 disabilities; and
 ``(v) effective recruitment and transition 
 programs at postsecondary educational 
 institutions.
 ``(B) Assistance to institutions of higher 
 education.--The National Technical Assistance Center 
 shall provide information and technical assistance to 
 faculty, staff, and administrators of institutions of 
 higher education to improve the services provided to, 
 the accommodations for, the retention rates of, and the 
 completion rates of, students with disabilities in 
 higher education settings, which may include--
 ``(i) collection and dissemination of best 
 and promising practices and materials for 
 accommodating and supporting students with 
 disabilities, including practices and materials 
 supported by the grants, contracts, or 
 cooperative agreements authorized under 
 subparts 1, 2, and 3;
 ``(ii) development and provision of 
 training modules for higher education faculty 
 on exemplary practices for accommodating and 
 supporting postsecondary students with 
 disabilities across a range of academic fields, 
 which may include universal design for learning 
 and practices supported by the grants, 
 contracts, or cooperative agreements authorized 
 under subparts 1, 2, and 3; and
 ``(iii) development of technology-based 
 tutorials for higher education faculty and 
 staff, including new faculty and graduate 
 students, on best and promising practices 
 related to support and retention of students 
 with disabilities in postsecondary education.
 ``(C) Information collection and dissemination.--
 The National Technical Assistance Center shall be 
 responsible for building, maintaining, and updating a 
 database of disability support services information 
 with respect to institutions of higher education, or 
 for expanding and updating an existing database of 
 disabilities support services information with respect 
 to institutions of higher education. Such database 
 shall be available to the general public through a 
 website built to high technical standards of 
 accessibility practicable for the broad spectrum of 
 individuals with disabilities. Such database and 
 website shall include available information on--
 ``(i) disability documentation 
 requirements;
 ``(ii) support services available;
 ``(iii) links to financial aid;
 ``(iv) accommodations policies;
 ``(v) accessible instructional materials;
 ``(vi) other topics relevant to students 
 with disabilities; and
 ``(vii) the information in the report 
 described in subparagraph (E).
 ``(D) Disability support services.--The National 
 Technical Assistance Center shall work with 
 organizations and individuals with proven expertise 
 related to disability support services for 
 postsecondary students with disabilities to evaluate, 
 improve, and disseminate information related to the 
 delivery of high quality disability support services at 
 institutions of higher education.
 ``(E) Review and report.--Not later than three 
 years after the establishment of the National Technical 
 Assistance Center, and every two years thereafter, the 
 National Technical Assistance Center shall prepare and 
 disseminate a report to the Secretary and the 
 authorizing committees analyzing the condition of 
 postsecondary success for students with disabilities. 
 Such report shall include--
 ``(i) a review of the activities and the 
 effectiveness of the programs authorized under 
 this part;
 ``(ii) annual enrollment and graduation 
 rates of students with disabilities in 
 institutions of higher education from publicly 
 reported data;
 ``(iii) recommendations for effective 
 postsecondary supports and services for 
 students with disabilities, and how such 
 supports and services may be widely implemented 
 at institutions of higher education;
 ``(iv) recommendations on reducing barriers 
 to full participation for students with 
 disabilities in higher education; and
 ``(v) a description of strategies with a 
 demonstrated record of effectiveness in 
 improving the success of such students in 
 postsecondary education.
 ``(F) Staffing of the center.--In hiring employees 
 of the National Technical Assistance Center, the 
 National Technical Assistance Center shall consider the 
 expertise and experience of prospective employees in 
 providing training and technical assistance to 
 practitioners.
 ``(5) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000.
 ``(b) The National Coordinating Center for Inclusion of Students 
With Intellectual Disabilities.--
 ``(1) Definition of eligible entity.--In this subsection, 
 the term `eligible entity' means an entity, or a partnership of 
 entities, that has demonstrated expertise in the fields of--
 ``(A) higher education;
 ``(B) the education of students with intellectual 
 disabilities;
 ``(C) the development of inclusive higher education 
 programs for students with intellectual disabilities; 
 and
 ``(D) evaluation and technical assistance.
 ``(2) In general.--From amounts appropriated under 
 paragraph (7), the Secretary shall enter into a cooperative 
 agreement, on a competitive basis, with an eligible entity for 
 the purpose of establishing a coordinating center for 
 institutions of higher education that offer inclusive higher 
 education programs for students with intellectual disabilities, 
 including institutions participating in grants authorized under 
 subpart 2 to provide--
 ``(A) recommendations related to the development of 
 standards for such programs;
 ``(B) technical assistance for such programs; and
 ``(C) evaluations for such programs, including 
 systematic collection of data on the experiences and 
 outcomes of individuals with intellectual disabilities.
 ``(3) Administration.--The program under this subsection 
 shall be administered by the Office of Postsecondary Education, 
 in collaboration with the Office of Special Education and 
 Rehabilitative Services.
 ``(4) Duration.--The Secretary shall enter into a 
 cooperative agreement under this subsection for a period of 
 five years.
 ``(5) Requirements of cooperative agreement.--The eligible 
 entity entering into a cooperative agreement under this 
 subsection shall establish and maintain a coordinating center 
 that shall--
 ``(A) serve as the technical assistance entity for 
 all inclusive higher education programs and 
 comprehensive transition and postsecondary programs for 
 students with intellectual disabilities;
 ``(B) provide technical assistance regarding the 
 development, evaluation, and continuous improvement of 
 such programs;
 ``(C) evaluate such programs using qualitative and 
 quantitative methodologies for measuring program 
 strengths in the areas of academic access, academic 
 enrichment, socialization, competitive integrated 
 employment, attainment of a degree, certificate, or 
 recognized postsecondary credential, and independent 
 living;
 ``(D) evaluate participant progress by creating and 
 maintaining a database of student-level information and 
 data related to the experiences and outcomes of youth 
 who participate in each inclusive higher education 
 program that receives a grant under this subpart;
 ``(E) create and maintain a mechanism for 
 continuing to collect outcome information from students 
 who participated in inclusive higher education programs 
 that were developed in previous grant award cycles;
 ``(F) assist recipients of a grant under this 
 subpart in efforts to award a degree, certificate, or 
 recognized postsecondary credential;
 ``(G) create and maintain a database of student and 
 program level data reflecting implementation of the 
 inclusive higher education program that receives a 
 grant under this subpart;
 ``(H) create and maintain a mechanism to 
 consolidate follow up data on student outcomes 
 collected by inclusive higher education programs funded 
 through previous grant cycles;
 ``(I) assist recipients of grants under subpart 2 
 in efforts to award a degree, certificate, or 
 recognized postsecondary credential to students with 
 intellectual disabilities upon the completion of such 
 programs;
 ``(J) identify model memoranda of agreement for use 
 between or among institutions of higher education and 
 State and local agencies providing funding for such 
 programs;
 ``(K) develop recommendations for the necessary 
 components of such programs, such as--
 ``(i) academic, career and technical, 
 social, and independent living skills;
 ``(ii) evaluation of student progress;
 ``(iii) program administration and 
 evaluation;
 ``(iv) student eligibility;
 ``(v) issues regarding the equivalency of a 
 student's participation in such programs to 
 semester, trimester, quarter, credit, or clock 
 hours at an institution of higher education, as 
 the case may be; and
 ``(vi) access to student housing for 
 students participating in the inclusive higher 
 education programs, including accommodations 
 and services that support independent living;
 ``(L) review and analyze--
 ``(i) the impact of State and Federal 
 policy on inclusive higher education 
 legislation; and
 ``(ii) funding streams for such programs;
 ``(M) provide recommendations regarding the funding 
 streams described in paragraph (H)(ii);
 ``(N) develop mechanisms for regular communication, 
 outreach and dissemination of information about 
 inclusive higher education programs for students with 
 intellectual disabilities under subpart 2 between or 
 among such programs and to families and prospective 
 students;
 ``(O) host a meeting of all recipients of grants 
 under subpart 2 not less often than once each year; and
 ``(P) convene a work group to continue the 
 development of and recommendations for model criteria, 
 standards, and components of inclusive higher education 
 programs and comprehensive transition and postsecondary 
 programs for students with intellectual disabilities, 
 that are appropriate for the development of 
 accreditation standards--
 ``(i) which work group shall include--
 ``(I) an expert in community 
 college education;
 ``(II) an expert in career 
 technical education;
 ``(III) an expert in 4-year 
 institutions of higher education;
 ``(IV) an expert in special 
 education;
 ``(V) a disability organization 
 that represents students with 
 intellectual disabilities;
 ``(VI) a representative from the 
 National Advisory Committee on 
 Institutional Quality and Integrity; 
 and
 ``(VII) a representative of a 
 regional or national accreditation 
 agency or association; and
 ``(ii) the work group will carry out the 
 following activities--
 ``(I) conduct outreach to 
 accrediting agencies;
 ``(II) develop a technical guidance 
 document to support implementation of 
 the model standards;
 ``(III) develop and conduct a 
 protocol for implementing the model 
 standards; and
 ``(IV) update recommendations for 
 the model standards, criteria, and 
 components of such programs, as 
 applicable.
 ``(6) Report.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the 
 establishment of the coordinating center under this subsection, 
 the coordinating center shall report to the Secretary, the 
 authorizing committees, and the National Advisory Committee on 
 Institutional Quality and Integrity on the activities described 
 in paragraph (5).
 ``(7) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection such 
 sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 
 five succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 778 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1140r) is repealed.

SEC. 7010. FORMULA GRANTS TO STATES TO IMPROVE HIGHER EDUCATION 
 OPPORTUNITIES FOR FOSTER YOUTH AND HOMELESS YOUTH.

 Title VII of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1133 et 
seq.) is further amended by adding at the end the following new part:

 ``PART F--GRANTS FOR IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND SUCCESS IN HIGHER 
 EDUCATION FOR FOSTER YOUTH AND HOMELESS YOUTH

``SEC. 791. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Foster youth.--The term `foster youth'--
 ``(A) means an individual whose care and placement 
 is the responsibility of the State or tribal agency 
 that administers a State or tribal plan under part B or 
 E of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 621 
 et seq.; 670 et seq.), without regard to whether foster 
 care maintenance payments are made under section 472 of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 672) on behalf of the individual; 
 and
 ``(B) includes any individual--
 ``(i) whose care and placement was the 
 responsibility of such a State or tribal agency 
 when, or at any time after, the individual 
 attained 13 years of age, without regard to 
 whether foster care maintenance payments were 
 made under section 472 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 672) on behalf of the individual; and
 ``(ii) who is no longer under the care and 
 responsibility of such a State or tribal 
 agency, without regard to any subsequent 
 adoption, guardianship arrangement, or other 
 form of permanency option.
 ``(2) Homeless youth.--The term `homeless youth' has the 
 meaning given the term `homeless children and youths' in 
 section 725 of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11434a).
 ``(3) Indian tribe; tribal organization.--The terms `Indian 
 Tribe' and `tribal organization' have the meanings given the 
 terms in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 5304).
 ``(4) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(5) State.--The term `State' means each of the several 
 States and the District of Columbia.
 ``(6) Territory.--The term `territory' means Puerto Rico, 
 United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of 
 the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and 
 the Republic of Palau.

``SEC. 792. FORMULA GRANTS TO STATES TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO AND SUCCESS 
 IN HIGHER EDUCATION FOR FOSTER YOUTH AND HOMELESS YOUTH.

 ``(a) Grant Program Established.--From the amount appropriated 
under subsection (h), the Secretary shall make allotments under 
subsection (b), to States having applications approved under subsection 
(c), to enable each State to--
 ``(1) carry out the Statewide transition initiative 
 described in subsection (d); and
 ``(2) make subgrants described in subsection (e).
 ``(b) Allocations.--
 ``(1) Formula.--
 ``(A) Reservation for indian tribes and 
 territories.--
 ``(i) In general.--From the amount 
 appropriated under subsection (h) for a fiscal 
 year and subject to clause (ii), the Secretary 
 shall reserve--
 ``(I) not more than 3 percent for 
 grants to Indian Tribes, consortia of 
 Indian Tribes, or Tribal organizations; 
 and
 ``(II) not more than 2 percent for 
 grants to territories.
 ``(ii) Requirements.--In awarding grants 
 under this subparagraph, the Secretary--
 ``(I) shall not award a grant under 
 subclause (I) or (II) of clause (i) for 
 a fiscal year for which no Indian Tribe 
 (or consortium of Indian Tribes) or 
 Tribal organization, or territory, 
 respectively, submits a satisfactory 
 application for a grant under such 
 subclause;
 ``(II) shall require that any 
 Indian Tribe, consortium, Tribal 
 organization, or territory that 
 receives a grant under this 
 subparagraph provide an assurance of a 
 partnership among relevant education, 
 child welfare, and homeless agencies or 
 organizations; and
 ``(III) may determine any other 
 requirements with respect to such 
 grants (including the allocation, 
 application, and use of fund 
 requirements), which to the extent 
 possible, shall be consistent with the 
 requirements for States under this 
 part, except that appropriate 
 adjustments shall be made based on the 
 needs and size of populations served by 
 the Indian Tribe, consortium, Tribal 
 organization, or territory applying for 
 the grant.
 ``(B) Reservation for department activities.--From 
 the amount appropriated under subsection (h) for a 
 fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve--
 ``(i) not more than 7 percent to--
 ``(I) provide technical assistance, 
 in consultation with Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, to States 
 carrying out activities under this 
 section; and
 ``(II) complete the evaluations 
 required by subsection (g)(1); and
 ``(ii) not more than 3 percent for 
 administrative expenses.
 ``(C) Allocations.--From the amount appropriated 
 under subsection (h) for a fiscal year and remaining 
 after the Secretary reserves funds under subparagraphs 
 (A) and (B), the Secretary shall allocate to each State 
 the greater of--
 ``(i) $500,000; or
 ``(ii) the amount that bears the same 
 proportion to the remaining appropriated amount 
 for such fiscal year as the number of foster 
 youth and homeless youth in the State bears to 
 the number of foster youth and homeless youth 
 in all States.
 ``(D) Ratable reduction.--If the amount 
 appropriated under subsection (h) for a fiscal year and 
 remaining after the Secretary reserves funds under 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) is less than the amount 
 required to be allocated to States under subparagraph 
 (C), then the amount of the allocation to each State 
 shall be ratably reduced.
 ``(2) State reservation.--From the amounts awarded a State 
 under paragraph (1)(C) for a fiscal year, the State may reserve 
 not more than 5 percent for administrative expenses.
 ``(3) Temporary ineligibility for subsequent payments.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall determine a 
 State to be temporarily ineligible to receive a grant 
 payment under this subsection for a fiscal year if--
 ``(i) the State fails to submit an annual 
 report under subsection (f) for the preceding 
 fiscal year; or
 ``(ii) the Secretary determines, based on 
 information in such annual report, that the 
 State is not effectively--
 ``(I) meeting the outcomes 
 described in the application of such 
 State under subsection (c)(2)(C), and 
 does not have a plan to improve the 
 outcomes;
 ``(II) monitoring and evaluating 
 the activities under subsections (d) 
 and (e); or
 ``(III) using funds as required 
 under subsections (d) and (e).
 ``(B) Reinstatement.--If the Secretary determines 
 that a State is ineligible under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary may enter into an agreement with the State 
 setting forth the terms and conditions under which the 
 State may regain eligibility to receive payments under 
 this section.
 ``(c) Applications.--
 ``(1) In general.--For each fiscal year for which a State 
 desires an allotment under subsection (b), the State shall 
 submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing the information described in paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(2) Information required.--An application submitted under 
 paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 ``(A) A plan for how the State will carry out the 
 activities under subsections (d) and (e).
 ``(B) A description of the State's capacity to 
 carry out such activities.
 ``(C) A description of intended outcomes for such 
 activities.
 ``(D) A plan for how the State will monitor and 
 evaluate such activities, including how the State will 
 use data to continually update and improve such 
 activities.
 ``(E) A description of how students will be 
 identified and recruited for participation in the 
 Statewide transition initiative under subsection (d).
 ``(F) An estimate of the number and characteristics 
 of the populations targeted for participation in the 
 Statewide transition initiative under subsection (d) 
 with attention to the diverse needs of homeless youth 
 and foster youth in the State.
 ``(G) A description of how the State will 
 coordinate services provided under the grant with 
 services provided to foster youth and homeless youth 
 under the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 11301 et seq.), the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 et seq.), the 
 Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. 5701 et 
 seq.), and other services provided to foster youth and 
 homeless youth by the State.
 ``(H) An assurance that the State will comply with 
 subtitle B of title VII of the McKinney-Vento Homeless 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11431 et seq.).
 ``(I) An assurance that the State will partner with 
 State educational agencies, local educational agencies, 
 institutions of higher education, State and local child 
 welfare authorities, and other relevant organizations 
 that serve foster youth or homeless youth.
 ``(J) An assurance that the State will submit the 
 annual report required under subsection (f).
 ``(K) A budgetary analysis of the use of funds 
 awarded under this section.
 ``(L) Such other information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(d) Statewide Transition Initiative.--
 ``(1) Use of funds.--Subject to subsection (b)(2), and in 
 consultation and coordination with the entities described in 
 paragraph (2) of this subsection, a State receiving a grant 
 award under this section shall use not less than 25 percent of 
 the funds to--
 ``(A) provide intensive outreach and support to 
 foster youth and homeless youth to--
 ``(i) improve the understanding and 
 preparation of such youth for enrollment in 
 institutions of higher education;
 ``(ii) increase the number of applications 
 to institutions of higher education submitted 
 by such youth; and
 ``(iii) increase the number of enrollments 
 at institutions of higher education;
 ``(B) provide education to foster youth and 
 homeless youth with respect to--
 ``(i) the benefits and opportunities of 
 postsecondary education;
 ``(ii) planning for postsecondary 
 education;
 ``(iii) financial aid opportunities that 
 assist youth with covering the cost of 
 attendance of an institution of higher 
 education;
 ``(iv) the Federal and State services and 
 benefits available to foster youth and homeless 
 youth while enrolled at an institution of 
 higher education, including health and mental 
 health services;
 ``(v) career exploration; and
 ``(vi) financial literacy training, 
 including security from identity theft;
 ``(C) assist foster youth and homeless youth with 
 submitting applications for--
 ``(i) enrollment at an institution of 
 higher education;
 ``(ii) financial aid for such enrollment; 
 and
 ``(iii) scholarships available for such 
 students, including under a State educational 
 and training voucher program referred to in 
 section 477(i) of the Social Security Act; and
 ``(D) provide free programming, which may include 
 free transportation to and from such programming, for 
 foster youth and homeless youth to prepare such 
 individuals socially and academically for the rigors of 
 postsecondary education during the summer before such 
 individuals first attend an institution of higher 
 education.
 ``(2) Required consultation and coordination.--In carrying 
 out the activities described in paragraph (1), a State shall 
 consult and coordinate with State educational agencies, local 
 educational agencies, institutions of higher education, State 
 and local child welfare authorities, and other relevant 
 organizations that serve foster youth or homeless youth.
 ``(e) Subgrants To Create Institutions of Excellence.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to the subsection (b)(2), a 
 State receiving a grant under this section shall, acting 
 through the administering State agency, use not less than 70 
 percent of the funds to award, on a competitive basis, 
 subgrants to eligible institutions to enable such institutions 
 to become institutions of excellence by improving college 
 access, retention, and completion rates for foster and homeless 
 youth as described in paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Application.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible institution desiring 
 a subgrant under this subsection shall submit an 
 application to the State in which such eligible 
 institution is located, at such time, in such manner, 
 and containing such information as the State may 
 require.
 ``(B) Technical assistance.--States shall provide 
 outreach and technical assistance to eligible 
 institutions with respect to applications for subgrants 
 under this subsection.
 ``(3) Activities.--An eligible institution that receives a 
 grant under this subsection shall use the grant funds to carry 
 out the following activities with respect to homeless youth and 
 foster youth:
 ``(A) Provide flexibility and assistance in 
 completing the application process to enroll at such 
 institution.
 ``(B) Coordinate programs with relevant on- and 
 off-campus stakeholders to increase the enrollment of 
 such youth at the institution and align services at the 
 institution for such youth.
 ``(C) Adjust the cost of attendance for such youth 
 at such eligible institution to include the cost of 
 housing during periods of non-enrollment.
 ``(D) Provide institutional aid to such students to 
 meet the cost of attendance that is not covered by 
 other Federal or State educational grants.
 ``(E) Provide outreach to such students to ensure 
 that such youth are aware of housing resources 
 available during periods of non-enrollment.
 ``(F) Subsidize any fees for such students 
 associated with orientation and offer free 
 transportation to college orientation or move-in week.
 ``(G) Hire and provide training for at least one 
 full-time staff at the eligible institution to serve as 
 a point of contact to provide case management services 
 and monthly face-to-face meetings with students who are 
 foster youth or homeless youth. Such individual shall 
 have an advanced degree and at least two years of 
 relevant experience.
 ``(H) Establish or enhance campus support programs 
 to provide such students with a wide-range of on-campus 
 services including--
 ``(i) assistance with financial aid;
 ``(ii) career advice; and
 ``(iii) leadership development.
 ``(I) Ensure the availability of robust student 
 health services (physical and mental) that meet the 
 specific needs of foster youth and homeless youth.
 ``(J) Establish or expand early alert systems to 
 identify and support such students who may be 
 struggling academically.
 ``(K) For each such student with reasonable, 
 unanticipated expenses that would not be covered by the 
 institutional aid provided under subparagraph (D) and 
 that would be necessary for the student to persist in 
 college during an academic year, provide the student 
 with access to an emergency grant to help cover such 
 expenses.
 ``(L) Collect, review, and monitor data for program 
 improvement.
 ``(4) Reliance on institutional aid.--Any institutional aid 
 provided to a student under paragraph (3)(D) by an eligible 
 institution during the grant period of the institution's grant 
 under this section shall continue to be provided during the 
 student's continuous enrollment at the institution, without 
 regard to whether the grant period ends during such enrollment.
 ``(5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Administering state agency.--The term 
 `administering State agency' means a State agency--
 ``(i) designated by the Governor or 
 executive of the State to administer the 
 subgrants under this subsection; and
 ``(ii) that, with respect to such State, 
 has jurisdiction over--
 ``(I) foster youth;
 ``(II) homeless youth;
 ``(III) elementary and secondary 
 education; or
 ``(IV) higher education.
 ``(B) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means an institution of higher education--
 ``(i) that is in partnership with--
 ``(I) the State child welfare 
 agency that is responsible for the 
 administration of the State plan under 
 part B or E of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 621 et seq.; 
 670 et seq.); and
 ``(II) an organization that serves 
 homeless youth (such as a youth shelter 
 or outreach program); and
 ``(ii) that may partner with any other 
 provider, agency, official, or entity that 
 serves foster youth and homeless youth, or 
 former foster youth and homeless youth.
 ``(f) State Reports.--For each year in which a State receives an 
allotment under subsection (b), the State shall prepare and submit a 
report to the Secretary that includes--
 ``(1) each activity or service that was carried out under 
 this section;
 ``(2) the cost of providing each such activity or service;
 ``(3) the number of students who received each activity or 
 service disaggregated by each subgroup of students described in 
 subclauses (I) through (VI) of section 1111(b)(2)(B)(xi) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6311(b)(2)(B)(xi));
 ``(4) using qualitative and quantitative analysis, how the 
 State--
 ``(A) improved access to higher education for 
 foster youth and homeless youth; and
 ``(B) measured youth satisfaction with activities 
 carried out under this part;
 ``(5) an analysis of the implementation and progress of the 
 Statewide transition initiative under subsection (d), including 
 challenges and changes made to the initiative throughout the 
 preceding year;
 ``(6) if, based on the analysis under paragraph (5), the 
 State determines that the program is not on track to meet the 
 intended outcomes described in the application of the State 
 under subsection (c)(2)(C), a description of how the State 
 plans to meet such intended outcomes; and
 ``(7) information on the eligible institutions receiving 
 subgrants, including how such institutions used subgrant funds 
 to carry out the activities described in subsection (e)(3).
 ``(g) Department Activities.--
 ``(1) Evaluations.--Beginning on the date on which funds 
 are first allotted under subsection (b), and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall evaluate recipients of 
 allotments and subgrants under this section. The results of 
 such evaluations shall be made publicly available on the 
 website of the Department.
 ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date on which funds are first allocated under subsection (b), 
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
 Congress that includes--
 ``(A) the amount of each allotment under subsection 
 (b);
 ``(B) the amount of each subgrant under subsection 
 (e); and
 ``(C) with respect to the year for which such 
 report is made, the results of the evaluations under 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), there are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
 $150,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding 
 fiscal years.
 ``(2) Adjustment for inflation.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amount authorized to be 
 appropriated under paragraph (1) for fiscal year 2022 
 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years shall be 
 deemed increased by the annual adjustment percentage.
 ``(B) Definition.--In this paragraph, the term 
 `annual adjustment percentage', as applied to a fiscal 
 year, means the estimated percentage change in the 
 Consumer Price Index (as determined by the Secretary, 
 using the definition in section 478(f)) for the most 
 recent calendar year ending before the beginning of 
 that fiscal year.''.

 TITLE VIII--ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS

SEC. 8001. REPEALS.

 Title VIII of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161a et 
seq.) is amended by repealing the following:
 (1) Part A (20 U.S.C. 1161a).
 (2) Parts C through E (20 U.S.C. 1161c et seq.).
 (3) Parts H and I (20 U.S.C. 1161h et seq.).
 (4) Parts K through P (20 U.S.C. 1161k et seq.).
 (5) Part R (20 U.S.C. 1161r).
 (6) Parts X through Z (20 U.S.C. 1161x et seq.).

SEC. 8002. RONALD V. DELLUMS MEMORIAL STEAM SCHOLARS PROGRAM.

 Part B of title VIII of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1161b)--
 (1) is redesignated as part A of such title; and
 (2) is amended to read as follows:

 ``PART A--RONALD V. DELLUMS MEMORIAL STEAM SCHOLARS

``SEC. 801. RONALD V. DELLUMS MEMORIAL STEAM SCHOLARS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Program Authorized.--
 ``(1) Grants for scholarships.--The Secretary shall award 
 grants under this section to institutions of higher education 
 (as defined in section 101) to provide scholarships to eligible 
 students for the purpose of enabling such students to enter 
 into the STEAM workforce and increasing the number of 
 underrepresented students in STEAM fields.
 ``(2) Eligible students.--A student is eligible for a 
 scholarship under this section if the student--
 ``(A) meets the requirements of section 484(a);
 ``(B) is an at least half-time student who has 
 completed at least the first year of undergraduate 
 study;
 ``(C) is enrolled in a program of undergraduate 
 instruction leading to a bachelor's degree at the 
 institution with a major in a STEAM field; and
 ``(D) has obtained a cumulative grade point average 
 of at least a 3.0 (or the equivalent as determined 
 under regulations prescribed by the Secretary) at the 
 end of the most recently completed term.
 ``(3) Priority for scholarships.--The Secretary shall set a 
 priority for awarding scholarships under this section for 
 students agreeing to work after graduation in a STEAM field.
 ``(4) Students from minority-serving institutions and 
 historically black colleges and universities.--The Secretary 
 shall ensure that not fewer than 50 percent of the scholarships 
 awarded under this section are awarded to eligible students who 
 attend historically Black colleges and universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions, including Hispanic-serving 
 institutions, Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institutions, American Indian Tribally 
 controlled colleges and universities, Alaska Native and Native 
 Hawaiian-serving institutions, Predominantly Black 
 Institutions, and Native American-serving, Nontribal 
 institutions.
 ``(5) Amount and duration of scholarship.--Scholarship 
 amounts awarded under this section shall not exceed--
 ``(A) $10,000 per student for an academic year; and
 ``(B) $40,000 per student in the aggregate.
 ``(b) Matching Requirement.--In order to receive a grant under this 
section, an institution of higher education shall provide matching 
funds for the scholarships awarded under this section in an amount 
equal to 25 percent of the Federal funds received.
 ``(c) Application.--An institution that desires a grant under this 
section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require. Each application shall include a description of how the 
institution will meet the matching requirement of subsection (b).
 ``(d) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which the 
first scholarship is awarded under this section, and each academic year 
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report 
containing--
 ``(1) a description and analysis of the demographic 
 information of students who receive scholarships under this 
 section, including information with respect to such students 
 regarding--
 ``(A) race;
 ``(B) ethnicity;
 ``(C) gender; and
 ``(D) eligibility to receive a Pell Grant;
 ``(2) the total number of underrepresented students in 
 STEAM fields who obtain a degree with scholarship funds each 
 year; and
 ``(3) an analysis of the effects of the program on the 
 goals of increasing the number of underrepresented students in 
 STEAM fields and the number of such students who enter into the 
 STEAM workforce.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 
and each of the five succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(f) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) The term `minority-serving institution' means an 
 institution eligible to receive assistance under title III or 
 V.
 ``(2) The term `STEAM' means science, technology, 
 engineering, arts, and mathematics.
 ``(3) The term `underrepresented student in STEAM fields' 
 means a student who is a member of a minority group for which 
 the number of individuals in such group who annually receive 
 bachelor's degrees in the STEAM fields per 10,000 individuals 
 in such group is substantially less than the number of white, 
 non-Hispanic individuals who annually receive bachelor's 
 degrees in the STEAM fields per 10,000 such individuals.''.

SEC. 8003. TEACH FOR AMERICA.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Subparagraph (C) of section 806(f)(1) of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161f(f)(1)) is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(C) $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of 
 the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Redesignation.--Part F of title VIII of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161f) is redesignated as part B of such title.

SEC. 8004. PATSY T. MINK FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Subsection (f) of section 807 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161g) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 
and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part G of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161g) is redesignated as part C of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 807 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161g), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 811.

SEC. 8005. IMPROVING SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING, AND MATHEMATICS 
 EDUCATION WITH A FOCUS ON AMERICAN INDIAN, ALASKA NATIVE, 
 AND NATIVE HAWAIIAN STUDENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 819 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1161j) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``alaska native and 
 native hawaiian'' and inserting ``native american'';
 (2) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``Alaska Natives and 
 Native Hawaiians'' and inserting ``American Indians, Alaska 
 Natives, Native Hawaiians and other Native American Pacific 
 Islanders to enable them to succeed in these fields'';
 (3) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and 
 (4), as paragraphs (2), (4), (5), and (6), 
 respectively;
 (B) by inserting before paragraph (2), as 
 redesignated by subparagraph (A), the following:
 ``(1) Native american.--The term `Native American' includes 
 Alaska Natives, American Indians, Native Hawaiians and Native 
 American Pacific Islanders.''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (2), as 
 redesignated by subparagraph (A), the following:
 ``(3) American indian.--The term `American Indian' has the 
 meaning given the term `Indian' in section 202 of the Indian 
 Land Consolidation Act (25 U.S.C. 2201).'';
 (4) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by inserting ``create or'' after ``to enable 
 the eligible partnership to'';
 (B) by inserting ``Native American'' after ``the 
 development of''; and
 (C) by striking ``, including existing programs for 
 Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian students'';
 (5) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Alaska Native 
 or Native Hawaiian students'' and inserting ``programs 
 that serve Native American students'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``Alaska Native 
 and Native Hawaiian students'' and inserting ``programs 
 that serve Native American students''; and
 (C) in paragraph (3), by striking ``Alaska Native 
 or Native Hawaiian students'' and inserting ``Native 
 American students'';
 (6) in subsection (f), by striking ``30 percent or more of 
 the program participants are Alaska Native or Native Hawaiian'' 
 and inserting ``30 percent or more of the program participants 
 are Native American''; and
 (7) in subsection (i), by striking ``to carry out this 
 section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2009 and 
 each of the five succeeding fiscal years'' and inserting 
 ``$5,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding 
 fiscal years''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part J of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161j) is redesignated as part D of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 819 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161j), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 816.

SEC. 8006. GRANTS FOR RURAL-SERVING INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Subsection (g) of section 861 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161q) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 
and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part Q of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161q) is redesignated as part E of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 861 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161q), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 821.

SEC. 8007. TRAINING FOR REALTIME WRITERS TO PROVIDE CLOSED CAPTIONING 
 AND COURT REPORTING SERVICES.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Section 872(e) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161s(e)) is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting 
``2021''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part S of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161s) is redesignated as part F of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 872 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161s), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 826.

SEC. 8008. GRANT PROGRAM TO ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN, AND IMPROVE VETERAN 
 STUDENT CENTERS.

 (a) In General.--Part T of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161t)--
 (1) is redesignated as part G of such title; and
 (2) is amended to read as follows:

 ``PART G--GRANTS FOR VETERAN STUDENT CENTERS

``SEC. 831. GRANTS FOR VETERAN STUDENT CENTERS.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--Subject to the availability of 
appropriations under subsection (i), the Secretary shall award grants 
to institutions of higher education or consortia of institutions of 
higher education to assist in the establishment, maintenance, 
improvement, and operation of Veteran Student Centers. The Secretary 
shall award not more than 30 grants in a fiscal year under this 
section.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--
 ``(1) Application.--An institution or consortium seeking a 
 grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(2) Criteria.--The Secretary may award a grant under 
 subsection (a) to an institution or a consortium if the 
 institution or consortium meets each of the following criteria:
 ``(A) The institution or consortium enrolls in 
 undergraduate or graduate courses--
 ``(i) a significant number of veteran 
 students, members of the Armed Forces serving 
 on active duty, and members of a reserve 
 component of the Armed Forces; or
 ``(ii) a significant percentage of veteran 
 students, as measured by comparing the overall 
 enrollment of the institution or consortium to 
 the number, for the most recent academic year 
 for which data are available, of veteran 
 students, members of the Armed Forces serving 
 on active duty, and members of a reserve 
 component of the Armed Forces who are enrolled 
 in undergraduate or graduate courses at the 
 institution or consortium.
 ``(B) The institution or consortium presents a 
 sustainability plan to demonstrate that the Veteran 
 Student Center of such institution or consortium will 
 be maintained and will continue operations upon 
 conclusion of the grant period under subsection (a).
 ``(3) Additional criteria.--
 ``(A) Mandatory considerations.--In awarding grants 
 under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider 
 institutions or consortia representing a broad spectrum 
 of sectors and sizes, including institutions or 
 consortia from urban, suburban, and rural regions of 
 the United States.
 ``(B) Discretionary criteria.--In awarding grants 
 under subsection (a), the Secretary may provide 
 consideration to institutions or consortia that meet 
 one or more of the following criteria:
 ``(i) The institution or consortium is 
 located in a region or community that has a 
 significant population of veterans.
 ``(ii) The institution or consortium 
 carries out programs or activities that assist 
 veterans in the local community and the spouses 
 of veteran students.
 ``(iii) The institution or consortium 
 partners in its veteran-specific programming 
 with nonprofit veteran service organizations, 
 local workforce development organizations, or 
 institutions of higher education.
 ``(iv) The institution or consortium 
 commits to hiring staff at the Veteran Student 
 Center that includes veterans (including 
 veteran student volunteers and veteran students 
 participating in a Federal work-study program 
 under part C of title IV, a work-study program 
 administered by the Secretary of Veteran 
 Affairs, or a State work-study program).
 ``(v) The institution or consortium commits 
 to using a portion of the grant received under 
 this section to develop and implement an early-
 warning veteran student retention program 
 designed to alert staff at the Veteran Student 
 Center that a veteran student may be facing 
 difficulties that could lead to the non-
 completion of the course of study of such 
 veteran.
 ``(vi) The institution or consortium 
 commits to providing mental health counseling 
 to its veteran students and their spouses.
 ``(vii) The institution or consortium 
 carries out programs or activities that assist 
 individuals pursuing a course of education 
 using educational assistance under chapter 31 
 of title 38, United States Code.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--An institution or consortium that is 
 awarded a grant under subsection (a) shall use such grant to 
 establish, maintain, improve, or operate a Veteran Student 
 Center.
 ``(2) Other allowable uses.--An institution or consortium 
 receiving a grant under subsection (a) may use a portion of 
 such funds to carry out supportive instruction services for 
 student veterans, including--
 ``(A) assistance with special admissions and 
 transfer of credit from previous postsecondary 
 education or experience; and
 ``(B) any other support services the institution or 
 consortium determines to be necessary to ensure the 
 success of veterans on campus in achieving education 
 and career goals.
 ``(d) Amounts Awarded.--
 ``(1) Duration.--Each grant awarded under subsection (a) 
 shall be for a 4-year period.
 ``(2) Total amount of grant and schedule.--Each grant 
 awarded under subsection (a) may not exceed a total of 
 $500,000. The Secretary shall disburse to an institution or 
 consortium the amounts awarded under the grant in such amounts 
 and at such times during the grant period as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(e) Report.--From the amounts appropriated to carry out this 
section, and not later than 3 years after the date on which the first 
grant is awarded under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to 
Congress a report on the grant program established under subsection 
(a), including--
 ``(1) the number of grants awarded;
 ``(2) the institutions of higher education and consortia 
 that have received grants;
 ``(3) with respect to each such institution of higher 
 education and consortium--
 ``(A) the amounts awarded;
 ``(B) how such institution or consortium used such 
 amounts;
 ``(C) a description of the students to whom 
 services were offered as a result of the award; and
 ``(D) data enumerating whether the use of the 
 amounts awarded helped veteran students at the 
 institution or consortium toward completion of a 
 degree, certificate, or credential;
 ``(4) best practices for veteran student success, 
 identified by reviewing data provided by institutions and 
 consortia that received a grant under this section; and
 ``(5) a determination by the Secretary with respect to 
 whether the grant program under this section should be extended 
 or expanded.
 ``(f) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary to carry out the 
grant program established under subsection (a) shall terminate on the 
date that is 4 years after the date on which the first grant is awarded 
under subsection (a).
 ``(g) Department of Education Best Practices Website.--Subject to 
the availability of appropriations under subsection (i) and not later 
than 3 years after the date on which the first grant is awarded under 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall develop and implement a website for 
veteran student services at institutions of higher education, which 
details best practices for serving veteran students at institutions of 
higher education.
 ``(h) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(2) Veteran student center.--The term `Veteran Student 
 Center' means a dedicated space on a campus of an institution 
 of higher education that provides students who are veterans or 
 members of the Armed Forces with the following:
 ``(A) A lounge or meeting space for such veteran 
 students, their spouses or partners, and veterans in 
 the community.
 ``(B) A centralized office for veteran services 
 that--
 ``(i) is a single point of contact to 
 coordinate comprehensive support services for 
 veteran students;
 ``(ii) is staffed by trained employees and 
 volunteers, which includes veterans and at 
 least one full-time employee or volunteer who 
 is trained as a veterans' benefits counselor;
 ``(iii) provides veteran students with 
 assistance relating to--
 ``(I) transitioning from the 
 military to student life;
 ``(II) transitioning from the 
 military to the civilian workforce;
 ``(III) networking with other 
 veteran students and veterans in the 
 community;
 ``(IV) understanding and obtaining 
 benefits provided by the institution of 
 higher education, Federal Government, 
 and State for which such students may 
 be eligible;
 ``(V) understanding how to succeed 
 in the institution of higher education, 
 including by understanding academic 
 policies, the course selection process, 
 and institutional policies and 
 practices related to the transfer of 
 academic credits; and
 ``(VI) understanding their 
 disability-related rights and 
 protections under the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 12101 et seq.) and section 504 of the 
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
 794); and
 ``(iv) provides comprehensive academic and 
 tutoring services for veteran students, 
 including peer-to-peer tutoring and academic 
 mentorship.
 ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this part $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 
and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Continuation of Awards.--An institution of higher education 
that received a grant under section 873 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161t) before the date of enactment of this Act, as 
such section 873 (20 U.S.C. 1161t) was in effect on the day before the 
date of enactment of this Act, shall continue to receive funds in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of such grant.

SEC. 8009. UNIVERSITY SUSTAINABILITY PROGRAM AMENDMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 881 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1161u) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting:
 ``(1) In general.--From the amounts appropriated to carry 
 out this section, the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall 
 make grants to eligible entities to establish sustainability 
 programs to design and implement the teaching and practice of 
 sustainability, including in the areas of staff and faculty 
 professional development, energy management, greenhouse gas 
 emissions reductions, green building, waste management, 
 transportation, resilience, green workforce, and other aspects 
 of sustainability that integrate the local community with 
 multidisciplinary academic programs and are applicable to the 
 private and Government sectors.''; and
 (B) by striking paragraph (3)(B) and inserting:
 ``(B) a nonprofit consortium, association, 
 alliance, or collaboration operating in partnership 
 with more than one institution of higher education.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting ``in alignment with local 
 community needs'' after ``following purposes'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)--
 (I) by striking ``establish'' and 
 inserting ``scale established'';
 (II) by striking ``purchasing, 
 toxics management,''; and
 (III) by inserting ``resilience, 
 green workforce,'' after 
 ``transportation,''; and
 (iii) in subparagraph (G), by inserting 
 ``economics, law, political science,'' after 
 ``business,''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``of'' 
 and inserting ``relating to''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting 
 ``city and State governments,'' after 
 ``business,'';
 (3) in subsection (e), by striking ``$250,000 or more than 
 $2,000,000'' and inserting ``$200,000 or more than $500,000''; 
 and
 (4) in subsection (f), by striking ``2009'' and inserting 
 ``2021''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part U of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161u) is redesignated as part H of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 881 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161u), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 836.

SEC. 8010. MODELING AND SIMULATION.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Subsection (e) of section 891 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161v) is amended, in the matter 
preceding paragraph (1), by striking the first sentence and inserting 
the following: ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out 
this section $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 
succeeding fiscal years.''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part V of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161v) is redesignated as part I of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 891 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161v), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 841.

SEC. 8011. PATH TO SUCCESS.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Section 892(g) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161w(g)) is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting 
``2021''.
 (b) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part W of title VIII of the Higher Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161w) is redesignated as part J of such 
 title.
 (2) Section.--Section 892 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161w), as amended by subsection (a), is 
 redesignated as section 846.

SEC. 8012. MANDATORY FUNDING FOR MASTERS AND POSTBACCALAUREATE 
 PROGRAMS.

 (a) Masters Degree Programs.--Section 897 of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161aa) is amended by striking ``$11,500,000 for 
fiscal year 2009 and for each of the five succeeding fiscal years'' and 
inserting ``$13,500,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal 
year''.
 (b) Postbaccalaureate Programs.--Section 898 of the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161aa-1) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``In addition'' and inserting ``(a) 
 Additional Appropriations for Part B of Title V.--In 
 addition'';
 (2) by striking ``$11,500,000 for fiscal year 2009 and for 
 each of the five succeeding fiscal years'' and inserting 
 ``$21,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each succeeding fiscal 
 year''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Additional Appropriations for Part A of Title VII.--In 
addition to any amounts appropriated under subpart 5 of part A of title 
VII, there are authorized to be appropriated, and there are 
appropriated, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, $13,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 
succeeding fiscal years to carry out subpart 5 of part A of title 
VII.''.
 (c) Redesignations.--
 (1) Part.--Part AA of title VIII of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161aa) is redesignated as part K of 
 such title.
 (2) Sections.--Sections 897 and 898 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1161aa et seq.), as amended by 
 subsection (a), are redesignated as sections 851 and 852, 
 respectively.

SEC. 8013. FUNDS FOR ACCESS TO OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES.

 Title VIII (20 U.S.C. 1161a et seq.) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965, as amended by the preceding provisions of this title, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``PART L--ACCESS TO OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES

``SEC. 856. AFFORDABLE COLLEGE TEXTBOOKS.

 ``(a) Grant Program.--
 ``(1) Grants authorized.--From the amounts appropriated 
 under paragraph (8), the Secretary shall make grants, on a 
 competitive basis, to eligible entities to support projects 
 that expand the use of high-quality open textbooks in order to 
 achieve savings for students while improving instruction and 
 student learning outcomes.
 ``(2) Applications.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each eligible entity desiring a 
 grant under this subsection, after consultation with 
 relevant faculty, shall submit an application to the 
 Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
 such information as the Secretary may reasonably 
 require.
 ``(B) Contents.--Each application submitted under 
 subparagraph (A) shall include--
 ``(i) a description of the proposed project 
 to be completed with grant funds;
 ``(ii) a plan for promoting and tracking 
 the use of open textbooks in postsecondary 
 courses offered by the eligible entity, 
 including an estimate of the projected savings 
 that will be achieved for students through the 
 use of such textbooks;
 ``(iii) a description of how the eligible 
 entity will evaluate whether existing open 
 educational resources could be used or adapted 
 into open educational resources before creating 
 new open educational resources;
 ``(iv) a plan for quality review (including 
 peer review), review of accuracy, and review of 
 accessibility of any open educational resources 
 created or adapted through the grant;
 ``(v) a plan for assessing the impact of 
 open textbooks on instruction and student 
 learning outcomes at the eligible entity;
 ``(vi) a plan for disseminating information 
 about the results of the project to 
 institutions of higher education outside of the 
 eligible entity, including promoting the 
 adoption of any open textbooks created or 
 adapted through the grant;
 ``(vii) a statement on consultation with 
 relevant faculty, including those engaged in 
 the creation of open educational resources, in 
 the development of the application; and
 ``(viii) an assurance that open educational 
 resources utilized, developed, or researched 
 will be available in accessible formats, which 
 may include braille, audio books, closed 
 captioning, and audio descriptions.
 ``(3) Special consideration.--In awarding grants under this 
 section, the Secretary shall give special consideration to 
 applications that demonstrate the greatest potential to--
 ``(A) achieve the highest level of savings for 
 students through sustainable expanded use of high-
 quality open textbooks in postsecondary courses offered 
 by the eligible entity;
 ``(B) achieve improvements in student learning and 
 student outcomes;
 ``(C) expand the use of open textbooks at 
 institutions of higher education outside of the 
 eligible entity; and
 ``(D) produce--
 ``(i) the highest quality and most 
 accessible open textbooks;
 ``(ii) open textbooks that can be most 
 easily utilized and adapted by faculty members 
 at institutions of higher education;
 ``(iii) open textbooks that correspond to 
 the highest enrollment courses at institutions 
 of higher education;
 ``(iv) open textbooks created or adapted in 
 partnership with entities, including campus 
 bookstores, that will assist in marketing and 
 distribution of the open textbook; and
 ``(v) open textbooks that conform to 
 accessibility standards under section 508 of 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
 794d).
 ``(4) Use of funds.--
 ``(A) Mandatory uses of funds.--An eligible entity 
 that receives a grant under this section shall use the 
 grant funds to carry out the following activities to 
 expand the use of open textbooks:
 ``(i) Professional development for any 
 faculty and staff members at institutions of 
 higher education, including the search for and 
 review of open textbooks.
 ``(ii) Creation or adaptation of high-
 quality open educational resources that conform 
 to accessibility standards under section 508 of 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
 794d), especially open textbooks, and the 
 quality assurance of such open educational 
 resources.
 ``(iii) Development or improvement of tools 
 and informational resources that support the 
 use of open textbooks, including improving 
 accessible instructional materials for students 
 with disabilities that conform to accessibility 
 standards under section 508 of the 
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794d).
 ``(iv) Research evaluating the efficacy of 
 the use of open textbooks for achieving savings 
 for students and the impact on instruction and 
 student learning outcomes.
 ``(B) Discretionary use of funds.--An eligible 
 entity that receives a grant under this section may use 
 grant funds to purchase or maintain electronic 
 equipment necessary for the operation or use of digital 
 open educational resources, including mobile computer 
 devices and accompanying hardware, software 
 applications, computer systems and platforms, and other 
 digital and online services and support.
 ``(5) Open licensing requirement.--
 ``(A) Copyright.--An eligible entity receiving a 
 grant under this section may, with prior approval from 
 the Secretary, assert a copyright in a copyrightable 
 work first produced under the grant.
 ``(B) Open license requirement.--
 ``(i) Requirement.--With respect to each 
 copyrightable work first produced under the 
 grant, except as provided in clause (ii), an 
 eligible entity that asserts a copyright under 
 subparagraph (A) shall provide to the public a 
 non-exclusive, royalty-free, perpetual, 
 irrevocable, worldwide license to carry out 
 each exclusive right provided to that eligible 
 entity under section 106 of title 17, United 
 States Code.
 ``(ii) Exception.--With respect to a 
 copyrightable work first produced under the 
 grant that employs preexisting material, the 
 requirement described under such subparagraph 
 shall apply to such work to the extent that--
 ``(I) no copyright subsists in such 
 preexisting material; or
 ``(II) the eligible entity is 
 authorized to license such material in 
 the manner described under such 
 subparagraph.
 ``(C) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
 subsection may be construed as affecting the 
 application of the requirements of chapter 18 of title 
 35, United States Code (commonly known as the `Bayh-
 Dole Act').
 ``(D) Copyrightable work defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term `copyrightable work' means a work 
 subject to protection under title 17, United States 
 Code, but does not include a work that may be 
 patentable or otherwise protectable under title 35, 
 United States Code.
 ``(6) Access and distribution.--The full and complete 
 digital content of each educational resource created or adapted 
 under paragraph (5) shall be made available free of charge to 
 the public--
 ``(A) on an easily accessible and interoperable 
 website, which shall be identified to the Secretary by 
 the eligible entity;
 ``(B) in a machine readable, digital format that 
 anyone can directly download, edit with attribution, 
 and redistribute; and
 ``(C) in a fully accessible format in compliance 
 with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) and section 508 of the 
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794d).
 ``(7) Report.--Upon an eligible entity's completion of a 
 project for which the eligible entity received a grant under 
 this section, the eligible entity shall prepare and submit a 
 report to the Secretary regarding--
 ``(A) the effectiveness of the project in expanding 
 the use of high-quality open textbooks and in achieving 
 savings for students;
 ``(B) the impact of the project on expanding the 
 use of open textbooks at institutions of higher 
 education outside of the eligible entity;
 ``(C) educational resources created or adapted 
 under the grant, including instructions on where the 
 public can access each educational resource under the 
 terms of paragraphs (5) and (6);
 ``(D) information about the quality review process 
 that was used to ensure quality and accuracy;
 ``(E) the impact of the project on instruction and 
 student learning outcomes; and
 ``(F) all project costs, including the value of any 
 volunteer labor and institutional capital used for the 
 project.
 ``(8) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section 
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 succeeding 
 fiscal years.
 ``(b) Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of College Affordability Act, the Secretary shall prepare and 
submit a report to authorizing committees detailing--
 ``(1) the high-quality open textbooks created or adapted 
 under this section;
 ``(2) the adoption of such open textbooks;
 ``(3) the savings generated for students, States, 
 territories, and the Federal Government through the use of open 
 textbooks; and
 ``(4) the impact of open textbooks on instruction and 
 student learning outcomes.
 ``(c) GAO Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of College Affordability Act, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall prepare and submit a report to the authorizing 
committees on the cost of textbooks to students at institutions of 
higher education. The report shall include--
 ``(1) the change of the cost of textbooks between the date 
 of the enactment of the College Affordability Act and the date 
 of such report;
 ``(2) the factors that have contributed to such change in 
 the cost of textbooks, including the impact of open textbooks 
 on the cost;
 ``(3) the extent to which open textbooks are used at 
 institutions of higher education compared to the use of open 
 textbooks before the date of the enactment of this subsection;
 ``(4) how institutions are tracking the impact of open 
 textbooks on instruction and student learning outcomes;
 ``(5) the availability of accessible forms of open 
 textbooks and the barriers faced by students with disabilities 
 in accessing accessible forms of open educational resources 
 compared to the barriers faced in accessing traditional 
 educational materials; and
 ``(6) the barriers faced by other student populations, 
 including low-income students, in accessing high-quality open 
 educational resources compared to the barriers faced in 
 accessing traditional educational materials.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Educational resource.--The term `educational 
 resource' means a print or digital educational material that 
 can be used in postsecondary instruction, including textbooks 
 and other written or audiovisual works.
 ``(2) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
 institution of higher education or a consortia of such 
 institutions of higher education.
 ``(3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101.
 ``(4) Open educational resource.--The term `open 
 educational resource' means a print or digital educational 
 resource that either resides in the public domain or has been 
 released under an intellectual property license that permits 
 its free use, reuse, modification, and sharing with others.
 ``(5) Open textbook.--The term `open textbook' means an 
 open educational resource or set of open educational resources 
 that either is a textbook or can be used in place of a textbook 
 for a postsecondary course at an institution of higher 
 education.
 ``(6) Relevant faculty.--The term `relevant faculty' means 
 both tenure track and contingent faculty members who may be 
 involved in the creation of open educational resources or the 
 use of open educational resources created as part of the grant 
 application.''.

SEC. 8014. ENCOURAGING CAMPUS COMPREHENSIVE MENTAL HEALTH AND SUICIDE 
 PREVENTION PLANS.

 Title VIII (20 U.S.C. 1161a et seq.) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965, as amended by the preceding provisions of this title, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``PART M--MENTAL HEALTH AND SUICIDE PREVENTION

``SEC. 861. ENCOURAGING CAMPUS COMPREHENSIVE MENTAL HEALTH AND SUICIDE 
 PREVENTION PLANS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall make efforts to encourage 
institutions of higher education to develop and implement comprehensive 
campus mental health and suicide prevention plans. Such efforts--
 ``(1) shall be conducted in coordination with the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services (acting through the Administrator 
 of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration);
 ``(2) shall align with--
 ``(A) the efforts of the Suicide Prevention 
 Resource Center, specifically the Center's model of 
 nine strategies that form a comprehensive approach to 
 suicide prevention;
 ``(B) the 21st Century Cures Act (42 U.S.C. 201 
 note); and
 ``(C) the programs authorized under the Garrett Lee 
 Smith Memorial Act (42 U.S.C. 201 note; Public Law 108-
 355);
 ``(3) shall take into consideration existing State efforts 
 to address mental health and suicide prevention at institutions 
 of higher education; and
 ``(4) may be carried out in collaboration with nonprofit 
 organizations and other experts and stakeholders in the field 
 of campus mental health and suicide prevention.
 ``(b) Reports.--The Secretary, or a designee of the Secretary, 
shall report to Congress on the efforts of the Secretary carried out 
under this section--
 ``(1) not later than one year after the date of enactment 
 of the College Affordability Act; and
 ``(2) three years after the date of enactment of such Act.
 ``(c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
creating new statutory requirements for institutions of higher 
education or granting the Secretary new regulatory authority.''.

 TITLE IX--DIRECTIVES TO THE SECRETARY OF EDUCATION

SEC. 9001. PROVIDING THAT THE SECRETARY OF EDUCATION MAY NOT ISSUE OR 
 ENFORCE CERTAIN RULES THAT WEAKEN THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE 
 PROHIBITION OF SEX DISCRIMINATION APPLICABLE UNDER TITLE 
 IX OF THE EDUCATION AMENDMENTS OF 1972.

 The Secretary of Education may not--
 (1) take any action to implement, enforce, or otherwise 
 give effect to the proposed amendments to regulations relating 
 to the enforcement of title IX of the Education Amendments of 
 1972, published on November 29, 2018, under the heading 
 ``Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs 
 or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance'' (83 Fed. 
 Reg. 61462); or
 (2) propose or issue any rule that is in substantially the 
 same form or substantially the same as any of such proposed 
 amendments.

SEC. 9002. STUDY AND REPORT ON SINGLE CERTIFICATION FORM.

 (a) Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall conduct a study on the 
feasibility of developing a single certification form that borrowers 
may use to electronically submit information with respect to--
 (1) TEACH Grants under subpart 9 of part A of title IV of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070g et seq.);
 (2) loan forgiveness under section 428J of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078-10);
 (3) loan cancellation under section 460 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087j); and
 (4) public service loan forgiveness under section 455(m) of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(m)).
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall submit a report to 
Congress that includes--
 (1) the results of the study required under subsection (a); 
 and
 (2) recommendations with respect to using a single 
 certification form that borrowers may use to electronically 
 submit information with respect to the programs specified in 
 paragraphs (1) through (4) of such subsection.

SEC. 9003. LONGITUDINAL STUDY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF STUDENT LOAN 
 COUNSELING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Education, acting through the Director of 
the Institute of Education Sciences, shall begin conducting a rigorous, 
longitudinal study of the impact and effectiveness of the student loan 
counseling--
 (1) provided under subsections (b), (l), and (n) of section 
 485 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092), as 
 amended by this Act; and
 (2) provided through such other means as the Secretary of 
 Education may determine.
 (b) Contents.--
 (1) Borrower information.--The longitudinal study carried 
 out under subsection (a) shall include borrower information, in 
 the aggregate and disaggregated by race, ethnicity, gender, 
 income, status as an individual with a disability, and status 
 as a first generation college student (defined in section 
 402A(h)(3)), on--
 (A) student persistence;
 (B) degree attainment;
 (C) program completion;
 (D) successful entry into student loan repayment;
 (E) cumulative borrowing levels; and
 (F) such other factors as the Secretary of 
 Education may determine.
 (2) Exception.--The disaggregation under paragraph (1) 
 shall not be required in a case in which the number of 
 borrowers in a category is insufficient to yield statistically 
 reliable information or the results would reveal personally 
 identifiable information about an individual borrower.
 (c) Interim Reports.--Not later than 18 months after the 
commencement of the study under subsection (a), and annually 
thereafter, the Secretary of Education shall evaluate the progress of 
the study and report any short-term findings to the appropriate 
committees of Congress.

SEC. 9004. STUDY AND PROCEDURES ON DETERMINING FAMILY SIZE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall--
 (1) conduct, in consultation with the Secretary of the 
 Treasury, a study which meets the specifications described in 
 subsection (b), on the effect of using data from the Internal 
 Revenue Service on the deduction for personal exemptions 
 provided by section 151 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 for a proxy for family size in an income-driven repayment plan, 
 and publish such study in the Federal Register;
 (2) use the results of the study conducted under paragraph 
 (1) to develop procedures for determining family size for the 
 automatic recertification of income for an income-driven 
 repayment plan in a manner that minimizes burdens and 
 unintended harm to borrowers;
 (3) publish the procedures developed under paragraph (2) in 
 the Federal Register; and
 (4) after a notice and comment period on such procedures, 
 use such comments to finalize the procedures.
 (b) Specifications.--The study conducted under subsection (a)(1) 
shall--
 (1) determine how closely such personal exemptions match 
 the family size that borrowers report on their income-driven 
 repayment plan request form;
 (2) compare the borrower's actual monthly payment amount 
 with the monthly payment amount borrowers would have using 
 family size information derived from tax returns; and
 (3) use data from more than one year, where possible, to 
 analyze how much family size changes over time.
 (c) Definition.--The term ``the income-driven repayment plan'' 
means a plan described in subparagraph (D) or (E) of section 455(d)(1) 
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(d)(1)) and the 
income-based repayment plan under section 493C(f) of such Act (20 
U.S.C. 1098e(f)), as added by section 4631(c) of this Act.

SEC. 9005. UNIVERSAL UNIQUE NUMERIC DATA IDENTIFIER.

 (a) Assignment of Unique Numeric Identifier Required.--Not later 
than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Education shall assign a unique numeric identifier to at 
least each campus of each institution of higher education that 
participates in a program under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.) to be used for reporting and 
disaggregating data for the purposes of the following:
 (1) Surveys conducted as a part of the Integrated 
 Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) or any other 
 Federal postsecondary institution data collection effort, as 
 completed in accordance with section 487(a)(17) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094(a)(17)).
 (2) Reports required to be filed under section 485(f) of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092(f)).
 (3) The electronic exchange of data under section 485B of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092b).
 (4) Determinations under section 496 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1099b).
 (5) Reports filed on the College Scorecard website of the 
 Department of Education (or any successor website).
 (6) Reports filed on the College Navigator website (as 
 defined in section 132 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1015a)).
 (7) Data submitted to the postsecondary student data system 
 established under section 132(l) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1015a(l)), as added by section 1022 of this 
 Act.
 (8) To the extent determined to be appropriate by the 
 Secretary, any other data systems of the Department of 
 Education that include information on institutions of higher 
 education.
 (b) Considerations.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary 
of Education shall--
 (1) consider the ability to use the unique numeric 
 identifier assigned under such subsection to--
 (A) disaggregate institutions of higher education 
 by corporate ownership;
 (B) identify an institution of higher education 
 with more than one campus; and
 (C) in the case of institutions of higher education 
 described in subparagraph (B), distinguish between a 
 campus with a specific location and a distance 
 education program;
 (2) account for interactions of the unique numeric 
 identifier with requirements under title IV of the Higher 
 Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.), including by preventing 
 institutional attempts to evade such requirements by changing 
 the unique numeric identifiers associated with the campuses of 
 the institution;
 (3) to the extent practicable, minimize the paperwork 
 burden on institutions of higher education;
 (4) create and make public a crosswalk indicating changes 
 in the unique numeric identifiers assigned by the Secretary to 
 each campus under subsection (a) and the numeric identifiers 
 used by the Department of Education prior to the date on which 
 the Secretary assigns each campus a unique numeric identifier; 
 and
 (5) annually create and make public an updated crosswalk 
 indicating changes in unique numeric identifiers assigned to 
 campuses, including changes that result from the establishment 
 of new locations, the closing of campuses, and changes in 
 ownership and affiliation.

SEC. 9006. QUESTIONS ON FOOD AND HOUSING INSECURITY IN NATIONAL 
 POSTSECONDARY STUDENT AID STUDY.

 For purposes of each National Postsecondary Student Aid Study 
conducted after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
Education shall include questions that measure rates of food and 
housing insecurity in the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study.

SEC. 9007. DISAGGREGATION OF DATA USING RACIAL GROUPS.

 (a) Study Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall carry out a 
study on the feasibility of disaggregating data reported under the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) to the Secretary 
of Education using the racial groups identified by the American 
Community Survey of the Bureau of the Census.
 (b) Elements.--The study required by subsection (a) shall, with 
respect to the data described in such subsection--
 (1) survey each method by which such data reported to the 
 Secretary of Education is disaggregated by race;
 (2) survey each method by which the Secretary of Education 
 disaggregates such data by race; and
 (3) in the case of such data that are reported to the 
 Secretary of Education and are not disaggregated by race using 
 the racial groups identified by the American Community Survey 
 of the Bureau of the Census, examine the feasibility of 
 disaggregating such data using such racial groups while 
 protecting student privacy.
 (c) Best Practices.--Not later than 6 months after the completion 
of the study required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Education 
shall issue best practices with respect to disaggregating data reported 
to the Secretary of Education using the racial groups identified by the 
American Community Survey of the Bureau of the Census.

SEC. 9008. DISAGGREGATION OF DATA BY SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER 
 IDENTITY.

 (a) Study Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall carry out a 
study on the options for disaggregating data reported under the Higher 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) to the Secretary of 
Education by sexual orientation and gender identity.
 (b) Elements.--The study required by subsection (a) shall--
 (1) survey the methods by which institutions of higher 
 education (as defined in section 102 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002) collect, report, and use data on 
 sexual orientation and gender identity;
 (2) survey each method by which the Secretary of Education 
 disaggregates data by sexual orientation and gender identity;
 (3) survey the methods by which the Secretary of Education 
 disaggregates data for other similarly-sized populations; and
 (4) identify options for disaggregating data reported under 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) by 
 sexual orientation and gender identity while protecting student 
 privacy.
 (c) Best Practices.--Not later than 6 months after the completion 
of the study required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Education 
shall issue best practices with respect to disaggregating data reported 
to the Secretary of Education by sexual orientation and gender 
identity.

SEC. 9009. ACCESSIBLE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS AND TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Establishment of Commission.--The Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the 
Secretary of Education shall establish an independent commission, 
comprised of key stakeholders, to develop guidelines for accessible 
postsecondary electronic instructional materials and related 
technologies in order--
 (1) to ensure students with disabilities are afforded the 
 same educational benefits provided to students without 
 disabilities through the use of electronic instructional 
 materials and related technologies;
 (2) to improve the selection and use of such materials and 
 technologies at institutions of higher education; and
 (3) to encourage entities that produce such materials and 
 technologies to make accessible versions more readily available 
 in the market.
 (b) Review.--In carrying out subsection (a), the commission shall--
 (1) review applicable information technology accessibility 
 standards; and
 (2) compile and annotate such accessibility standards as an 
 additional information resource for institutions of higher 
 education and companies that service the higher education 
 market.
 (c) Membership.--
 (1) Stakeholder groups.--The commission shall be composed 
 of representatives from the following categories:
 (A) Communities of persons with disabilities for 
 whom the accessibility of postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials and related technologies is a 
 significant factor in ensuring equal participation in 
 higher education, and nonprofit organizations that 
 provide accessible electronic materials to these 
 communities.
 (B) Higher education leadership, including 
 institution of higher education presidents, provosts, 
 deans, vice presidents or deans of libraries, chief 
 information officers, and other senior institutional 
 executives.
 (C) Developers of postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials and manufacturers of related 
 technologies.
 (2) Appointment of members.--The commission members shall 
 be appointed as follows:
 (A) 6 members, 2 from each category described in 
 paragraph (1), shall be appointed by the Speaker of the 
 House of Representatives, 3 of whom shall be appointed 
 on the recommendation of the majority leader of the 
 House of Representatives and 3 of whom shall be 
 appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader 
 of the House of Representatives, with the Speaker 
 ensuring that 1 developer of postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials and 1 manufacturer of related 
 technologies are appointed. The Speaker shall also 
 appoint 2 additional members, 1 student with a 
 disability and 1 faculty member from an institution of 
 higher education.
 (B) 6 members, 2 from each category described in 
 paragraph (1), shall be appointed by the President pro 
 tempore of the Senate, 3 of whom shall be appointed on 
 the recommendation of the majority leader of the Senate 
 and 3 of whom shall be appointed on the recommendation 
 of the minority leader of the Senate, with the 
 President pro tempore ensuring that 1 developer of 
 postsecondary electronic instructional materials and 1 
 manufacturer of related technologies are appointed. The 
 President pro tempore shall also appoint 2 additional 
 members, 1 student with a disability and 1 faculty 
 member from an institution of higher education.
 (C) 3 members, each of whom must possess extensive, 
 demonstrated technical expertise in the development and 
 implementation of accessible postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials, shall be appointed by the 
 Secretary of Education. 1 of these members shall 
 represent postsecondary students with disabilities, 1 
 shall represent higher education leadership, and 1 
 shall represent developers of postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials.
 (3) Eligibility to serve as a member.--Federal employees 
 are ineligible for appointment to the commission. An appointee 
 to a volunteer or advisory position with a Federal agency or 
 related advisory body may be appointed to the commission so 
 long as his or her primary employment is with a non-Federal 
 entity and he or she is not otherwise engaged in financially 
 compensated work on behalf of the Federal Government, exclusive 
 of any standard expense reimbursement or grant-funded 
 activities.
 (d) Authority and Administration.--
 (1) Authority.--The commission's execution of its duties 
 shall be independent of the Secretary of Education, the 
 Attorney General, and the head of any other agency or 
 department of the Federal Government with regulatory or 
 standard setting authority in the areas addressed by the 
 commission.
 (2) Administration.--
 (A) Staffing.--There shall be no permanent staffing 
 for the commission.
 (B) Leadership.--Commission members shall elect a 
 chairperson from among the appointees to the 
 commission.
 (C) Administrative support.--The Commission shall 
 be provided administrative support, as needed, by the 
 Secretary of Education through the Office of 
 Postsecondary Education of the Department of Education.
 (e) Duties.--
 (1) Guidelines.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, subject to a 6-month extension that it 
 may exercise at its discretion, the commission shall--
 (A) develop and issue guidelines for accessible 
 postsecondary electronic instructional materials, and 
 related technologies; and
 (B) in developing the guidelines, the commission 
 shall--
 (i) establish a technical panel pursuant to 
 paragraph (4) to support the commission in 
 developing the guidelines;
 (ii) develop criteria for determining which 
 materials and technologies constitute 
 postsecondary electronic instructional 
 materials and related technologies;
 (iii) identify existing national and 
 international accessibility standards that are 
 relevant to student use of postsecondary 
 electronic instructional materials and related 
 technologies at institutions of higher 
 education;
 (iv) identify and address any unique 
 pedagogical and accessibility requirements of 
 postsecondary electronic instructional 
 materials and related technologies that are not 
 addressed, or not adequately addressed, by the 
 identified, relevant existing accessibility 
 standards;
 (v) identify those aspects of 
 accessibility, and types of postsecondary 
 instructional materials and related 
 technologies, for which the commission cannot 
 produce guidelines or which cannot be addressed 
 by existing accessibility standards due to--
 (I) inherent limitations of 
 commercially available technologies; or
 (II) the challenges posed by a 
 specific category of disability that 
 covers a wide spectrum of impairments 
 and capabilities which makes it 
 difficult to assess the benefits from 
 particular guidelines on a categorical 
 basis;
 (vi) ensure that the guidelines are 
 consistent with the requirements of section 504 
 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
 794) and titles II and III of the Americans 
 with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131 et seq.; 
 42 U.S.C. 12181 et seq.);
 (vii) ensure that the guidelines are 
 consistent, to the extent feasible and 
 appropriate, with the technical and functional 
 performance criteria included in the national 
 and international accessibility standards 
 identified by the commission as relevant to 
 student use of postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials and related 
 technologies;
 (viii) allow for the use of an alternative 
 design or technology that results in 
 substantially equivalent or greater 
 accessibility and usability by individuals with 
 disabilities than would be provided by 
 compliance with the guidelines; and
 (ix) provide that where electronic 
 instructional materials, or related 
 technologies, that comply fully with the 
 guidelines are not commercially available, or 
 where such compliance is not technically 
 feasible, the institution may select the 
 product that best meets the guidelines 
 consistent with the institution's business and 
 pedagogical needs.
 (2) Annotated list of information technology standards.--
 Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, subject to a 6-month extension that it may exercise 
 at its discretion, the commission established in section 2 
 shall, with the assistance of the technical panel established 
 under paragraph (4), develop and issue an annotated list of 
 information technology standards.
 (3) Approval.--Issuance of the guidelines and annotated 
 list of information technology standards shall require approval 
 of at least 75 percent of the members of the commission.
 (4) Technical panel.--Not later than 1 month after first 
 meeting, the Commission shall appoint and convene a panel of 12 
 technical experts, each of whom shall have extensive, 
 demonstrated technical experience in developing, researching, 
 or implementing accessible postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials, or related technologies. The 
 commission has discretion to determine a process for 
 nominating, vetting, and confirming a panel of experts that 
 fairly represents the stakeholder communities on the 
 commission. The technical panel shall include a representative 
 from the United States Access Board.
 (f) Review of Guidelines.--Not later than 5 years after issuance of 
the guidelines and annotated list of information technology standards 
described in subsections (a) and (b), and every 5 years thereafter, the 
Secretary of Education shall publish a notice in the Federal Register 
requesting public comment about whether there is a need to reconstitute 
the commission to update the guidelines and annotated list of 
information technology standards to reflect technological advances, 
changes in postsecondary electronic instructional materials and related 
technologies, or updated national and international accessibility 
standards. The Secretary shall then submit a report and recommendation 
to Congress regarding whether the Commission should be reconstituted.
 (g) Rule of Application.--
 (1) Nonconforming postsecondary electronic instructional 
 materials or related technologies.--Nothing in this section 
 shall be construed to require an institution of higher 
 education to require, provide, or both recommend and provide, 
 postsecondary electronic instructional materials or related 
 technologies that conform to the guidelines. However, an 
 institution that selects or uses nonconforming postsecondary 
 electronic instructional materials or related technologies must 
 otherwise comply with existing obligations under section 504 of 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and titles II 
 and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131 
 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 12181 et seq.) to provide access to the 
 educational benefit afforded by such materials and technologies 
 through provision of appropriate and reasonable modification, 
 accommodation, and auxiliary aids or services.
 (2) Relationship to existing laws and regulations.--With 
 respect to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
 U.S.C. 701 et seq.), nothing in this Act may be construed--
 (A) to authorize or require conduct prohibited 
 under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and 
 the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, including the 
 regulations issued pursuant to those laws;
 (B) to expand, limit, or alter the remedies or 
 defenses under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
 1990 and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
 (C) to supersede, restrict, or limit the 
 application of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
 1990 and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; or
 (D) to limit the authority of Federal agencies to 
 issue regulations pursuant to the Americans with 
 Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Rehabilitation Act of 
 1973.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Annotated list of information technology standards.--
 The term ``annotated list of information technology standards'' 
 means a list of existing national and international 
 accessibility standards relevant to student use of 
 postsecondary electronic instructional materials and related 
 technologies, and to other types of information technology 
 common to institutions of higher education, such as 
 institutional websites or registration systems, annotated by 
 the commission established pursuant to this section. The 
 annotated list of information technology standards is intended 
 to serve solely as a reference tool to inform any consideration 
 of the relevance of such standards in higher education 
 contexts.
 (2) Postsecondary electronic instructional materials.--The 
 term ``postsecondary electronic instructional materials'' means 
 digital curricular content that is required, provided, or both 
 recommended and provided by an institution of higher education 
 for use in a postsecondary instructional program.
 (3) Related technologies.--The term ``related 
 technologies'' refers to any software, applications, learning 
 management or content management systems, and hardware that an 
 institution of higher education requires, provides, or both 
 recommends and provides for student access to and use of 
 postsecondary electronic instructional materials in a 
 postsecondary instructional program.
 (4) Technical panel.--The term ``technical panel'' means a 
 group of experts with extensive, demonstrated technical 
 experience in the development and implementation of 
 accessibility features for postsecondary electronic 
 instructional materials and related technologies, established 
 by the Commission pursuant to subsection (e)(4), which will 
 assist the commission in the development of the guidelines and 
 annotated list of information technology standards authorized 
 under this section.

SEC. 9010. SERVING AND SUPPORTING STUDENTS WITH MENTAL HEALTH 
 DISABILITIES IN INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

 (a) Findings and Purposes.--
 (1) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (A) More than 75 percent of mental health 
 conditions begin before the age of 24.
 (B) More than 25 percent of students between the 
 ages of 18 and 24 reported a mental health concern.
 (C) More than 50 percent of students between the 
 ages of 18 and 24 reported having a severe 
 psychological problem.
 (D) More than 50 percent of students between the 
 ages of 18 and 24 reported feelings of hopelessness.
 (E) Higher education counseling centers are 
 devoting more time to rapid-response treatment with 
 more than 25 percent of students who sought help 
 reporting they had intentionally hurt themselves.
 (F) Over a 5-year period, counseling center 
 utilization increased by an average of 30 to 40 
 percent, while enrollment increased by only 5 percent, 
 forcing institutions to stretch mental health services 
 to more students without increasing resources.
 (2) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are the 
 following:
 (A) To ensure States and institutions of higher 
 education are provided with accurate information on the 
 mental health concerns facing students.
 (B) To provide detailed recommendations that 
 institutions of higher education, States, and the 
 Federal Government can take to improve the mental 
 health services available to students and properly 
 treat the rising number of students with mental health 
 issues.
 (b) Advisory Commission on Serving and Supporting Students With 
Mental Health Disabilities in Institutions of Higher Education.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall establish 
 a commission to be known as the Advisory Commission on Serving 
 and Supporting Students with Mental Health Disabilities in 
 Institutions of Higher Education (referred to in this section 
 as the ``Commission'').
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) Total number of members.--The Commission shall 
 include not more than 20 members, who shall be 
 appointed by the Secretary of Education in accordance 
 with subparagraphs (B) and (C).
 (B) Members of the commission.--The Commission 
 shall include 1 representative from each of the 
 following:
 (i) The Office of Postsecondary Education 
 of the Department of Education.
 (ii) The Office of Special Education and 
 Rehabilitation Services of the Department of 
 Education.
 (iii) The Office of Civil Rights of the 
 Department of Education.
 (iv) The Office of Civil Rights of the 
 Department of Justice.
 (v) The National Council on Disability.
 (vi) A membership association for 
 administrative and personnel professionals 
 focused on creating an inclusive higher 
 education environment for individuals with 
 disabilities, as determined by the Secretary.
 (vii) An organization that represents the 
 Protection and Advocacy for Individuals with 
 Mental Illness program, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (viii) An organization operated by and 
 representing secondary and postsecondary 
 education students with mental health 
 disabilities advocating for mental health 
 services and suicide prevention.
 (ix) An organization representing college 
 and university counseling directors.
 (C) Additional members of the commission.--In 
 addition to the members included under subparagraph 
 (B), the Commission shall include the following:
 (i) Four members from leadership of 
 institutions of higher education who have 
 demonstrated experience in successfully 
 supporting the retention and graduation of 
 students with mental health disabilities, 
 including from counseling and psychiatric 
 services staff. With respect to such 4 members, 
 1 member shall be a staff member of a 2-year 
 degree-granting institution of higher 
 education, 1 member shall be a staff member 
 from a 4-year degree-granting institution of 
 higher education, 1 member shall be a member of 
 campus law enforcement, and 1 member shall 
 serve as a general counsel. Such 4 members 
 shall represent institutions of differing 
 sizes.
 (ii) Three members from family members of 
 individuals who are--
 (I) enrolled in an institution of 
 higher education on the date such 
 family member is appointed to the 
 Commission; or
 (II) former students with a mental 
 health disability.
 (iii) Four members from individuals with 
 mental health disabilities, including not less 
 than 2 individuals enrolled in an institution 
 of higher education on the date of appointment 
 to the Commission. Any remaining member shall 
 be an individual with a mental health 
 disability who has attended an institution of 
 higher education.
 (D) Timing.--The Secretary of Education shall 
 establish the Commission and appoint the members of the 
 Commission not later than 60 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (3) Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Commission shall 
 select a chairperson and vice chairperson from among the 
 members of the Commission. Either the chairperson or the vice 
 chairperson shall be a student or former student with a mental 
 health disability.
 (4) Meetings.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the 
 call of the chairperson, but not less often than 8 
 times.
 (B) First meeting.--Not later than 60 days after 
 the appointment of the members of the Commission under 
 paragraph (2), the Commission shall hold the 
 Commission's first meeting.
 (5) Duties.--The Commission shall conduct a study, using 
 the highest quality and most representative data and research 
 available, and prepare a report for the Secretary of Education 
 that includes the following:
 (A) Findings from stakeholders, including through 
 solicitation of public testimony, related to the 
 challenges faced by students with mental health 
 disabilities in institutions of higher education, 
 including--
 (i) the services available to students with 
 mental health disabilities in institutions of 
 higher education and their effectiveness in 
 supporting these students;
 (ii) the impact of policies and procedures 
 that help or hinder the goal of providing equal 
 opportunity for students with mental health 
 disabilities, such as reasonable accommodation 
 policies, mandatory and voluntary leave 
 policies, and disciplinary policies;
 (iii) the use of protected health 
 information of students with mental health 
 disabilities by institutions of higher 
 education, including the extent to which 
 campus-based mental health providers share this 
 information with college or university 
 officials without student consent; and
 (iv) the impact of providing mental health 
 services on a student's academic performance, 
 well-being, and ability to complete college.
 (B) Conclusions on the major challenges facing 
 students with mental health disabilities in 
 institutions of higher education.
 (C) Recommendations to improve the overall 
 education, and retention and graduation rates, of 
 students with mental health disabilities in 
 institutions of higher education, with the goal of 
 helping these students access educational opportunities 
 equal to those of their peers without disabilities.
 (6) Commission personnel matters.--
 (A) Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission 
 shall not receive compensation for the performance of 
 services for the Commission, but shall be allowed 
 reasonable travel expenses, including per diem in lieu 
 of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of 
 agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, 
 United States Code, while away from their homes or 
 regular places of business in the performance of 
 services for the Commission. Notwithstanding section 
 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary of 
 Education may accept the voluntary and uncompensated 
 services of members of the Commission.
 (B) Staff.--The Secretary of Education may 
 designate such personnel as may be necessary to enable 
 the Commission to perform its duties.
 (C) Detail of government employees.--Any Federal 
 Government employee, with the approval of the head of 
 the appropriate Federal agency, may be detailed to the 
 Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall 
 be without interruption of loss of civil service status 
 or privilege.
 (D) Facilities, equipment, and services.--The 
 Secretary of Education shall make available to the 
 Commission, under such arrangements as may be 
 appropriate, necessary equipment, supplies, and 
 services.
 (7) Reports.--
 (A) Interim and final reports.--The Commission 
 shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of Education, 
 as well as the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, 
 and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Education and Labor of the House of Representatives--
 (i) an interim report that summarizes the 
 progress of the Commission, along with any 
 interim findings, conclusions, and 
 recommendations as described in paragraph (5); 
 and
 (ii) a final report that states final 
 findings, conclusions, and recommendations as 
 described in such paragraph.
 (B) Preparation and submission.--The reports 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be prepared and 
 submitted--
 (i) in the case of the interim report, not 
 later than 1 year after the date on which all 
 the members of the Commission are appointed; 
 and
 (ii) in the case of the final report, not 
 later than 2 years after the date on which all 
 the members of the Commission are appointed.
 (8) Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the day 
 after the date on which the Commission submits the final report 
 under paragraph (7).
 (c) GAO Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
submit to Congress a report that examines the challenges faced by 
students with mental health disabilities in institutions of higher 
education, including--
 (1) the services available to students with mental health 
 disabilities in institutions of higher education and what is 
 known about their effectiveness in supporting these students;
 (2) the impact of policies and procedures that help or 
 hinder the goal of providing equal opportunity for students 
 with mental health disabilities, such as reasonable 
 accommodation policies, mandatory and voluntary leave policies, 
 and disciplinary policies;
 (3) the use of protected health information of students 
 with mental health disabilities by institutions of higher 
 education, including campus-based mental health providers 
 sharing this information with college or university officials 
 without student consent;
 (4) the impact of providing mental health services on a 
 student's academic performance, well-being, and ability to 
 complete college;
 (5) information on the major challenges facing students 
 with mental health disabilities in institutions of higher 
 education; and
 (6) recommendations to improve the overall education, and 
 retention and graduation rates, of students with mental health 
 disabilities in institutions of higher education, with the goal 
 of helping these students access educational opportunities 
 equal to those of their peers without disabilities.

SEC. 9011. FEDERAL STUDENT LOAN CANCELLATION COMMISSION.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to establish a 
commission to study--
 (1) the impact of Federal student loan debt on the short- 
 and long-term socioeconomic outcomes of--
 (A) individual borrowers; and
 (B) regional and national economies;
 (2) the feasibility of canceling Federal student loan debt; 
 and
 (3) the benefits of any such cancellation.
 (b) Establishment.--There is established the Commission on Federal 
Student Loan Cancellation (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
the ``Commission'').
 (c) Duties.--The Commission shall perform the following duties:
 (1) Study the decline in State investment in, and the 
 attendant rise in debt financing for, higher education from 
 1965 to the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Identify, compile, and synthesize the relevant corpus 
 of evidentiary documentation on Federal student loans and the 
 impact of those loans on borrowers, disaggregated by--
 (A) Pell Grant recipient status;
 (B) race or ethnicity (in accordance with section 
 153(a)(3)(B) of the Education Sciences Reform Act (20 
 U.S.C. 9543(a)(3)(B)), as amended by section 10401 of 
 this Act);
 (C) completion and non-completion of each category 
 of educational programs (as defined in section 
 435(a)(9)(E) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as 
 added by section 4110(a)(1)(B) of this Act); and
 (D) post-graduation employment information.
 (3) Analyze evidentiary data on the following 
 relationships:
 (A) The macroeconomic impacts of partial and total 
 student debt cancellation.
 (B) The impact of student loan default on long-term 
 financial success and security.
 (C) The impact of partial and total student debt 
 cancellation on income inequality, including the racial 
 wealth gap.
 (D) The impact of the income inequality and the 
 racial wealth gap on student debt repayment.
 (4) Study proposals to cancel Federal student loan debt in 
 consideration of the Commission's findings under paragraph (3).
 (5) Study the feasibility of establishing a Federal student 
 loan cancellation program.
 (d) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 24 months after the date on 
 which the last member of the Commission is appointed, the 
 Commission shall submit to the Congress a report containing the 
 data collected and analyzed under paragraphs (1) through (3) of 
 subsection (c) and recommendations to create a Federal student 
 loan cancellation program in consideration of the Commission's 
 findings under subsection (c)(3).
 (2) Specific questions.--In making recommendations under 
 paragraph (1), the Commission shall address, among other 
 issues, the following:
 (A) Whether any borrowers should be prioritized in 
 loan cancellation and a rationale for any such 
 prioritization.
 (B) How such recommendations and the proposed loan 
 cancellation program take into consideration the wealth 
 disparities faced by racial groups.
 (C) How the proposed cancellation program interacts 
 with existing student loan cancellation programs and 
 policies.
 (D) How the proposed cancellation program protects 
 future students from facing the same debt burden.
 (E) How the proposed cancellation program should be 
 funded and implemented.
 (e) Membership.--
 (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be 
 composed of 13 members, who shall be appointed, not later 180 
 days after the date of enactment of this Act, as follows:
 (A) One member shall be appointed by the President.
 (B) Four members shall be appointed by the Speaker 
 of the House of Representatives.
 (C) Four members shall be appointed by the 
 President pro tempore of the Senate.
 (D) Four members shall be appointed by the 
 Secretary of Education.
 (2) Composition.--All members of the Commission shall be 
 individuals who are qualified to serve on the Commission by 
 virtue of their expertise in Federal student aid and student 
 loan debt. The Commission shall be composed, at a minimum, of 
 Department of Education officials, academic researchers, 
 consumer advocates, and an impacted individual.
 (f) Terms.--The term of office for members shall be for the life of 
the Commission. A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the powers 
of the Commission and shall be filled in the same manner in which the 
original appointment was made.
 (g) Chair and Vice Chair.--The Commission shall elect a Chair and 
Vice Chair from among its members. The term of office of each shall be 
for the life of the Commission.
 (h) Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall serve 
without compensation. All members of the Commission shall be reimbursed 
for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them 
in the performance of their duties to the extent authorized by chapter 
57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (i) Powers of the Commission.--
 (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Commission may, for the 
 purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, hold 
 such hearings and sit and act at such times and at such places 
 in the United States, and request the attendance and testimony 
 of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, 
 correspondence, memoranda, papers, and documents, as the 
 Commission considers appropriate.
 (2) Powers of subcommittees and members.--Any subcommittee 
 or member of the Commission may, if authorized by the 
 Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized 
 to take by this section.
 (3) Obtaining official data.--The Commission may acquire 
 directly from the Secretary of Education available information 
 which the Commission considers useful in the discharge of its 
 duties. The Secretary of Education shall cooperate with the 
 Commission with respect to such information and shall furnish 
 all information requested by the Commission to the extent 
 permitted by law.
 (j) Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the 
date on which the Commission submits its report to the Congress under 
subsection (d).

SEC. 9012. DISTRIBUTION OF RESOURCES TO PREVENT INCIDENTS OF BIAS ON 
 CAMPUS.

 Not later that 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and 
every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary of Education shall, in 
consultation with the Attorney General, disseminate to institutions of 
higher education resources (including best practices information) about 
preventing and responding to incidents of bias, including bias based on 
actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex 
(including sexual orientation, gender identity, pregnancy, childbirth, 
a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth, and sex 
stereotype), or disability, at institutions of higher education 
(including elements of institutional policies that have proven 
successful).

SEC. 9013. GAO STUDY ON RACIAL AND SOCIOECONOMIC EQUITY GAPS AT PUBLIC 
 4-YEAR INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Report.--The Comptroller General shall prepare and submit a 
report to the authorizing committees that examines--
 (1) racial and socioeconomic equity gaps among racial and 
 income groups in enrollment, degree attainment, and Federal 
 student loan repayment rates, and other outcomes at public 4-
 year degree granting institutions of higher education, 
 disaggregated by State;
 (2) the extent to which the rates and other outcomes 
 described in paragraph (1) have changed over time;
 (3) the factors that may contribute to differences in the 
 rates and other outcomes described in paragraph (1) among 
 racial and income groups (such as State spending on public, 4-
 year institutions of higher education, the availability of 
 Federal and State financial aid, and FAFSA filing rates);
 (4) efforts by States and institutions of higher education 
 to attempt to close racial and income gaps in the rates and 
 other outcomes described in paragraph (1);
 (5) the racial breakdown of faculty and staff at public 4-
 year institutions of higher education and how retention rates 
 for minority faculty and staff compare to non-minority faculty 
 and staff; and
 (6) efforts by States and institutions of higher education 
 to attempt to improve inclusion for students belonging to 
 racial and income groups that are historically underrepresented 
 in higher education.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (2) Authorizing committees; states.--The terms 
 ``authorizing committees'' and ``State'' have the meanings 
 given the terms in section 103 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1003).

SEC. 9014. GAO STUDY ON LICENSE REVOCATIONS RELATED TO STUDENT LOAN 
 DEFAULTS.

 (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on State practices related to the denial, suspension, 
or revocation of an individual's professional or driver's license as a 
penalty for student loan default.
 (b) Contents.--The study shall include a review of--
 (1) State laws related to the denial, suspension, or 
 revocation of a professional or driver's license as a penalty 
 for student loan default, and the types of licenses included in 
 such laws;
 (2) the extent to which student loan borrowers are affected 
 by such license denials, suspensions, or revocations; and
 (3) the actual and potential consequences of such actions 
 on Federal student loan borrowers.
 (c) Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit a report to the 
Committee on Education and Labor of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
containing the results of the study, together with any recommendations 
the Comptroller General determines appropriate.
 (d) Outreach.--In conducting the study, the Comptroller General 
shall seek information from State or local licensing boards and other 
entities administering State laws pertaining to the denial, suspension, 
or revocation of a professional or driver's license as a penalty for 
student loan default, and other nonprofit entities that have researched 
issues pertaining to State licensure.

 TITLE X--AMENDMENTS TO OTHER LAWS

 PART A--EDUCATION OF THE DEAF ACT OF 1986

SEC. 10001. COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.

 Section 103(a)(1) of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 
U.S.C. 4303(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``twenty-one'' and inserting ``twenty-
 three'';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``three'' and inserting ``four''; 
 and
 (B) in clause (i)--
 (i) by striking ``one'' and inserting 
 ``two''; and
 (ii) by striking ``Senator'' and inserting 
 ``Senators''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``eighteen'' and 
 inserting ``nineteen''.

SEC. 10002. ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS OF LAURENT CLERC NATIONAL DEAF 
 EDUCATION CENTER.

 Section 104(b)(5) of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 
U.S.C. 4304(b)(5)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(5) The University, for purposes of the elementary and 
 secondary education programs carried out by the Clerc Center, 
 shall--
 ``(A)(i)(I) provide an assurance to the Secretary 
 that the University has adopted and is implementing 
 challenging State academic standards that meet the 
 requirements of section 1111(b)(1) of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6311(b)(1));
 ``(II) demonstrate to the Secretary that the 
 University is implementing a set of high-quality 
 student academic assessments in mathematics, reading or 
 language arts, and science, and any other subjects 
 chosen by the University, that meet the requirements of 
 section 1111(b)(2) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)(2)); 
 and
 ``(III) demonstrate to the Secretary that the 
 University is implementing an accountability system 
 consistent with section 1111(c) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 
 6311(c)); or
 ``(ii)(I) select the challenging State academic 
 standards and State academic assessments of a State, 
 adopted and implemented, as appropriate, pursuant to 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1111(b) of such Act 
 (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)); and
 ``(II) adopt the accountability system, consistent 
 with section 1111(c) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 6311(c)), 
 of such State; and
 ``(B) publicly report, except in a case in which 
 such reporting would not yield statistically reliable 
 information or would reveal personally identifiable 
 information about an individual student--
 ``(i) the results of the academic 
 assessments implemented under subparagraph (A); 
 and
 ``(ii) the results of the annual evaluation 
 of the programs at the Clerc Center, as 
 determined using the accountability system 
 adopted under subparagraph (A).''.

SEC. 10003. FEDERAL ENDOWMENT PROGRAMS FOR GALLAUDET UNIVERSITY AND THE 
 NATIONAL TECHNICAL INSTITUTE FOR THE DEAF.

 Section 207 of the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C. 
4357) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e), by striking ``(and its non-Federal 
 match)''; and
 (2) in subsection (g)(1), by striking ``amounts contributed 
 to the fund from non-Federal sources, and'' and inserting ``and 
 the related''.

PART B--TRIBALLY CONTROLLED COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES ASSISTANCE ACT OF 
 1978

SEC. 10101. TRIBALLY CONTROLLED COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES ASSISTANCE 
 ACT OF 1978.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 2 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges and 
Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1801) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``or has been 
 formally'' and inserting ``and has been formally'';
 (B) in paragraph (7), by adding ``and'' at the end;
 (C) in paragraph (8), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a period; and
 (D) by striking paragraph (9); and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) Such number shall be calculated based on the number 
 of Indian students who are enrolled--
 ``(A) at the conclusion of the third week of each 
 academic term; or
 ``(B) on the fifth day of a shortened program 
 beginning after the conclusion of the third full week 
 of an academic term.'';
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``for purposes of 
 obtaining'' and inserting ``solely for the purpose of 
 obtaining'';
 (C) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by striking ``students'' and inserting 
 ``individuals 16 years of age or older''; and
 (ii) by striking ``credit hours.'' and 
 inserting ``credit hours, except that the 
 provisions of paragraphs (1) and (3) shall not 
 apply to any determination under this 
 paragraph.'';
 (D) in paragraph (5)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by inserting ``hour'' after 
 ``credit'';
 (II) by striking ``in the case of 
 an institution on a quarter system, or 
 15 contact hours in the case of an 
 institution on a semester system,''; 
 and
 (III) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as 
 subparagraph (C); and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A) 
 the following:
 ``(B) shall be determined as one academic credit 
 hour for every three continuing education program 
 credits earned in the case of an institution on a 
 semester system (which may be adjusted by the 
 Secretary, if necessary, for institutions using 
 academic periods other than semesters, such as 
 trimesters or quarters); and''; and
 (E) by inserting after paragraph (5), the 
 following:
 ``(6) Enrollment data from the prior-prior academic year 
 shall be used.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--The Tribally Controlled Colleges and 
 Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.) is 
 amended by inserting after section 2 (25 U.S.C. 1801), the 
 following:

 ``authorization of appropriations

 ``Sec. 3. (a)(1) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out sections 105, 107, 112(b), and 113 such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal year 2021 and each of the five succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(2) Funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization under 
paragraph (1) shall be transferred by the Secretary of the Treasury 
through the most expeditious method available, with each of the 
tribally controlled colleges or universities being designated as its 
own certifying agency.
 ``(b) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out title 
III such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 
five succeeding fiscal years. Any funds appropriated pursuant to this 
subsection are authorized to remain available until expended.
 ``(c) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out titles 
IV and V such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2021 and each of 
the five succeeding fiscal years.
 ``(d)(1) For the purpose of affording adequate notice of funding 
available under this Act, amounts appropriated in an appropriation Act 
for any fiscal year to carry out this Act shall become available for 
obligation on July 1 of that fiscal year and shall remain available 
until September 30 of the succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(2) In order to effect a transition to the forward funding method 
of timing appropriation action described in paragraph (1), there are 
authorized to be appropriated, in an appropriation Act or Acts for the 
same fiscal year, two separate appropriations to carry out this Act, 
the first of which shall not be subject to paragraph (1).''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 110 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1810) is repealed.
 (B) Section 111 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1811) is amended by striking ``110(a)(2)'' and 
 inserting ``3(a)(2)''.
 (C) Section 306 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1836) is repealed.
 (D) Title III of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1831 
 et seq.) is amended by striking ``section 306'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``section 3(b)''
 (E) Section 403 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1852) is repealed.
 (F) Section 502 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1862) is amended--
 (i) in subsection (a), by striking 
 ``Subject to the availability of 
 appropriations, for fiscal year 2009 and each 
 fiscal year thereafter,'' and inserting ``From 
 the amount made available under section 3(c) 
 for each fiscal year,''; and
 (ii) in subsection (d)(1), by striking 
 ``For fiscal year 2009 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, of amounts made available pursuant 
 to section 504,'' and inserting ``From the 
 amount made available under section 3(c) for 
 each fiscal year,''.
 (G) Section 504 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges 
 and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 1864) is repealed.
 (c) Annual Report on Emerging Tribal Colleges.--Section 104 of the 
Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 
(25 U.S.C. 1804a) is amended to read as follows:

 ``annual report on emerging tribal colleges

 ``Sec. 104. Not later than December 31 of each year, the Secretary 
shall submit a report to the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, the 
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, the House 
Committee on Natural Resources, the House Committee on Education and 
Labor, the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior, and the 
House Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior on developing and 
emerging tribally controlled colleges or universities. Such report 
shall include information on--
 ``(1) inquiries received by the Secretary from federally 
 recognized Indian Tribes and tribal organizations regarding the 
 process for establishing a tribally controlled college or 
 university;
 ``(2) the status of ongoing efforts to establish tribally 
 controlled colleges or universities;
 ``(3) the geographic location, current and projected size, 
 and anticipated application time frame of each reported 
 institution; and
 ``(4) such other data as the Secretary may deem 
 relevant.''.
 (d) Eligibility Studies.--Section 106 of the Tribally Controlled 
Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1806) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``for the fiscal year 
 succeeding'' and inserting ``for the second fiscal year 
 succeeding''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``drawn from'' and all 
 that follows through the period at the end and inserting 
 ``drawn from the general administrative appropriations to the 
 Secretary.''
 (e) Grants to Tribally Controlled Colleges or Universities.--
Section 107 of the Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities 
Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1807) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking ``given to 
 institutions'' and all that follows through the period at the 
 end and inserting ``given to institutions which received 
 payments under this title in fiscal year 2019 or were 
 affiliated with an institution which received payments under 
 this title in fiscal year 2019.''; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by inserting ``higher education'' 
 after ``national Indian''.
 (f) Amount of Grants.--Section 108 of the Tribally Controlled 
Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1808) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (a)(2) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(2) Exceptions.--
 ``(A) If the sum appropriated for any fiscal year 
 for payments under this section is not sufficient to 
 pay in full the total amount that approved applicants 
 are eligible to receive under this section for such 
 fiscal year, the Secretary shall first allocate to each 
 such applicant that received funds under this part for 
 the preceding fiscal year an amount equal to 100 
 percent of the product of the per capita payment for 
 the preceding fiscal year and such applicant's Indian 
 student count for the current program year, plus an 
 amount equal to the actual cost of any increase to the 
 per capita figure resulting from inflationary increases 
 to necessary costs beyond the institution's control.
 ``(B) The amount of a grant under paragraph (1) 
 shall not exceed an amount equal to the total cost of 
 the education program provided by the applicable 
 tribally controlled college or university.''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``of the funds available for 
 allotment by October 15 or no later than 14 days after 
 appropriations become available'' and inserting ``of 
 the amounts appropriated for any fiscal year on or 
 before July 1 of that fiscal year''; and
 (B) by striking ``January 1'' and inserting 
 ``September 30''.
 (g) Report on Facilities.--Section 112 of the Tribally Controlled 
Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1812) is 
amended to read as follows:

 ``report on facilities

 ``Sec. 112. (a) The Secretary shall provide for the conduct of a 
study on the condition of tribally controlled college or university 
facilities, which, for purposes of this section, shall include the 
facilities of a Tribal College or University, as defined in section 
316(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b)). Such 
study shall identify the need for new construction, renovation, and 
infrastructure enhancements of tribally controlled college or 
university facilities.
 ``(b) The study required in subsection (a) may be conducted 
directly by the Secretary or by contract.
 ``(c) A report on the results of the study required in subsection 
(a) shall be submitted to the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, the 
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, the House 
Committee on Natural Resources, the House Committee on Education and 
Labor, the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior, and the 
House Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior not later than 18 
months after the date of the enactment of the College Affordability 
Act.''.
 (h) Modification of Facilities Program.--Section 113 of the 
Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 
(25 U.S.C. 1813) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``of the Administrator 
 of General Services under section 112(a) of this Act'' and 
 inserting ``under section 112(c)'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``a tribally controlled 
 college or university--'' and all that follows through the 
 period at the end and inserting ``a tribally controlled college 
 or university shall be a Tribal College or University, as 
 defined in section 316(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b)).'';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (d) through (f) as 
 subsections (e) through (g), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (c) the following:
 ``(d) Activities eligible for a grant under this section shall be 
activities that address a wide variety of facilities and infrastructure 
needs including--
 ``(1) building of new facilities;
 ``(2) renovating or expanding existing or acquired 
 facilities;
 ``(3) providing new and existing facilities with equipment 
 and infrastructure, including laboratory equipment, computer 
 infrastructure and equipment, broadband infrastructure and 
 equipment, library books, and furniture; and
 ``(4) property acquisition.''.
 (i) Conforming Amendment for the Navajo Tribe.--Section 114(a) of 
the Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 
1978 (25 U.S.C. 1814(a)) is amended striking ``The Navajo'' and 
inserting ``Except as provided in sections 112 and 113, the Navajo''.
 (j) Rules and Regulations.--Section 115 of the Tribally Controlled 
Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1815) is 
repealed.
 (k) Endowment Grants.--Section 302 of the Tribally Controlled 
Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1832) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) The period of a grant under this section shall be not more 
than 20 years. During the grant period, an institution may withdraw and 
expend interest income generated by the endowment for any operating or 
academic purpose. An institution may not withdraw or expend any of the 
endowment fund corpus. After the termination of the grant period, an 
institution may use the endowment fund corpus for any operating or 
academic purpose.
 ``(d)(1) If at any time during the grant period an institution 
withdraws part of the endowment fund corpus, the institution shall 
repay to the Secretary an amount equal to 150 percent of the withdrawn 
amount. The Secretary may use up to 75 percent of such repaid funds to 
make additional endowment grants to, or to increase existing endowment 
grants at, other eligible institutions.
 ``(2) Notwithstanding subsection (c) and paragraph(1), the 
Secretary may allow an institution to expend part of the endowment fund 
corpus if the institution demonstrates such an expenditure is necessary 
because of--
 ``(A) a financial emergency, such as a pending insolvency 
 or temporary liquidity problem;
 ``(B) a life-threatening situation occasioned by a natural 
 disaster or arson; or
 ``(C) any other unusual occurrence or exigent 
 circumstance.''.
 (l) Participation of Tribally Controlled Postsecondary Career and 
Technical Institutions Under Other Titles.--Section 503(a) of the 
Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Assistance Act of 1978 
(25 U.S.C. 1863(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Participation of Tribally Controlled Postsecondary Career and 
Technical Institutions Under Other Titles.--For purposes of the 
preceding titles of this Act, a tribally controlled postsecondary 
career and technical institution shall not be considered to be a 
tribally controlled college or university except as follows:
 ``(1) For purposes of section 105(a)(1), the Secretary 
 shall provide, upon request from a tribally controlled 
 postsecondary career and technical institution, technical 
 assistance either directly or through contract.
 ``(2) For purposes of section 113, title III, and title IV, 
 a tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical 
 institution shall be considered to be a tribally controlled 
 college or university.''.
 (m) Clerical Amendments.--The Tribally Controlled Colleges and 
Universities Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), as 
amended by the preceding provisions of this section, is further 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``Bureau of Indian Affairs'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``Bureau of Indian Education'';
 (2) by striking ``Navajo Community College Act'' each place 
 it appears and inserting ``Dine College Act''; and
 (3) in section 109 (25 U.S.C. 1809), by redesignating the 
 second subsection (c) as subsection (d).

 PART C--STRENGTHENING PROGRAM ALIGNMENT FOR POSTSECONDARY PERKINS 
 CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS

SEC. 10201. STRENGTHENING PROGRAM ALIGNMENT FOR POSTSECONDARY PERKINS 
 CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to 
 carry out this section $181,000,000 for fiscal year 2021 and 
 each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
 (2) Outlying areas.--In addition to the amounts authorized 
 to be appropriated under paragraph (1), there are authorized to 
 be appropriated $1,520,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of the 
 5 succeeding fiscal years, for the purpose of awarding funds to 
 carry out this section to the outlying areas described in 
 section 115(a) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2325(a)).
 (3) Tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical 
 institutions.--In addition to the amounts authorized to be 
 appropriated under paragraphs (1) and (2), there are authorized 
 to be appropriated $10,469,000 for fiscal year 2021 and each of 
 the 5 succeeding fiscal years, for the purpose of awarding 
 funds to carry out this section to tribally controlled 
 postsecondary career and technical institutions described in 
 section 117(a) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2327(a)).
 (b) Allotment and Allocation.--
 (1) State allotment.--
 (A) In general.--From the amount appropriated under 
 subsection (a)(1) for each fiscal year, the Secretary 
 of Education shall allot funds to States in the same 
 manner as allotments are made to States under 111(a)(2) 
 of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education 
 Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2321(a)(2)), except that such 
 section 111(a)(2) shall be applied by substituting 
 ``From the amount appropriated under subsection 
 (a)(1),'' for ``From the remainder of the amount 
 appropriated under section 9 and not reserved under 
 paragraph (1) for a fiscal year,''.
 (B) Reallotment.--If for any fiscal year the amount 
 appropriated for allotments under this paragraph is 
 insufficient to satisfy the provisions of subparagraph 
 (A), the payments to all States under such subparagraph 
 shall be ratably reduced.
 (2) Requirements for state allotment.--From the amount 
 allotted to each State under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, 
 the eligible agency shall use such funds in the same manner and 
 in the same amounts as described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of 
 section 112(a) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2321(a)).
 (3) Eligible recipient allocation.--
 (A) In general.--From the amount allotted to each 
 State under paragraph (1) and not used under paragraph 
 (2) for a fiscal year, the eligible agency shall 
 allocate funds to each eligible recipient within the 
 State in the same manner that funds are allocated to 
 eligible institutions or consortium of eligible 
 institutions under section 132(a)(2) of the Carl D. 
 Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 
 U.S.C. 2352(a)(2)), except that such section 132(a)(2) 
 shall be applied by substituting ``the amount allotted 
 to the State under paragraph (1) and not used under 
 paragraph (2)'' for ``the portion of funds made 
 available under section 112(a)(1) to carry out this 
 section''.
 (B) Requirements for allocation.--To receive an 
 allocation under subparagraph (A), an eligible 
 recipient shall meet the following requirements:
 (i) Provide a description to the Secretary, 
 at such time and in such manner, as may be 
 required by the Secretary of how the eligible 
 recipient will use the allocation to support 
 and coordinate with--
 (I) any funds received by such 
 eligible recipient under title I of the 
 Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical 
 Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2321 
 et seq.); and
 (II) the activities described in 
 the State plan of the eligible agency 
 that distributes funds under such title 
 to such eligible recipient, and local 
 application of such eligible recipient 
 under such title.
 (ii) Establish partnerships with each of 
 the following:
 (I) A local educational agency or a 
 consortia of local educational 
 agencies.
 (II) An area career and technical 
 education school, in a case in which 
 such a school is located in the State 
 or local area of the eligible 
 recipient.
 (III) A State or local workforce 
 development system.
 (IV) A 4-year institution of higher 
 education.
 (4) Allotments to outlying areas.--From funds appropriated 
 under subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall--
 (A) make a grant in the amount of $660,000 to Guam;
 (B) make a grant in the amount of $350,000 to each 
 of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and 
 American Samoa; and
 (C) make a grant in the amount of $160,000 to the 
 Republic of Palau.
 (c) Uses of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--Each eligible recipient that receives an 
 allocation under subsection (b)(2) shall use such allocation to 
 carry out a career and technical education program of study 
 that shall--
 (A) include alignment to career pathways, the use 
 of articulation agreements, and career guidance and 
 academic counseling;
 (B) combine a minimum of 2 years of secondary 
 education (as determined under State law) with a 
 minimum of 2 years of postsecondary education in a 
 nonduplicative, sequential course of study;
 (C) include work-based learning or apprenticeship 
 programs;
 (D) be aligned with--
 (i) the workforce development system; and
 (ii) institutions of higher education 
 offering baccalaureate or advanced degree 
 programs;
 (E) offer education and training in high-skill, 
 high-wage, or in-demand industry sectors and 
 occupations to meet the regional needs and support the 
 priorities described in the most recent comprehensive 
 local needs assessment conducted by the eligible 
 recipient under section 134(c) of the Carl D. Perkins 
 Career and Technical Education Act (20 U.S.C. 2354(c)); 
 and
 (F) carry out the requirements of subparagraph (A), 
 (B), (C), (D), or (E) of paragraph (2).
 (2) Requirements.--Each career and technical education 
 program of study described in paragraph (1) shall carry out at 
 least one of the following:
 (A) Supporting the development, delivery, or 
 implementation of a statewide effort to scale such 
 program of study and career pathways.
 (B) Establishing industry or sector partnerships 
 inside or outside the State.
 (C) Providing equal access to, and supports for, 
 successful completion of the career and technical 
 education program of study to individuals who are 
 members of special populations, including the 
 development of services appropriate to the needs of 
 special populations.
 (D) Improving career guidance, academic counseling, 
 and career exploration activities for prospective or 
 participating students through the development and 
 implementation of graduation and career plans aligned 
 to career pathways.
 (E) Developing curriculum and supports for 
 effective transitions between the following:
 (i) The transition from a secondary career 
 and technical education program to a 
 postsecondary career and technical education 
 program.
 (ii) The transition from postsecondary 
 career and technical education programs to an 
 institution of higher education offering a 
 baccalaureate or an advanced degree program.
 (iii) The transition from a workforce 
 development system to a postsecondary career 
 and technical education program.
 (iv) The transition from a postsecondary 
 career and technical education program to 
 employment.
 (v) The transition from a career and 
 technical education program to an 
 apprenticeship program or from an 
 apprenticeship program to an institution of 
 higher education or employment.
 (3) Restriction on uses of funds.--Each eligible recipient 
 that receives an allocation under subsection (b)(2) shall not 
 use more than 5 percent of such allocation for costs associated 
 with the administration of activities.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Apprenticeship program.--The term ``apprenticeship 
 program'' means an apprenticeship registered under the Act of 
 August 16, 1937 (commonly known as the ``National 
 Apprenticeship Act''; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 
 et seq.).
 (2) Eligible recipient.--The term ``eligible recipient'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 3(21)(B) of the Carl 
 D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 2302(21)(B)).
 (3) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (4) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational 
 agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 8101 of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801).
 (5) Perkins cte terms.--The terms ``articulation 
 agreement'', ``area career and technical education school'', 
 ``career and technical education'', ``eligible agency'', 
 ``program of study'', ``special population'', and ``work-based 
 learning'' have the meanings given the terms in section 3 of 
 the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 
 (20 U.S.C. 2302).
 (6) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 111(d) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and 
 Technical Education Act of 2006.
 (7) WIOA terms.--The terms ``career pathway'', ``workforce 
 development system'', ``in-demand industry sector or 
 occupation'', and ``industry or sector partnership'' have the 
 meanings given the terms in section 3 of the Workforce 
 Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3201).

 PART D--GENERAL EDUCATION PROVISIONS ACT

SEC. 10301. RELEASE OF EDUCATION RECORDS TO FACILITATE THE AWARD OF A 
 RECOGNIZED POSTSECONDARY CREDENTIAL.

 Section 444(b) of the General Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 
1232g(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (K)(ii), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a semicolon; and
 (B) in subparagraph (L), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (L) the following:
 ``(M) an institution of postsecondary education in which 
 the student was previously enrolled, to which records of 
 postsecondary coursework and credits are sent for the purpose 
 of applying such coursework and credits toward completion of a 
 recognized postsecondary credential (as that term is defined in 
 section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 
 U.S.C. 3102)), upon condition that the student provides written 
 consent prior to receiving such credential.''.

 PART E--EDUCATION SCIENCES REFORM ACT OF 2002

SEC. 10401. INCLUSION OF RACIAL SUBGROUPS IN IPEDS DATA.

 Section 153(a)(3) of the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002 (20 
U.S.C. 9543(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``feasible, information'' and inserting the 
 following: ``feasible--
 ``(A) information'';
 (2) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) information from the Integrated Postsecondary 
 Education Data Survey, the postsecondary student data 
 system established under section 132(l), or a successor 
 system (whichever includes the most recent data), that 
 is disaggregated by race in a manner that captures all 
 the racial groups specified in the American Community 
 Survey of the Bureau of the Census;''.

 PART F--U.S. INSTITUTE OF PEACE

SEC. 10501. REAUTHORIZATION OF THE U.S. INSTITUTE OF PEACE.

 Section 1710 of the United States Institute of Peace Act (22 U.S.C. 
4609) is amended in subsection (a)(1) by striking ``fiscal years 2009 
through 2014'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2021 and each of the 5 
succeeding fiscal years''.
 Union Calendar No. 583

116th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 H. R. 4674

 [Report No. 116-700]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend and strengthen the Higher Education Act of 1965 to lower the 
cost of college for students and families, to hold colleges accountable 
 for students' success, and to give a new generation of students the 
 opportunity to graduate on-time and transition to a successful career.

_______________________________________________________________________

 December 28, 2020

 Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
 House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed