S 2311 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2311
To discourage American employers from eliminating American jobs by relocating
United States-based operations to a foreign country, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 4 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. WOFFORD, and Mr. RIEGLE) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor
and Human Relations
A BILL
To discourage American employers from eliminating American jobs by relocating
United States-based operations to a foreign country, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Save American Jobs Act'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) APPLICATION OF WARN ACT DEFINITIONS- The terms used in this Act shall
 have the meanings prescribed for such terms by section 2 of the Worker
 Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 2101), except that--
 (1) the term `employer' means any business enterprise that employs--
 (A) 25 or more employees, excluding part-time employees, or
 (B) 25 or more employees who in the aggregate work at least 1,000 hours
 per week (exclusive of hours of overtime),
 (2) the term `plant closing' is the same as the definition in such section
 2, except that it shall be considered to have occurred if the shutdown
 results in an employment loss for 12 or more employees, and
 (3) the term `mass layoff' means a reduction in force which--
 (A) is not the result of a plant closing, and
 (B) results in an employment loss at the single site of employment during
 any 30-day period for--
 (i)(I) at least 25 percent of the employees (excluding any part-time
 employees), and
 (II) at least 12 employees (excluding any part-time employees), or
 (ii) at least 50 employees (excluding any part-time employees).
 (b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS- As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `Federal agency' means an executive agency (as defined in
 section 105 of title 5, United States Code) and a military department
 (as defined in section 102 of title 5, United States Code); and
 (2) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
SEC. 3. EMPLOYERS COVERED.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An employer shall be deemed a covered employer for purposes
 of sections 4 and 5 if--
 (1) the employer orders a plant closing or mass layoff at a work site; and
 (2) within a year before or after the plant closing or mass layoff is
 carried out at the work site the employer transfers work from such site
 to a foreign country in which the average wage is less than 50 percent of
 the average wage in the United States, as determined under section 7(d).
 (b) WORK TRANSFER DEFINED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), work shall be considered
 to be transferred to a foreign country for purposes of subsection (a)
 if the employer involved--
 (A) increases the amount of work performed in another country and such
 work is substantially similar to the work performed at the work site at
 which the plant closing or mass layoff occurs; or
 (B) increases the amount of products which are imported from another country
 and such products are substantially similar to the products produced at
 such work site.
 (2) EXCEPTION- If an employer who orders a plant closing or mass layoff
 at a work site described in subsection (a) proves that the increase in--
 (A) work described in paragraph (1)(A) which is performed in another
 country; or
 (B) products described in paragraph (1)(B) which are imported from another
 country,
is not related to the plant closing or mass layoff at such work site, the
employer shall not be deemed a covered employer for purposes of sections 4
and 5.
 (3) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of paragraph (1), if an increase described
 in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) is carried out by any person
 which owns at least 10 percent of an employer described in subsection (a)
 or by any person at least 10 percent of which is owned by such employer,
 such employer shall be considered to have carried out such increase.
SEC. 4. NOTICE OF RELOCATION.
 (a) NOTICE- A covered employer shall not commence a plant closing or mass
 layoff as described in section 3 until the end of a 120-day period after
 such employer serves written notice--
 (1) of the kind required by section 3 of the Worker Adjustment and Retraining
 Notification Act (29 U.S.C. 2102 et seq.); and
 (2) on the Secretary.
 (b) PENALTY- An employer that violates subsection (a) shall be subject
 to a civil penalty not to exceed an amount of $10,000 for each day of
 such violation, except that the Secretary may reduce such amount for just
 cause shown.
 (c) DOL LIST- The Secretary shall compile and maintain a list of all covered
 employers, and shall distribute an updated list to all Federal agencies at
 least once every six months. A covered employer shall be included on such
 list for a period of 5 years from the date the Secretary receives notice
 pursuant to subsection (a).
SEC. 5. BENEFITS.
 A covered employer shall not commence a plant closing or mass layoff as
 described in section 3 unless such employer provides to each affected
 employee--
 (1) severance pay equal to one week of the average wage at which such
 employee was employed during the preceding year, multiplied by the number
 of years the employee was employed by such employer;
 (2) for the continuation of health care benefits previously provided for
 12 months after the plant closing or mass layoff; and
 (3) reimbursement (not to exceed $10,000) for retraining as authorized
 by section 204 of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 1604) and
 for relocation.
SEC. 6. RESTRICTED ACCESS TO FEDERAL FUNDS.
 (a) FEDERAL CONTRACTS- A Federal agency, when awarding a civilian or
 defense-related contract, shall give preference to a United States employer
 that does not appear on the list described in section 4(c) over an employer
 that does appear on such list.
 (b) FEDERAL GRANTS AND LOANS-
 (1) ELIGIBILITY- Except as provided in paragraph (2), an employer that
 appears on the list described in section 4(c) shall be ineligible for any
 direct or indirect Federal grant or Federal guaranteed loan.
 (2) WAIVERS- The Secretary, in consultation with the appropriate Federal
 agency providing a loan or grant, may waive the ineligibility requirements
 under paragraph (1) if the employer applying for such loan or grant
 demonstrates that a lack of such loan or grant would--
 (A) threaten national security;
 (B) result in a substantial job loss in the United States; or
 (C) substantially harm the environment.
 (c) FEDERAL BENEFITS FOR WORKERS- No provision of this section shall
 be construed to permit withholding or denial of payments, compensation,
 or benefits under any other Federal law (including Federal unemployment
 compensation, disability payments, or worker retraining or readjustment
 funds) to employees of a covered employer.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT- The Secretary or any individual may bring an action
 to restrain a violation of this section. In any action brought under
 this subsection, the district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction, for cause shown, to issue declaratory and injunctive relief,
 as well as attorneys' fees, experts' fees, and costs, and such other legal
 and equitable relief as may be appropriate.
SEC. 7. INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To ensure compliance with this Act, or any regulation
 issued under this Act, the Secretary shall have, subject to subsection
 (c), the investigative authority provided under section 11(a) of the Fair
 Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(a)).
 (b) OBLIGATION TO KEEP AND PRESERVE RECORDS- Any employer shall keep
 and preserve records in accordance with section 11(c) of the Fair Labor
 Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 211(c)) and in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Secretary.
 (c) SUBPOENA POWERS- For the purposes of any investigation provided for
 in this section, the Secretary shall have the subpoena authority provided
 for under section 9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 209).
 (d) LIST OF AFFECTED COUNTRIES- The Secretary shall publish annually in
 the Federal Register the names of countries described in section 3(a)
 as determined under regulations promulgated by the Secretary. Prior to
 the publication of the first such list, the applicability of section 3(a)
 to foreign countries shall be determined according to the average hourly
 compensation costs for production workers, as reported by the Bureau of
 Labor Statistics.
SEC. 8. ENFORCEMENT OF NOTICE AND BENEFITS REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) CIVIL ACTION BY EMPLOYEES-
 (1) LIABILITY- Any employer who violates section 4 or 5 shall be liable
 to any affected employee--
 (A) for damages equal to--
 (i) the amount of any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other
 compensation denied or lost to such employee by reason of the violation,
 (ii) the interest on the amount described in clause (i) calculated at the
 prevailing rate, and
 (iii) an additional amount as liquidated damages equal to the sum of the
 amount described in clause (i) and the interest described in clause (ii),
 except that if an employer who has violated section 4 or 5 proves to the
 satisfaction of the court that the act or omission which violated such
 section was in good faith and that the employer had reasonable grounds for
 believing that the act or omission was not a violation of such section,
 such court may, in the discretion of the court, reduce the amount of the
 liability to the amount and interest determined under clauses (i) and
 (ii), respectively,
 (B) for damages equal to any actual monetary loss sustained by the employee
 as a direct result of the violation, such as the cost of providing health
 care, and
 (C) for such equitable relief as may be appropriate, including, without
 limitation, employment, reinstatement, and promotion.
 (2) STANDING- An action to recover the damages or equitable relief prescribed
 in paragraph (1) may be maintained against any employer (including a public
 agency) in any Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction by any
 one or more affected employees for and in behalf of--
 (A) the affected employees, or
 (B) the affected employees and other employees similarly situated.
 (3) FEES AND COSTS- The court in such an action shall, in addition to
 any judgment awarded to the plaintiff, allow a reasonable attorney's fee,
 reasonable expert witness fees, and other costs of the action to be paid
 by the defendant.
 (b) ACTION BY THE SECRETARY-
 (1) ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION- The Secretary shall receive, investigate, and
 attempt to resolve complaints of violations of sections 4 or 5 in the same
 manner that the Secretary receives, investigates, and attempts to resolve
 complaints of violations of sections 6 and 7 of the Fair Labor Standards
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206 and 207).
 (2) CIVIL ACTION- The Secretary may bring an action in any court of
 competent jurisdiction to recover on behalf of an eligible employee the
 damages described in subsection (a)(1)(A).
 (3) SUMS RECOVERED- Any sums recovered by the Secretary on behalf of an
 employee pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be held in a special deposit account
 and shall be paid, on order of the Secretary, directly to each employee
 affected. Any such sums not paid to an employee because of inability to
 do so within a period of 3 years shall be deposited into the Treasury of
 the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
 (c) LIMITATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- An action may be brought under subsection (a) or (b)
 not later than 3 years after the date of the last event constituting the
 alleged violation for which the action is brought.
 (2) COMMENCEMENT- In determining when an action is commenced by the
 Secretary under subsection (b) for the purposes of this subsection, it
 shall be considered to be commenced on the date when the complaint is filed.
 (3) EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION- If a complaint is filed with
 the Secretary under subsection (b)(1), an action under subsection (a)(2)
 may not be commenced until the expiration of 90 days following the filing
 of such complaint.
 (4) INTERVENTION- The Secretary or an affected employee shall have the
 right to intervene in any action brought under subsection (a) or (b).
 (d) ACTION FOR INJUNCTION BY SECRETARY- The district courts of the United
 States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, over an action brought
 by the Secretary to restrain violations of sections 4 or 5, including
 actions to restrain the withholding of payment of wages, salary, employment
 benefits, or other compensation, plus interest, found by the court to be
 due to eligible employees.
SEC. 9. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall become effective 60 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act.