S 414 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 414
To provide access to check cashing services.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 7 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To provide access to check cashing services.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Government Check Cashing Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. GOVERNMENT CHECK CASHING SERVICES.
 (a) REQUIREMENT TO OFFER SERVICES- Each depository institution shall offer a
 government check cashing service that meets the requirements of this section.
 (b) TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE- A government check cashing service
 offered by a depository institution meets the requirements of this section
 if it is a service--
 (1) which is available to individuals (or to members, in the case of a
 credit union) for the purpose of cashing government checks in amounts of
 $1,500 or less if the individual presenting the check is the individual
 to whom the check has been issued;
 (2) which does not require other account relationships with such depository
 institution;
 (3) which does not require the individual to meet any prerequisite which
 discriminates against low-income individuals in order to use such service;
 (4) for which fees, if any, for cashing government checks do not exceed
 an amount needed to recover all related costs, including fraud losses,
 as determined by the Board based on actual cost studies;
 (5) which allows the customer to designate not less than 3 offices of such
 depository institution at which such customer may cash government checks
 upon presentation of--
 (A) a copy of the registration provided in accordance with subsection (d)
 of this section; and
 (B) an identification card in the form described in subsection (d)(2)(D)
 of this section.
 (c) EXCEPTION- A depository institution is not required to provide a
 government check cashing service under this Act to any individual who has--
 (1) a transaction account at any other depository institution, or
 (2) a government check cashing relationship at any other depository
 institution.
 (d) REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall
 prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to establish the customer
 registration program required to use a government check cashing service.
 (2) MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS- Regulations prescribed by the Board under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection shall contain, at a minimum, the following
 requirements:
 (A) Each depository institution shall provide for registration in all
 of its deposit taking offices staffed by individuals employed by such
 depository institution.
 (B) Registration shall be by means of an application containing the
 application date, and the name, address, date of birth, and handwritten
 signature of the applicant as well as other information the Board determines
 to be reasonably necessary to facilitate registration of customers for
 the purpose of this section.
 (C) At the time of account registration, an applicant may be required by
 the depository institution to sign a document in which he states whether
 he has or has applied for any transaction account or other government
 check cashing service.
 (D) At the time of service registration, an applicant may be required
 to present an identification card in such form as the Board may require,
 which includes the signature and a photograph of such customer.
 (E) The applicant shall be provided a copy of the completed service
 registration evidencing the fact that the registration has been received
 and filed with the depository institution within 15 days of such filing.
 (3) REJECTION FOR INTENTIONAL MATERIAL MISREPRESENTATION- If the depository
 institution determines that an intentional material misrepresentation has
 been made in the information required to enable use of a government check
 cashing service, the depository institution may reject such registration.
 (e) INFORMATION ON SERVICE- Upon request by any individual, a depository
 institution shall provide such individual with a written summary describing
 the service offered by such depository institution which meets the
 requirements of this section.
 (f) GOVERNMENT CHECK DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `government check' means any check which was issued by--
 (1) the United States, any State, or any agency of the United States; or
 (2) any agency of the State in which the check is presented for cashing
 purposes (in connection with a government check cashing service), any
 local unit of local government of such State, or any agency of any such
 unit of local government.
 (g) SPECIAL RULE FOR CREDIT UNIONS- Any credit union which, in the ordinary
 course of business, cashes checks for members shall cash any government check
 in an amount of $1,500 or less for any member without charge if the member
 presenting the check is the individual to whom the check has been issued.
 (h) SPECIAL RULE FOR CERTAIN DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- A depository
 institution which does not cash checks for customers shall not be required
 to provide government check cashing services pursuant to this Act.
 (i) PREVENTION OF FRAUD LOSSES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board may, by regulation or order, suspend any
 requirement of this section for any classification of checks if the Board
 determines that--
 (A) depository institutions are experiencing an unacceptable level of
 losses due to check-related fraud with respect to such class of checks; or
 (B) there is reasonable cause to believe that such class of checks is
 being used in a scheme to defraud.
 (2) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Within 10 days of issuing any order or prescribing
 any regulation under paragraph (1), the Board shall submit a report
 to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
 of the Senate containing the reason for the order or regulation and the
 evidence considered in making the determination to issue an order or
 prescribe a regulation.
 (j) CONSUMER RIGHTS- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
 Board may promulgate regulations to ensure that any individual shall have
 the right to require that any recurring government check issued to that
 individual be directly deposited in an account held by that individual in
 a depository institution, taking into account the safety and soundness of
 the institutions involved and the efficient operation of the payments system.
SEC. 3. POSTING OF NOTICES.
 (a) NOTICE REQUIRED- Each depository institution shall post a conspicuous
 notice in the appropriate area of each location where deposits are accepted
 that informs account holders and potential account holders that government
 check cashing services are available pursuant to this Act.
 (b) CONTENTS OF NOTICE- Any notice required under subsection (a) shall
 clearly explain the material features and limitations of government check
 cashing services, so that customers can reasonably be expected to understand
 the terms of the service offered.
SEC. 4. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT- Compliance with the requirements imposed
 under this Act and regulations prescribed by the Board under section 6
 shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act--
 (A) by the Comptroller of the Currency with respect to national banks;
 (B) by the Board with respect to member banks of the Federal Reserve System
 (other than a national bank); and
 (C) by the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 with respect to banks the deposits of which are insured by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than members of the Federal Reserve
 System);
 (2) section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, section 407 of
 the National Housing Act, and sections 6(i) and 17 of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act, by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (acting directly or
 through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation) with respect
 to any depository institution which is subject to any provision of such
 sections; and
 (3) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National Credit Union Administration
 Board with respect to any insured credit union.
 (b) ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS-
 (1) VIOLATION OF THIS ACT TREATED AS VIOLATION OF OTHER ACTS- For purposes
 of the exercise by any Federal depository institutions regulatory agency
 of any such agency's powers under any Act referred to in subsection (a),
 a violation of--
 (A) a requirement imposed under this Act shall be deemed to be a violation
 of a requirement imposed under that Act; and
 (B) any regulation prescribed by the Board under section 6 shall be deemed
 to be a violation of a regulation prescribed by such agency under such Act.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY UNDER OTHER ACTS- In addition to any Federal
 depository institutions regulatory agency's powers under any provision
 of law referred to in subsection (a), each such agency may exercise, for
 purposes of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under this
 Act, any other authority conferred on such agency by any other law.
SEC. 5. CIVIL LIABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any depository institution that fails to comply with any
 requirement imposed under this Act or any regulation adopted pursuant to
 this Act with respect to any person shall be liable to such person in an
 amount equal to the sum of--
 (1) any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of the failure;
 and
 (2)(A) in the case of an individual action, such additional amount as the
 court may allow, except that liability under this subparagraph shall not
 be less than $100 nor greater than $1,000; or
 (B) in the case of a class action, such additional amount as the court
 may allow, except that--
 (i) as to each member of the class, no minimum recovery shall be applicable;
 and
 (ii) the total recovery under this subparagraph in any class action or
 series of class actions arising out of the same failure to comply by the
 same depository institution shall not be more than the lesser of $500,000
 or 1 percent of the net worth of the depository institution.
 (b) AMOUNT OF DAMAGES- In determining the amount of award in any class
 action, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors--
 (1) the amount of any actual damages awarded;
 (2) the frequency and persistence of failures of compliance;
 (3) the resources of the depository institution;
 (4) the number of persons adversely affected; and
 (5) the extent to which the failure to comply was intentional.
 (c) OTHER RELIEF- Upon application by an aggrieved party, the appropriate
 United States district court or any other court of competent jurisdiction
 may grant such equitable and declaratory relief as is necessary to enforce
 the requirements imposed under this Act.
 (d) COSTS AND FEES- In the case of any successful action under subsection
 (a) or (c), the costs of the action, together with a reasonable attorney's
 fee as determined by the court, shall be added to any damages awarded by
 the court under such section.
 (e) GOOD FAITH RELIANCE- No provision of this Act imposing liability shall
 apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any
 official rule, regulation, or interpretation thereof by the Board or in
 conformity with any interpretation or approval by an official or employee
 of the Federal Reserve System duly authorized by the Board to issue such
 interpretations or approvals under such procedures as the Board may prescribe
 therefor, notwithstanding that after such act or omission has occurred,
 such rule, regulation, interpretation, or approval is amended, rescinded,
 or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
 (f) JURISDICTION- Any action under this section may be brought in the
 appropriate United States district court without regard to the amount in
 controversy, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. No such action
 shall be brought later than one year after the date of the occurrence of
 the violation.
SEC. 6. REGULATIONS.
 The Board shall prescribe such regulations as it may determine to be
 appropriate to carry out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 7. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) FEDERAL DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS REGULATORY AGENCY- The term `Federal
 depository institutions regulatory agency' means--
 (A) the Comptroller of the Currency with respect to national banks;
 (B) the Board with respect to member banks of the Federal Reserve System
 (other than national banks);
 (C) the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with
 respect to federally insured depository institutions described in clause
 (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act
 (other than national banks and member banks of the Federal Reserve System);
 (D) the Federal Home Loan Bank Board with respect to federally insured
 depository institutions described in clause (v) or (vi) of section
 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act; and
 (E) the National Credit Union Administration Board with respect to
 federally insured depository institutions described in clause (iv) of
 section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (2) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System.
 (3) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- The term `depository institution' means any
 federally insured depository institution described in clauses (i) through
 (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (4) STATE- The term `State' has the meaning given to such term in section
 3(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 (5) GOVERNMENT CHECK CASHING RELATIONSHIP- The term `government check
 cashing relationship' means a relationship between an individual and a
 depository institution under which a government check cashing service is
 provided pursuant to section 2(b) of this Act.
 (6) TRANSACTION ACCOUNT- The term `transaction account' has the meaning
 given such term by section 19(b)(1)(C) of the Federal Reserve Act.
SEC. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall take effect on the expiration of the date which is 180 days
 after the date of enactment of this Act.