HR 1489 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1489
To increase the safety to humans and the environment from the transportation
by pipeline of natural gas and hazardous liquids, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 19, 1991
Mr. SHARP (for himself, Mr. MOORHEAD, Mr. TAUZIN, Mr. LEVINE of California,
and Mr. BEILENSON) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly
to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To increase the safety to humans and the environment from the transportation
by pipeline of natural gas and hazardous liquids, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Pipeline Safety Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 3(a) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1672(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting `and the protection of the environment'
 after `need for pipeline safety';
 (2) in paragraph (1)(D), by inserting `and the protection of the environment'
 after `contribute to public safety'; and
 (3) in paragraph (3)(A), by inserting `, or that could have a significant
 adverse impact on the natural environment' after `life or property'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 203 of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety
 Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2002) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting `and the protection of the
 environment' after `safe transportation of hazardous liquids';
 (2) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by inserting `, or that could have a significant
 adverse impact on the natural environment' after `life or property'; and
 (3) in subsection (b)(4), by inserting `and the protection of the
 environment' after `contribute to public safety'.
SEC. 3. ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AND HIGH-DENSITY POPULATION AREAS.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 3 of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1672) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (f), by inserting `Such inventory shall also include an
 identification of each of the pipeline facilities of such operator which
 pass through an area described in regulations issued under subsection
 (i)(1).' after `leak history of such pipe.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) HIGH-DENSITY POPULATION AREAS- (1) Not later than 24 months after the
 date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall issue regulations
 establishing criteria for the identification, by operators of pipeline
 facilities, of all pipeline facilities that are located in high-density
 population areas. Such regulations shall provide for such identification
 to be carried out through the inventory required under subsection (f).
 `(2) Natural gas distribution lines shall not be included among pipeline
 facilities required to be identified pursuant to paragraph (1).'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 203 of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety
 Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2002) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (j)--
 (A) by inserting `and operators of gathering lines,' after `subject to
 this title,'; and
 (B) by inserting `Such inventory shall also include an identification of
 each of the pipeline facilities and gathering lines of such operator which
 pass through an area described in regulations issued under subsection (m),
 whether or not such pipeline facility or gathering line is otherwise subject
 to regulation under this Act.' after `leak history of such pipe.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(m) ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AND HIGH-DENSITY POPULATION AREAS- Not later
 than 24 months after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary
 shall issue regulations establishing criteria for the identification,
 by operators of pipeline facilities and operators of gathering lines, of--
 `(1) all pipeline facilities and gathering lines, whether otherwise subject
 to regulation under this Act or not, that are located in areas that are
 described, by the Secretary in consultation with the Administrator of the
 Environmental Protection Agency, as unusually sensitive to environmental
 damage in the event of a pipeline accident; and
 `(2) all pipeline facilities, whether otherwise subject to regulation
 under this Act or not, that--
 `(A) cross a river, as such term is defined by the Secretary by regulation;
 or
 `(B) are located in areas that are described in such criteria as high-density
 population areas.
Such regulations shall provide for such identification to be carried out
through the inventory required under subsection (j).'.
SEC. 4. INCREASED INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 3(g) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1672(g)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 respectively;
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `INSPECTION DEVICES- '; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) The Secretary shall issue regulations requiring the periodic inspection
 of each pipeline identified pursuant to subsection (i) with an instrumented
 internal inspection device. Any such pipeline that, as of the effective
 date of such regulations, cannot practicably accommodate an instrumented
 internal inspection device shall, within 5 years after such effective date,
 be modified to accommodate such devices. In the preparation of regulations
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall determine whether, and under
 what conditions, exceptions to the requirements of this paragraph should
 be permitted based on considerations of technological availability, cost,
 physical constraints, the availability of alternative information sources
 that would result in an equal or greater degree of safety, and any other
 considerations the Secretary considers relevant. The regulations may
 provide for such exceptions.'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 203(k) of the Hazardous Liquids Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2002(k)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 respectively;
 (2) by inserting `(1)' after `INSPECTION DEVICES- '; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) The Secretary shall issue regulations requiring the periodic inspection
 of each pipeline identified pursuant to subsection (m) with an instrumented
 internal inspection device. Any such pipeline that, as of the effective
 date of such regulations, cannot practicably accommodate an instrumented
 internal inspection device shall, within 5 years after such effective date,
 be modified to accommodate such devices. In the preparation of regulations
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall consider whether, and under what
 conditions, exceptions to the requirements of this paragraph should be
 permitted based on considerations of technological availability, cost,
 physical constraints, and the availability of alternative information
 sources that would result in an equal or greater degree of safety. The
 regulations may provide for such exceptions.'.
 (c) DEVELOPMENT OF SMART PIG- (1) The Secretary of Transportation shall
 undertake to develop an instrumented internal inspection device (smart pig)
 capable of detecting potential seam failures, including those in electric
 resistance weld pipe.
 (2) The Secretary of Transportation shall, within 2 years after the date of
 enactment of this Act, submit a report to the Congress on the status of the
 development of an instrumented internal inspection device under paragraph
 (1).
SEC. 5. EXCESS FLOW VALVES.
 Section 3 of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1672) as amended by this Act is further amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) EXCESS FLOW VALVES- (1) Not later than 18 months after the date
 of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall issue regulations
 prescribing the circumstances under which operators of natural gas
 distribution systems must install excess flow valves in such systems. In
 prescribing such circumstances, the Secretary shall consider--
 `(A) the system design pressure and the system operating pressure;
 `(B) the types of customers to which the distribution system supplies
 natural gas, including hospitals, schools, and commercial enterprises;
 `(C) the location of customer meters; and
 `(D) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be relevant.
The Secretary may provide for waivers from the requirements of this subsection.
 `(2) Regulations issued under paragraph (1) shall only apply to--
 `(A) natural gas distribution systems installed after the effective date
 of such regulations; and
 `(B) other natural gas distribution systems where repairs to such system
 require the replacement of parts in such a manner as to accommodate the
 installation of excess flow valves.'.
SEC. 6. TECHNICAL PIPELINE SAFETY STANDARDS COMMITTEES.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 4 of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1673) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by inserting `, including two members who have
 education, background, or experience in environmental protection or public
 safety' after `from the general public'; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting `The Committee, if requested by the
 Secretary, shall make recommendations to the Secretary concerning policy
 development.' after `Secretary for his consideration.'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 204 of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety
 Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2003) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by inserting `, including two members who have
 education, background, or experience in environmental protection' after
 `from the general public'; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting `The Committee, if requested by the
 Secretary, shall make recommendations to the Secretary concerning policy
 development.' after `Secretary for his consideration.'.
SEC. 7. OPERATOR TRAINING.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- The third sentence of section 3(a) of the Natural Gas
 Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49 U.S.C. App. 1672(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `may' and inserting in lieu thereof `shall'; and
 (2) by inserting `, including the ability to recognize and appropriately
 react to abnormal operating conditions which may indicate a dangerous
 situation or a condition exceeding design limits' after `perform such
 functions'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- The second sentence of section 203(c) of the Hazardous
 Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2002(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `may' and inserting in lieu thereof `shall';
 (2) by striking `and certified' and inserting in lieu thereof `, and
 certified by the operator'; and
 (3) by inserting `, including the ability to recognize and appropriately
 react to abnormal operating conditions which may indicate a dangerous
 situation or a condition exceeding design limits' after `perform such
 functions'.
SEC. 8. LOW INTERNAL STRESS HAZARDOUS LIQUID PIPELINE FACILITIES.
 Section 203(b) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 (49
 U.S.C. App. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `The Secretary shall not
 exempt from regulation under this Act any pipeline facility solely on the
 basis of the fact that such pipeline facility operates at low internal
 stress.' after paragraph (4).
SEC. 9. USER FEES.
 Section 7005(a)(1) of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
 of 1985 is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) SCHEDULE- The Secretary of Transportation (hereafter in this section
 referred to as the `Secretary') shall establish a schedule of fees based on--
 `(A) the usage, in reasonable relationship to volume-miles, miles, revenues,
 or an appropriate combination thereof, of natural gas and hazardous liquid
 pipelines; and
 `(B) in the case of pipeline facilities not in operation, the performance
 of activities by the Secretary under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act
 of 1968 or the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 in preparation
 for the operation of such pipeline facilities.
In establishing such schedule, the Secretary shall take into consideration
the allocation of departmental resources.'.
SEC. 10. PIPELINE FACILITY INSPECTION AMENDMENTS.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 3(h) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1672(h)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking `pipeline facility operators described in paragraph (1)(A)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `operators of pipeline facilities described
 in paragraph (3)' in subparagraph (A); and
 (B) by striking `paragraph (1)(A)' and inserting in lieu thereof `paragraph
 (3)' in subparagraph (B);
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking `periodic inspection program' and
 all that follows through `and its inlets' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `periodic inspection program of
 `(A) all offshore pipeline facilities; and
 `(B) any other pipeline facilities which cross under, over, or through
 navigable waters (as such term is defined by the Secretary), if the location
 of such pipeline facilities in such navigable waters could pose a hazard
 to navigation or public safety'; and
 (3) in paragraph (4), by striking `offshore pipeline facility' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `pipeline facility described in paragraph (3)(A) or (B)'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 203(l) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2002(l)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking `pipeline facility operators described in paragraph (1)(A)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `operators of pipeline facilities described
 in paragraph (3)' in subparagraph (A); and
 (B) by striking `paragraph (1)(A)' and inserting in lieu thereof `paragraph
 (3)' in subparagraph (B);
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking `periodic inspection program' and
 all that follows through `and its inlets' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `periodic inspection program of
 `(A) all offshore pipeline facilities; and
 `(B) any other pipeline facilities which cross under, over, or through
 navigable waters (as such term is defined by the Secretary), if the location
 of such pipeline facilities in such navigable waters could pose a hazard
 to navigation or public safety';
 (3) in paragraph (4), by striking `offshore pipeline facility' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `pipeline facility described in paragraph (3)(A) or (B)'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) TRANSFER PIPELINE FACILITIES- The Secretary shall not exempt from
 regulation under this Act any offshore pipeline facility solely on the
 basis of the fact that such pipeline facility serves to transfer hazardous
 liquids in underwater pipelines between vessels and onshore facilities.'.
SEC. 11. GATHERING LINES.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- (1) The Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 is amended--
 (A) in section 2(3)--
 (i) by inserting `, other than gathering through regulated gathering lines,'
 after `include the gathering of gas'; and
 (ii) by inserting `, but such term shall include the movement of gas
 through regulated gathering lines' after `a nonrural area'; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 21. GATHERING LINES.
 `(a) GATHERING LINES DEFINED- The Secretary shall, within 1 year after
 the date of enactment of this section, define by regulation the term
 `gathering lines'.
 `(b) REGULATED GATHERING LINES DEFINED- The Secretary shall, within one year
 after the date of enactment of this section, define by regulation the term
 `regulated gathering lines'. In defining such term, the Secretary shall
 consider such factors as location, length of line from the well site,
 operating pressure, throughput, and the toxicity of the transported gas
 in determining the types of lines which are functionally gathering but
 which, due to specific physical characteristics, warrant regulation under
 this Act.'.
 (2) The amendments made by paragraph (1)(A) shall take effect on the
 effective date of the regulations required under section 21 of the
 Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968, as added by paragraph (1)(B)
 of this subsection.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- (1) The Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of
 1979 is amended--
 (A) in section 202(3)--
 (i) by striking `any such';
 (ii) by inserting `, other than regulated gathering lines,' after `movement
 through gathering lines'; and
 (iii) by inserting `, but such term shall include the movement of hazardous
 liquids through regulated gathering lines' after `any of such facilities';
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 220. GATHERING LINES.
 `(a) GATHERING LINES DEFINED- The Secretary shall, within 2 years after
 the date of enactment of this section, define by regulation the term
 `gathering lines'.
 `(b) REGULATED GATHERING LINES DEFINED- The Secretary shall, within 2 years
 after the date of enactment of this section, define by regulation the term
 `regulated gathering lines'. In defining such term, the Secretary shall
 consider such factors as location, length of line from the well site,
 operating pressure, throughput, diameter, and the composition of the
 transported hazardous liquid in determining the types of lines which are
 functionally gathering but which, due to specific physical characteristics,
 warrant regulation under this Act.'.
 (2) The amendments made by paragraph (1)(A) shall take effect on the
 effective date of the regulations required under section 220 of the
 Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979, as added by paragraph (1)(B)
 of this subsection.
 (3) The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
`Sec. 220. Gathering lines.'.
SEC. 12. REVISED REPORTING REQUIREMENT.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- Section 5(a)(ii) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act
 of 1968 (49 U.S.C. App. 1674(a)(5)(ii)) is amended by striking `$5,000'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `an amount established by the Secretary'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 205(a) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2004(a)) is amended by striking `$5,000'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `an amount established by the Secretary'.
SEC. 13. UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.
 Section 9001(1)(D) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6991(1)(D))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(D) pipeline facility (including gathering lines)--
 `(i) regulated under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1671 et seq.),
 `(ii) regulated under the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979
 (49 U.S.C. App. 2001 et seq.), or
 `(iii) which is an intrastate pipeline facility regulated under State
 laws as provided in the provisions of law referred to in clause (i) or
 (ii) of this subparagraph,
which is determined by the Secretary to be connected to a pipeline, operated
or intended to be capable of operating at pipeline pressure, or operated or
intended to be capable of operating as an integral part of a pipeline,'.
SEC. 14. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 (a) NATURAL GAS- (1) Section 17(a) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act
 of 1968 (49 U.S.C. App. 1684(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraphs:
 `(10) $6,405,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1992;
 `(11) $6,857,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1993; and
 `(12) $7,405,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1994.'.
 (2) Section 17(c) of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1684(c)) is amended by striking `and $5,500,000 for the fiscal
 year ending September 30, 1991' and inserting in lieu thereof `$5,500,000 for
 the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991, $7,750,000 for the fiscal year
 ending September 30, 1992, $9,500,000 for the fiscal year ending September
 30, 1993, and $9,500,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1994'.
 (b) HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS- Section 214(b) of the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
 Safety Act of 1979 (49 U.S.C. App. 2013(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraphs:
 `(10) $1,600,500 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1992;
 `(11) $1,728,500 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1993; and
 `(12) $1,866,800 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1994.'.
 (c) DEVELOPMENT OF SMART PIG- There are authorized to be appropriated
 $1,000,000 for carrying out section 4(c) of this Act.
SEC. 15. NATURAL GAS PIPELINE SAFETY ACT OF 1968 TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 The first section of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1671 note) is amended to read as follows:
`SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS
 `SECTION 1. (a) This Act may be cited as the `Natural Gas Pipeline Safety
 Act of 1968'.
 `(b) The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
`TABLE OF CONTENTS
`Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
`Sec. 2. Definitions.
`Sec. 3. Standards established.
`Sec. 4. Technical Pipeline Safety Standards Committee.
`Sec. 5. State certifications and agreements.
`Sec. 6. Standards for LNG facilities.
`Sec. 7. Financial responsibility for certain LNG activities; studies.
`Sec. 8. Judicial review.
`Sec. 9. Cooperation with Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and State
commissions.
`Sec. 10. Compliance.
`Sec. 11. Penalties.
`Sec. 12. Specific relief.
`Sec. 13. Inspection and maintenance plans.
`Sec. 14. Powers and duties of the Secretary.
`Sec. 15. Natural gas safety cooperation and coordination.
`Sec. 16. Annual report.
`Sec. 17. Appropriations authorized.
`Sec. 18. Consumer education.
`Sec. 19. Citizen's civil action.
`Sec. 20. Minimum requirements for one-call notification systems.
`Sec. 21. Gathering lines.'.