HR 3429 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3429
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to improve the enforcement
and compliance programs.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 26, 1991
Mr. PALLONE introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to improve the enforcement
and compliance programs.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clean Water Enforcement and Compliance
 Improvement Amendments Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Congress finds that--
 (1) a significant number of persons who have been issued permits under
 section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act are in violation
 of such permits;
 (2) current enforcement programs of the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency and the States fail to address violations of such permits
 in a timely and effective manner;
 (3) often violations of such permits continue for a considerable period
 of time, yielding significant economic benefits for the violator and thus
 penalizing similar facilities which act lawfully;
 (4) penalties assessed and collected by the Administrator from violators of
 such permits are often less than the economic benefit gained by the violator;
 (5) swift and timely enforcement by the Administrator and the States of
 violations of such permits is necessary to increase levels of compliance
 with such permits; and
 (6) actions of private citizens have been effective in enforcing such
 permits and directing funds to environmental mitigation projects.
 (b) FINDING WITH RESPECT TO HARM CAUSED BY VIOLATIONS- Section 101 of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) FINDING WITH RESPECT TO HARM CAUSED BY VIOLATIONS- Congress finds that a
 discharge which results in a violation of this Act, including a regulation,
 standard, limitation, requirement, or order issued pursuant to this Act,
 interferes with the restoration and maintenance of the chemical, physical,
 and biological integrity of the water system into which the discharge
 occurs, including any downstream waters, and, therefore, harms users of
 such water system.'.
SEC. 3. VIOLATIONS OF REQUIREMENTS OF LOCAL CONTROL AUTHORITIES.
 Section 307(d) of Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1317)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) VIOLATIONS- After the effective date of any effluent standard or
 prohibition, pretreatment standard or requirement, or local limit promulgated
 under this section, it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any
 source to operate any source in violation of any such effluent standard
 or prohibition, pretreatment standard or requirement, or local limit.'.
SEC. 4. INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, AND PROVIDING INFORMATION.
 (a) APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS- Section 308(a) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1318(a)) is amended by striking `the
 owner or operator of any point source' and inserting `a person subject to
 a requirement of this Act'.
 (b) PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION- The first sentence of section 308(b)
 of such Act is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(including information contained in the Permit Compliance
 System of the Environmental Protection Agency)' after `obtained under
 this section';
 (2) by inserting `made' after `shall be'; and
 (3) by inserting `by computer telecommunication and other means' after
 `public' the first place it appears.
SEC. 5. CIVIL PENALTIES.
 (a) ENFORCEMENT OF LOCAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- Section 309(a)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(a)(1)) is amended by inserting after `404 of
 this Act,' the following: `or is in violation of any requirement imposed
 in a pretreatment program approved under section 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8)
 of this Act,'. Section 309(a)(3) of such Act is amended by inserting after
 `404 of this Act by a State,' the following: `or is in violation of any
 requirement imposed in a pretreatment program approved under section
 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8) of this Act,'.
 (2) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Section 309(c)(3)(A) of such Act is amended by
 inserting after `Army or by a State,' the following: `or who knowingly
 violates any requirement imposed in a pretreatment program approved under
 section 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8) of this Act,'.
 (3) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- Section 309(g)(1)(A) of such Act is amended
 by inserting after `404 by a State,' the following: `or has violated
 any requirement imposed in a pretreatment program approved under section
 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8) of this Act or an order issued by the Administrator
 under subsection (a) of this section,'.
 (b) TREATMENT OF SINGLE OPERATIONAL UPSETS-
 (1) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Section 309(c) of such Act is amended by striking
 paragraph (5) and redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (5)
 and (6), respectively.
 (2) CIVIL PENALTIES- Section 309(d) of such Act is amended by striking
 the last sentence.
 (3) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- Section 309(g)(3) of such Act is amended by
 striking the last sentence.
 (c) USE OF CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MITIGATION PROJECTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 309(d) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(d)) is amended
 by inserting after the second sentence the following new sentence: `The
 court may, in the court's discretion, order that a civil penalty be used
 for carrying out mitigation projects which are consistent with the purposes
 of this Act and which enhance the public health or environment.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 505(a) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1365(a))
 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the last sentence
 the following: `, including ordering the use of a civil penalty for carrying
 out mitigation projects in accordance with such section 309(d)'.
 (d) DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF PENALTIES-
 (1) CIVIL PENALTIES- The second sentence of section 309(d) of such Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1319(d)) is amended by inserting `the amount of any penalty
 previously imposed on the violator by a court or administrative agency for
 the same violation or violations,' after `economic impact of the penalty
 on the violator,'.
 (2) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- Section 309(g)(3) of such Act is amended by
 inserting `the amount of any penalty previously imposed on the violator
 by a court or administrative agency for the same violation or violations,'
 after `resulting from the violation,'.
 (e) LIMITATION ON DEFENSES- Section 309(g)(1) of such Act is amended by
 adding at the end the following new sentence: `In a proceeding to assess
 or review a penalty under this subsection, the adequacy of consultation
 between the Administrator or the Secretary, as the case may be, and the
 State shall not be a defense to assessment or enforcement of such penalty.'.
 (f) AMOUNTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Section 309(g)(2) of such Act is amended to read as
 follows:
 `(2) AMOUNTS OF PENALTIES- The amount of a civil penalty under paragraph
 (1) may not exceed $25,000 per violation per day for each day during which
 the violation continues. Before issuing an order assessing a civil penalty
 under this subsection, the Administrator or the Secretary, as the case
 may be, shall give to the person to be assessed the penalty written notice
 of the Administrator's or Secretary's proposal to issue the order and the
 opportunity to request, within 30 days of the date the notice is received
 by such person, a hearing on the proposed order. The hearing shall not be
 subject to section 554 or 556 of title 5, United States Code, but shall
 provide a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present evidence.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 309(g)(1) of such Act is amended by
 striking `class I civil penalty or a class II'.
 (g) STATE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AS BAR TO FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS-
 Section 309(g)(6)(A) of such Act is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or' after the comma at the end of clause (i);
 (2) by striking clause (ii); and
 (3) in clause (iii)--
 (A) by striking `, the Secretary, or the State' and inserting `or the
 Secretary'; and
 (B) by striking `or such comparable State law, as the case may be,'.
 (h) RECOVERY OF ECONOMIC BENEFIT- Section 309 of such Act is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) RECOVERY OF ECONOMIC BENEFIT- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this section, any civil penalty assessed and collected under this section
 must be in an amount which is not less than the amount of the economic
 benefit or savings (if any) resulting from the violation for which the
 penalty is assessed plus interest as determined under section 3717(a)
 of title 31, United States Code, accruing from the date of the violation.'.
 (i) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES- Such section 309 is further amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES OF CIVIL PENALTIES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this section, the amount of a civil penalty assessed under
 this section may not be compromised below the amount determined by adding--
 `(1) the minimum amount required for recovery of economic benefit under
 subsection (h), to
 `(2) 50 percent of the difference between the amount of the civil penalty
 assessed and such minimum amount.'.
 (j) MINIMUM AMOUNT FOR SERIOUS VIOLATIONS- Such section 309 is further
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) MINIMUM CIVIL PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN SERIOUS VIOLATIONS AND FOR
 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS-
 `(1) SERIOUS VIOLATIONS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section
 (other than paragraph (2)), the minimum civil penalty which may be assessed
 and collected under this subsection from a person--
 `(A) for a discharge from a point source of a hazardous pollutant which
 exceeds any applicable effluent limitation established by or under this
 Act by 20 percent or more, or
 `(B) for a discharge from a point source of a pollutant (other than a
 hazardous pollutant) which exceeds any applicable effluent limitation
 established by or under this Act by 40 percent or more,
shall be $1,000 for the first such violation in a 180-day period.
 `(2) SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 section, the minimum civil penalty which may be assessed and collected
 under this subsection from a person--
 `(A) for the second or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of a hazardous pollutant which exceeds any applicable effluent
 limitation established by or under this Act by 20 percent or more,
 `(B) for the second or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of a pollutant (other than a hazardous pollutant) which exceeds
 any applicable effluent limitation established by or under this Act by 40
 percent or more,
 `(C) for the fourth or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of any pollutant which exceeds the same applicable effluent limitation
 established by or under this Act, or
 `(D) for not filing in a 180-day period 2 or more reports in accordance
 with section 402(r)(1),
shall be $5,000 for each of such violations.
 `(3) INSPECTIONS FOR SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS- The Administrator shall
 classify any person described in paragraph (2) as a significant noncomplier
 and shall conduct an inspection described in section 402(q) of this Act
 of the facility at which the violations were committed. Such inspections
 shall be conducted at least once in the 180-day period following the date
 of the most recent violation which resulted in such person being classified
 as a significant noncomplier.
 `(4) ANNUAL REPORTING- The Administrator shall transmit to Congress and to
 the Governors of the States, and shall publish in the Federal Register,
 on an annual basis a list of all persons classified as significant
 noncompliers under paragraph (3) in the preceding calendar year and the
 violations which resulted in such classifications.
 `(5) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this section, the amount of a civil penalty established pursuant to this
 subsection may not be compromised.
 `(6) HAZARDOUS POLLUTANT DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the
 term `hazardous pollutant' has the meaning the term `hazardous substance'
 has under subsection (c)(6) of this section.'.
 (k) STATE PROGRAM- Section 402(b)(7) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(b)(7))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(7) To abate violations of the permit or the permit program which shall
 include, beginning on the last day of the 2-year period beginning on
 the date of the enactment of the Clean Water Compliance and Enforcement
 Improvement Amendments Act of 1991, a penalty program comparable to the
 Federal penalty program under section 309 of this Act and which shall
 include at a minimum criminal, civil, and civil administrative penalties
 and may include other ways and means of enforcement;'.
SEC. 6. NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMITS.
 (a) JUDICIAL REVIEW OF RULINGS ON APPLICATIONS FOR STATE PERMITS- Section
 402(b)(3) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(b)(3))
 is amended by inserting `and to insure that any person who is or may be
 adversely affected by such ruling have the right to judicial review of
 such ruling' before the semicolon at the end.
 (b) INSPECTIONS FOR MAJOR INDUSTRIAL AND MUNICIPAL DISCHARGERS- Section
 402(b) of such Act is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting a
 semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(10) To ensure that any permit for a discharge from a major industrial or
 municipal facility, as defined by the Administrator by regulation, includes
 conditions under which such facility will be subject to at least annual
 inspections by the State in accordance with subsection (q) of this section;'.
 (c) MONTHLY REPORTS FOR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS OF POTWS- Section
 402(b) of such Act is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(11) To ensure that any permit for a discharge from a publicly owned
 treatment works in the State includes conditions under which the treatment
 works will require any significant industrial user of the treatment works,
 as defined by the Administrator by regulation, to prepare and submit to
 the Administrator, the State, and the treatment works a monthly discharge
 monitoring report as a condition to using the treatment works;'.
 (d) PERMITS REQUIRED FOR INTRODUCTION OF POLLUTANTS INTO POTWS- Section
 402(b) of such Act is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(12) To ensure that, after the last day of the 2-year period beginning on
 the date of the enactment of this paragraph, any significant industrial user,
 or other source designated by the Administrator, introducing a pollutant
 into a publicly owned treatment works has, and operates in accordance with,
 a permit issued by the treatment works or the State for introduction of
 such pollutant; and'.
 (e) GRANTING OF AUTHORITY TO POTWS FOR INSPECTIONS AND PENALTIES- Section
 402(b) of such Act is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(13) To ensure that the State will grant to publicly owned treatment works
 in the State, not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this
 paragraph, authority, power, and responsibility to conduct inspections under
 subsection (q) of this section and to assess and collect civil penalties
 and civil administrative penalties under paragraph (7) of this subsection.'.
 (f) INSPECTIONS- Section 402 of such Act is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsection:
 `(q) INSPECTION-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Each permit for a discharge into the navigable waters
 or introduction of pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works issued
 under this section shall include conditions under which the effluent being
 discharged will be subject to random inspections in accordance with this
 subsection by the Administrator or the State, in the case of a State permit
 program under this section.
 `(2) MINIMUM STANDARDS- The Administrator shall establish minimum standards
 for inspections under this subsection. Such standards shall require,
 at a minimum, the following:
 `(A) An annual representative sampling by the Administrator or the State,
 in the case of a State permit program under this section, of the effluent
 being discharged; except that if the discharge is not from a major industrial
 or municipal facility such sampling shall be conducted at least once every
 3 years.
 `(B) An analysis of all samples collected under subparagraph (A) by a Federal
 or State owned and operated laboratory or a State approved laboratory,
 other than one that is being used by the permittee or that is directly or
 indirectly owned, operated, or managed by the permittee.
 `(C) An evaluation of the maintenance record of any treatment equipment
 of the permittee.
 `(D) An evaluation of the sampling techniques used by the permittee.
 `(E) A random check of discharge monitoring reports of the permittee for each
 12-month period for the purpose of determining whether or not such reports
 are consistent with the applicable analyses conducted under subparagraph (B).
 `(F) An inspection of the sample storage facilities and techniques of
 the permittee.'.
 (g) REPORTING- Section 402 of such Act is further amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(r) REPORTING-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Each person holding a permit issued under this section
 which is determined by the Administrator to be a major industrial or
 municipal discharger of pollutants into the navigable waters shall prepare
 and submit to the Administrator a monthly discharge monitoring report. Any
 other person holding a permit issued under this section shall prepare and
 submit to the Administrator quarterly discharge monitoring reports or more
 frequent discharge monitoring reports if the Administrator requires. Such
 reports shall contain, at a minimum, such information as the Administrator
 shall require by regulation.
 `(2) REPORTING OF HAZARDOUS DISCHARGES-
 `(A) GENERAL RULE- If a discharge from a point source for which a permit
 is issued under this section exceeds an effluent limitation contained
 in such permit and is likely to cause injury to persons or damage to the
 environment or to pose a threat to human health and the environment, the
 person holding such permit shall notify the Administrator, in writing,
 of such discharge not later than 2 hours after the later of the time at
 which such discharge commenced or the time at which the permittee knew or
 had reason to know of such discharge.
 `(B) SPECIAL RULE FOR HAZARDOUS POLLUTANTS- If a discharge described in
 subparagraph (A) is of a hazardous pollutant (as defined in section 309(j)
 of this Act), the person holding such permit shall provide the Administrator
 with such additional information on the discharge as may be required by
 the Administrator. Such additional information shall be provided to the
 Administrator within 24 hours after the later of the time at which such
 discharge commenced or the time at which the permittee became aware of
 such discharge. Such additional information shall include, at a minimum, an
 estimate of the danger posed by the discharge to the environment, whether
 the discharge is continuing, and the measures taken or being taken (i)
 to remediate the problem caused by the discharge and any damage to the
 environment, and (ii) to avoid a repetition of the discharge.
 `(3) SIGNATURE- All reports filed under paragraph (1) must be signed by
 the highest ranking official having day-to-day managerial and operational
 responsibility for the facility at which the discharge occurs or, in the
 absence of such person, by another responsible high ranking official at
 such facility. Such highest ranking official shall be responsible for the
 accuracy of all information contained in such reports; except that such
 highest ranking official may file with the Administrator amendments to
 any such report if the report was signed in the absence of the highest
 ranking official by another high ranking official and if such amendments
 are filed within 7 days of the return of the highest ranking official.'.
 (h) APPLICABILITY- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 permits issued before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act;
 except that--
 (1) with respect to permits issued before such date of enactment to a major
 industrial or municipal discharger, such amendments shall take effect on
 the last day of the 1-year period beginning on such date of enactment; and
 (2) with respect to all other permits issued before such date of enactment,
 such amendments shall take effect on the last day of the 2-year period
 beginning on such date of enactment.
SEC. 7. EXPIRED STATE PERMITS.
 Section 402(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(d))
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) EXPIRED STATE PERMITS- In any case in which--
 `(A) a permit issued by a State for a discharge has expired,
 `(B) the permittee has submitted in a timely manner an application to the
 State for a new permit for the discharge, and
 `(C) the State has not acted on the application before the last day of
 the 18-month period beginning on the date the permit expired,
the Administrator may issue a permit for the discharge under subsection (a).'.
SEC. 8. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.
 Section 302(b)(2)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1312(b)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sentence: `The Administrator may only issue a permit pursuant to this
 subparagraph for a period exceeding 2 years if the Administrator makes
 the findings described in clauses (i) and (ii) of this subparagraph on
 the basis of a public hearing.'.
SEC. 9. EMERGENCY POWERS.
 Section 504 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1364)
 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 504. COMMUNITY PROTECTION.
 `(a) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS; COURT ACTION- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of this Act, whenever the Administrator finds that, because of an actual
 or threatened direct or indirect discharge of a pollutant, there may be
 an imminent and substantial endangerment to the public health or welfare
 (including the livelihood of persons) or the environment, the Administrator
 may issue such orders or take such action as may be necessary to protect
 public health or welfare or the environment and commence a suit (or cause it
 to be commenced) in the United States district court for the district where
 the discharge or threat occurs. Such court may grant such relief to abate
 the threat and to protect against the endangerment as the public interest
 and the equities require, enforce, and adjudge penalties for disobedience
 to orders of the Administrator issued under this section, and grant other
 relief according to the public interest and the equities of the case.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- Any person who, without sufficient cause,
 violates or fails to comply with an order of the Administrator issued
 under this section, shall be liable for civil penalties to the United
 States in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per day for each day on which
 such violation or failure occurs or continues.'.
SEC. 10. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) SUITS FOR PAST VIOLATIONS- Section 505 of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1365) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1) by inserting `to have violated or' after `who
 is alleged';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii) by striking `occurs' and inserting `has
 occurred or is occurring';
 (3) in subsection (f)(6) by inserting `has been or' after `which'; and
 (4) in subsection (g) by striking `which is' and inserting `which has
 been, is,'.
 (b) EFFECT OF JUDGMENTS ON CITIZEN SUITS- Section 505(b) of such Act is
 amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `No judgment or
 final order in a judicial or administrative action by the Administrator
 or a State shall bar an action for the same violation under subsection
 (a)(1) unless the action or order meets the requirements of paragraph
 (1)(B) of this subsection or section 309(g)(6) of this Act.'.
 (c) PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS AND LOCAL LIMITS- Section 505(f)(4) of such
 Act is amended by striking `or pretreatment standards' and inserting `,
 pretreatment standard, pretreatment requirement, or local limit'.
 (d) DEFINITION OF CITIZEN- Section 505(g) of such Act is amended by inserting
 before the period at the end the following: `, including a person who uses
 the water downstream from a discharge, or would use such water if it were
 not polluted, during the period that the discharge exceeds an effluent
 standard or limitation issued under this Act'.
SEC. 11. ISSUANCE OF SUBPENAS.
 Section 509(a)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1369(a)(1)) is amended by striking `obtaining information under
 section 305 of this Act, or carrying out section 507(e) of this Act,'
 and inserting `carrying out this Act,'.
SEC. 12. NATIONAL CLEAN WATER TRUST FUND.
 Title V of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1361-1377)
 is amended by redesignating section 519 as section 520 and by inserting
 after section 518 the following new section:
`SEC. 519. NATIONAL CLEAN WATER TRUST FUND.
 `(a) CREATION OF TRUST FUND- There is established in the Treasury of the
 United States a trust fund to be known as the `Clean Water Trust Fund'.
 `(b) TRANSFERS TO TRUST FUND- There are hereby appropriated to the Clean
 Water Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the penalties assessed under section
 309(d) of this Act and amounts assessed through citizen suits under section
 505(a) of this Act (excluding any amounts ordered to be used to carry out
 mitigation projects under section 309(d) or 505(a), as the case may be)
 and collected after December 31, 1991.
 `(c) ADMINISTRATION OF TRUST FUND- The Administrator shall administer the
 Clean Water Trust Fund. The Administrator shall use moneys in the fund to
 carry out inspections and enforcement activities pursuant to this Act.'.