S 2228 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2228
To develop a comprehensive program to ensure the wholesomeness of fish and
fish products intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 1 (legislative day JANUARY 23), 1990
Mr. HOLLINGS (for himself, Mr. KERRY, Mr. STEVENS, and Mr. MITCHELL)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To develop a comprehensive program to ensure the wholesomeness of fish and
fish products intended for human consumption and sold in interstate commerce,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety and
 Quality Assurance Act of 1990'.
FINDINGS AND PURPOSES
 SEC. 2. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Seafood constitutes an important component of the Nation's food
 supply. Domestic and imported fish and fish products are consumed throughout
 the Nation, and are harvested and marketed by a large, diverse commercial
 fishing industry.
 (2) Heightened awareness of the health benefits associated with seafood
 and greater diversity of fish products have raised consumption rates and
 increased the demand for wholesome, high quality seafood.
 (3) The sale of fish havested from polluted waters and the sale of
 adulterated or misbranded fish products are injurious to the public welfare,
 destroy markets for wholesome and properly labeled and packaged fish and
 fish products, and result in injury to consumers and losses to the United
 States seafood industry.
 (4) Existing Federal standards and systems of inspection and monitoring
 have failed to incorporate advances in science and food technology and
 are insufficient to ensure consumer safety and public confidence in the
 wholesomeness of fish and fish products.
 (5) A significant number of consumer illnesses are caused by improper
 handling of fish and fish products in the home, and individuals dependent
 for dietary protein on fish obtained through recreational fishing are at
 particular risk.
 (6) The Federal Government has the responsibility of ensuring the safety
 and quality of fish products sold in interstate commerce for consumption
 in the United States
 (7) A comprehensive national seafood safety and quality assurance program
 is necessary to protect public health and to maintain the position of the
 United States as a leading supplier of and market for fish and fish products.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is declared to be the purposes of the Congress in this
 Act to--
 (1) safeguard the safety of fish and fish products sold in interstate
 commerce to consumers;
 (2) increase the health benefits of consuming seafood and enhance public
 confidence in the wholesomeness of fish and fish products; and
 (3) promote commerce in fish and fish products by encouraging the acceptance
 of wholesome fish and fish products in foreign and domestic markets.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 3. As used in this Act, unless the context requires otherwise,
 the term--
 (1) `adulterated' means with respect to any fish or fish product that the
 fish or fish product--
 (A) bears or contains any contaminant, but in case the contaminant is
 not an added substance, such fish or fish product shall not be considered
 adulterated if the quantity of such contaminant it bears or contains does
 not ordinarily render it unsafe for human consumption;
 (B) has been made or derived in whole or in part from fish harvested in
 a growing or harvesting area that is determined to contain substances
 which indicate that such fish or fish product is likely to be unsafe for
 human consumption;
 (C) is or has been contained in a package that is composed in whole or in
 part of any contaminant that may render such fish or fish product unsafe
 for human consumption;
 (D) has been imported from a country which does not have a seafood safety
 and quality assurance program approved by the Secretary under section 9;
 (E) is not in compliance with, or has not been processed in accordance with,
 this Act or standards and regulations promulgated under this Act; or
 (F) has any valuable constituent in whole or in part omitted or abstracted
 therefrom; any substance substituted wholly or in part therefor; damage
 or inferiority concealed in any manner; or any substance added thereto or
 mixed or packed therewith so as to increase its bulk or weight, reduce its
 quality or strength, or make it appear better or of greater value than it is.
 (2) `contaminant' means any substance which is hazardous to human health
 when ingested, and includes--
 (A) such chemicals as heavy metals, pesticides, and polychlorinated
 biphenyls;
 (B) such parasitic or microbiological organisms as nematodes, bacteria,
 and viruses; and
 (C) such naturally occurring toxins as ciguatoxin and scombrotoxin.
 (3) `fish' includes all finfish, mollusks, crustaceans, amphibians,
 and other forms of aquatic animal and plant life, whether from wild or
 cultured sources, except birds and mammals;
 (4) `fish product' means any food product intended for human consumption
 and derived in whole or in part from fish, including unprocessed fish,
 except any product that--
 (A) contains fish in a relatively small proportion or historically has
 not been considered by consumers as a product of the seafood industry, and
 (B) is exempted by the Secretary from the definition of fish product under
 such conditions as may be prescribed to assure that the fish contained in
 such product is not adulterated and that such product is not represented
 as a fish product.
 (5) `Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point method' means a system for
 ensuring seafood safety and quality which consists of indentification
 of the consumer hazards associated with fish and fish products and their
 processing, assessment of the severity of those hazards, determination of
 critical control points required to control the hazards, and establishment
 of monitoring procedures to determine that each critical control point is
 under control;
 (6) `inspection' means the examination, by an authorized Federal or State
 agent, or any fish or fish product, or any processing facility, or of any
 activity involving the handling or processing of any fish or fish product,
 to ensure that the requirements of this Act and regulations promulgated
 under this Act are met;
 (7) `interstate commerce' means commerce--
 (A) between a place in a State and a place outside such State (including
 a place outside the United States);
 (B) between two places in a State through another State or a place outside
 of the United States; or
 (C) within the District of Columbia or any territory or possession of the
 United States.
 (8) `label' means a display of written, printed, or graphic matter upon
 the immediate package (not including package liners) of any article;
 (9) `labeling' means all labels and other written, printed, or graphic
 matter upon any article or any of its packages, or accompanying such article;
 (10) `misbranded' means with respect to any fish or fish product that--
 (A) the labeling of the fish or fish product is false or misleading in
 any particular;
 (B) the fish or fish product is offered for sale under the name of
 another food;
 (C) the package of the fish or fish product is so made, formed, or filled
 as to be misleading;
 (D) any word, statement, or other information required by or under authority
 of this Act to appear on the label or other labeling is not prominently
 placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as compared with other words,
 statements, designs, or devices, in the labeling) and in such terms as
 to render it likely to be read and understood by the ordinary individual
 under customary conditions of purchase and use; or
 (E) the fish or fish product purports to be, or is represented as, a food
 for which a definition and standard of identity or composition has been
 prescribed by regulation under this Act unless--
 (i) the fish or fish product conforms to such definition and standard, and
 (ii) the label of the fish or fish product bears the name of the food
 specified in the definition and standard.
 (11) `official mark' means any symbol prescribed by regulations promulgated
 to this Act to identify the status of any fish or fish product;
 (12) `package' includes any container, box, can, tin, cloth, plastic,
 or other receptacle, wrapper, or cover;
 (13) `person' means any individual (whether or not a citizen of the United
 States), any corporation, partnership, association, cooperative, or other
 entity (whether or not organized under the laws of any State), and any
 State, local, or foreign government, or any entity of such government or
 the Federal Government;
 (14) `process' means to handle, store, prepare, produce, manufacture,
 preserve, pack, transport, or hold fish or fish products for eventual sale
 in interstate commerce to consumers, except (A) such actions when carried
 out by restaurants and other establishments incidental to retail sale and
 (B) handling, storing, holding, or transporting by any contract carrier
 or common carrier incidental to shipment;
 (15) `processing facility' means any vessel, area or premises (including
 such structures, buildings, vehicles, support vessels, and equipment as
 are associated with that vessel, area, or premises) used for the processing
 of fish or fish products;
 (16) `seafood' means fish products in general;
 (17) `Secretary' means the Secretary of Commerce;
 (18) `shellfish' means any species of oyster, clam, or mussel, either
 shucked or in the shell, and either fresh or frozen, or otherwise processed,
 or any part thereof;
 (19) `State' means any State of the United States, the Commonwealth of
 Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or any
 other territory or commonwealth of the United States.
SEAFOOD SAFETY AND QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM
 SEC. 4. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- Not later than two years after the date
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish, in accordance with
 this Act, a comprehensive seafood safety and quality assurance program for
 fish and fish products sold in interstate commerce. The program shall be
 designed in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Transportation, the heads
 of other appropriate Federal and State agencies, and representatives of
 the seafood industry and national consumer organizations. The program
 shall provide for--
 (1) establishment and implementation of Federal seafood standards under
 section 5;
 (2) inspection of fish and fish products under section 6;
 (3) development and implementation of procedures for enforcing the program;
 (4) monitoring of the water quality of growing and harvesting areas under
 section 7;
 (5) delegation of inspection, enforcement, and monitoring authority to State
 governments and compensation to the States for carrying out that authority;
 (6) design and implementation of a national consumer education and
 information program relating to health hazards associated with the human
 consumption of fish and fish products; and
 (7) establishment and administration of a shellfish indicator research
 program and other research in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
 (b) CONSISTENCY WITH ISSC GUIDELINES- The program established under
 subsection (a) shall be consistent, to the maximum extent practicable,
 with the guidelines for the National Shellfish Sanitation Program developed
 by the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference.
FEDERAL SEAFOOD STANDARDS
 SEC. 5. (a) IN GENERAL- The Federal seafood standards required as part of
 the program established under section 4 shall include standards prescribed
 in accordance with subsection (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f).
 (b) SANITATION AND QUALITY CONTROL- The Secretary shall prescribe standards
 of sanitation and quality control for the processing of fish and fish
 products. The standards shall include--
 (1) plans of operation for each processing method that are based on the
 Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point method and on the results of the
 Model Seafood Surveillance Program carried out by the National Marine
 Fisheries Service of the Department of Commerce; and
 (2) all applicable sanitation and good manufacturing practices established
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (c) CONTAMINANT LEVELS- (1) The Secretary, after consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall develop and prescribe standards
 for contaminant levels which are most likely to cause fish or fish products
 to be unsafe for human consumption. Such standards may include indicators,
 including indicator organisms, from which it may reasonably be inferred
 that a contaminant in the fish or fish product is likely to be present
 whenever the contaminant itself cannot be practicably detected.
 (2) In developing the standards required under paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall contract with the National Academy of Sciences to--
 (A) identify the contaminants which are most commonly found in fish and
 fish products;
 (B) identify the contaminants which are most hazardous to human health
 when ingested;
 (C) recommend priorities, on the basis of public health significance,
 for the development of standards for contaminants; and
 (D) prepare and submit to the Secretary within eighteen months after the
 date of enactment of this Act a report on the contaminants identified under
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) and the priorities recommended under subparagraph
 (C), together with a full explanation of reasons for such findings and
 recommendations.
 (3) The Secretary shall report to the Congress annually, beginning one
 year after the date of completion of the report required by paragraph
 (2)(D), regarding the progress that, as of the date of such annual report,
 has been made to implement the standards required under paragraph (1). The
 annual report shall, among other things--
 (A) describe, as of the date of such report, the research that has been
 conducted and the research that remains to be conducted in order to
 establish any of such standards that have not yet been developed;
 (B) specify, with respect to each of such standards that has not yet
 been established, the public health significance of the failure to have
 established such standard;
 (C) specify a timetable for the development of each such standard that
 has not yet been established; and
 (D) estimate the costs, including the costs of research, associated with
 the development of each such standard.
 (d) IDENTITY, QUALITY, LABELING, AND PACKAGING- (1) The Secretary shall
 prescribe standards of identity and composition, minimum quality, labeling,
 and packaging of fish and fish products. Such standards shall build upon
 existing Federal regulations and shall be consistent with any applicable
 international standards related to fish and fish products.
 (2) In developing a standard of identity, the Secretary shall define a
 common or usual name for a fish or fish product which fairly describes the
 nature of the fish or fish product or its characterizing ingredients. The
 common or usual name may include generic designations for fish or fish
 products which have similar nutritional properties or other characteristics
 affecting the marketing of food products.
 (3) To promote commerce in fish and fish products, the Secretary may
 establish voluntary grading criteria for fish and fish products which
 exceed minimum quality standards developed pursuant to this subsection.
 (4) Labeling and packaging standards shall include a requirement that each
 package of fish or fish product that is processed by a processing facility
 registered under this Act be marked, at the time the package leaves the
 processing facility, with--
 (A) the unique code assigned by the Secretary under section 6 for the
 purpose of identifying the processing facility; and
 (B) a label that bears or contains an official mark that is available only
 to processing facilities which are registered under this Act;
except that the Secretary may exempt from such requirement any processing
facility if the Secretary determines that the facility is not the primary
processing facility with respect to such fish or fish product and such
exemption will not undermine the ability of the Secretary to ensure that
standards prescribed under this Act are met.
 (e) WATER QUALITY- The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Chairman of the Interstate
 Shellfish Sanitation Conference, and the heads of other appropriate
 Federal or State agencies, shall prescribe standards for the water quality
 of shellfish growing and harvesting areas. Prior to issuing such standards,
 the Secretary shall carry out a comprehensive assessment of the effectiveness
 of existing Federal water quality standards and guidelines for classifying
 shellfish growing areas in--
 (1) minimizing hazards associated with the human consumption of shellfish;
 and
 (2) assuring an adequate supply of safe and high quality domestic shellfish.
 (f) OTHER STANDARDS- The Secretary shall prescribe such other standards
 as the Secretary determines are necessary to carry out the provisions of
 this Act.
 (g) ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE- In implementing this section, the Secretary
 shall--
 (1) consult with interested Federal agencies, representatives of affected
 States, and representatives of consumer organizations and the seafood
 industry;
 (2) promulgate regulations to establish the Federal seafood standards
 required, and such regulations or guidelines as the Secretary determines
 are appropriate for applying and enforcing such standards; and
 (3) review and revise such standards, regulations, and guidelines on a
 continuing basis, no less frequently than once every three years, to reflect
 changes in processing methods and related advances in science and technology.
FEDERAL INSPECTION SYSTEM
 SEC. 6. (a) INSPECTION SYSTEM- As part of the program established under
 section 4, the Secretary shall establish and administer a comprehensive
 and efficient inspection system for fish and fish products that protects
 the consuming public from fish and fish products that are adulterated
 or misbranded. Such system shall, in accordance with the Hazard Analysis
 Critical Control Point method--
 (1) provide for the appointment and training of authorized inspection
 officers, and for the training of personnel involved in processing;
 (2) be specifically designed to take into consideration the special
 characteristics of fish and fish products and of the processing of fish
 and fish products;
 (3) be based upon the Model Seafood Surveillance Project conducted by the
 National Marine Fisheries Service of the Department of Commerce;
 (4) provide for the registration and the inspection of processing facilities;
 (5) provide for the inspection of fish and fish products and of the
 processing of them, at such points, in such manner, and with such frequency
 as the Secretary determines are necessary based on the Model Seafood
 Surveillance Project referred to in paragraph (3), a consideration of
 the nature and frequency of operations, adequacy of monitoring programs,
 history of compliance with this Act, and such other factors as the Secretary
 may determine are appropriate; and
 (6) include such other inspection activities as are determined by the
 Secretary to be necessary for effectively carrying out the provisions of
 this Act.
 (b) REGISTRATION- (1) No processing facility may process any fish or fish
 product unless such processing facility is registered by the Secretary
 under this section, except as provided in paragraph (7).
 (2) Application for registration under the program shall be made to the
 Secretary using such forms and containing such matter as the Secretary
 shall prescribe by regulation.
 (3) The Secretary shall approve an application under this section unless,
 on the basis of such application and an inspection of such processing
 facility, the Secretary determines that the processing facility is unfit
 to engage in the processing of fish and fish products. If the Secretary
 approves such an application, the Secretary shall assign a unique code to
 such facility for identification purposes.
 (4)(A) If the Secretary does not approve an application for registration,
 the Secretary shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the
 disapproval and the reasons therefor.
 (B) Any applicant whose application for registration has not been approved by
 the Secretary may at any time make another application for registration. The
 Secretary shall approve such application if the Secretary finds that the
 processing facility is no longer unfit to engage in the processing of fish
 and fish products.
 (5) If a processing facility registered under this section fails to comply
 with any requirement of this Act or regulations promulgated under this Act,
 the Secretary may, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing--
 (A) revoke the registration;
 (B) suspend the registration for a period of time; or
 (C) impose conditions and restrictions on the registration as the Secretary
 determines are necessary and appropriate.
 (6)(A) The holder of a registration that has been revoked or suspended may
 at any time apply for reinstatement thereof. The Secretary shall immediately
 grant reinstatement of the registration if the Secretary finds that the
 processing facility is no longer unfit to engage in the processing of fish
 and fish products.
 (B) The holder of a registration that is conditional or restricted may
 at any time apply for the removal of such conditions or restrictions. The
 Secretary shall immediately remove such conditions or restrictions if the
 Secretary finds that adequate measures have been taken to comply with this
 Act or regulations promulgated under this Act.
 (7) The Secretary may exempt classes of processing facilities from such
 registration requirement if the Secretary determines the exemption will not
 undermine the ability of the Secretary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
 (c) POWERS OF INSPECTION OFFICERS- An inspection officer authorized by
 the Secretary to conduct inspections under this Act (including a State
 employee deputized under section 8(d) to conduct such inspections) may,
 pursuant to procedures prescribed by the Secretary, take such actions as
 are necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the provisions of this Act
 and regulations promulgated under this Act. Such actions shall include,
 but not be limited to--
 (1) the inspection of processing facilities and related fish and fish
 products, packages, labeling, conditions, equipment, and records,
 (2) the sampling of fish and fish products, and
 (3) the detention and condemnation of adulterated and misbranded fish and
 fish products in accordance with subsection (e).
 (d) RECORDS AND DOCUMENTATION- Owners or operators of processing facilities
 registered under subsection (b) shall--
 (1) maintain accurate records regarding--
 (A) the fishery from which the fish or fish products originated;
 (B) activities related to food safety and sanitation; and
 (C) receipt, delivery, sale, movement, and disposition of fish and fish
 products;
 (2) permit the Secretary, upon request, at reasonable times to have access
 to and copy any such records; and
 (3) make available to the Secretary information relating to such matters
 as the Secretary may require.
The Secretary may prescribe such additional requirements for the records
and documentation of processing facilities and other business enterprises
as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
 (e) PRODUCT DETENTION AND CONDEMNATION- (1) Subject to paragraph (2),
 all fish and fish products found by the Secretary to be adulterated or
 misbranded shall be immediately segregated and, if objection is not made
 within forty-eight hours, condemned. If objection is made, such fish or
 fish products that are in perishable form may be processed to the extent
 necessary to prevent spoilage pending hearing and judicial review.
 (2) If the Secretary determines that an adulterated or misbranded fish or
 fish product can, by relabeling or other action, be brought into compliance
 with this Act or regulations promulgated under this Act, final determination
 as to the condemnation of such fish or fish product may be deferred pending
 the performance by the owner of such fish or fish product, within a time
 specified by the Secretary, of such relabeling or other action as the
 Secretary may authorize. If after such action is performed, the Secretary
 determines that the fish or fish product has been brought into compliance
 with this Act and regulations thereunder, the Secretary shall premit its
 entry into interstate commerce.
 (3) Any fish or fish product condemned by the Secretary without objection,
 or after hearing and judicial review, shall be destroyed for human food
 purposes under the supervision of the Secretary.
 (f) LABELING AND PACKAGE- (1) The owner or operator of each processing
 facility registered under the program shall, subject to terms and
 conditions determined by the Secretary, submit to the Secretary, prior
 to use, any label or package to be used by that facility for fish or fish
 products. The Secretary shall review such label and package for compliance
 with the standards established under this Act. No such label or package
 may be used unless it has been approved by the Secretary.
 (2)(A) The Secretary shall approve any label unless the Secretary determines
 that such label is false or misleading.
 (B) The Secretary shall approve any package unless the Secretary determines
 that such package does not comply with the standards established under
 this Act.
 (3)(A) If the Secretary does not approve any label or package, the Secretary
 shall promptly notify the owner or operator of the processing facility
 proposing such label or package in writing of the disapproval and the
 reasons therefor.
 (B) The owner or operator whose label or package has not been approved by the
 Secretary may at any time propose another label or package for approval. The
 Secretary shall approve the revised label unless the Secretary determines
 that such label is false or misleading. The Secretary shall approve the
 revised package unless the Secretary determines that such package does
 not comply with the standards established under this Act.
 (g) NOTICE- Upon completion of any inspection and before leaving the
 processing facility, the Secretary shall give to the owner or operator of
 the facility a report in writing describing the results of the inspection.
 (h) TRADEMARK PROTECTION- The Secretary may apply for, secure, and maintain
 protection under the trademark laws of the United States and under the
 design, copyright, or trademark laws of a foreign country for any official
 mark or other mark, number, or device required by the Secretary for carrying
 out this Act.
MONITORING OF GROWING AND HARVESTING AREAS
 SEC. 7. (a) MONITORING SYSTEM- As part of the program established under
 section 4, the Secretary shall establish and maintain a comprehensive
 monitoring system to identify and designate geographical growing and
 harvesting areas from which significant quantities of fish and fish products
 not in compliance with this Act or regulations under this Act originate,
 or may be reasonably expected to originate.
 (b) DESIGNATED AREAS- The Secretary may, by regulation, prohibit or restrict
 the sale or other disposition in interstate commerce of any fish or fish
 products from an area designated under subsection (a).
 (c) REVIEW- The Secretary shall periodically review the areas designated
 under subsection (a) and shall withdraw or modify the designation to the
 extent the Secretary determines is consistent with the requirements of
 this section.
 (d) PUBLIC NOTICE- The Secretary shall notify the Governor of any affected
 State and the Chairman of any affected Regional Fishery Management Council,
 and to the extent practicable, shall give reasonable public notice before
 any action is taken under this section.
STATE INSPECTION AND MONITORING PROGRAMS
 SEC. 8. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall encourage States to continue,
 strengthen, or establish seafood safety and quality assurance programs at
 least equal to the program established under this Act.
 (b) ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide to a State, in the planning and
 developing of such a program--
 (1) advisory assistance;
 (2) technical and laboratory assistance and training (including necessary
 materials and equipment); and
 (3) financial and other aid.
 (c) APPROVAL OF STATE PROGRAMS- (1) At any time after establishment of
 the Federal seafood safety and quality assurance program under this Act,
 the Governor of any State desiring to administer its own seafood safety
 and quality assurance program may submit to the Secretary a full and
 complete description of the program the State administers or proposes to
 establish and administer under State law. In addition, such State shall
 submit a statement from the attorney general (or appropriate legal officer)
 that the laws of such State provide adequate authority to carry out the
 described program. The Secretary shall approve each such submitted program
 for a period of no more than five years unless the Secretary determines
 that adequate authority and capacity does not exist to--
 (A) ensure that fish and fish products originating in the State and entering
 interstate commerce meet or exceed the Federal standards established under
 section 5;
 (B) ensure that inspection and monitoring systems are comparable in
 effectiveness to systems established by the Secretary under sections 6 and 7;
 (C) provide the Secretary with regular reports regarding State activities
 under the program; and
 (D) abate violations of the program, including civil and criminal penalties
 and other ways and means of enforcement.
 (2) The Secretary shall monitor the effectiveness of each approved State
 program and if such program is not being effectively implemented shall,
 after notice and opportunity for hearing and appropriate corrective action,
 withdraw approval of the State program and reinstate the Federal program.
 (3) The Secretary shall annually grant to each State with a program approved
 under this subsection an amount not to exceed 60 per centum of the cost
 of operating a federally equivalent State program.
 (d) DEPUTIZATION OF STATE EMPLOYEES- For States that are not approved by
 the Secretary under subsection (c), the Secretary may deputize specific
 State employees under an agreement with any State to carry out, on behalf
 of and at the request of the Secretary, inspection and monitoring activities
 pursuant to sections 6 and 7. Agreements with a State under this subsection
 may provide for training of deputized State employees. The Secretary shall
 pay for or reimburse the State for the expenses of such training and for
 the actual cost of inspection activities performed by a deputized State
 employee at the request of the Secretary.
IMPORTS
 SEC. 9. (a) IN GENERAL- (1) No fish or fish product may be entered, or
 withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption in the United States unless such
 fish or fish product--
 (A) is not adulterated or misbranded;
 (B) complies with all standards applicable to fish and fish products in
 interstate commerce in the United States;
 (C) is marked and labeled as required by regulations for imported articles;
 and
 (D) complies with the requirements of this section.
 (2) Upon entry for consumption in the United States, fish or fish products
 satisfying the requirements of paragraph (1) shall be deemed to be and
 treated as domestic fish or fish products.
 (b) INSPECTION OF IMPORTS- The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary
 of the Treasury, shall enforce this section through random inspections
 and sampling of fish and fish products that are offered for importation or
 entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption in the United States,
 and through any other procedures the Secretary determines are necessary
 to ensure compliance with this Act.
 (c) CORRECTIVE ACTIONS- All fish and fish products that are refused entry
 pursuant to subsection (a) or that are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse,
 for consumption in the United States in violation of this section shall,
 pursuant to regulations, be destroyed unless--
 (1) such fish and fish products are exported within a time fixed therefor
 by the Secretary; or
 (2) the Secretary determines that any such fish or fish product can be
 brought into compliance with this Act by relabeling or other action.
If the Secretary determines that the fish or fish product can be brought
into compliance, the destruction of such fish or fish product may be
deferred pending filing of a written application by the owner or consignee
and the execution by the applicant of a bond within a time specified by
the Secretary. Upon such filing and execution of a bond, the Secretary may
authorize the applicant to perform such relabeling or other actions specified
by the Secretary. After such action is performed, if the Secretary determines
that such fish or fish product has been brought into compliance with this Act,
the Secretary shall permit its entry for consumption in the United States.
 (d) COSTS- Storage, cartage, labor, and other costs resulting from the
 denial of entry, or withdrawal from warehouse, of any fish or fish product
 shall be paid by the owner or consignee, and nonpayment of such costs
 shall constitute a lien against such fish or fish product and any other
 fish or fish product thereafter entered, or withdrawn from warehouse,
 by such owner or consignee, for consumption in the United States.
 (e) FOREIGN PROGRAM- (1) Upon request, the Secretary shall review the
 seafood safety and quality assurance program of each country desiring to
 export fish or fish products into the United States to determine if such
 program is at least equal to the program established under this Act.
 (2) If the Secretary determines that a country desiring to export fish
 or fish products to the United States has a program at least equal to the
 program established under this Act and that such country will permit the
 enforcement measures determined to be necessary pursuant to paragraph (5),
 the Secretary shall issue a certificate to such country stating that the
 country maintains such a program.
 (3) No fish or fish product shall be permitted entry for consumption in
 the United States from a country that does not have such a certificate
 that is valid and in effect.
 (4) The Secretary shall periodically, not less than once every five years,
 review such certificates and shall revoke the certificate of any country
 that the Secretary determines is not maintaining a seafood inspection
 program at least equal to the program established under this Act.
 (5) The Secretary shall enforce this subsection through the imposition of
 random inspections, sampling, and testing at such stages in the processing
 of fish or fish products, and such other actions as the Secretary determines
 are necessary to ensure compliance with this Act.
EXPORTS
 SEC. 10. (a) STANDARDS- Fish or fish products intended for export to a
 foreign country may be exempted from specific requirements of this Act if
 such exemption is necessary to avoid conflict with a law or custom of the
 importing nation. Fish or fish products so exempted shall be deemed not to
 be adulterated or misbranded under this Act if such fish or fish products--
 (1) are in accord with the specifications of the foreign purchaser;
 (2) are not in conflict with the laws of the country to which they are
 intended for export;
 (3) are shipped in a package whose outside labeling states that the fish
 or fish products are intended for export; and
 (4) are not sold, offered for sale, or otherwise disposed of in commerce
 within the United States;
except that any such fish or fish product shall be deemed to be adulterated
if the Secretary determines such fish or fish product represents a significant
hazard to the health of the eventual consumer.
 (b) INSPECTION- The Secretary shall inspect fish or fish products intended to
 be exported to foreign countries at such times and places and in such manner
 as the Secretary determines are necessary to ensure compliance with this Act.
 (c) CERTIFICATES- The Secretary shall, upon request, provide a certificate
 of export stating the condition of fish or fish products inspected under
 this section.
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES
 SEC. 11. (a) PROHIBITED ACTS- No person shall--
 (1) process any fish or fish product at any processing facility, except
 in compliance with this Act or any regulations promulgated thereunder;
 (2) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in interstate commerce any fish
 or fish product that is adulterated or misbranded at the time of such sale,
 transportation, offer for sale or transportation, receipt for transportation,
 or disposal;
 (3) commit, with respect to any fish or fish product, and while such fish or
 fish product is being transported in interstate commerce or held for sale
 after such transportation, any act that is intended to cause or has the
 effect of causing such fish or fish product to be adulterated or misbranded;
 (4) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in interstate commerce any fish
 or fish product that is not processed in accordance with the requirements
 of this Act or any regulations promulgated thereunder;
 (5) forge, counterfeit, or falsely represent any official mark or
 registration;
 (6) without authorization from the Secretary, use any official mark or
 registration, or simulation thereof, or alter, detach, deface, or destroy
 any official mark or registration;
 (7) refuse to permit entry or inspection to or on any processing facility,
 or otherwise interfere with any inspection or other person carrying out
 duties required under this Act; or
 (8) create or maintain records that are false either by content or omission,
 or destroy records containing information required under this Act or any
 regulations promulgated under this Act.
 (b) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Any person who, after notice and opportunity for a
 hearing, violates subsection (a) shall be liable to the United States for a
 civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each violation. Each
 day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. In
 determining the amount of such penalty, the Secretary shall take into
 account the gravity of the violations and, with respect to the violator, the
 degree of culpability and history of prior violations (including violations
 resolved by written warnings), and such other matters as justice may require.
 (2) The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or without
 conditions, any civil penalty that is subject to imposition or that has
 been imposed under this section.
 (c) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- (1) Any person who violates subsection (a) shall--
 (A) be fined in an amount not to exceed $10,000, or imprisoned for not
 more than one year, or both; and
 (B) if such violation involves intent to defraud, or any distribution of
 any fish or fish product that is adulterated, be fined in an amount not
 to exceed $20,000, or imprisoned for not more than three years, or both.
 (d) NOTICE OF WARNING- In the case of one or more minor violations of this
 Act or regulations promulgated under this Act, the Secretary may, whenever
 the Secretary believes that the public interest will be adequately served
 thereby, issue to the violator a suitable written notice of warning. In
 determining whether the public interest will be adequately served by
 a written notice of warning, the Secretary shall consider, among other
 factors--
 (1) the compliance history of such person;
 (2) the magnitude of the violation;
 (3) whether compliance with this Act would likely be obtained as a result
 of such notice; and
 (4) whether such violation is of a minor or technical nature.
 (e) CARRIERS- No common carrier or contract carrier shall be subject to
 penalties under this section for the receipt, carriage, holding, or delivery,
 in the usual course of business, as a carrier, of any adulterated or
 misbranded fish or fish product owned by another person, unless the carrier--
 (1) during the time of such receipt, carriage, holding, or delivery, had
 knowledge or was in possession of facts that would cause a reasonable person
 to believe that the fish or fish product were adulterated or misbranded
 or were otherwise not eligible for transportation under this Act, or
 (2) refuses to furnish on request of the Secretary the name and address
 of the person from whom the carrier received the adulterated or misbranded
 fish or fish product, and copies of all documents pertaining to the delivery
 of such fish or fish product.
HEARINGS AND SUBPOENAS
 SEC. 12. (a) ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING- The Secretary shall afford an
 opportunity for a written hearing to any person adversely affected by the
 action or inaction of the Secretary under this Act. As soon as practicable
 after such hearing the Secretary shall take appropriate action.
 (b) SUBPOENAS- (1) For the purposes of any hearing or investigation under
 this Act, the Secretary may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and
 testimony of witnesses and the production of any documentation or other
 evidence that relates to any matter under investigation or in dispute
 before the Secretary and to administer oaths or affirmations.
 (2) The Secretary shall pay witnesses subpoenaed under this subsection
 customary reasonable fees and mileage.
 (3) In case of contempt or refusal to obey a subpoena served upon any person
 pursuant to this subsection, the district court of the United States for
 the district in which such person is found, resides, or transacts business,
 upon application by the Secretary and after notice to such person, shall
 have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear and
 give testimony before the Secretary or to appear and produce documents
 before the Secretary or both, and any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof.
EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS
 SEC. 13. (a) IN GENERAL- This Act shall not apply to--
 (1) the processing by any individual of fish and fish products of that
 individual's own raising or harvesting exclusively for use by that
 individual, or by that individual's household members, nonpaying guests,
 and employees; and
 (2) vessels that harvest or commercially prepare fish or fish products unless
 they prepare fish or fish products other than by gutting, decapitating,
 gilling, icing, or brine chilling, as determined by the Secretary.
 (b) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS- This Act shall not apply to any processing facility
 solely processing fish products not intended for human consumption.
 (c) STUDY- (1) The Secretary shall, not later than eighteen months after
 the date of enactment of this Act, conduct and complete a study of--
 (A) the role of vessels exempted under subsection (a)(2) in providing fish
 and fish products; and
 (B) based on a scientific analysis conducted pursuant to the Hazard Analysis
 Critical Control Point method, the necessity of including any particular
 type or class of such vessels in the inspection program conducted pursuant
 to this Act.
The Secretary may from time to time update any such study.
 (2) The Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries of the House of Representatives the results of the study required
 under paragraph (1) and the results of any update of such study.
 (3) If as a result of the study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) or any
 update of such study the Secretary recommends that any type or class of
 vessel exempted pursuant to subsection (a)(2) should be included in the
 seafood safety and quality assurance program established under this Act,
 the Secretary shall, after public notice and an opportunity for comment,
 promulgate regulations to include any such type or class of vessel in
 such program.
CONSUMER EDUCATION AND INFORMATION
 SEC. 14. (a) DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PROGRAM- The Secretary shall
 design and implement a national consumer education and information program
 on seafood.
 (b) COLLECTION, ANALYSIS AND DISSEMINATION- (1) Under the program referred
 to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall collect and analyze information
 on the health hazards associated with the human consumption of fish and
 fish products (including information on the number, causes, and geographic
 location of illnesses related to such consumption) and shall disseminate
 the results of such collection and analysis to consumers, persons involved
 in processing, and other interested persons.
 (2) In the collection and analysis of information referred to in paragraph
 (1), the Secretary shall, among other things, assess such health hazards
 with respect to--
 (A) fish and fish products that are commercially harvested and processed
 as compared with those harvested for recreational or subsistence purposes
 and prepared noncommercially;
 (B) fish and fish products that are domestically harvested and processed
 as compared with imported fish and fish products that are harvested and
 processed outside the United States; and
 (C) contamination originating from certain practices that occur both prior
 to and after sale of fish or fish products to consumers, especially in
 connection with the manner in which consumers handle and prepare the fish
 and fish products they purchase.
 (3) In disseminating the results of the collection and analysis of
 information referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 (A) inform consumers and persons involved in processing regarding the
 standards and good practice requirements prescribed under section 5 and
 promote public awareness, understanding, and acceptance of such standards
 and requirements;
 (B) advise individuals involved in recreational and subsistence fisheries
 concerning the health hazards associated with the fish they may harvest
 and the precautions they should take to safeguard themselves and others
 from those hazards; and
 (C) provide such other information or advice to consumers and other persons
 as the Secretary determines will promote the purposes of this Act.
 (c) DESIGNATION OF NATIONAL AND REGIONAL CENTERS- Under the program referred
 to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall designate national and regional
 centers that will conduct, support, and foster research, investigation,
 experimentation, education, and training regarding seafood safety and
 quality assurance.
RESEARCH PRIORITIES
 SEC. 15. (a) SHELLFISH INDICATOR RESEARCH PROGRAM- (1) The Secretary
 shall establish and administer a five-year shellfish indicator research
 program to develop a system of classification of shellfish growing waters
 based upon the latest technological advancements in microbiology and
 epidemiological methods. In establishing such a program, the Secretary
 shall develop a program plan which shall provide for, but not be limited
 to, the following activities:
 (A) Environmental assessment of commercial shellfish growing areas in the
 United States, including evaluation of the relationships between indicators
 of fecal contamination and human enteric pathogens.
 (B) Evaluation of such relationships with respect to potential health
 hazards associated with human consumption.
 (C) A comparison of the current microbiological methods used for evaluation
 of indicator bacteria and human enteric pathogens in shellfish and shellfish
 growing waters with new technological methods designed for this purpose.
 (D) Design of epidemiological studies to relate microbiological data,
 sanitary survey data, and human shellfish consumption data to actual
 hazards to health associated with such consumption.
 (E) Recommendations for revising the Federal standards established under
 section 5 and improving the capabilities of Federal and State agencies
 to effectively manage shellfish resources and ensure the safety of fish
 products containing shellfish.
 (2) The research program established pursuant to this section shall evaluate
 representative estuaries in each of the major shellfish growing regions
 of the United States and shall result in development of recommendatons
 pertaining to shellfish management and regulatory considerations for each
 of the following shellfish growing regions:
 (A) the New England region, consisting of the States north of New Jersey
 which border the Atlantic Ocean;
 (B) the Mid-Atlantic region, consisting of Maryland, Virginia, Delaware,
 and New Jersey;
 (C) the South Atlantic region, consisting of North Carolina, South Carolina,
 Georgia, and the Atlantic coast of Florida;
 (D) the Gulf of Mexico region, consisting of Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi,
 Alabama, and the gulf coast of Florida; and
 (E) the Pacific region, consisting of Hawaii, California, Oregon, Washington,
 and Alaska.
 (3) The Secretary shall carry out the research program authorized by
 this section by providing assistance in the form of grants to eligible
 applicants. Not later than ninety days after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a call for
 research proposals to carry out the research program. Not later than ninety
 days after the date of such publication, the Secretary shall award a grant
 or grants to eligible applicants for carrying out the research program. As
 used in this paragraph, the term `eligible applicant' means--
 (A) any public or private institution of higher education;
 (B) any public or private organization with suitable research capabilities;
 or
 (C) any consortium of two or more entities referred to in subparagraphs
 (A) and (B).
 (4) The Secretary shall establish an advisory panel to assist in the
 development and implementation of the research program. Such advisory
 panel shall include one representative from each of the following agencies
 or organizations: the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug
 Administration, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference. In
 addition, the Secretary shall appoint an industry representative from each
 of the shellfish growing regions identified in paragraph (2) to serve on
 the advisory panel.
 (5)(A) The Secretary shall review the research program authorized by this
 section not less than every two years and, on the basis of that review,
 make changes in the administration of the program that are appropriate to
 carry out more effectively the activities described in paragraph (1).
 (B) The Secretary shall submit a biennial report to the Committee on
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on
 Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives regarding
 the operation of the program. Each such report shall include, with respect
 to the period covered by the report--
 (i) a description of the research assisted under the program and the
 results of such research; and
 (ii) all changes to the program made under subparagraph (A) since the
 previous such report.
 (C) At the completion of the research program, the final report submitted
 pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall include any recommendation for legislative
 action needed to improve the effectiveness of shellfish management and
 ensure the safety of shellfish and fish products containing shellfish.
 (D) The final report shall be made available to appropriate Federal and
 State agencies, the shellfish industry, and the general public and shall
 be reviewed in a series of public hearings held in each of the five regions
 described in paragraph (2).
 (b) OTHER RESEARCH- The Secretary shall conduct and support research with
 respect to--
 (1) testing the methodology for detecting and measuring biological and
 chemical contaminants in fish and fish product;
 (2) techniques and procedures for inspecting fish and fish products;
 (3) sanitation practices for the processing, transportation, and storage
 of fish and fish products; and
 (4) any other matters that may further the purposes of this Act.
REGULATIONS
 SEC. 16. The Secretary may promulgate such regulations as the Secretary
 determines are appropriate in carrying out this Act.
INTERAGENCY COOPERATION
 SEC. 17. By agreement with the head of any Federal agency, the Secretary
 may utilize on a reimbursable basis or otherwise, the personnel, services,
 and facilities of any other department or agency of the United States in
 the performance of his duties under this Act.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 18. (a) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated, to carry
 out this Act, not to exceed $35,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, $60,000,000
 for fiscal year 1992, and $90,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.
 (b) RESEARCH PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION- Of the funds authorized to be
 appropriated under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary not to exceed $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years, 1991, 1992,
 and 1993, for carrying out the research program authorized by section 15.