HR 2815 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2815
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform standards of
liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 27, 1991
Mr. MCEWEN introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on the Judiciary, Public Works and Transportation, and Energy
and Commerce
A BILL
To regulate interstate commerce by providing for uniform standards of
liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `General Aviation Accident Liability Standards
 Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) transportation by air of passengers continues to comprise an increasingly
 important component of the Nation's overall transportation system;
 (2) although the incidence of injuries to passengers in general aviation
 accidents has decreased, the number of general aviation accident liability
 claims against general aviation aircraft manufacturers and the amount of
 damages sought in such claims is increasing at disproportionate rates, beyond
 any relationship to the quality of the aircraft manufactured and in use;
 (3) the current system for determining liability and damages for compensating
 individuals injured in general aviation accidents is inadequate;
 (4) competent general aviation manufacturers and component part manufacturers
 are ceasing or limiting production of general aviation aircraft or some
 models of such aircraft because of the increasing costs and unavailability
 of product liability insurance;
 (5) the increase in the number of liability claims and the size of awards and
 settlements, and the excessive time and expense devoted to the resolution
 of such claims, impose a substantial economic burden on general aviation
 manufacturers and their dealers;
 (6) the Federal Government has an interest in the general aviation
 accident liability system because the Federal Government has established
 a comprehensive system for regulating general aviation, including--
 (A) establishing standards for design, construction, and certification of
 general aviation aircraft,
 (B) establishing standards for maintenance of aircraft, licensing of repair
 facilities, and licensing of persons who may perform or approve maintenance,
 repairs, and inspections,
 (C) establishing standards for training and licensing of pilots,
 (D) establishing a comprehensive air control system,
 (E) conducting investigations to determine the probable cause of aviation
 accidents and prevent future accidents, and
 (F) conducting other activities necessary to assure a safe air transportation
 system;
and this Federal system is the exclusive legal authority for regulating
aviation operations and safety;
 (7) it is in the national interest to reduce unnecessary expenditures
 related to general aviation accident liability claims while providing more
 rapid and more efficient compensation for individuals harmed in general
 aviation accidents; and
 (8) Federal action to reform the general aviation accident liability system
 will result in--
 (A) the maintenance of airworthy general aviation aircraft; and
 (B) a more rational general aviation accident liability system.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to establish standards for
 determining liability for harm arising out of general aviation accidents.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act, the term--
 (1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation
 Administration;
 (2) `claimant' means any person who brings a general aviation accident
 liability action subject to this Act, and any person on whose behalf such
 an action is brought, including--
 (A) the claimant's decedent; and
 (B) the claimant's parent or guardian, if the action is brought through
 or on behalf of a minor or incompetent;
 (3) `general aviation accident' means any accident which arises out of
 the operation of any general aviation aircraft and which results in harm;
 (4) `general aviation aircraft' means any powered aircraft for which a
 type certificate or an airworthiness certificate has been issued by the
 Administrator under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1301
 et seq.) which, at the time such certificate was originally issued, had
 a maximum seating capacity of fewer than twenty passengers, and which is
 not, at the time of the accident, engaged in scheduled passenger carrying
 operations as defined in regulations issued under the Federal Aviation
 Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1301 et seq.);
 (5) `general aviation manufacturer' means--
 (A) the builder or manufacturer of the airframe of a general aviation
 aircraft;
 (B) the manufacturer of the engine of a general aviation aircraft; and
 (C) the manufacturer of any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 of a general aviation aircraft;
 (6) `harm' means--
 (A) property damage or bodily injury sustained by a person;
 (B) death resulting from such bodily injury;
 (C) pain and suffering which is caused by such bodily injury; and
 (D) emotional harm (including bereavement and loss of affection, care,
 or society) which is caused by such bodily injury;
 (7) `product' means a general aviation aircraft and any system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of a general aviation aircraft; and
 (8) `property damage' means physical injury to tangible property, including
 loss of use of tangible property.
SEC. 4. PREEMPTION; APPLICABILITY.
 (a) PREEMPTION- This Act supersedes any State law regarding recovery, under
 any legal theory, for harm arising out of a general aviation accident, to
 the extent that this Act establishes a rule of law or procedure applicable
 to the claim.
 (b) PROTECTION OF SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY- Nothing in this Act shall be
 construed to supersede or to waive or affect any defense of sovereign
 immunity asserted by the United States or any State.
 (c) NO AFFECT ON NONGENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS- Nothing in this
 Act shall be construed to affect the liability of a manufacturer, owner,
 or operator of any aircraft that is not a general aviation aircraft, or a
 person who repairs, maintains, or provides any other support for any aircraft
 that is not a general aviation aircraft, for damages for harm arising out
 of the operation of an aircraft that is not a general aviation aircraft.
 (d) PROTECTION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION- No right of action for harm exists
 under this Act if that right would be inconsistent with the provisions of
 any applicable workers' compensation law.
 (e) LIMITATION ON APPLICABILITY- The provisions of this Act shall apply
 only to--
 (1) any manufacturer, owner, or operator of any general aviation aircraft
 and any person who repairs, maintains, or provides any other support for
 such an aircraft;
 (2) any occupant of a general aviation aircraft at the time of a general
 aviation accident and any person who brings an action for harm caused by
 such accident on behalf of such occupant; and
 (3) any nonoccupant of a general aviation aircraft at the time of a general
 aviation accident only if such nonoccupant is bringing an action for harm
 caused by such accident which arises out of the harm to an occupant of
 such aircraft at the time of such accident.
SEC. 5. UNIFORM STANDARDS OF LIABILITY FOR GENERAL AVIATION ACCIDENTS.
 (a) NEGLIGENT PARTIES- Any person claiming damages for harm arising out
 of a general aviation accident may bring an action against a party and
 may recover damages from such party if such party was negligent and such
 negligence is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 (b) GENERAL AVIATION MANUFACTURERS- (1) Any person claiming damages for
 harm arising out of a general aviation accident may bring an action against
 a general aviation manufacturer of a product and may recover damages from
 such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) the product, when it left the control of the manufacturer, was in
 a defective condition unreasonably dangerous for its intended purpose,
 according to engineering and manufacturing practices which were reasonably
 feasible;
 (B) the defective condition is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm; and
 (C) the general aviation aircraft was being used at the time of the accident
 for a purpose and in a manner for which it was designed and manufactured.
 (2) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident may bring an action against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) at the time the product left the control of the manufacturer, the
 manufacturer--
 (i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 a danger connected with the product that caused the claimant's harm; and
 (ii) failed to provide the warnings or instructions that a person exercising
 reasonable care would have provided with respect to the danger which caused
 the harm alleged by the claimant, unless such warnings or instructions,
 if provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the user
 of the product; or
 (B) after the product left the control of the general aviation manufacturer,
 the manufacturer--
 (i) knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about
 the danger which caused the claimant's harm; and
 (ii) failed to take reasonable steps to provide warnings or instructions,
 after the manufacture of the product, which would have been provided by a
 person exercising reasonable care, unless such warnings or instructions, if
 provided, would not have materially affected the conduct of the product user;
and the failure to provide warnings or instructions described in subparagraph
(A) or (B) of this paragraph is a proximate cause of the claimant's harm.
 (3) Any person claiming damages for harm arising out of general aviation
 accident may bring an action against a general aviation manufacturer of a
 product and may recover damages from such general aviation manufacturer if--
 (A) the manufacturer made an express warranty with respect to the product;
 (B) such warranty relates to that aspect of the product which caused
 the harm;
 (C) the product failed to conform to such warranty; and
 (D) the failure of the product to conform to such warranty is a proximate
 cause of the claimant's harm.
 (c) PROCEDURE- (1) In an action governed by subsection (b) of this section,
 a general aviation manufacturer shall not be liable if such manufacturer
 proves, by a preponderance of the evidence, that--
 (A) the defective condition could have been corrected by compliance with
 action described in an airworthiness directive issued by the Administrator;
 and
 (B) such directive was issued at a reasonable time before the date of the
 accident and after the product left the control of the general aviation
 manufacturer.
 (2) In any action governed by subsection (b) of this section, evidence
 of compliance with standards, conditions or specifications established,
 adopted, or approved by the Federal Aviation Administration shall be
 admissible with regard to whether the product was defective and unreasonably
 dangerous for its intended purpose.
SEC. 6. COMPARATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- All actions for harm arising out of a general
 aviation accident shall be governed by the principles of comparative
 responsibility. Comparative responsibility attributed to the claimant's
 conduct shall not bar recovery in an action under this Act, but shall
 reduce any damages awarded to the claimant in an amount proportionate
 to the responsibility of the claimant. The trier of fact shall determine
 comparative responsibility by making findings indicating the percentage of
 total responsibility for the claimant's harm attributable to the claimant,
 each defendant, each third-party defendant, and any other person not a
 party to the action.
 (b) SEVERAL LIABILITY- Except as provided in subsection (c) of this
 section, a defendant is severally but not jointly liable in any action
 for harm arising out of a general aviation accident, and the liability of
 any defendant in any such action shall be determined on the basis of such
 defendant's proportionate share of responsibility for the claimant's harm.
 (c) JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY- In any action for harm arising out of a
 general aviation accident--
 (1) a general aviation manufacturer who is the builder or manufacturer
 of the airframe of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly
 and severally liable for harm caused by a defective system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of such aircraft that the manufacturer installed
 or certified as part of the original type design for such aircraft; and
 (2) a general aviation manufacturer who is the manufacturer of a system
 or component of the general aviation aircraft involved is jointly and
 severally liable for damages caused by a defective subassembly or other
 part of such system or component.
 (d) INDEMNITY; CONTRIBUTION- A general aviation manufacturer and any other
 person jointly liable under subsection (c) of this section shall have the
 right to bring an action for indemnity or contribution against any person
 with whom they are jointly liable under subsection (c) of this section.
SEC. 7. TIME LIMITATION ON LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section,
 no civil action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident which
 is brought against a general aviation manufacturer may be brought for harm
 which is alleged to have been caused by an aircraft or a system, component,
 subassembly, or other part of an aircraft and which occurs more than--
 (1) 20 years from--
 (A) the date of delivery of the aircraft to its first purchaser or lessee,
 if delivered directly from the manufacturer; or
 (B) the date of first delivery of the aircraft to a person engaged in the
 business of selling or leasing such an aircraft; or
 (2) with respect to any system, component, subassembly, or other part
 which replaced another product in, or which was added to, the aircraft,
 and which is alleged to have caused the claimant's harm, 20 years from
 the date of the replacement or addition.
 (b) EXPRESS WARRANTY EXCEPTION- Subsection (a) of this section does not apply
 in the case of harm to a claimant which occurs after the period set forth
 in subsection (a) of this section if the general aviation manufacturer or
 the seller of the product that caused the claimant's harm gave an express
 warranty that the product would be suitable, for the purpose for which it
 was intended, for a longer period of time.
 (c) REPAIRS AND WARNINGS- Nothing in this section shall be construed to
 affect a person's duty to provide, after the sale or lease of an aircraft, to
 aircraft owners, and to repair facilities to which a license or certificate
 to perform repairs has been issued by the Administrator, additional or
 modified warnings or instructions regarding the use or maintenance of such
 aircraft or any system, component, or other part of such aircraft.
SEC. 8. SUBSEQUENT REMEDIAL MEASURES.
 In any general aviation accident liability action governed by this Act,
 evidence of any measure taken after an event which, if taken previously,
 would have made the event less likely to occur is not admissible to provide
 liability. Such evidence is admissible to the extent permitted under rule
 407 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.
SEC. 9. ADMISSIBILITY OF CERTAIN EVIDENCE.
 In an action governed by this Act, evidence of Federal, State, or local
 income tax liability or any Social Security or other payroll tax liability
 attributable to past or future earnings, support, or profits and the present
 value of future earnings, support, or profits alleged to have been lost
 or diminished because of harm arising out of a general aviation accident
 is admissible regarding proof of the claimant's harm.
SEC. 10. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Punitive damages may be awarded in an action under this Act
 for harm arising out of a general aviation accident only if the claimant
 establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the harm suffered was the
 direct result of conduct manifesting a conscious, flagrant indifference
 to the safety of those persons who might be harmed by use of the general
 aviation aircraft involved.
 (b) EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL WORTH AND PROFITS- Evidence regarding the
 financial worth of a defendant or the defendant's profits or any other
 evidence relating solely to a claim for punitive damages under this Act is
 not admissible unless the claimant establishes, before any such evidence
 is offered, that the claimant can present evidence that will establish
 prima facie proof of conduct manifesting a conscious, flagrant indifference
 to the safety of those persons who might be harmed by use of the general
 aviation aircraft involved.
SEC. 11. TIME LIMITATION ON BRINGING ACTIONS.
 Any action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident shall be
 barred, notwithstanding any State law, unless--
 (1) the complaint is filed within 2 years after the date on which the
 accident occurred which caused the claimant's harm; and
 (2) the summons and complaint are properly served upon the defendant within
 120 days after the filing of such complaint, unless the party on whose
 behalf such service is required can show good cause why such service was
 not made within such 120-day period.
Paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not apply to service of process in a
foreign country pursuant to rule 4(i) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
or any similar State law.
SEC. 12. SANCTIONS.
 It is the intent of Congress that, with respect to any action governed by
 this Act, the sanctions for violation of rule 11 of the Federal Rules of
 Civil Procedure, including orders to pay to the other party or parties the
 amount of their reasonable expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee,
 be strictly enforced.
SEC. 13. JURISDICTION.
 (a) DISTRICT COURTS- The district courts of the United States, concurrently
 with the State courts, shall have original jurisdiction, in all civil
 actions where the matter in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $50,000,
 exclusive of interest and costs, for harm arising out of a general aviation
 accident and in all actions for indemnity or contribution described in
 section 6(d) of this Act.
 (b) REMOVAL- A civil action which is brought in a State court may be removed
 to the district court of the United States for the district embracing the
 place where the action is pending, without the consent of any other party,
 by any defendant against whom a claim in such action is asserted for harm
 arising out of a general aviation accident.
 (c) SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION- In any case commenced in or removed
 to a district court of the United States under subsection (a) or (b) of
 this section, the court shall have jurisdiction to determine all claims
 under State law that arise out of the same general aviation accident if a
 substantial question of fact is common to the claims under State law and
 to the Federal claim, defense, or counterclaim.
 (d) APPROPRIATE DISTRICT- (1) A civil action in which the district courts
 of the United States have jurisdiction under subsection (a) of this section
 may be brought only in a district in which--
 (A) the accident giving rise to the claim occurred; or
 (B) any plaintiff or defendant resides.
 (2) In an action pending in a district court of the United States under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, a district court may, on motion of any
 party or its own motion, transfer the action to any other district for
 the convenience of parties and witnesses in the interest of justice.
 (3) For purposes of this subsection, a corporation shall be considered to
 be a resident of any State in which it is incorporated or licensed to do
 business or is doing business.
SEC. 14. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act or the application of the provision to any
 person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Act and the
 application of the provision to any other person or circumstance shall
 not be affected by such invalidation.
SEC. 15. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) APPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN CIVIL ACTIONS- This Act shall apply to any
 civil action for harm arising out of a general aviation accident which is
 filed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) LIBERAL LEAVE TO AMEND PLEADINGS- If an action governed by this Act
 is filed within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 liberal leave shall be given to a party to amend any pleading, motion,
 statement of jurisdiction or venue, or other matter to conform to the
 provisions of this Act.