[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3474 Introduced in House (IH)]

105th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3474

 To help parents keep their children from starting to use tobacco 
products, to expose the tobacco industry's past misconduct and to stop 
 the tobacco industry from targeting children, to eliminate or greatly 
reduce the illegal use of tobacco products by children, to improve the 
public health by reducing the overall use of tobacco products, and for 
 other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 17, 1998

 Mr. Fazio of California (for himself, Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Bonior, Mr. 
Pallone, Mr. Sawyer, Mr. Meehan, Mr. Ackerman, Mr. Allen, Mr. Becerra, 
Mr. Blumenauer, Mr. Boswell, Mr. Brown of California, Ms. DeGette, Mr. 
 Delahunt, Ms. DeLauro, Mr. Faleomavaega, Mr. Farr of California, Mr. 
 Ford, Mr. Hinchey, Mr. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Mr. LaFalce, Mr. 
Lampson, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Levin, Mr. Lewis of Georgia, Mr. Lipinski, Mr. 
Matsui, Ms. McCarthy of Missouri, Mr. McGovern, Mr. McHale, Mr. Minge, 
 Mr. Nadler, Ms. Norton, Mr. Oberstar, Mr. Olver, Mr. Pomeroy, Ms. 
Roybal-Allard, Mr. Serrano, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Stokes, Mrs. Tauscher, Ms. 
 Velazquez, Mr. Wexler, Ms. Woolsey, Mr. Underwood, and Mr. Yates) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
 Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, the 
 Judiciary, Education and the Workforce, Agriculture, the Budget, 
Resources, and International Relations, for a period to be subsequently 
 determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such 
 provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To help parents keep their children from starting to use tobacco 
products, to expose the tobacco industry's past misconduct and to stop 
 the tobacco industry from targeting children, to eliminate or greatly 
reduce the illegal use of tobacco products by children, to improve the 
public health by reducing the overall use of tobacco products, and for 
 other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, 

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Healthy Kids 
Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
Sec. 3. Purposes.
Sec. 4. Definitions.
 TITLE I--HEALTHY KIDS TRUST FUND

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

Sec. 101. Establishment of Trust Fund.
Sec. 102. Liability of tobacco product manufacturers.
Sec. 103. Licensing of manufacturers.
Sec. 104. Enforcement.
 Subtitle B--Payments

 Chapter 1--To States

Sec. 111. Payments to States.
 Chapter 2--Federal Health Programs

Sec. 121. National Institutes of Health Trust Fund for Health Research.
 Chapter 3--Investments For Children

Sec. 131. Improving child care and early childhood development.
Sec. 132. Improving elementary education.
Sec. 133. Increased enrollment of children with the medicaid and State 
 children's health insurance programs.
Sec. 134. Medicare cancer patient demonstration project; evaluation and 
 report to Congress.
 TITLE II--FDA JURISDICTION OVER TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sec. 201. Reference.
Sec. 202. Statement of general authority.
Sec. 203. Treatment of tobacco products as drugs and devices.
Sec. 204. Safety and efficacy standard and recall authority.
Sec. 205. General health and safety regulation of tobacco products.
 ``Subchapter F--Tobacco Products

 ``Sec. 571. Promulgation of regulations.
 ``Sec. 572. Scientific Advisory Committee.
 ``Sec. 573. Performance standards.
 ``Sec. 574. Disclosure and reporting of tobacco and nontobacco 
 ingredients and constituents.
 ``Sec. 575. Tobacco product warnings, labeling and packaging.
 ``Sec. 576. Preservation of State and local authority.
 ``Sec. 577. Restrictions on youth access to tobacco products.
 ``Sec. 578. Public disclosure of health research.
 ``Sec. 579. Citizen suits.
 ``Sec. 580. Agricultural producers.
 ``Sec. 581. Authority of Secretary.
Sec. 206. Repeals.
Sec. 207. Authority of Federal Trade Commission.
 TITLE III--YOUTH SMOKING REDUCTION TARGETS AND INCENTIVES TO REDUCE 
 YOUTH SMOKING RATES

Sec. 301. Purpose.
Sec. 302. Child tobacco use surveys.
Sec. 303. Reduction in underage tobacco product usage.
Sec. 304. Noncompliance.
Sec. 305. Rulemaking procedures.
Sec. 306. Miscellaneous provisions.
TITLE IV--TOBACCO TRANSITION ASSISTANCE FOR PRODUCERS, COMMUNITIES, AND 
 OTHER PERSONS

Sec. 401. Minimum purchase requirements of domestic Flue-cured and 
 Burley tobacco for manufacturers of 
 cigarettes.
Sec. 402. Tobacco Transition Trust Fund and use of Trust Fund.
 TITLE V--STANDARDS TO REDUCE INVOLUNTARY EXPOSURE TO TOBACCO SMOKE

Sec. 501. Standards to reduce involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke.
 TITLE VI--PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--Research Programs

Sec. 601. Tobacco-related research.
Sec. 602. Research relating to patterns of smoking.
Sec. 603. Surveillance and evaluation.
 Subtitle B--Education and Prevention Programs

Sec. 611. Grants for school- and community-based tobacco danger 
 education programs.
 Subtitle C--Miscellaneous Programs

Sec. 621. Counter-advertising programs.
Sec. 622. National Tobacco Cessation Program.
Sec. 623. Assistance for those suffering from tobacco-related 
 illnesses.
Sec. 624. International tobacco control.
Sec. 625. National Event Sponsorship Program.
Sec. 626. Programs to reduce alcohol and illicit drug use by minors.
 TITLE VII--LIABILITY PROTECTION; CONSENT DECREES; NATIONAL PROTOCOL

 Subtitle A--Liability Protection and Attorney Fees

Sec. 701. Dismissal of and limitations on civil actions.
Sec. 702. Attorney's fees and expenses.
 Subtitle B--Consent Decrees

Sec. 711. Consent decrees.
Sec. 712. Non-participating manufacturers.
 Subtitle C--National Tobacco Control Protocol

 Chapter 1--Establishment

Sec. 721. National Tobacco Control Protocol.
 Chapter 2--Terms And Conditions

Sec. 725. Application of chapter.
Sec. 726. Agreement to prohibit certain advertising.
Sec. 727. Consensual restrictions.
Sec. 728. Agreement on format and content requirements for labeling and 
 advertising.
Sec. 729. Agreement to ban on nontobacco items and services, contests 
 and games of chance, and sponsorship of 
 events.
 Chapter 3--Enforcement

Sec. 731. Federal enforcement of the protocol.
Sec. 732. State enforcement of the protocol.
Sec. 733. Private enforcement of protocol.
 TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 801. Prohibition on use of funds to facilitate the exportation or 
 promotion of tobacco.
Sec. 802. Whistleblower protections.
Sec. 803. Prohibitions relating to tobacco products and children.
Sec. 804. Preservation of State and local authority.
Sec. 805. Severability.
 TITLE IX--PROVISIONS RELATING TO NATIVE AMERICANS

Sec. 901. Provisions relating to Native Americans.
 TITLE X--TOBACCO ASBESTOS TRUST

Sec. 1001. Tobacco asbestos trust fund.
Sec. 1002. Funding of trust; assessment from tobacco companies.
Sec. 1003. Structure and operation.
Sec. 1004. Rights of parties.
Sec. 1005. Definitions.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Approximately 3,000 children begin smoking each day. 
 1,000 of these children will die prematurely from a tobacco-
 related illness or condition.
 (2) The tobacco industry has targeted tobacco product 
 marketing and promotional efforts toward children as a source 
of replacement smokers. The industry has also targeted minorities.
 (3) Approximately 90 percent of smokers start by the time 
 they are 18 years old. Half of all smokers start by age 14.
 (4) Although most children plan to quit smoking after 
 experimenting, the vast majority find that they have become 
 addicted and cannot quit.
 (5) Seventy percent of adult smokers would like to quit 
 smoking, but the tobacco industry has manipulated the level of 
 nicotine in tobacco products and added ingredients to enhance 
 the addictive effects of nicotine to ensure that users of these 
 products remain addicted.
 (6) Tobacco products cause cancer, heart disease, lung 
 disease, and other fatal illnesses. More than 400,000 Americans 
 die each year of these tobacco-related illnesses and 
 conditions.
 (7) Tobacco-related illnesses, medical conditions resulting 
 from tobacco use, and lost wages and productivity cost the 
 United States in excess of $100,000,000,000 annually.
 (8) Federal and State taxpayers have spent and will 
 continue to spend tens of billions of dollars annually paying 
 for the medicare, medicaid, and other Federal and State health 
 program costs arising from tobacco-related illnesses and 
 conditions.
 (9) The tobacco industry has systematically invoked and 
 abused the attorney-client privilege to hide its attempts to 
 mislead the American public about the health risks associated 
 with tobacco use, its manipulation of nicotine levels, and its 
 efforts to lure underage users and minorities to its products.
 (10) Nicotine is an addictive drug. The marketplace for 
 tobacco products is largely based on addiction.
 (11) Worldwide, smoking kills 3,000,000 people each year. 
 If current smoking patterns continue, tobacco use will kill 
 10,000,000 people a year by 2025.
 (12) Environmental tobacco smoke is responsible for 3,000 
 lung cancer deaths annually in American nonsmokers. 
 Environmental tobacco smoke also harms children's health.
 (13) In 1995, the tobacco industry spent close to 
 $4,900,000,000 to attract new users, retain current users, 
 increase current consumption, and generate favorable long-term 
 attitudes toward smoking and tobacco use.
 (14) Tobacco product advertising misleadingly portrays the 
 use of tobacco as socially acceptable and healthful.
 (15) Tobacco product advertising is regularly seen by 
 persons under the age of 18, and persons under the age of 18 
 are regularly exposed to tobacco product promotional efforts.
 (16) Through advertisements during and sponsorship of 
 sporting events, tobacco has become strongly associated with 
 sports and has become portrayed as an integral part of sports 
 and the healthy lifestyle associated with rigorous sporting 
 activity.
 (17) Children are exposed to substantial and unavoidable 
 tobacco advertising, that leads to favorable beliefs about 
 tobacco use, plays a role in leading young people to 
 overestimate the prevalence of tobacco use, and increases the 
 number of young people who begin to use tobacco.
 (18) Tobacco advertising increases the size of the tobacco 
 market by increasing consumption of tobacco products including 
 increasing tobacco sales to young people.
 (19) Children are more influenced by tobacco advertising 
 than adults, they smoke the most advertised brands, and 
 children as young as 3 to 6 can recognize a character 
 associated with smoking at the same rate that they recognize 
 cartoons and fast food characters.
 (20) Tobacco company documents indicate that young people 
 are an important and often crucial segment of the tobacco 
 market.
 (21) Comprehensive advertising restrictions will have a 
 positive effect on the smoking rates of young people, as 
 evidenced by the experience in Norway, Finland, and other 
 countries.
 (22) Restrictions on advertising are necessary to prevent 
 unrestricted tobacco advertising from undermining legislation 
 prohibiting access to young people and providing for education 
 about tobacco use.
 (23) International experience shows that advertising 
 regulations that are stringent and comprehensive have a greater 
 impact on overall tobacco use and young people's use than 
 weaker or less comprehensive ones. Text only requirements, 
 while not as stringent as a ban, will accomplish this 
purpose while preserving the informational function of advertising.

SEC. 3. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to help American families dramatically reduce the 
 number of children illegally using tobacco products by--
 (A) increasing the price of cigarettes by at least 
 $1.50 per pack in order to discourage youth purchases;
 (B) implementing prevention, education, cessation, 
 and counter-advertising programs;
 (C) restricting advertisements designed to 
 encourage kids to use tobacco products;
 (D) imposing penalties on manufacturers for failing 
 to reach youth smoking rate reduction targets;
 (E) requiring retailers to comply with laws 
 forbidding sales to minors; and
 (F) giving the Food and Drug Administration and 
 State and local governments the authority and resources 
 to keep tobacco products out of the hands of minors;
 (2) to compensate taxpayers for their costs attributable to 
 tobacco-related illnesses by reimbursing the medicaid and 
 medicare programs and resolving the legal claims of Federal, 
 State and local governments for those costs that resulted from 
 past misconduct by the tobacco industry;
 (3) to improve the public health by reducing the number of 
 adult users of tobacco products through approved cessation 
 programs and limiting public exposure to environmental tobacco 
 smoke;
 (4) to provide assistance to tobacco farmers, tobacco 
 factory workers, and rural communities;
 (5) to affirm the full authority of the Food and Drug 
 Administration to regulate the manufacture, labeling, sale, 
 distribution, and advertising of tobacco products to the 
 fullest extent authorized by the commerce clause of the United 
 States Constitution;
 (6) to make available to the public tobacco industry 
 documents regarding the health effects of tobacco products, 
 addiction, the agricultural production of tobacco, the 
 manufacture of tobacco products, the distribution of tobacco 
 products, and the marketing of tobacco products to youths; and
 (7) to enhance global anti-tobacco efforts to minimize the 
 adverse health effects of tobacco products.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Brand.--The term ``brand'' means a variety of a tobacco 
 product distinguished by the tobacco used, tar content, 
 nicotine content, flavoring used, size, filtration, or 
 packaging.
 (2) Cigar.--The term ``cigar'' means any roll of tobacco 
 wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco 
 (other than any roll of tobacco which is a cigarette or 
 cigarillo within the meaning of paragraph (3) or (4)).
 (3) Cigarette.--The term ``cigarette'' means--
 (A) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any 
 substance not containing tobacco; and
 (B) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance 
 containing tobacco which, because of its appearance, 
 the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its 
 packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or 
 purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (4) Cigarillos.--The term ``cigarillos'' means any roll of 
 tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or any substance containing 
 tobacco (other than any roll of tobacco which is a cigarette 
 within the meaning of paragraph (3)) and as to which 1,000 
 units weigh not more than 3 pounds.
 (5) Cigarette tobacco.--The term ``cigarette tobacco'' 
 means any product that consists of loose tobacco and is 
 intended for use by persons in a cigarette. Unless otherwise 
 stated, the requirements of this Act pertaining to cigarettes 
 shall also apply to cigarette tobacco.
 (6) Distributor.--The term ``distributor'' means any person 
 who furthers the distribution of tobacco products, whether 
 domestic or imported, at any point from the original place of 
 manufacture to the person who sells or distributes the product 
 to individuals for personal consumption. Such term shall not 
 include common carriers.
 (7) Little cigar.--The term ``little cigar'' means any roll 
 of tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or any substance containing 
 tobacco (other than any roll of tobacco which is a cigarette 
 within the meaning of subsection (1)) and as to which 1,000 
 units weigh not more than 3 pounds.
 (8) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means any 
 person, including any repacker or relabeler, who manufactures, 
 fabricates, assembles, processes, or labels a tobacco product.
 (9) Package.--The term ``package'' means a pack, box, 
 carton, or container of any kind in which tobacco products are 
 offered for sale, sold, or otherwise distributed to consumers.
 (10) Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual, 
 partnership, corporation, parent corporation, or any other 
 business or legal entity or successor in interest of any such 
 person.
 (11) Pipe tobacco.--The term ``pipe tobacco'' means any 
 loose tobacco that, because of its appearance, type, packaging, 
 or labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, 
 consumers as a tobacco product to be smoked in a pipe.
 (12) Point of sale.--The term ``point of sale'' means any 
 location at which an individual can purchase or otherwise 
 obtain tobacco products for personal consumption.
 (13) Retailer.--The term ``retailer'' means any person who 
 sells tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption, 
 or who operates a facility where vending machines or self-
 service displays are permitted under this Act.
 (14) Roll-your-own tobacco.--The term ``roll-your-own 
 tobacco'' means any tobacco which, because of its appearance, 
 type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable for use and likely to 
 be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making 
 cigarettes.
 (15) Sale.--The term ``sale'' includes the selling, 
 providing samples of, or otherwise making tobacco products 
 available for personal consumption in any place within the 
 scope of this Act.
 (16) Secretary.--Except as provided in title IV, the term 
 ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (17) Smokeless tobacco.--The term ``smokeless tobacco'' 
 means any product that consists of cut, ground, powdered, or 
 leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal 
 cavity.
 (18) State.--The term ``State'' includes the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the 
 United States. Such term includes any political division of any 
 State.
 (19) Tobacco.--The term ``tobacco'' means tobacco in its 
 unmanufactured form.
 (20) Tobacco product.--The term ``tobacco product'' means 
 any product made of or derived from tobacco leaf for human 
 consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, 
 cigarillos, cigarette tobacco, cigars, little cigars, pipe 
 tobacco, and smokeless tobacco, and roll-your-own tobacco.
 (21) Trust fund.--Except as provided in section 121 and 
 title IV, the term ``Trust Fund'' means the Health Enhancement 
 and Lowered Tobacco Hazards for Young Kids Trust Fund 
 established under section 101.

 TITLE I--HEALTHY KIDS TRUST FUND

 Subtitle A--General Provisions

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.

 (a) Creation.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of 
 the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Health 
 Enhancement and Lowered Tobacco Hazards for Young Kids Trust 
 Fund'' (referred to as the ``HEALTHY Kids Trust Fund''), 
 consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited 
 to the Trust Fund.
 (2) Trustees.--The trustees of the Trust Fund shall be the 
 Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (b) Transfers.--There are hereby appropriated and transferred to 
the Trust Fund an amount equal to the initial payment under section 102 
and 75 percent of the--
 (1) amounts received under the annual assessments made 
 under section 102;
 (2) amounts paid as fines or penalties, including interest 
 thereon, under section 103; and
 (3) amounts repaid or recovered under title III, including 
 interest thereon.
 (c) Repayable Advances.--
 (1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 to the Trust Fund, as repayable advances, such sums as may from 
 time to time be necessary to make the expenditures described in 
 subsection (d).
 (2) Repayment with interest.--Repayable advances made to 
 the Trust Fund shall be repaid, and interest on such advances 
 shall be paid, to the general fund of the Treasury when the 
 Secretary of the Treasury determines that moneys are available 
 in the Trust Fund for such purposes.
 (3) Rate of interest.--Interest on advances made pursuant 
 to this subsection shall be at a rate determined by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury (as of the close of the calendar 
 month preceding the month in which the advance is made) to be 
equal to the current average market yield on outstanding marketable 
obligations of the United States with remaining period to maturity 
comparable to the anticipated period during which the advance will be 
outstanding.
 (d) Expenditures From Trust Fund.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall 
be made available in each fiscal year, without further appropriation as 
follows:
 (1) 14.5 percent of such amounts shall be made available 
 for payments to States as provided for under section 111.
 (2) 20 percent of such amounts shall be made available for 
 grants to the States for child care and early childhood 
 development as provided for in section 131 in the first 5 years 
 and then 17 percent of such amounts shall be made so available 
 for grants to the States.
 (3) 9 percent of such amounts shall be made available for 
 grants to States for education as provided for in section 132 
 in the first 5 years and then 6 percent of such amounts shall 
 be made so available to grants to States.
 (4) 4 percent of such amounts shall be made available to 
 carry out the outreach and increased enrollment provisions 
 under the amendments made by section 133 to the medicaid 
 program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396 et seq.) and the children's health insurance program under 
 title XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.).
 (5) 15.5 percent of such amounts shall be made available 
 for public health programs, of which--
 (A) $300,000,000 shall be made available to the 
 Secretary to carry out subchapter F of chapter V of the 
 Food Drug and Cosmetic Act (as added by section 204);
 (B) $200,000,000 shall be made available to the 
 Indian Health Service to be used as provided for in 
 title IX; and
 (C) the remainder shall be made available for 
 public health programs as provided for in title VI.
 (6) 21 percent of such amounts shall be made available to 
 the National Institutes of Health Trust Fund for Health 
 Research for the conduct of health research as provided for in 
 section 121.
 (7) For agricultural programs as provided for in title IV--
 (A) 12 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to the Tobacco Transition Trust Fund for each 
 of the first 10 fiscal years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act;
 (B) 4 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to the Tobacco Transition Trust Fund for each 
 of the 11th through 15th fiscal years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (C) 2 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to the Tobacco Transition Trust Fund for each 
 of the 16th through 25th fiscal years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (8) For the Hospital Insurance Trust Fund--
 (A) 4 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to such Trust Fund for each of the first 10 
 fiscal years after the date of enactment of this Act 
 (less amounts made available under paragraph (9) for 
 the first 3 such fiscal years);
 (B) 8 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to such Trust Fund for each of the 11th 
 through 15th fiscal years after the date of enactment 
 of this Act;
 (C) 9 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to such Trust Fund for each of the 16th 
 through 25th fiscal years after the date of enactment 
 of this Act; and
 (D) 10 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available to such Trust Fund for each subsequent fiscal 
 year.
 (9) For carrying out section 134, $250,000,000 shall be 
 made available in each of the 3 fiscal years described in such 
 section;
 (10) For reducing the debt--
 (A) 6 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available for such reduction in each of the 6th through 
 10th fiscal years after the date of enactment of this 
 Act;
 (B) 10 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available for such reduction in each of the 11th 
 through 15th fiscal years after the date of enactment 
 of this Act;
 (C) 11 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available for such reduction in each of the 16th 
 through 25th fiscal years after the date of enactment 
 of this Act; and
 (D) 12 percent of such amounts shall be made 
 available for such reduction in each subsequent fiscal 
 year.
 (e) Budgetary Treatment and Definition.--
 (1) Treatment.--Amounts made available under paragraphs (8) 
 and (10) of subsection (d) shall not be included--
 (A) by the Office of Management and Budget in the 
 estimates and reports required by sections 252(b) and 
 254 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit 
 Control Act of 1985; and
 (B) by the Committee on the Budget of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on the Budget of the 
 Senate for purposes of congressional enforcement under 
 section 302(f) and 311(2)(B) of the Congressional 
 Budget Act of 1974 and section 202 of House Concurrent 
 Resolution 67 (104th Congress).
 (2) Definition.--In subsection (d)(10), the term ``debt'' 
 means any obligation of the Federal Government included in the 
 debt subject to limit.

SEC. 102. LIABILITY OF TOBACCO PRODUCT MANUFACTURERS.

 (a) Payments.--
 (1) Initial payment.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, each manufacturer shall 
 pay to the Trust Fund an amount that bears the same 
 ratio to $16,000,000,000 as the average stock market 
 capitalization of the tobacco manufacturer (as defined 
 in subparagraph (B)) bears to the average stock market 
 capitalization of all tobacco manufacturers for 1996.
 (B) Average stock market capitalization.--For 
 purposes of paragraph (1), the average stock market 
 capitalization of a manufacturer for a year shall be 
 determined by the Secretary of the Treasury based on 
 data submitted by manufacturers and other appropriate 
 data. Such determinations shall be made regardless of 
 whether the manufacturer issues stock.
 (2) Subsequent payments.--
 (A) with respect to the first fiscal year following 
 the year in which the amount is paid under paragraph 
 (1), each manufacturer shall pay to the Trust Fund an 
 amount which bears the same ratio to $24,330,000,000 as 
 the manufacturer's gross receipts from the domestic 
 volume of sales of tobacco products it made during the 
 year for which the payment is made bears to 
 $24,330,000,000;
 (B) with respect to the 2d such fiscal year 
 following the year in which the amount is paid under 
 paragraph (1) and each of the next 2 succeeding fiscal 
 years, each manufacturer shall pay to the Trust Fund an 
 amount which bears the same ratio to $26,330,000,000 as 
 the manufacturer's gross receipts from the domestic 
 volume of sales of tobacco products it made during the 
 year for which the payment is made bears to 
 $26,330,000,000;
 (C) with respect to the 5th fiscal year following 
 the year in which the amount is paid under paragraph 
 (1) and each of the next 4 succeeding fiscal years, 
 each manufacturer shall pay to the Trust Fund an amount 
 which bears the same ratio to $27,360,000,000 as the 
 manufacturer's gross receipts from the domestic volume 
 of sales of tobacco products it made during the year 
 for which the payment is made bears to $27,360,000,000;
 (D) with respect to the 10th fiscal year following 
 the year in which the amount is paid under paragraph 
 (1) and each of the next 5 succeeding fiscal years, 
 each manufacturer shall pay to the Trust Fund an amount 
 which bears the same ratio to $29,850,000,000 as the 
 manufacturer's gross receipts from the domestic volume 
 of sales of tobacco products it made during the year 
 for which the payment is made bears to $29,850,000,000;
 (E) with respect to the 16th fiscal year following 
 the year in which the amount is paid under paragraph 
 (1) and each of the next 8 succeeding fiscal years, 
 each manufacturer shall pay to the Trust Fund an amount 
 which bears the same ratio to $29,120,000,000 as the 
 manufacturer's gross receipts from the domestic volume 
 of sales of tobacco products it made during the year 
 for which the payment is made bears to $29,120,000,000;
 (3) Small manufacturers.--In the case of small cigar, large 
 cigar, snuff, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, and roll-your-own 
 tobacco manufacturers, the amount to be paid under paragraph 
 (2) shall be based on one-half of the gross receipts from the 
 domestic volume of sales of the tobacco product it made during 
 the year for which the payment is to be made.
 (4) Annual assessments and collection.--For each calendar 
 year beginning with the first full fiscal year following the 
 calendar year in which this Act is enacted, the Secretary shall 
 assess each manufacturer an amount determined under this 
 subsection. Such assessments shall be collected in a manner 
 similar to the manner in which excise taxes are collected under 
 chapter 52 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (b) Inflation Adjustment.--In the case of a calendar year after 
2001, the dollar amount described in subparagraph (C) of paragraphs 
(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8), and the percentage in 
subparagraph (C) of paragraph (4), applicable to the preceding calendar 
year shall be increased by an amount equal to--
 (1) such dollar amount (or percentage), multiplied by
 (2) the greater of--
 (A) the medical consumer price percentage increase 
 for such calendar year as determined in the same manner 
 as the adjustment is determined under section 1(f)(3) 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for such calendar 
 year by substituting ``the second preceding calendar 
 year'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) 
 thereof; or
 (B) 3 percent.
 (c) Assessments Applicable to Floor Stocks.--
 (1) In general.--Tobacco products manufactured in or 
 imported into the United States which are removed before any 
 assessment date, and held on such date for sale by any person, 
 shall be subject to an assessment in an amount equal to the 
 excess of--
 (A) the assessment which would be imposed under 
 subsection (b) on the product if the product had been 
 removed on such date, over
 (B) the prior assessment (if any) imposed under 
 such subsection on such product.
 (2) Liability for assessment and method of payment.--
 (A) Liability for assessment.--A person holding 
 tobacco products on any assessment date, to which any 
 assessment imposed under paragraph (1) applies shall be 
 liable for such assessment.
 (B) Method of payment.--The assessment imposed 
 under paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe by 
 regulations.
 (C) Time for payment.--The assessment imposed under 
 paragraph (1) shall be paid on or before April 1 
 following any assessment date.
 (3) Articles in foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the 
 Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a) and any 
 other provision of law, any product which is located in a 
 foreign trade zone on any assessment date, shall be subject to 
 the assessment imposed by paragraph (1) if--
 (A) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or 
 customs duties liquidated, with respect to such product 
 before such date; or
 (B) such article is held on such date under the 
 supervision of a customs officer.
 (4) Assessment date.--The term ``assessment date'' means 
 January 1.
 (d) No Tax Benefit.--
 (1) In general.--The initial payment described in 
 subsection (a)(1) shall not be considered to be an ordinary and 
 necessary expense in carrying on a trade or business for 
 purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and shall not be 
 tax deductible.
 (2) Look-back penalties.--The payment of penalties under 
 title III shall not be considered to be an ordinary and 
 necessary expense in carrying on a trade or business for 
 purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and shall not be 
 deductible.
 (e) Effect of Bankruptcy.--Section 507(a)(8) of title 11, United 
States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (F)(iii), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (2) in subparagraph (G), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(H) a payment, an assessment, or a penalty to be 
 paid into the Health Enhancement and Lowered Tobacco 
 Hazards for Young Kids Trust Fund under section 102 (or 
 any other section) of the Healthy Kids Act.''.
 (f) Limitation.--A manufacturer may not utilize any proceeds from 
liability insurance coverage to make payments or pay assessments under 
this section.
 (g) Healthy Kids Stamp.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
to provide that a Healthy Kids Stamp be affixed to each package of a 
tobacco product for which an assessment has been paid under this 
section.
 (h) Nonapplication to Certain Manufacturers.--
 (1) Exemption.--A manufacturer described in paragraph (2) 
 shall be exempt from the requirements of this section relating 
 to--
 (A) the payment of an initial payment under 
 subsection (a)(1); and
 (B) the payment of that portion of the annual 
 assessments under this section that will be provided 
 under paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 101(d) to 
 States.
 (2) Manufacturer.--A manufacturer described in this section 
 is a manufacturer that has resolved tobacco-related civil 
 actions with more than 25 States (in this paragraph referred to 
 as ``settling States'') prior to January 1, 1998 through 
 written settlement agreements signed by the attorneys general 
 of such States, so long as such manufacturer provides to all 
 other States by not later than December 31, 1998, the 
 opportunity to enter into written settlement agreements that 
 are substantially similar to the agreements that such 
 manufacturer has entered into with the settling States and that 
 provide such other States with the most favorable annual 
 payment terms of its written settlement offers to the settling 
 States.
 (3) Limitation.--The provisions of paragraph (1) shall 
 apply only to assessments on cigarettes to the extent that such 
 cigarettes constitute less than 3 percent of all cigarettes 
 manufactured and distributed for consumer use in any year.

SEC. 103. LICENSING OF MANUFACTURERS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Food and Drug 
Administration, shall establish a tobacco manufacturer licensing 
program.
 (b) Requirement.--A manufacturer or importer shall have in effect a 
license issued under the program under subsection (a) in order--
 (1) to be eligible to manufacture and distribute tobacco 
 products in the United States, or, in the case of an importer, 
 to be eligible to import tobacco products; and
 (2) to be eligible to receive the protections provided 
 under subtitle A of title VII.
 (c) Eligibility.--A manufacturer or importer shall not be eligible 
to receive a license under this section if such manufacturer or 
importer has failed to pay the payment of assessment required under 
section 102 or fails to comply with such other requirements as the 
Secretary may prescribe in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
 (d) Revocation and Suspension.--The Secretary shall promulgate 
regulations to provide for the enforcement of the program established 
under section (a). Such regulations shall provide for the revocation or 
suspension of a license for nonpayment of required assessments.

SEC. 104. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation 
with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall enforce the 
provisions of section 102 with respect to any manufacturer that fails 
to pay any amount assessed under section 102.
 (b) Amount of Penalty.--The amount of the penalty imposed by 
subsection (a) on any failure with respect to a manufacturer shall be 
established by the Secretary of the Treasury for each day during the 
noncompliance period, except that no such penalty shall be less than 
$25,000 plus interest.
 (c) Noncompliance Period.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``noncompliance period'' means, with respect to any failure to pay an 
assessment under section 102, the period--
 (1) beginning on the due date for such payment; and
 (2) ending on the date on which such payment is paid in 
 full.

 Subtitle B--Payments

 CHAPTER 1--TO STATES

SEC. 111. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Availability of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--The amounts made available for a fiscal 
 year under section 101(d)(1) shall be made available to carry 
 out subsections (b) and (d).
 (2) No overpayment.--With respect to the amount provided to 
 a State under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary 
 shall not treat such amount as an overpayment under any joint 
 Federal-State health program.
 (3) Fiscal year limitation.--Amounts made available for a 
 fiscal year under subsection (b) shall not exceed the amount 
 available for such fiscal year under section 101(d)(1).
 (b) Reimbursement.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use amounts made 
 available under subsection (a)(1) in each fiscal year to 
 provide funds to each State that is eligible under subsection 
 (c) to reimburse such State for amounts expended by the State 
 under the State program under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) or any other State health program 
 for the treatment of individuals with tobacco-related illnesses 
 or conditions.
 (2) Amount.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the amount for which a State is eligible under 
 paragraph (1) shall be based on the ratio of the total 
 Federal payments to the State under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) for the 
 fiscal year involved to the total Federal payments to 
 all States under such title for such fiscal year.
 (B) Federal payment revision.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 and American Samoa shall be treated as having received 
 Federal payments under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) without limitation under 
 section 1108(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C.1308(c)).
 (3) Adjustment.--With respect to a fiscal year in which the 
 amount determined under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection 
 (a) exceeds the limitation under subsection (a)(3), the 
 Secretary shall make pro rata reductions in the amounts 
 provided to States under this subsection.
 (4) Reallotment.--The amount for which a State is eligible 
 under this subsection that is not made available to the State 
 as a result of the failure of the State to meet the 
 requirements of subsection (c) shall be made available to other 
 States on a pro rata basis.
 (5) Use of funds.--Amounts provided to a State under this 
 subsection shall be used--
 (A) to reimburse the State for expenses incurred by 
 the State under the State program under title XIX of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) 
 relating to the treatment of tobacco-related illnesses 
 or conditions;
 (B) to reimburse the State for other expenses 
 incurred by the State in providing directly, or 
 reimbursing others for the provision of, treatment for 
 tobacco-related illnesses or conditions; and
 (C) to provide funds to local governmental entities 
 as provided for in subsection (d).
 (c) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive funds under this 
section a State shall--
 (1) agree to resolve in accordance with section 701 any 
 civil action that has been commenced by the State against a 
 tobacco manufacturer, distributor, or retailer of a tobacco 
 product seeking recovery for expenditures attributable to the 
 treatment of tobacco induced illnesses and conditions or other 
 damages;
 (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval a plan 
 describing the manner in which the State will comply with the 
 requirements of subsection (d) and a certification that all 
 actions described in paragraph (1) have been resolved; and
 (3) comply with the provisions of subsection (d) with 
 respect to State and local governments.
 (d) Funds for Local Governmental Entities.--To be eligible to 
receive funds under subsection (b), a State shall have adopted 
procedures to provide an equitable portion of such funds to local 
governmental entities within the State that can demonstrate that such 
entities incurred tobacco-related health costs through--
 (1) contributions to the program under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.);
 (2) the provision of indigent care;
 (3) the provision of health care coverage to governmental 
 employees; or
 (4) the implementation of tobacco product enforcement or 
 tobacco product regulatory requirements in accordance with this 
 Act.
 (e) Review of State Plans by Secretary.--The Secretary shall, in 
accordance with regulations of the Secretary, review each State plan 
submitted in accordance with subsection (c)(2) and shall provide local 
governments located within each State with an opportunity to comment on 
the adequacy of the State plan for such State. The Secretary shall not 
approve any such State plan unless the Secretary makes an explicit 
written finding that local governmental entities will receive an 
equitable portion of the funds provided under subsection (a) or (b) of 
this section in light of the factors listed in subsection (d).

 CHAPTER 2--FEDERAL HEALTH PROGRAMS

SEC. 121. NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH TRUST FUND FOR HEALTH RESEARCH.

 (a) Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury 
of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``National 
Institutes of Health Trust Fund for Health Research'' (hereafter 
referred to in this section as the ``Trust Fund''), consisting of such 
amounts as may be appropriated or transferred to the Trust Fund as 
provided in this section.
 (b) Funding.--There shall be transferred to the Trust Fund an 
amount equal to the amount made available for a fiscal year under 
section 101(d)(6) to carry out this section in such fiscal year.
 (c) Obligations From Trust Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of paragraph 
 (4), with respect to the amounts made available in the Trust 
 Fund in a fiscal year, the Secretary shall distribute during 
 any fiscal year--
 (A) 2 percent of such amounts to the Office of the 
 Director of the National Institutes of Health to be 
 allocated at the Director's discretion--
 (i) for carrying out the responsibilities 
 of the Office of the Director, including the 
 Office of Research on Women's Health and the 
 Office of Research on Minority Health, the 
 Office of Alternative Medicine, the Office of 
 Rare Disease Research, the Office of Behavioral 
 and Social Sciences Research (for use for 
 efforts to reduce tobacco use), the Office of 
 Dietary Supplements, and the Office for Disease 
 Prevention; and
 (ii) for construction and acquisition of 
 equipment for or facilities of or used by the 
 National Institutes of Health;
 (B) 2 percent of such amounts for transfer to the 
 National Center for Research Resources to carry out 
 section 1502 of the National Institutes of Health 
 Revitalization Act of 1993 concerning Biomedical and 
 Behavioral Research Facilities;
 (C) 7.5 percent of such amounts to be used for 
 research into the prevention and cure of cancer;
 (D) 7.5 percent of such amounts to be used as 
 provided for in section 601;
 (E) 1 percent of such amounts to be used for 
 prevention research programs at the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention;
 (F) 1 percent of such amounts to be used for 
 quality and health outcomes research at the Agency for 
 Health Care Policy and Research;
 (G) the remainder of such amounts to member 
 institutes and centers, including the Office of AIDS 
 Research, of the National Institutes of Health in the 
 same proportion to such remainder, as the amount of 
 annual appropriations under appropriations Acts for 
 each member institute and center for the fiscal year 
 bears to the total amount of appropriations under 
 appropriations Acts for all member institutes and 
 centers of the National Institutes of Health for the 
 fiscal year.
 (2) Plans of allocation.--The amounts transferred under 
 paragraph (1)(G) shall be allocated by the Director of the 
 National Institutes of Health or the various directors of the 
 institutes and centers, as the case may be, pursuant to 
 allocation plans developed by the various advisory councils to 
 such directors, after consultation with such directors.
 (3) Grants and contracts fully funded in first year.--With 
 respect to any grant or contract funded by amounts distributed 
 under paragraph (1), the full amount of the total obligation of 
 such grant or contract shall be funded in the first year of 
 such grant or contract, and shall remain available until 
 expended.
 (4) Trigger and release of monies and phase-in.--
 (A) Trigger and release.--No expenditure shall be 
 made under paragraph (1) during any fiscal year in 
which the annual amount appropriated for the National Institutes of 
Health under 1 or more appropriations Acts (not including amounts 
provided for purposes of this section) is less than the amount so 
appropriated for the prior fiscal year.
 (B) Phase-in.--The Secretary shall phase in the 
 distributions required under paragraph (1) so that--
 (i) 25 percent of the amount in the Trust 
 Fund is distributed in the first fiscal year 
 for which funds are available;
 (ii) 50 percent of the amount in the Trust 
 Fund is distributed in the second fiscal year 
 for which funds are available;
 (iii) 75 percent of the amount in the Trust 
 Fund is distributed in the third fiscal year 
 for which funds are available; and
 (iv) 100 percent of the amount in the Trust 
 Fund is distributed in the fourth and each 
 succeeding fiscal year for which funds are 
 available.

 CHAPTER 3--INVESTMENTS FOR CHILDREN

SEC. 131. IMPROVING CHILD CARE AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall use amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(2) for a fiscal year for the following purposes:
 (1) Improving the affordability of child care through 
 increased appropriations for child care under the Child Care 
and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.).
 (2) Enhancing the quality of child care and early childhood 
 development through the provision of grants to States under the 
 Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 9858 et seq.).
 (3) Expanding the availability and quality of school-age 
 care through the provision of grants to States under the Child 
 Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858 et 
 seq.).
 (4) Assisting young children by providing grants to local 
 collaboratives under the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.) for the purpose of 
 improving parent education and supportive services, 
 strengthening the quality of child care, improving health 
 services, and improving services for children with 
 disabilities.
 (b) Supplement not Supplant.--Amounts made available to a State 
under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other 
Federal, State and local funds provided for programs that serve the 
health and developmental needs of children. Amounts provided to the 
State under any of the provisions of law referred to in this section 
shall not be reduced solely as a result of the availability of funds 
under this section.
 (c) Authority of Secretary.--In providing funds to States under 
this section, the Secretary may consider the amount of funds allocated 
to States under section 111. The Secretary may allocate funds under 
this section based on the relative need for funds in the various States 
and the strength of the State plans or applications for such funds.

SEC. 132. IMPROVING ELEMENTARY EDUCATION.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Education shall use 
amounts made available under section 101(d)(3) for a fiscal year to 
award grants to States and local educational agencies to train, recruit 
and hire elementary school teachers for the purpose of reducing the 
average class size for students in grades 1 through 3 to not more than 
18 students per teacher.
 (b) Regulations Required.--The Secretary of Education, not later 
than March 1, 1999, shall promulgate regulations as the Secretary 
determines necessary to assist States and school districts in providing 
smaller class sizes with qualified teachers in early grades. Such 
regulations may include provisions relating to--
 (1) the use of funds by the State, including the awarding 
 of grants to local educational agencies;
 (2) teacher preparation and certification; and
 (3) accountability for improved student achievement.
 (c) State Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Each State desiring a grant under this 
 section shall submit to the Secretary of Education a State plan 
 at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
 information as the Secretary may require.
 (2) Contents.--Each State plan shall demonstrate to the 
 satisfaction of the Secretary of Education that--
 (A) the activities assisted by the State with funds 
 made available under this section will be conducted in 
compliance with any regulations promulgated under subsection (a);
 (B) the State will use the funds made available 
 under this section to reduce class size for students in 
 grades 1 through 3 in elementary schools throughout the 
 State, focusing on using the funds to train, recruit, 
 and hire teachers for elementary schools serving 
 communities with the least available resources for such 
 activities and the largest class sizes in those grades; 
 and
 (C) of the funds that are made available to the 
 State under this section, the State will make available 
 to each local educational agency that serves children 
 in grades 1 through 3 and in which at least 30 percent 
 of the children are from families below the Federal 
 poverty level, at least as great a percentage of such 
 funds as the percentage of funds provided to that local 
 educational agency as compared to other local 
 educational agencies in the State under part A of title 
 I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
 1965.
 (3) Approval.--The Secretary shall approve a State plan 
 submitted under paragraph (1) if the State plan meets the 
 requirements of this subsection.
 (d) Ensuring a Qualified Teacher in Every Classroom.--To be 
eligible to receive funds under this Act, each State shall ensure 
that--
 (1) not later than the period that begins on the date of 
 enactment of this Act and ends 5 years after such date, and 
 subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), each teacher in a public 
 elementary or secondary school in the State has demonstrated 
 the subject matter knowledge, teaching knowledge, and teaching 
 skill necessary to teach effectively in the content area or 
 areas in which the teacher provides instruction;
 (2) each teacher in the State for whom the demonstration 
 described in paragraph (1) has been waived temporarily by State 
 or local education agencies to respond to emergency teacher 
 shortages or other circumstances shall, not later than 1 year 
 after such waiver, demonstrate the subject matter knowledge, 
 teaching knowledge, and teaching skill necessary to teach 
 effectively in the content area or areas in which the teacher 
 provides instruction;
 (3) no student will be taught for more than 1 year by an 
 elementary school teacher, or for more than 2 consecutive years 
 in the same subject by a secondary school teacher, who has not 
 made the demonstration described in paragraph (1); and
 (4) during the period described in paragraph (1), 
 elementary school and secondary school teachers who do not meet 
 the requirements of paragraph (1), are not disproportionately 
 employed in high poverty elementary schools or secondary 
 schools.
 (e) Supplement not Supplant.--Amounts made available to a State 
under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other 
Federal, State and local funds provided for programs that improve 
elementary education as provided for in this section. Amounts provided 
to the State under this section shall not be reduced solely as a result 
of the availability of funds under this section.
 (f) Authority of Secretary.--In providing funds to States under 
this section, the Secretary may consider the amount of funds allocated 
to States under section 111. The Secretary may allocate funds under 
this section based on the relative need for funds in the various States 
and the strength of the State plans.

SEC. 133. INCREASED ENROLLMENT OF CHILDREN WITH THE MEDICAID AND STATE 
 CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Transitional Increased Federal Matching Rate for Increased 
Medicaid Administrative Costs.--Section 1931(h) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-1(h)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``attributable to'' and 
 all that follows and inserting ``attributable to--
 ``(A) administrative costs of eligibility 
 determinations that (but for the enactment of this 
 section) would not be incurred; and
 ``(B) outreach activities to enroll uninsured 
 children in a State plan approved under this title or 
 title XXI.''; and
 (2) by striking paragraphs (3) and (4) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(3) Limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Beginning with fiscal year 1998, 
 the total amount of additional Federal funds that are 
 expended as a result of the application of this 
 subsection shall not exceed $525,000,000.
 ``(B) Availability of appropriation.--Any amount 
 appropriated in accordance with this paragraph shall 
remain available until expended.
 ``(C) Equitable distribution of funds.--In applying 
 this paragraph, the Secretary shall ensure the 
 equitable distribution of additional funds among the 
 States.''.
 (b) Medicaid Presumptive Eligibility for Low-Income Children.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1920A(b)(3) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1a(b)(3)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)(i))--
 (i) by striking ``or (II)'' and inserting 
 ``, (II)''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, or (III) is an 
 elementary school or secondary school, as such 
 terms are defined in section 14101 of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 8801), is a child care resource and 
 referral agency, a child support enforcement 
 agency, TANF and Medicaid agencies (and, in the 
 case of TANF, contractors), public housing 
 agencies, and contractors that process 
 applications and perform rent recertification 
 functions for the public housing and section 8 
 programs, owners and managers of housing with 
 project-based section 8 assistance, or is 
 authorized to determine the eligibility of a 
 child for obtaining child health assistance 
 under title XXI that is in the form of coverage 
 that meets the requirements of section 2103'' 
 before the semicolon; and
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``limiting the 
 classes of'' and inserting ``imposing limitations on''.
 (2) Retroactivity.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 take effect as if included in the enactment of section 4912 of 
 the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 
 571).
 (c) Medicaid Expenditures Counted Against State Allotments Under 
Title XXI.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2104(d) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Certain Medicaid Expenditures Counted Against Individual 
State Allotments.--The amount of the allotment otherwise provided to a 
State under subsection (b) or (c) for a fiscal year shall be reduced by 
the amount (if any) of the payments made to that State under section 
1903(a) for expenditures claimed by the State during such fiscal year 
that is attributable to the provision of medical assistance to a child 
for which payment is made under section 1903(a)(1) on the basis of an 
enhanced FMAP under the fourth sentence of section 1905(b).''.
 (2) Retroactivity.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 takes effect as if included in the enactment of section 4901 of 
 the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 
 552).
 (d) Optional Medicaid and State Children's Health Insurance Program 
Eligibility for Lawfully Present Alien Children.--
 (1) Establishment of optional medicaid eligibility 
 Category.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is amended--
 (A) in subclause (XIII), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subclause (XIV), by adding ``or'' at the 
 end; and
 (C) by adding after subclause (XIV) the following:
 ``(XV) who are children lawfully 
 present in the United States and 
 eligible under clause (i) of this 
 subparagraph or under any subclause of 
 this clause but for title IV of the 
 Personal Responsibility and Work 
 Opportunities Reconciliation Act of 
 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.);''.
 (2) Applicability of title iv of the personal 
 responsibility and work opportunities reconciliation act of 
 1996.--Section 1902(l) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(l)) is amended by adding after paragraph (4) the 
 following:
 ``(5) In the case of any State that is providing medical assistance 
to children described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XV), title IV of 
the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunities Reconciliation Act 
of 1996 shall not apply to such children.''.
 (3) Establishment of optional eligibility category.--
 Section 2110(b) of the Social Security Act, as created by 
 section 4901 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (P.L. 105-33) 
 is amended by adding after paragraph (4) the following:
 ``(5) Children included at state option.--For States 
 electing to provide medical assistance under title XIX to 
 children described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XV), at State 
 option the term `targeted low-income child' may include 
children lawfully present in the United States notwithstanding title IV 
of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunities Reconciliation 
Act of 1996. For States electing this option, the provisions of such 
title IV shall not apply to such children.''.
 (3) Retroactivity.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1), 
 (2), and (3) take effect as if included in the enactment of the 
 Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 251).
 (e) Authorizing Increase in Federal Medical Assistance Percentage 
to Reward States for Enrolling Eligible, but Otherwise Unenrolled, 
Children Under Medicaid Plans.--Section 1903 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``and (j)'' and 
 inserting ``, (j), and (x)(2)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(x) Authorizing Increase in Federal Medical Assistance Percentage 
to Reward States for Enrolling Eligible, but Otherwise Unenrolled, 
Children Under Medicaid Plans.--
 ``(1) Establishment of mechanism.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a mechanism to recognize a State's above average 
 performance in conducting outreach activities and enrolling 
 children who are eligible, but would not otherwise be enrolled, 
 under this title. In determining whether a State has an above 
 average performance for purposes of this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall take into account--
 ``(A) the State's enrollment of children in 
 families described in sections 1925 and 1931(b);
 ``(B) the State's implementation of the presumptive 
 eligibility provisions described in section 1920A;
 ``(C) the State's implementation of a streamlined 
 eligibility and enrollment process for children; and
 ``(D) the State's implementation of the 12-month 
 continuous eligibility option described in section 
 1902(e)(12).
 ``(2) Authorizing increased fmap for medical assistance for 
 children.--Under such mechanism, if the Secretary determines 
 that a State has an above average performance with respect to 
 such activities and enrollment, subject to paragraph (3), the 
 Secretary may increase the Federal medical assistance 
 percentage otherwise applicable under subsection (a)(1), with 
 respect to some or all expenditures for medical assistance for 
 some or all children enrolled under the plan, to a percentage 
 not to exceed the enhanced FMAP described in section 2105(b) 
 for the State and fiscal year involved.
 ``(3) Limitation on aggregate payments.--The aggregate 
 amount to be paid to all States for a fiscal year under this 
 section as a result of this subsection shall not exceed the 
 amount provided under section 101(d)(4) of the Healthy Kids Act 
 for such fiscal year (less aggregate amounts paid to States for 
 the fiscal year under the amendments made by subsections (a) 
 through (d) of section 133 of such Act).
 ``(4) Information.--As a condition of providing for an 
 increase in payments to a State under this subsection, the 
 Secretary may require the State to provide (or provide access 
 to) such information as the Secretary may require to carry out 
 the mechanism established under paragraph (1).''.

SEC. 134. MEDICARE CANCER PATIENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT; EVALUATION AND 
 REPORT TO CONGRESS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a 3-year 
demonstration project which provides for payment under the medicare 
program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et 
seq.) of routine patient care costs--
 (1) which are provided to an individual diagnosed with 
 cancer and enrolled in the medicare program under such title as 
 part of the individual's participation in an approved clinical 
 trial program; and
 (2) which are not otherwise eligible for payment under such 
 title for individuals who are entitled to benefits under such 
 title.
 (b) Application.--The beneficiary cost sharing provisions under the 
medicare program, such as deductibles, coinsurance, and copayment 
amounts, shall apply to any individual participating in a demonstration 
project conducted under this section.
 (c) Approved Clinical Trial Program.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term 
 ``approved clinical trial program'' means a clinical trial 
 program which is approved by--
 (A) the National Institutes of Health;
 (B) a National Institutes of Health cooperative 
 group or a National Institutes of Health center; and
 (C) the National Cancer Institute, with respect to 
 programs that oversee and coordinate extramural 
 clinical cancer research, trials sponsored by such 
 Institute and conducted at designated cancer centers, 
 clinical trials, and Institute grants that support 
 clinical investigators.
 (2) Modifications in approved trails.--Beginning 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Cancer Policy Board of the Institute of 
 Medicine, may modify or add to the requirements of paragraph 
 (1) with respect to an approved clinical trial program.
 (d) Routine Patient Care Costs.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, ``routine 
 patient care costs'' shall include the costs associated with 
 the provision of items and services that--
 (A) would otherwise be covered under the medicare 
 program if such items and services were not provided in 
 connection with an approved clinical trial program; and
 (B) are furnished according to the design of an 
 approved clinical trial program.
 (2) Exclusion.--For purposes of this section, ``routine 
 patient care costs'' shall not include the costs associated 
 with the provision of--
 (A) an investigational drug or device, unless the 
 Secretary has authorized the manufacturer of such drug 
 or device to charge for such drug or device; or
 (B) any item or service supplied without charge by 
 the sponsor of the approved clinical trial program.
 (e) Study.--The Secretary shall study the impact on the medicare 
program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act of covering 
routine patient care costs for individuals with a diagnosis of cancer 
and other diagnoses, who are entitled to benefits under such title and 
who are enrolled in an approved clinical trial program.
 (f) Report to Congress.--Not later than 30 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress 
that contains a detailed description of the results of the study 
conducted under subsection (e) including recommendations regarding the 
extension and expansion of the demonstration project conducted under 
this section.
 (g) Funding.--The Secretary shall use amounts made available under 
section 101(d)(9)(A) for a fiscal year to carry out this section.

 TITLE II--FDA JURISDICTION OVER TOBACCO PRODUCTS

SEC. 201. REFERENCE.

 Whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms 
of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the 
reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other 
provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et 
seq.).

SEC. 202. STATEMENT OF GENERAL AUTHORITY.

 The regulations promulgated by the Secretary in the rule dated 
August 28, 1996 (Vol. 61, No. 168 C.F.R.), adding part 897 to title 21, 
Code of Federal Regulations, shall be deemed to have been promulgated 
under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act as amended by this title.

SEC. 203. TREATMENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AS DRUGS AND DEVICES.

 (a) Definitions.--
 (1) Drug.--Section 201(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) is 
 amended by striking ``; and (D)'' and inserting ``; (D) 
 nicotine in tobacco products; and (E)''.
 (2) Devices.--Section 201(h) (21 U.S.C. 321(h)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``or'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end and inserting ``or''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (3), the 
 following:
 ``(4) a delivery component of a tobacco product; and''.
 (3) Other definitions.--Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(kk) The term `tobacco product' means any product made or derived 
from tobacco leaf made for human consumption including, but not limited 
to, cigarettes, cigarillos, cigarette tobacco, cigars, little cigars, 
pipe tobacco, and smokeless tobacco, and roll-your-own tobacco.''.
 (b) Regulatory Authority.--Section 503(g) (21 U.S.C. 353(g)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) The Secretary may regulate any tobacco product as a drug, 
device, or both, and may designate the office of the Administration 
that shall be responsible for regulating such products.''.
 (c) Devices.--Section 520(e)(1) (21 U.S.C. 360j(e)(1)) is amended 
by striking ``or use--'' and inserting ``or use, including restrictions 
on the access to, and the advertising and promotion of, tobacco 
products--''.
 (d) Misbranding.--Section 502 (21 U.S.C. 360) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(u) In the case of a tobacco product, it is sold, distributed, 
advertised, or labeled in violation of this Act or the regulations 
promulgated under this Act.
 ``(v) The regulations promulgated in accordance with subchapter F 
shall, at a minimum, require that a tobacco product be deemed to be 
misbranded if the labeling of the package of the product, or any claim 
of the manufacturer in connection with the product, states or implies 
(as determined by the Secretary) that the product presents a reduced 
health risk unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the 
Secretary that the product will achieve the best public health result, 
taking into account all relevant factors including, but not limited to, 
the probability of the increased number of new users of tobacco 
products and the reduced probability that existing users of tobacco 
products will quit.''.
 (e) Enforcement.--Section 301 (42 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(aa) The failure to comply with the requirements of section 581.
 ``(bb) The failure or refusal to comply with any of the 
requirements of subsections (a), (b) or (e) of section 578.''.
 (f) State and Local Requirements.--Section 521 (21 U.S.C. 360k) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (b)'' and 
 inserting ``subsections (b) and (c)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(c) This section shall not apply to devices that are tobacco 
products.''.

SEC. 204. SAFETY AND EFFICACY STANDARD AND RECALL AUTHORITY.

 (a) Safety and Efficacy Standard.--Section 513(a) (21 U.S.C. 
360c(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by inserting after the first 
 sentence the following: ``For a device which is a tobacco 
 product, the assurance in the previous sentence need not be 
 found if the Secretary finds that special controls achieve the 
 best public health result.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) 
 as clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), respectively;
 (B) by striking ``(2) For'' and inserting ``(2)(A) 
 For''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), subsections (c)(2)(C), 
(d)(2)(B), (e)(2)(A), (f)(3)(B)(i), and (f)(3)(C)(i), and sections 514, 
519(a), 520(e), and 520(f), the safety and effectiveness of a device 
that is a tobacco product need not be found if the Secretary finds that 
the action to be taken under any such provision would achieve the best 
public health result. The finding as to whether the best public health 
result has been achieved shall be determined with respect to the risks 
and benefits to the population as a whole, including users and non-
users of the tobacco product, and taking into account--
 ``(i) the increased or decreased likelihood that existing 
 consumers of tobacco products will stop using such products; 
 and
 ``(ii) the increased or decreased likelihood that those who 
 do not use tobacco products will start using such products.''.
 (b) Recall Authority.--Section 518(e)(1) (21 U.S.C. 360h(e)(1)) is 
amended by inserting after ``adverse health consequences or death,'' 
the following: ``and for tobacco products that the best public health 
result would be achieved,''.

SEC. 205. GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 Chapter V (21 U.S.C. 351 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

 ``Subchapter F--Tobacco Products

``SEC. 571. PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.

 ``Any regulations necessary to implement this subchapter shall be 
promulgated not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of 
this subchapter using notice and comment rulemaking (in accordance with 
chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code). Such regulations may be 
revised thereafter as determined necessary by the Secretary.

``SEC. 572. SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

 ``(a) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall establish an advisory 
committee, to be known as the `Scientific Advisory Committee', to 
assist the Secretary.
 ``(b) Membership.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall appoint as members 
 of the Scientific Advisory Committee any individuals with 
 expertise in the medical, scientific, or other technological 
 data involving the manufacture and use of tobacco products, and 
 of appropriately diversified professional backgrounds.
 ``(2) Limitations.--Notwithstanding section 5(b) of the 
 Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App. 3), the Secretary 
 may not appoint to the Committee any individual who--
 ``(A) is in the regular full-time employ of the 
 Federal Government;
 ``(B) is, or is in the employ of, a manufacturer, 
 distributor, or retailer of a tobacco product, or 
 organization substantially funded by manufacturers, 
 distributors, or retailers of tobacco products;
 ``(C) is, or is in the employ of, an attorney 
 representing an entity described in subparagraph (B); 
 or
 ``(D) is, or is in the employ of, a consultant 
 employed by or under retainer to an entity described in 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(3) Chairperson.--The Secretary shall designate 1 of the 
 members of the advisory committee to serve as chairperson of 
 the Committee.
 ``(c) Compensation and Expenses.--Members of the Scientific 
Advisory Committee shall be entitled to the same compensation and 
expenses as the compensation and expenses provided to members of the 
advisory committees established under section 514(b)(5)(B).
 ``(d) Duties.--The Scientific Advisory Committee shall--
 ``(1) provide assistance to the Secretary;
 ``(2) examine the effects of the alteration of the nicotine 
 yield levels in tobacco products;
 ``(3) examine whether there is a threshold level below 
 which nicotine yields do not produce dependence on the tobacco 
 product involved, and, if so, what that level is; and
 ``(4) review other safety, dependence or health issues 
 relating to tobacco products as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.

``SEC. 573. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

 ``(a) General Rule.--The Secretary may adopt a performance standard 
under section 514(a)(2) for a tobacco product regardless of whether the 
product has been classified under section 513. Such standards may 
include--
 ``(1) the reduction or elimination of nicotine yields of 
 the product;
 ``(2) the reduction or elimination of other constituents or 
 harmful components of the product; or
 ``(3) standards relating to any other requirement pursuant 
 to section 512(a)(2).
 ``(b) Tobacco Constituents.--The Secretary may require that a 
manufacturer test, report and disclose tobacco and tobacco smoke 
constituents, including labeling and advertising disclosures relating 
to such constituents, including, but not limited to, tar and nicotine.

``SEC. 574. DISCLOSURE AND REPORTING OF TOBACCO AND NONTOBACCO 
 INGREDIENTS AND CONSTITUENTS.

 ``(a) Disclosure of All Ingredients.--
 ``(1) Immediate and annual disclosure.--Not later than 30 
 days after the date of enactment of this subchapter, and 
 annually thereafter, each manufacturer of a tobacco product 
 shall submit to the Secretary an ingredient list for each brand 
 of tobacco product it manufactures that contains the 
 information described in paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Requirements.--The list described in paragraph (1) 
 shall, with respect to each brand or variety of tobacco product 
 of a manufacturer, include--
 ``(A) a list of all ingredients, constituents, 
 substances, and compounds that are found in or added to 
 the tobacco or tobacco product (including the paper, 
 filter, or packaging of the product if applicable) in 
 the manufacture of the tobacco product, for each brand 
 or variety of tobacco product so manufactured, 
 including, if determined necessary by the Secretary, 
 any material added to the tobacco used in the product 
 prior to harvesting;
 ``(B) the quantity of the ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, and compounds that are listed 
 under subparagraph (A) in each brand or variety of 
 tobacco product;
 ``(C) the nicotine content of the product, measured 
 in milligrams of nicotine;
 ``(D) for each brand or variety of cigarettes--
 ``(i) the filter ventilation percentage 
 (the level of air dilution in the cigarette as 
 provided by the ventilation holes in the 
 filter, described as a percentage);
 ``(ii) the pH level of the smoke of the 
 cigarette; and
 ``(iii) the tar, nicotine, and carbon 
 monoxide delivery level under Federal Trade 
 Commission parameters and any other smoking 
 conditions established by the Secretary, 
 reported in milligrams of tar, nicotine, and 
 carbon monoxide per cigarette;
 ``(E) for each brand or variety of smokeless 
 tobacco products--
 ``(i) the pH level of the tobacco;
 ``(ii) the moisture content of the tobacco 
 expressed as a percentage of the weight of the 
 tobacco; and
 ``(iii) the nicotine content--
 ``(I) for each gram of the product, 
 measured in milligrams of nicotine;
 ``(II) expressed as a percentage of 
 the dry weight of the tobacco; and
 ``(III) with respect to unionized 
 (free) nicotine, expressed as a 
 percentage per gram of the tobacco and 
 expressed in milligrams per gram of the 
 tobacco; and
 ``(F) any other information determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Methods.--The Secretary shall have the authority to 
 promulgate regulations to establish the methods to be used by 
 manufacturers in making the determinations required under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(b) Safety Assessments.--
 ``(1) Application to new ingredients.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this subchapter, and annually 
 thereafter, each manufacturer shall submit to the 
 Secretary a safety assessment for each new ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound that such 
 manufacturer desires to make a part of a tobacco 
 product. Such new ingredient, constituent, substance, 
 or compound shall not be included in a tobacco product 
 prior to approval by the Secretary of such a safety 
 assessment.
 ``(B) Method of filing.--A safety assessment 
 submitted under subparagraph (A) shall be signed by an 
 officer of the manufacturer who is acting on behalf of 
 the manufacturer and who has the authority to bind the 
 manufacturer, and contain a statement that ensures that 
 the information contained in the assessment is true, 
 complete and accurate.
 ``(C) Definition of new ingredient.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A), the term `new ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound' means an 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound listed 
 under subsection (a)(1) that was not used in the brand 
 or variety of tobacco product involved prior to January 
 1, 1998.
 ``(2) Application to other ingredients.--With respect to 
 the application of this section to ingredients, constituents, 
 substances, or compounds listed under subsection (a) to which 
 paragraph (1) does not apply, all such ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, or compounds shall be reviewed 
 through the safety assessment process within the 5-year period 
 beginning on the date of enactment of this subchapter. The 
 Secretary shall develop a procedure for the submission of 
 safety assessments of such ingredients, constituents, 
 substances, or compounds that staggers such safety assessments 
 within the 5-year period.
 ``(3) Basis of assessment.--The safety assessment of an 
 ingredient, constituents, substance, or compound described in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) shall--
 ``(A) be based on the best scientific evidence 
 available at the time of the submission of the 
 assessment; and
 ``(B) demonstrate that there is a reasonable 
 certainty among experts qualified by scientific 
 training and experience who are consulted, that the 
 ingredient, constituents, substance, or compound will 
 not present any risk to consumers or the public in the 
 quantities used under the intended conditions of use.
 ``(c) Prohibition.--
 ``(1) Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate 
 regulations to prohibit the use of any ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound in the tobacco product of a 
 manufacturer--
 ``(A) if no safety assessment has been submitted by 
 the manufacturer for the ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound as otherwise required under this 
 section; or
 ``(B) if the Secretary finds that the manufacturer 
 has failed to demonstrate the safety of the ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound that was the 
 subject of the assessment under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Review of assessments.--
 ``(A) General review.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the receipt of a safety assessment under 
 subsection (b), the Secretary shall review the findings 
 contained in such assessment and approve or disapprove 
 of the safety of the ingredient, constituents, 
 substance, or compound that was the subject of the 
 assessment. The Secretary may, for good cause, extend 
 the period for such review. The Secretary shall provide 
 notice to the manufacturer of an action under this 
 subparagraph.
 ``(B) Inaction by secretary.--If the Secretary 
 fails to act with respect to an assessment of an 
 existing ingredient, constituent, substance, or 
 additive during the period referred to in subparagraph 
 (A), the manufacturer of the tobacco product involved 
 may continue to use the ingredient, constituents, 
 substance, or compound involved until such time as the 
 Secretary makes a determination with respect to the 
 assessment.
 ``(d) Right to Know; Full Disclosure of Ingredients to the 
Public.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), a 
 package of a tobacco product shall disclose all ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, or compounds contained in the product 
 in accordance with regulations promulgated under section 701(a) 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Disclosure of percentage of domestic and foreign 
 tobacco.--The regulations referred to in paragraph (1) shall 
 require that the package of a tobacco product disclose, with 
 respect to the tobacco contained in the product--
 ``(A) the percentage that is domestic tobacco; and
 ``(B) the percentage that is foreign tobacco.
 ``(3) Health disclosure.--Notwithstanding section 301(j), 
 the Secretary may require the public disclosure of any 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound contained in a 
 tobacco product that relates to a trade secret or other matter 
 referred to in section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, if 
 the Secretary determines that such disclosure will promote the 
 public health.

``SEC. 575. TOBACCO PRODUCT WARNINGS, LABELING AND PACKAGING.

 ``(a) Cigarette Warnings.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Packaging.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or 
 distribution any cigarettes the package of which fails 
 to bear, in accordance with the requirements of this 
 subsection, one of the following labels:
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Are Addictive.
 ``WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Can Harm Your 
 Children.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Fatal Lung Disease.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Cancer.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Strokes And Heart 
 Disease.
 ``WARNING: Smoking During Pregnancy Can Harm 
 Your Baby.
 ``WARNING: Smoking Can Kill You.
 ``WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Causes Fatal Lung 
 Disease In Nonsmokers.
 ``WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces 
 Serious Risks To Your Health.
 ``(B) Advertising.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 manufacturer, importer, distributor or retailer of 
 cigarettes to advertise or cause to be advertised any 
cigarette unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the 
requirements of this subsection, one of the following labels:
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Are Addictive.
 ``WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Can Harm Your 
 Children.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Fatal Lung Disease.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Cancer.
 ``WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Strokes And Heart 
 Disease.
 ``WARNING: Smoking During Pregnancy Can Harm 
 Your Baby.
 ``WARNING: Smoking Can Kill You.
 ``WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Causes Fatal Lung 
 Disease In Nonsmokers.
 ``WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces 
 Serious Risks To Your Health.
 ``(C) Additional warnings.--Beginning on the date 
 that is 18 months after the date of enactment of this 
 subchapter, the Secretary may substitute for, or 
 require warnings in addition to, those otherwise 
 required under subparagraphs (A) and (B) if the 
 Secretary determines that such warnings would be more 
 effective in deterring the use of cigarettes.
 ``(2) Requirements for labeling.--
 ``(A) Location.--Each label statement required by 
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) shall be located on 
 the upper portion of the front and rear panels of the 
 cigarette package (or carton) directly on the package 
 underneath the cellophane or other clear wrapping and 
 occupy not less than 25 percent of such panels.
 ``(B) Type and color.--With respect to each label 
 statement required by subparagraph (A) of paragraph 
 (1), the phrase `WARNING' shall appear in capital 
 letters and the label statement shall be printed in 17 
 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary to reflect the length of the required 
 statement. All the letters in the label shall appear in 
 conspicuous and legible type, in contrast by 
 typography, layout, or color with all other printed 
 material on the package, and be printed in an 
 alternating black-on-white and white-on-black format as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Exception.--With respect to cigarettes 
 manufactured and distributed prior to January 1, 2000, 
 the provisions of subparagraph (A) shall not apply with 
 respect to the front panel in the case of a flip-top 
 cigarette package (offered for sale on June 1, 1997) 
 where the front portion of the flip-top does not 
 comprise at least 25 percent of the front panel. In the 
 case of such a package, the label statement required by 
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) shall occupy the 
 entire front portion of the flip-top.
 ``(D) Symbols.--The Secretary shall designate or 
 create symbols to represent the content of the warnings 
 required under subparagraphs (A) and (B) and shall 
 publish them in the Federal Register. Each warning 
 required by subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall include the 
 symbol designated or created by the Secretary for such 
 warning within 180 days of publication of the symbol in 
 the Federal Register.
 ``(3) Requirements for advertising.--
 ``(A) Location.--Each label statement required by 
 subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall appear in a 
 conspicuous and prominent format and location at the 
top of each advertisement within the trim area and shall occupy not 
less than 20 percent of the area of the advertisement involved.
 ``(B) Type, color and format.--
 ``(i) Type.--With respect to each label 
 statement required by subparagraph (B) of 
 paragraph (1), the phrase `WARNING' shall 
 appear in capital letters and the label 
 statement shall be printed in the following 
 types:
 ``(I) With respect to whole page 
 advertisements on broadsheet 
 newspaper--45 point type.
 ``(II) With respect to half page 
 advertisements on broadsheet 
 newspaper--39 point type.
 ``(III) With respect to whole page 
 advertisements on tabloid newspaper--39 
 point type.
 ``(IV) With respect to half page 
 advertisements on tabloid newspaper--27 
 point type.
 ``(V) With respect to DPS magazine 
 advertisements--31.5 point type.
 ``(VI) With respect to whole page 
 magazine advertisements--31.5 point 
 type.
 ``(VII) With respect to 28cm x 3 
 column advertisements--22.5 point type.
 ``(VIII) With respect to 20cm x 2 
 column advertisements--15 point type.
 Within the 20 percent requirement described in 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary may revise the 
 required type sizes if the Secretary determines 
 that such revisions will enhance public health 
 protections.
 ``(ii) Color.--All the letters in the label 
 under this subparagraph shall appear in 
 conspicuous and legible type, in contrast by 
 typography, layout, or color with all other 
 printed material on the package, and be printed 
 in an alternating black-on-white and white-on-
 black format as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(iii) Format.--The label statements under 
 subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall be 
 black when the background is white and white 
 when the background is black, and shall be in 
 the point size required under this 
 subparagraph. The label statements shall be 
 enclosed by a rectangular border that is the 
 same color as the letters of the statements and 
 that is the width of the first down stroke of 
 the capital `W' of the word `WARNING' in the 
 label statements.
 ``(C) Language requirement.--The label statements 
 required under paragraph (1)(B) shall be in English, 
 except that--
 ``(i) in the case of an advertisement that 
 appears in a newspaper, magazine, periodical or 
 other publication that is not in English, such 
 statements shall appear in the predominant 
 language of the publication; or
 ``(ii) in the case of any other 
 advertisement that is not in English, such 
 statements shall appear in the same language as 
 that principally used in the advertisement.
 ``(4) Rotation of label statements.--
 ``(A) Labeling.--The label statements specified in 
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) shall be randomly 
 displayed in each 12 month period, in as equal a number 
 of times as is possible on each brand of the product 
 and be randomly distributed in all areas of the United 
 States in which such product is marketed in accordance 
 with a plan submitted by the manufacturer, importer, 
 distributor or retailer and approved by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Advertising.--The label statements specified 
 in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall be rotated 
 quarterly in alternating sequence in advertisements for 
 each such brand of cigarettes in accordance with a plan 
 submitted by the manufacturer, importer, distributor or 
 retailer and approved by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Approval of plans.--The Secretary shall 
 review each plan submitted by a manufacturer, importer, 
 distributor or retailer of cigarettes under this 
 paragraph and approve such plan if the plan will 
 provide for the equal distribution and display on 
 packaging and the rotation required in advertising 
 under this paragraph and if such plan assures that all 
 of the labels required under subparagraphs (A) and (B) 
will be displayed by the manufacturer, importer, distributor or 
retailer at the same time.
 ``(b) Smokeless Tobacco Products.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Packaging.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or 
 distribution any smokeless tobacco product the package 
 of which fails to bear, in accordance with the 
 requirements of this subsection, one of the following 
 labels:
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Cause Mouth Cancer.
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Kill You.
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Cause Gum Disease 
 And Tooth Loss.
 ``WARNING: This Product Is Not A Safe 
 Alternative To Cigarettes.
 ``WARNING: This Product Contains Cancer-Causing 
 Chemicals.
 ``WARNING: Smokeless Tobacco Is Addictive.
 ``(B) Advertising.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 manufacturer, importer, distributor or retailer of 
 smokeless tobacco products to advertise or cause to be 
 advertised any smokeless tobacco product unless the 
 advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements 
 of this subsection, one of the following labels:
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Cause Mouth Cancer.
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Kill You.
 ``WARNING: This Product Can Cause Gum Disease 
 And Tooth Loss.
 ``WARNING: This Product Is Not A Safe 
 Alternative To Cigarettes.
 ``WARNING: This Product Contains Cancer-Causing 
 Chemicals.
 ``WARNING: Smokeless Tobacco Is Addictive.
 ``(C) Additional warnings.--Beginning on the date 
 that is 18 months after the date of enactment of this 
 subchapter, the Secretary may substitute for, or 
 require warnings in addition to, those otherwise 
 required under subparagraphs (A) and (B) if the 
 Secretary determines that such warnings would be more 
 effective in deterring the use of smokeless tobacco 
 products.
 ``(2) Requirements for labeling.--
 ``(A) Location.--Each label statement required by 
 subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) shall be located on 
 the 2 most prominent display panels of the product and 
 occupy not less than 25 percent of such panels.
 ``(B) Type and color.--With respect to each label 
 statement required by subparagraph (A) of paragraph 
 (1), the phrase `WARNING' shall appear in capital 
 letters and the label statement shall be printed in 17 
 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary to reflect the length of the required 
 statement and the size of the package. All the letters 
 in the label shall appear in conspicuous and legible 
 type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with 
 all other printed material on the package and be 
 printed in an alternating black-on-white and white-on-
 black format as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(3) Advertising and rotation.--The provisions of 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a) shall apply to 
 advertisements for smokeless tobacco products and the rotation 
 of the label statements required under paragraph (1)(A) on such 
 products.
 ``(c) Other Tobacco Products.--The Secretary may prescribe such 
regulations as may be necessary to establish warning labels for other 
tobacco product packaging, labeling and advertising.
 ``(d) Construction.--
 ``(1) In general.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to limit the ability of the Secretary to change the 
 text or layout of any of the warning statements, or any of the 
 labeling provisions, under subsections (a) and (b) and other 
 provisions of this Act, if determined necessary by the 
 Secretary in order to make such statements or labels larger, 
 more prominent, more conspicuous, or more effective.
 ``(2) Unfair acts.--Nothing in this section (other than the 
 requirements of subsections (a), (b) and (c)) shall be 
 construed to limit or restrict the authority of the Federal 
 Trade Commission with respect to unfair or deceptive acts or 
 practices in the advertising of cigarettes or smokeless tobacco 
 products.
 ``(e) Limited Preemption.--
 ``(1) State and local action.--No warning label with 
 respect to cigarettes or smokeless tobacco products, or any 
 other tobacco product for which warning labels have been 
 required under this section, other than the warning labels 
 required under this Act, shall be required by any State or 
 local statute or regulation to be included on any package of 
 cigarettes or a smokeless tobacco product.
 ``(2) Effect on liability law.--Nothing in this section 
 shall relieve any person from liability at common law or under 
 State statutory law to any other person.
 ``(f) Electronic Medium Advertising.--It shall be unlawful to 
advertise tobacco products on any medium of electronic communications 
subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission.

``SEC. 576. PRESERVATION OF STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY.

 ``Except as otherwise provided for in section 575(e), nothing in 
this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting a State or locality 
from imposing requirements, prohibitions, penalties or other measures 
to further the purposes of this subchapter that are in addition to the 
requirements, prohibitions, or penalties required under this 
subchapter. State and local governments may impose additional tobacco 
product control measures to further restrict or limit the use of such 
products.

``SEC. 577. RESTRICTIONS ON YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall restrict the access of 
minors to tobacco products.
 ``(b) State Licensing.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), in 
 order to receive any amounts under section 111 of the Healthy 
 Kids Act, a State shall have in place a program that meets or 
 exceeds (as determined by the Secretary) the requirements of 
 the model State program described in paragraph (3) under which 
 a retailer would be required to obtain a State or local license 
 to sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products directly to 
 consumers in such State.
 ``(2) Start-up period.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may waive the 
 requirement of paragraph (1) for such time as the 
 Secretary determines is necessary, after promulgation 
 of the model program described in paragraph (3), to 
 permit the legislature of a State to meet and enact 
 laws to comply with paragraph (1) and to permit the 
 State to implement the program described in paragraph 
 (1).
 ``(B) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a waiver 
 under subparagraph (A), the Governor of the State 
 involved shall certify to the Secretary in writing that 
 the State intends to implement a program that meets the 
 requirements of this section at the earliest possible 
 opportunity. If, subsequent to such notification, the 
 Secretary determines that the State has failed to 
 implement such a program, the Secretary may recover any 
 funds distributed to the State under section 111 of the 
 Healthy Kids Act.
 ``(3) Model program.--Not later than 12 months after the 
 date of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall 
 promulgate a model State program. Such model State program 
 shall at a minimum--
 ``(A) provide for the collection of licensing fees 
 by the State or locality to defray the costs of 
 administering the program;
 ``(B) prohibit retailers from selling or otherwise 
 distributing tobacco products directly to consumers in 
 a State unless such retailers have in effect tobacco 
 licenses issued or renewed in accordance with State or 
 local laws;
 ``(C) provide for the notification of every person 
 in the State who is engaged in the distribution at 
 retail of tobacco products of the license requirement 
 and of the date by which such person shall have 
 obtained a license in order to continue to distribute 
 such products;
 ``(D) prohibit licensed retailers from selling or 
 otherwise distributing tobacco products to minors;
 ``(E) provide for penalties of up to $50,000 for 
 each violation of the requirements under such program 
 relating to the sale or distribution of tobacco 
 products without a license and for appropriate 
 penalties for other violations of laws relating to 
 youth access to tobacco products;
 ``(F) require retailers to comply with the 
 applicable requirements of this section and any 
 regulations relating to this section; and
 ``(G) provide for the suspension or revocation of a 
 license in the case of a retailer that repeatedly sells 
 or distributes tobacco products to individuals in 
 violation of subsection (a) or State or local law.
 ``(c) Penalties.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
providing for the application of penalties for the sale or distribution 
of tobacco products to minors in violation of the requirements of 
subsection (a) that are consistent with the following:
 ``(1) Employees of retailers.--In the case of an employee 
 of a retailer who distributes a tobacco product to a minor in 
 violation of subsection (a), the regulations shall provide for 
 the application of a civil money penalty of--
 ``(A) $25 for the 1st violation;
 ``(B) $50 for the 2nd violation; and
 ``(C) $150 for the 3rd and subsequent violations.
 ``(2) Minors.--In the case of a minor who purchases or 
 attempts to purchase a tobacco product in violation of 
 subsection (a) (other than a minor engaged in an authorized 
 sting or a law enforcement operation), the regulations may 
 provide for civil money penalties, loss of driving privileges, 
 or other penalties.
 ``(3) Retailers.--In the case of a retailer who distributes 
 a tobacco product to a minor in violation of subsection (a), 
 the regulations shall provide for the application of a civil 
 money penalty of at least--
 ``(A) $250 for the 1st violation;
 ``(B) $500 for the 2nd violation;
 ``(C) $1,500 for the 3rd violation;
 ``(D) $5,000 for the 4th violation; and
 ``(E) $10,000 for the 5th and subsequent 
 violations.
 ``(d) Enforcement.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into agreements 
 with, and provide grants to, States to enforce this section. 
 Any State that elects to enforce the provisions of this section 
 within the State shall conduct sting operations and other 
 compliance checks and enforce State laws under this section 
 through the use of penalties described in subsection (c) so as 
 to ensure that minors are successful in purchasing tobacco 
 products less than 5 percent of the time. States may use funds 
 made available under this Act to provide the technologies 
 necessary to aid retailers in the verification of age to 
 determine eligibility to purchase tobacco products.
 ``(2) Requirements.--The Secretary may by regulation 
 implement such requirements as the Secretary determines 
 necessary to ensure that any compliance checks performed by the 
 State under paragraph (1) are accurate.
 ``(3) Violations.--If the Secretary determines that the 
 provisions of subsection (a) are being violated within a State, 
 the Secretary shall have the authority to enforce such 
 provisions in the State.
 ``(e) State Compliance.--Beginning with the 3rd full calendar year 
following the date of enactment of this subchapter, if, with respect to 
a State, the Secretary determines that minors are successful in 
purchasing tobacco products more than 5 percent of the time, the 
Secretary shall notify the State and reduce payments to the State under 
section 111 of the Healthy Kids Act by 1 percent for each percentage 
point by which the State is not in compliance with this subsection.
 ``(f) Preemption.--The provisions of this section shall not preempt 
any provision of State or local law that provides greater restrictions 
than those required in this section.
 ``(g) Federal Licensing of Entities.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of Defense, Secretary of State, and other appropriate 
 Federal officials, shall establish and implement a Federal 
 tobacco licensing program to be applied to entities that sell 
 or distribute tobacco products--
 ``(A) on any military installation (as defined in 
 section 2801(c)(2) of title X, United States Code);
 ``(B) in any United States embassy;
 ``(C) in any facility owned and operated by the 
 Federal Government either in the United States or in a 
 foreign country;
 ``(D) in any duty-free shop located within the 
 United States; or
 ``(E) through any other Federal entity or on any 
 other Federal property as determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Requirements.--The program established under 
 paragraph (1) shall apply requirements (including those for 
 penalties, suspensions, and revocations) similar to those 
 required to be implemented by States under this section.
 ``(3) Indian tribes and tribal lands.--For purposes of 
 applying and enforcing the provisions of this section to 
 entities that sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products on 
 Indian reservations (as defined in section 403(9) of the Indian 
 Child Protection and Family Violence Prevention Act (25 U.S.C. 
 3202(9))), an Indian tribe or tribal organization (as such 
 terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Self Determination 
 and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b)) shall be treated 
 as a State.

``SEC. 578. PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF HEALTH RESEARCH.

 ``(a) Submission by Manufacturers.--Not later than 3 months after 
the date of the enactment of this subchapter and thereafter as required 
by the Secretary, each manufacturer of a tobacco product shall submit 
to the Secretary a copy of each document in the manufacturer's 
possession or control, directly or indirectly--
 ``(1) relating, referring, or pertaining to--
 ``(A) any health effects in humans or animals, 
 including addiction, caused by the use of tobacco 
 products or components of tobacco products;
 ``(B) the engineering, manipulation or control of 
 nicotine in tobacco products;
 ``(C) the sale or marketing of tobacco products;
 ``(D) any research involving safer tobacco 
 products; or
 ``(E) such other matters as the Secretary may 
 prescribe; or
 ``(2) produced, or ordered to be produced, by the tobacco 
 product manufacturer in any health-related civil or criminal 
 proceeding, judicial or administrative, that has been commenced 
 by the United States, an agency of the United States, a State 
 or local governmental entity, or any person, or on behalf of 
 such an entity or person, including attorney-client and other 
 documents produced or ordered to be produced for in camera 
 inspection.
 ``(b) Additional Information.--For the purpose of obtaining 
additional information relating to the matters in subsection (a), the 
Secretary may hold hearings, require testimony, the deposition of 
witnesses, the answering of interrogatories, or enter into and inspect 
facilities.
 ``(c) Disclosure by the Secretary.--Starting not later than 6 
months after the date of the enactment of this subchapter, the 
Secretary shall begin to make available to the public, using the 
Internet and other means, the documents submitted under subsection (a).
 ``(d) Protection of Certain Information.--The Secretary shall not 
disclose information obtained under this section if such information is 
entitled to protection as a trade secret or under the attorney-client 
privilege unless the Secretary determines that the disclosure of such 
information is necessary to promote the public health.
 ``(e) Enforcement.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
manufacturers of tobacco products shall provide any deposition, 
documents, or other information, answer any interrogatories, and allow 
any entry or inspection required pursuant to this section.
 ``(f) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to interfere in any way with the discovery rights of courts 
or parties in civil or criminal proceedings, administrative or 
judicial, involving tobacco products, or the right of access to such 
documents under any other provision of law.
 ``(g) Definition.--In this section:
 ``(1) Documents.--The term `documents' includes originals 
 and drafts of any kind of written or graphic matter, regardless 
 of the manner of production or reproduction, of any kind of 
 description, whether sent or received or neither, and all 
 copies thereof that are different in any way from the original 
(whether by interlineation, receipt stamp, notation, indication of 
copies sent or received or otherwise) regardless of whether 
`confidential', `privileged', or otherwise, including any paper, book, 
account, photograph, blueprint, drawing, agreement, contract, 
memorandum, advertising material, letter, telegram, object, report, 
record, transcript, study, note, notation, working paper, intra-office 
communication, intra-department communication, interdepartment 
communication, chart, minute, index sheet, routing sheet, computer 
software, computer data, delivery ticket, flow sheet, price list, 
quotation, bulletin, circular, manual, summary, recording of telephone 
or other conversation or of interviews, or of conferences, or any other 
written, recorded, transcribed, punched, taped, filmed, or graphic 
matter, regardless of the manner produced or reproduced. Such term 
shall also include any tape, recording, videotape, computerization, or 
other electronic recording, whether digital or analog or a combination 
of the two.
 ``(2) Manufacturer of a tobacco product.--The term 
 `manufacturer of a tobacco product' also includes the Tobacco 
 Institute, the Council for Tobacco Research, the Smokeless 
 Tobacco Council, the Center for Indoor Air Research, or any 
 other trade association or entity that is primarily funded by 
 persons who manufacture a tobacco product.

``SEC. 579. CITIZEN SUITS.

 ``(a) Authority.--Any individual on his or her own behalf may 
commence a civil action--
 ``(1) against any person who is alleged to be in violation 
 of this subchapter, in the district court for the district in 
 which the alleged violation occurred or in which the defendant 
 resides or is found; or
 ``(2) against the Secretary or the Commissioner where there 
 is alleged a failure of the Secretary or Commissioner to 
 perform any act or duty required under this subchapter, in a 
 district court for the district in which an alleged failure to 
 perform occurred or in the district court of the District of 
 Columbia.
 ``(b) Jurisdiction.--The district courts of the United States shall 
have jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the 
citizenship of the parties, to enforce the provisions of this 
subchapter, or to order the Secretary to perform such act or duty, as 
the case may be, and to apply any appropriate civil penalties. The 
district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to compel 
action by an agency where such action is found to be unreasonably 
delayed, except that such an action may not be maintained unless the 
plaintiff has provided the Secretary with a notice of the intent of the 
plaintiff to file such action at least 90 days prior to the filing of 
such action.
 ``(c) Costs and Damages.--A court under subsection (b) may award 
costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees, to any party 
where the court determines that such an award is appropriate. No 
damages of any kind, whether compensatory or punitive, may be awarded 
to the individual in actions described in subsection (a)(2). Any 
damages awarded to the Federal Government shall be paid to the 
Treasury.

``SEC. 580. AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS.

 ``The Secretary may not promulgate any regulation under this 
subchapter that has the effect of placing regulatory burdens on tobacco 
producers (as such term is used for purposes of the Agricultural 
Adjustment Act of 1938 (7 U.S.C. 1281 et seq.) and the Agricultural Act 
of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1441 et seq.)) in excess of the regulatory burdens 
generally placed on other agricultural commodity producers. Any 
authority granted to the Secretary for regulation of any tobacco 
product as a drug, device, or combination is not intended to include 
the authority to promulgate regulations that apply to any person 
engaged in the growing, cultivation, or curing of raw tobacco. This 
section shall not be construed to limit the regulatory requirements 
that may be imposed on producers who are also manufacturers under this 
Act.

``SEC. 581. AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY.

 ``To carry out this subchapter, the Secretary may hold hearings, 
administer oaths, issue subpoenas, require the testimony or deposition 
of witnesses, the production of documents, or the answering of 
interrogatories, or, upon presentation of the proper credentials, enter 
and inspect facilities. In the case of a refusal of a person to obey a 
subpoena, any district court of the United States for the district in 
which such person is found, resides or conducts business, upon 
application by the Commissioner, shall have jurisdiction to issue an 
order requiring such person to appear and give testimony or to appear 
and produce evidence or both. The failure to obey such an order of the 
court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof, and by 
penalties of up to $25,000 per day.''.

SEC. 206. REPEALS.

 The following provisions of law shall be repealed:
 (1) The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.).
 (2) The Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education 
 Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.).

SEC. 207. AUTHORITY OF FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.

 Nothing in this title, or an amendment made by this title, shall be 
construed to in any way reduce the jurisdiction of the Federal Trade 
Commission over the advertising of tobacco products.

 TITLE III--YOUTH SMOKING REDUCTION TARGETS AND INCENTIVES TO REDUCE 
 YOUTH SMOKING RATES

SEC. 301. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this title to encourage the achievement of 
reductions in the proportion of underage consumers of tobacco products 
through the imposition of additional financial deterrents relating to 
tobacco products if certain underage tobacco-use reduction targets are 
not met.

SEC. 302. CHILD TOBACCO USE SURVEYS.

 (a) Annual Performance Survey.--Not later than 1 year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter the Secretary 
shall conduct a survey to determine, in accordance with subsection (b), 
the percentage of all individuals under 18 years of age who identify 
each manufacturer's tobacco product as the usual tobacco product smoked 
or used within the past 30 days and the percentage of each ethnic group 
of such individuals who identify each manufacturer's tobacco product as 
the usual tobacco product smoked or used within the past 30 days.
 (b) Exclusion of Certain Ages.--The Secretary shall exclude from 
the survey conducted under subsection (a), children under the age of 12 
years (or such other lesser age as the Secretary may establish to 
strengthen the validity of the survey).
 (c) Baseline Level.--The baseline level of tobacco product use with 
respect to a manufacturer is the percentage of each ethnic group of 
individuals under 18 years of age determined to have used any tobacco 
product of such manufacturer in the first annual performance survey for 
1999.
 (d) Additional Measures.--In order to increase the understanding of 
youth tobacco product use, the Secretary may, for informational 
purposes only, add additional measures to the survey under subsection 
(a), conduct periodic or occasional surveys at other times, and conduct 
surveys of other populations such as young adults. The results of such 
surveys shall be made available to manufacturers and the public to 
assist in efforts to reduce youth tobacco use.
 (e) Administration.--
 (1) Results.--The Secretary shall establish a scientific 
 advisory board to ensure that surveys conducted under this 
 section produce results that are reasonably precise and valid.
 (2) Technical adjustments.--The Secretary may make 
 technical changes in the manner in which the surveys are 
 conducted so long as adjustments are made to ensure that the 
 results of the surveys are comparable from year to year.
 (3) Participation in survey.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the Secretary may conduct a survey involving 
 minors if the results of such survey with respect to such 
 minors are kept confidential and not disclosed.

SEC. 303. REDUCTION IN UNDERAGE TOBACCO PRODUCT USAGE.

 (a) Annual Determination.--The Secretary shall annually determine, 
based on the annual performance surveys under section 302, whether the 
required percentage reduction (as described in subsection (b)) in the 
underage use of tobacco products for a year has been achieved for the 
year involved. Such determination shall be based on--
 (1) with respect to cigarette products, the percentage 
 prevalence of the use of a manufacturer's tobacco products by 
 each ethnic group of individuals who are under 18 years of age 
 (as determined under section 302(a)) for the year involved as 
 compared to the baseline level for the manufacturer (as 
 determined under section 302(c)); and
 (2) with respect to smokeless tobacco products, the 
 percentage prevalence of the use of a manufacturer's smokeless 
 tobacco products by each ethnic group of individuals who are 
 under 18 years of age (as determined under section 302(a)) for 
 the year involved as compared to the baseline level for the 
 manufacturer (as determined under section 302(c)).
 (b) Percentage Reduction in Underage Use of Tobacco Products.--For 
purposes of this section, the required percentage reduction from the 
baseline level in the percentage underage use of tobacco products with 
respect to each manufacturer of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco 
products shall be as follows:
 (1) Cigarettes.--With respect to cigarettes--
 (A) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's cigarettes shall be at least 20 
 percent for each of the calendar years 2001 and 2002;
 (B) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's cigarettes shall be at least 40 
 percent for each of the calendar years 2003 and 2004;
 (C) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's cigarettes shall be at least 55 
 percent for each of the calendar years 2005 through 
 2007; and
 (D) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's cigarettes shall be at least 67 
 percent for calendar year 2008 and each subsequent 
 calendar year.
 (2) Smokeless tobacco products.--With respect to smokeless 
 tobacco products--
 (A) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's smokeless tobacco products shall be 
 at least 20 percent for each of the calendar years 2001 
 and 2002;
 (B) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's smokeless tobacco products shall be 
 at least 40 percent for each of the calendar years 2003 
 and 2004;
 (C) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's smokeless tobacco products shall be 
 at least 55 percent for each of the calendar years 2005 
 and 2007; and
 (D) the percentage reduction in the percentage use 
 of a manufacturer's smokeless tobacco products shall be 
 at least 67 percent for calendar year 2008 and each 
 subsequent calendar year.
 (c) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2005, the Secretary shall 
prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report 
concerning the progress made in achieving percentage reductions in the 
use of tobacco products by each ethnic group together with the 
recommendations, if any, of the Secretary for stronger reductions in 
calendar years after 2008.

SEC. 304. NONCOMPLIANCE.

 (a) Manufacturer-Specific Penalty.--If the Secretary determines 
under section 303(a) that the required percentage reduction for either 
cigarettes or smokeless tobacco products has not been achieved by a 
manufacturer as required under section 303(b), the Secretary shall 
impose a penalty on the manufacturer in an amount equal to $.02 cents 
multiplied by (1) the difference between the percentage reduction 
required under section 303(b) for the year involved and the actual 
percentage reduction achieved by the manufacturer, and (2) the number 
of units of the tobacco product involved that is manufactured and 
distributed for consumer use by such manufacturer in the year following 
the year for which the determination is made.
 (b) De Minimis Rules.--
 (1) Exemption.--The Secretary shall not impose a penalty on 
 a manufacturer under subsection (b) if the Secretary determines 
 that the tobacco products manufactured by such manufacturer are 
 used by less than 0.5 percent of children.
 (2) Penalty.--If the Secretary determines that--
 (A) the manufacturer was not manufacturing tobacco 
 products in the year the baseline survey was conducted; 
 and
 (B) under an annual survey conducted under section 
 302(a) for the year involved, the tobacco products 
 manufactured by such manufacturer are used by more than 
 0.5 percent of children;
 the Secretary shall impose a penalty on such manufacturer in an 
 amount equal to $.02 cents multiplied by the percentage 
 reduction required under section 303(b) for the year involved 
 and the total number of units of the tobacco product involved 
 that is manufactured and distributed for consumer use in the 
 year following the year for which the determination is made.
 (c) Noncompliance Fees for Consecutive Violations.--
 (1) In general.--If a manufacturer of a tobacco product 
 fails to comply with the reductions required under this title 
 in 3 or 4 consecutive years, the noncompliance fee that is 
 required to be paid by the manufacturer under this section for 
 each unit of tobacco products manufactured by such manufacturer 
 which is distributed for consumer use in the year following the 
 year in which the noncompliance occurs, shall be the amount 
 determined under subsection (b) for the year multiplied by 2.
 (2) Additional noncompliance.--If a manufacturer or 
 industry described in paragraph (1) fails to comply with the 
 reductions required under this title in 5 or 6 consecutive 
 years, the noncompliance fee described in such paragraph shall 
 be the amount determined under subsection (b) for the year 
 multiplied by 3.
 (d) Prohibition on Single-Pack Sales in Cases of Repeated 
Noncompliance.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall establish regulations to prohibit the 
sale of single packs of a manufacturer's tobacco products in cases of 
repeated noncompliance with the reductions required under section 
303(b). Such regulations shall require that, if a manufacturer fails to 
comply with such reductions in 4 or more consecutive years, the 
manufacturer's tobacco products may be sold in the following year only 
in packages containing not less than 10 units of the product per 
package (200 cigarettes per package in the case of cigarettes, and a 
corresponding package size for other tobacco products).
 (e) Required Generic Packaging in Severe Cases of Repeated 
Noncompliance.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall establish regulations to require units 
and packages of a manufacturer's tobacco products to have generic 
packaging in severe cases of repeated noncompliance with the reductions 
required under section 303(b). Such regulations shall require that, if 
a manufacturer fails to comply with such reductions in 6 or more 
consecutive years, the manufacturer's tobacco products may be sold in 
the following year only in units and packages whose packaging contains 
no external images, logos, or text (other than any required labels), 
except that the brand name and the identifier `tobacco' may appear on 
the packaging in block lettering in black type on a white background.
 (f) Payment.--The penalty to be paid by a manufacturer under this 
section shall be paid on a quarterly basis, with payments due not later 
than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
 (g) Procedures.--In assessing penalties under this section, the 
Secretary shall have in place procedures to take into account the 
effect that the margin of error of the annual survey may have on the 
amounts of penalties assessed to manufacturers.
 (h) Other Products.--The Secretary may promulgate regulations 
requiring reductions in the use of other tobacco products by 
individuals under 18 years of age. Such regulations shall contain 
provisions for the application of monetary penalties for the failure of 
manufacturers to achieve such reductions.

SEC. 305. RULEMAKING PROCEDURES.

 (a) Docket.--Not later than the date of the proposal of any 
regulation under this title, the Secretary shall establish a rulemaking 
docket for action on such regulation (referred to in this section as a 
``rule''). Whenever a rule applies only within a particular State, a 
second (identical) docket shall be established in the appropriate 
regional office of the Department of Health and Human Services.
 (b) Publication.--In the case of any rule to which this section 
applies, notice of proposed rulemaking shall be published in the 
Federal Register, as provided under section 553(b) of title 5, United 
States Code, shall be accompanied by a statement of its basis and 
purpose and shall specify the period available for public comment 
(hereinafter referred to as the ``comment period''). The notice of 
proposed rulemaking shall also state the docket number, the location or 
locations of the docket, and the times it will be open to public 
inspection. The statement of basis and purpose shall include a summary 
of--
 (1) the factual data on which the proposed rule is based;
 (2) the methodology used in obtaining the data and in 
 analyzing the data; and
 (3) the major legal interpretations and policy 
 considerations underlying the proposed rule.
 (c) Public Comment.--
 (1) Public inspection.--The rulemaking docket required 
 under subsection (a) shall be open for inspection by the public 
 at reasonable times specified in the notice of proposed 
 rulemaking. Any person may copy documents contained in the 
 docket. The Secretary shall provide copying facilities which 
 may be used at the expense of the person seeking copies, but 
 the Secretary may waive or reduce such expenses in such 
 instances as the public interest requires. Any person may 
 request copies by mail if the person pays the expenses, 
 including personnel costs to do the copying.
 (2) Comments and other material in docket.--
 (A) Comments.--Promptly upon receipt by the 
 Secretary, all written comments and documentary 
 information on the proposed rule received from any 
 person for inclusion in the docket during the comment 
 period shall be placed in the docket. The transcript of 
 public hearings, if any, on the proposed rule shall 
 also be included in the docket promptly upon receipt 
 from the person who transcribed such hearings. All 
 documents which become available after the proposed 
 rule has been published and which the Secretary 
 determines are of central relevance to the rulemaking 
 shall be placed in the docket as soon as possible after 
 their availability.
 (B) Requirement to place in docket.--The drafts of 
 proposed rules submitted by the Secretary to the Office 
 of Management and Budget for any interagency review 
 process prior to the proposal of any such rule, all 
 documents accompanying such drafts, and all written 
 comments thereon by other agencies and all written 
 responses to such written comments by the Secretary 
 shall be placed in the docket no later than the date of 
 proposal of the rule. The drafts of the final rule 
 submitted for such review process prior to promulgation 
 and all such written comments thereon, all documents 
 accompanying such drafts, and written responses thereto 
 shall be placed in the docket no later than the date of 
 promulgation.
 (3) Limitation.--No objection may be submitted with respect 
 to a rule under this section on a date that is more than 90 
 days after the date on which the rule is published under 
 subsection (b).
 (d) Opportunity for Oral Presentation.--In promulgating a rule to 
which this section applies--
 (1) the Secretary shall allow any person to submit written 
 comments, data, or documentary information;
 (2) the Secretary shall give interested persons an 
 opportunity for the oral presentation of data, views, or 
 arguments, in addition to an opportunity to make written 
 submissions;
 (3) a transcript shall be kept of any oral presentation; 
 and
 (4) the Secretary shall keep the record of such proceeding 
 open for 30 days after completion of the proceeding to provide 
 an opportunity for submission of rebuttal and supplementary 
 information.
 (e) Material to Accompany Rule.--
 (1) In general.--The promulgated rule shall be accompanied 
 by--
 (A) a statement of basis and purpose like that 
 referred to in subsection (b) with respect to a 
 proposed rule; and
 (B) an explanation of the reasons for any major 
 changes in the promulgated rule from the proposed rule.
 (2) Responses.--The promulgated rule shall also be 
 accompanied by a response to each of the significant comments, 
 criticisms, and new data submitted in written or oral 
 presentations during the comment period.
 (3) Limitation.--The promulgated rule may not be based (in 
 part or whole) on any information or data which has not been 
 placed in the docket as of the date of such promulgation.
 (f) Judicial Review.--
 (1) In general.--The record for judicial review shall 
 consist exclusively of the material referred to in subsection 
 (b), subparagraph (A) of subsection (c)(2), and paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) of subsection (e).
 (2) Limitations.--Only an objection to a rule or procedure 
 which was raised with reasonable specificity during the period 
 for public comment (including any public hearing) may be raised 
 during judicial review. If the person raising an objection can 
 demonstrate to the Secretary that it was impracticable to raise 
 such objection within such time or if the grounds for such 
 objection arose after the period for public comment (but within 
 the time specified for judicial review) and if such objection 
 is of central relevance to the outcome of the rule, the 
 Secretary shall convene a proceeding for reconsideration of the 
 rule and provide the same procedural rights as would have been 
 afforded had the information been available at the time the 
 rule was proposed. If the Secretary refuses to convene such a 
 proceeding, such person may seek review of such refusal in the 
 United States court of appeals for the appropriate circuit. 
 Such reconsideration shall not postpone the effectiveness of 
 the rule. The effectiveness of the rule may be stayed during 
 such reconsideration, however, by the Secretary or the court 
 for a period not to exceed 3 months.
 (g) Jurisdiction.--The sole forum for challenging procedural 
determinations made by the Secretary under this section shall be in the 
United States court of appeals for the appropriate circuit at the time 
of the substantive review of the rule. No interlocutory appeals shall 
be permitted with respect to such procedural determinations. In 
reviewing alleged procedural errors, the court may invalidate the rule 
only if the errors were so serious and related to matters of such 
central relevance to the rule that there is a substantial likelihood 
that the rule would have been significantly changed if such errors had 
not been made.
 (h) Reversal of Secretary's Action.--In the case of review of any 
action of the Secretary to which this section applies, the court may 
reverse any such action found to be--
 (1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or 
 otherwise not in accordance with law;
 (2) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or 
 immunity;
 (3) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or 
 limitations, or short of statutory right; or
 (4) without observance of procedure required by law, if--
 (A) such failure to observe such procedure is 
 arbitrary or capricious;
 (B) the requirement of subsection (f)(2) has been 
 met; and
 (C) the condition of the last sentence of 
 subsection (g) is met.
 (i) Deadlines.--Each statutory deadline for promulgation of rules 
to which this section applies which requires promulgation less than 6 
months after date of proposal may be extended to not more than 6 months 
after date of proposal by the Secretary upon a determination that such 
extension is necessary to afford the public, and the agency, adequate 
opportunity to carry out the purposes of this section.
 (j) Effective Date.--The requirements of this section shall take 
effect with respect to any rule the proposal of which occurs after 90 
days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (k) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed 
to authorize judicial review of regulations or orders of the Secretary 
under this Act, except as otherwise provided for in this title.
 (l) No Stay.--In any action respecting the promulgation of 
regulations under this title or the administration or enforcement of 
this title no court shall grant any stay, injunctive, or similar relief 
before final judgment by such court in such action.
 (m) Public Participation.--It is the intent of Congress that, 
consistent with the policy of the Administrative Procedures Act, the 
Secretary in promulgating any regulation under this title, including a 
regulation subject to a deadline, shall ensure a reasonable period for 
public participation of at least 30 days, except as otherwise expressly 
provided for.

SEC. 306. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

 (a) Judicial Review.--A manufacturer of tobacco products may seek 
judicial review of any action under this title only after a penalty has 
been assessed and paid by the manufacturer to the Department of the 
Treasury and only in the United States District Court for the District 
of Columbia. In an action by a manufacturer seeking judicial review of 
an annual performance survey, the manufacturer may prevail--
 (1) only if the manufacturer shows that the results of the 
 performance survey were arbitrary and capricious; and
 (2) only to the extent that the manufacturer shows that it 
 would have been required to pay a substantially lesser penalty 
 if the results of the performance survey were not arbitrary and 
 capricious.
 (b) Prohibition.--No stay or other injunctive relief may be granted 
by the Secretary or any court that has the effect of enjoining the 
imposition and collection of penalties to be applied under this 
section.
 (c) Definitions.--As used in this title:
 (1) Child.--The term ``child'' means, except as provided in 
 section 302(b), an individual who is under the age of 18.
 (2) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' includes any 
 person who imports a finished tobacco product.

TITLE IV--TOBACCO TRANSITION ASSISTANCE FOR PRODUCERS, COMMUNITIES, AND 
 OTHER PERSONS

SEC. 401. MINIMUM PURCHASE REQUIREMENTS OF DOMESTIC FLUE-CURED AND 
 BURLEY TOBACCO FOR MANUFACTURERS OF CIGARETTES.

 (a) Definitions.--For the purposes of this section:
 (1) Domestic tobacco.--The term ``domestic tobacco'' means 
 Flue-cured tobacco and Burley tobacco grown in the United 
 States.
 (2) Manufacturer of cigarettes.--The term ``manufacturer of 
 cigarettes'' means any enterprise that produces cigarettes sold 
 in the United States with a total value, determined by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture for a calendar year, in excess of a de 
 minimus amount. The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish 
 the de minimus amount to be used for a calendar year, except 
 that such amount shall not be more than $1,000,000.
 (b) Purchase Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Effective beginning with calendar year 
 1999, each manufacturer of cigarettes shall purchase at a 
 minimum a quantity of domestic tobacco that is equal to that 
 manufacturer's share of the target quantity of domestic tobacco 
 determined under subsection (c).
 (2) Reporting requirement.--Each manufacturer of cigarettes 
 shall report to the Secretary of Agriculture the manufacturer's 
 purchases of domestic tobacco in such manner and at such times 
 as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation.
 (c) Target Quantity and Manufacturer's Share.--
 (1) In general.--For each calendar year for the purposes of 
 this section, the target quantity of domestic tobacco shall be 
 not less than the average purchase of domestic, green-weight 
 Burley tobacco and domestic green-weight Flue-cured tobacco by 
 domestic manufacturers for the 1995, 1996, and 1997 marketing 
 years.
 (2) Cigarette manufacturer's share.--The Secretary of 
 Agriculture shall determine the share of the target quantity 
 for a calendar year to be allocated to each manufacturer of 
 cigarettes on the basis of the manufacturer's share of the 
 total quantity of cigarettes sold in the United States for the 
 preceding year, as determined by the Secretary. If the 
 Secretary of Agriculture determines that it is impracticable to 
 use a particular preceding calendar year as the base period, 
 the Secretary may utilize some other appropriate period as the 
 base period.
 (3) Adjustments.--The amount of purchases determined by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture for a manufacturer of cigarettes for 
 any calendar year may be increased by any increase in sales by 
 the manufacturer of cigarettes in the United States for that 
 calendar year as compared with the base period.
 (4) Affiliates.--For purposes of the calculations required 
 in this subsection, the Secretary of Agriculture may combine 
 the sales of a manufacturer of cigarettes with sales of 
 affiliated manufacturers as determined to be needed or 
 appropriate.
 (d) Penalty for Violations.--
 (1) In general.--If a manufacturer of cigarettes fails to 
 make the required purchases for a calendar year, the 
 manufacturer of cigarettes shall be subject to a penalty in the 
 amount determined in under paragraph (4). If the Secretary of 
 Agriculture determines that the manufacturer of cigarettes 
 failed to make the required purchases because of the use of 
imported tobacco to manufacture cigarettes, the Secretary may assess 
all or a portion of the penalty amount against the importer or other 
party involved in the marketing of the cigarettes, as the Secretary 
considers appropriate or necessary to insure full enforcement of this 
section.
 (2) Liability.--The manufacturer of cigarettes or other 
 party potentially liable for a penalty under this subsection 
 will bear the burden of presenting satisfactory proof of the 
 required purchases.
 (3) Notice and hearing.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall 
 assess a penalty under this subsection only after notice and 
 opportunity for a hearing.
 (4) Amount of penalty.--The amount of a penalty under this 
 subsection shall be equal, for each pound of the shortage, to 
 an amount not to exceed 75 percent of the average per pound 
 market price, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture, 
 for domestic tobacco of the like kind for the calendar year 
 preceding the calendar year in which the shortage has occurred.
 (5) Relation to other sums due.--Penalty amounts assessed 
 under this subsection shall be in addition to other amounts as 
 may be due, including late fees and interest.
 (e) Barring of Sales of Cigarettes.--
 (1) Order.--Until the amount of a penalty assessed under 
 subsection (d) is paid, the Secretary of Agriculture may issue 
 an order barring the manufacturer of cigarettes or other party 
 subject to the penalty, and its affiliates, from further sales 
 of cigarettes in the United States.
 (2) Additional reports and sanctions.--As part of an order 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Agriculture may require 
 such interim reports of domestic tobacco purchases as the 
 Secretary considers warranted and demand reasonable interim 
 assurances of compliance with this section.
 (3) Enforcement.--The Secretary of Agriculture may seek 
 enforcement of an order under this subsection in the district 
 courts of the United States.
 (f) Disposition of Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, sums collected as penalties, late fees, or interest under this 
section shall be deposited in the No Net Cost Tobacco Fund of, or the 
No Net Cost Tobacco Account for, the relevant tobacco producer-owned 
cooperative marketing associations handling the domestic tobacco that 
is the subject of the shortage producing the collection, as determined 
by the Secretary of Agriculture.

SEC. 402. TOBACCO TRANSITION TRUST FUND AND USE OF TRUST FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the 
United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Tobacco Transition 
Trust Fund'' (in this section referred to as the ``Trust Fund''), 
consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the 
Trust Fund.
 (b) Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are appropriated and 
transferred to the Trust Fund for each fiscal year amounts made 
available to the Trust Fund as provided for in section 101(d)(7).
 (c) Repayable Advances.--
 (1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 to the Trust Fund, as repayable advances, such sums as may from 
 time to time be necessary to make expenditures under subsection 
 (d).
 (2) Repayment with interest.--Repayable advances made to 
 the Trust Fund shall be repaid, and interest on the advances 
 shall be paid, to the general fund of the Treasury when the 
 Secretary of the Treasury determines that moneys are available 
 in the Trust Fund to make the payments.
 (3) Rate of interest.--Interest on an advance made under 
 this subsection shall be at a rate determined by the Secretary 
 of Treasury (as of the close of the calendar month preceding 
 the month in which the advance is made) that is equal to the 
 current average market yield on outstanding marketable 
 obligations of the United States with remaining period to 
 maturity comparable to the anticipated period during which the 
 advance will be outstanding.
 (d) Expenditures From Trust Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), amounts in the 
 Trust Fund shall be available for expenditure to provide--
 (A) transition payments to tobacco quota holders 
 and quota lessees to compensate quota holders and quota 
 lessees for lost value of tobacco crops as a result of 
 reduced demand for tobacco;
 (B) economic development assistance to tobacco 
 producing communities;
 (C) retraining for tobacco producers, tobacco 
 factory workers; and tobacco warehousemen;
 (D) educational scholarships for tobacco producers 
 and their immediate dependents;
 (E) funds to cover the cost of providing crop 
 insurance for tobacco producers; and
 (F) funds to cover the administrative costs 
 incurred by the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out a 
 price support program for tobacco.
 (2) Implementation.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be 
 available for making expenditures described in paragraph (1) 
 only if a law is enacted not later than January 1, 2000, that 
 specifically prescribes authorized uses of the Trust Fund.
 (e) Effect on Price Support Program.--Nothing in this section shall 
prohibit the Secretary of Agriculture from administering a price 
support program for tobacco so long as all administrative costs are 
paid out of the Trust Fund.
 (f) Budgetary Treatment.--This section constitutes budget authority 
in advance of appropriations Acts.
 (g) Termination of Effectiveness.--The authority provided by this 
section terminates effective January 1, 2000, unless a law is enacted 
not later than that date that specifically prescribes authorized uses 
of the Trust Fund.

 TITLE V--STANDARDS TO REDUCE INVOLUNTARY EXPOSURE TO TOBACCO SMOKE

SEC. 501. STANDARDS TO REDUCE INVOLUNTARY EXPOSURE TO TOBACCO SMOKE.

 The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 35. STANDARDS TO REDUCE INVOLUNTARY EXPOSURE TO TOBACCO SMOKE.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section--
 ``(1) Public facility.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `public facility' means 
 any workplace covered by this Act and any enclosed 
 structure regularly entered by 10 or more individuals 
 at least 1 day per week, including any such building 
 owned by or leased to a Federal, State, or local 
 government entity (including Congress). Such term shall 
 not include any building or portion thereof while used 
 as a private residence.
 ``(B) Exclusions.--The term `public facility' does 
 not include a portion of a building which is used as a 
 bar, a facility in which a retailer engages primarily 
 in the business of selling tobacco products, a hotel 
 guest room that is designated as a smoking room, a 
 private club while in use for social or fraternal 
 activities that are not open to the public, a casino, a 
 bingo parlor, or a prison.
 ``(C) Bar.--The term ``bar'' means any indoor area 
 that is open to the general public and that is devoted 
 to the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for on-
 premises consumption where the service of food is only 
 incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
 Service of food shall be considered incidental if the 
 food service generates less than 50 percent of the 
 total annual gross food and liquor sales of the 
 establishment.
 ``(2) Responsible entity.--The term `responsible entity' 
 means, with respect to any public facility, the owner or 
 operator of such facility except that, in the case of any such 
 facility or portion thereof which is leased, such term means 
 the lessee.
 ``(b) Smoke-Free Environment Policy.--
 ``(1) Policy required.--In order to protect children and 
 adults from cancer, respiratory disease, heart disease, and 
 other adverse health effects associated with breathing 
 environmental tobacco smoke, the responsible entity for each 
 public facility shall adopt and implement at such facility a 
 smoke-free environment policy which meets the requirements of 
 paragraph (2) or (4).
 ``(2) Elements of policy.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each smoke-free environment 
 policy for a public facility shall--
 ``(i) prohibit the smoking of cigarettes, 
 cigars, and pipes, and any other combustion of 
 tobacco within the facility and on facility 
 property within the immediate vicinity of the 
 entrance to the facility or any air intake vent 
 (including open windows and doors); and
 ``(ii) post a clear and prominent notice of 
 the smoking prohibition in appropriate and 
 visible locations at the public facility.
 ``(B) Exception.--The smoke-free environment policy 
 for a public facility may provide an exception to the 
 prohibition specified in subparagraph (A) for 1 or more 
 specially designated smoking areas within a public 
 facility if such area or areas meet the requirements of 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Specially designated smoking areas.--A specially 
 designated smoking area meets the requirements of this 
 subsection if--
 ``(A) the area is ventilated in accordance with 
 specifications promulgated by the Secretary of Labor, 
 in consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, that ensure that air 
 from the area is directly exhausted to the outside of 
 the building and does not recirculate or drift to other 
 areas within the public facility;
 ``(B) the area is maintained at negative pressure, 
 as compared to adjacent nonsmoking areas, as determined 
 under regulations promulgated by the Secretary of 
 Labor, in consultation with the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency; and
 ``(C) nonsmoking individuals are fully advised that 
 the area is a smoking area and such individuals do not 
 have to enter the area for any purpose while smoking is 
 occurring in such area, and for an additional period 
 that allows for at least 3 air exchanges to occur in 
 the room.
 Cleaning and maintenance work shall be conducted in such area 
 only while no smoking is occurring in the area, following an 
 additional period that allows for at least 3 air exchanges to 
 occur in the room.
 ``(4) Special rules.--
 ``(A) Schools and other facilities serving 
 children.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to a 
 facility described in clause (ii), the 
 responsible entity for the facility shall--
 ``(I) adopt and implement at such 
 facility a smoke-free environment 
 policy that prohibits the smoking of 
 cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, and any 
 other combustion of tobacco within the 
 facility and on facility property;
 ``(II) adopt and implement at such 
 facility a smoke-free environment 
 policy that prohibits the use of 
 smokeless tobacco products within the 
 facility and on facility property; and
 ``(III) post a clear and prominent 
 notice of the smoking and smokeless 
 tobacco prohibition in appropriate and 
 visible locations at the public 
 facility.
 ``(ii) Facility.--A facility described in 
 this clause is--
 ``(I) an elementary or secondary 
 school (as such term is defined in 
 section 14101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 8801);
 ``(II) any facility at which a Head 
 Start program or project is being 
 carried out under the Head Start Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.);
 ``(III) any facility at which a 
 licensed or certified child care 
 provider provides child care services; 
 and
 ``(IV) any recreation or other 
 facility maintained primarily to 
 provide services to children as 
 determined by the Secretary of Labor.
 ``(B) Public transportation.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to any 
 responsible entity which operates conveyances 
 of public transportation (including bus, rail, 
 aircraft, boat, or any other conveyance 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary of 
 Labor), the responsible entity shall--
 ``(I) adopt and implement on such 
 conveyances a smoke-free environment 
 policy that prohibits the smoking of 
 cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, and any 
 other combustion of tobacco within the 
 conveyance and on property affiliated 
 with the conveyance; and
 ``(II) post a clear and prominent 
 notice of the smoking prohibition in 
 appropriate and visible locations on 
 the conveyance.
 ``(ii) Rail transportation.--The smoke-free 
 environment policy for a responsible entity 
 that operates a rail carrier providing rail 
 commuter service may provide an exception to 
 the prohibition specified in clause (i) with 
 respect to such service for 1 or more specially 
 designated smoking cars if such cars meet the 
 requirements of paragraph (3).
 ``(c) Enforcement.--To be eligible to receive funds under the 
Healthy Kids Act, a State shall make a demonstration to the Secretary 
that the State is enforcing this section within the State. Such laws or 
procedures shall permit aggrieved individuals to enforce this section 
through administrative and judicial means.
 ``(d) Preemption.--Notwithstanding section 18, nothing in this 
section shall preempt or otherwise affect any other existing or future 
Federal, State or local law which provides protection from health 
hazards from environmental tobacco smoke that are as least as stringent 
as those provided for in this section.
 ``(e) Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate such 
regulations as the Secretary deems necessary to carry out this section.
 ``(f) Effective Date.--The provisions of this section shall take 
effect on the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
section.''.

 TITLE VI--PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--Research Programs

SEC. 601. TOBACCO-RELATED RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
encourage and promote (through grants, contracts, or otherwise) 
expanded research, investigations, experiments and studies, 
concerning--
 (1) the relationship between the use of tobacco products 
 and cancer, cardiovascular diseases, lung diseases and other 
 diseases;
 (2) the effects of tobacco products, ingredients of tobacco 
 products, and tobacco smoke on the human body and methods of 
 reducing any negative effects, including the development of 
 non-addictive, reduced risk tobacco products;
 (3) the addictive effects of nicotine and how such effects 
 differ with respect to different individuals;
 (4) the prevention and cure of diseases and illnesses most 
 associated with the use of tobacco products;
 (5) differentials between brands of tobacco products with 
 respect to health effects or addiction;
 (6) the effectiveness of drugs and devices in assisting 
 individuals to stop using tobacco products; and
 (7) the relationship between the use of tobacco products 
 and cancer, particularly among minorities.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant, contract, or 
other assistance under this section an entity or individual shall 
prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received by an individual or entity 
under this section shall be used to carry out activities under the 
program established under subsection (a).
 (d) Additional Requirements.--To be eligible to receive a grant, 
contract, or other assistance under this section an entity or 
individual shall provide assurances to the Secretary that--
 (1) any research to be conducted under the grant or 
 contract will be generally consistent with the requirements 
 applicable to research conducted under the authority of the 
 National Institutes of Health;
 (2) adequate records will be maintained with respect to 
 such assistance; and
 (3) amounts provided to the individual or entity will be 
 subject to independent audit.
 (e) Effect on Minorities and Women.--The program established under 
subsection (a) shall be conducted in a manner that ensures that 
research will be conducted at minority education institutions, where 
available, or by minority researchers and minority public health 
organizations to investigate the different effects of tobacco use on 
minorities and women in proportion to their prevalence in the smoking 
population.
 (f) Dissemination of Results.--The Secretary shall establish 
procedures for the dissemination of the results of the research 
conducted under this section.
 (g) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to the amount made available under section 
121(c)(1)(D) for a fiscal year.

SEC. 602. RESEARCH RELATING TO PATTERNS OF SMOKING.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to provide 
for the conduct of research (through the provision of grants, 
contracts, or otherwise) concerning the cultural, social, behavioral, 
neurological and psychological reasons that individuals refrain from 
using tobacco products, begin to use tobacco products, continue using 
tobacco products, or quit using tobacco products.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant, contract, or 
other assistance under this section an entity or individual shall 
prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received by an individual or entity 
under this section shall be used to carry out activities under the 
program established under subsection (a).
 (d) Additional Requirements.--To be eligible to receive a grant, 
contract, or other assistance under this section an entity or 
individual shall provide assurances to the Secretary that--
 (1) any research to be conducted under the grant or 
 contract will be generally consistent with the requirements 
 applicable to research conducted under the authority of the 
 National Institutes of Health;
 (2) adequate records will be maintained with respect to 
 such assistance; and
 (3) amounts provided to the individual or entity will be 
 subject to independent audit.
 (e) Effect on Minorities and Women.--The program established under 
subsection (a) shall be conducted at minority education institutions, 
where available, or by minority researchers and minority public health 
organizations to investigate the different factors affecting tobacco 
use among minorities and women in proportion to their prevalence in the 
smoking population.
 (f) Dissemination of Results.--The Secretary shall establish 
procedures for the dissemination of the results of the research 
conducted under this section.
 (g) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 10 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

SEC. 603. SURVEILLANCE AND EVALUATION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall conduct surveillance 
and evaluation activities, including the surveys authorized under title 
III, to monitor patterns of tobacco use and determine the effectiveness 
of various anti-tobacco programs funded under this Act. Such activities 
shall include studies of the responsiveness of smokers and potential 
smokers, particularly youth smokers, to price increases and non-price 
incentives.
 (b) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 5 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

 Subtitle B--Education and Prevention Programs

SEC. 611. GRANTS FOR SCHOOL- AND COMMUNITY-BASED TOBACCO DANGER 
 EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to award 
grants to States to enable such States to assist schools, colleges, 
universities, communities, or community organizations--
 (1) to carry out school-based and college- or university-
 based education programs concerning the dangers of using 
 tobacco products using methods that are proven and effective; 
 and
 (2) to carry out community-based prevention programs, 
 including utilizing education institutions or minority public 
 health clinics or organizations in predominantly minority 
 communities in proportion to their prevalence in the smoking 
 population, using methods that are proven to be culturally and 
 linguistically appropriate.
Programs under paragraphs (1) and (2) which are designed to deal with 
the use of tobacco products by blacks shall be carried out by part B 
institutions as defined in section 322(2) of the Higher Education Act 
(20 U.S.C. 1061(2)). Programs under such paragraphs which are designed 
to deal with the use of tobacco products by Hispanics shall be carried 
out by Hispanic Serving Institutions as defined in section 316(b)(1) of 
the Higher Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b)(1)). Programs under such 
paragraphs which are designed to deal with the use of tobacco products 
by Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders shall be carried out by 
national or regional community based programs or research institutions 
with proven experience in Asian American and Pacific Islander health 
research.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section a State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require, including a State plan (that 
is subject to approval by the Secretary) that describes--
 (1) the types of programs that the State will fund under 
 the grant;
 (2) the manner in which the State will ensure that the 
 programs will be age-appropriate, culturally appropriate, and 
 linguistically appropriate for the target population; and
 (3) the manner in which the State will monitor the 
 effectiveness of such programs.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received by a State under this section 
shall be used to--
 (1) carry out State-wide school-based education programs 
 that are focused on those regions of the State with high 
 smoking rates and targeted at populations who are most at risk 
 to start smoking;
 (2) carry out State-wide college- and university-based 
 education programs to discourage individuals between the ages 
 of 18 and 24 from beginning to use tobacco products, such 
 programs to be focused on colleges or universities with high 
 smoking rates;
 (3) carry out community-based prevention programs that are 
 focused on those populations, within the community, including 
 minority populations in proportion to their prevalence in the 
 smoking population, that are most at-risk to use tobacco 
 products or that have been targeted by tobacco advertising or 
 marketing;
 (4) develop curriculums for such programs;
 (5) acquire materials for such programs;
 (6) expand the IMPACT or ASSIST program; and
 (7) carry out other activities determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (d) Additional Requirements.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this section a State shall provide assurances to the Secretary 
that--
 (1) the State will annually report to the Secretary on the 
 effectiveness of the educational approaches implemented by the 
 State;
 (2) adequate records will be maintained with respect to 
 such assistance;
 (3) amounts provided to individuals or entities will be 
 subject to independent audit; and
 (4) the State will involve local public health officials in 
 the planning and implementation of the program.
 (e) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 15 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

 Subtitle C--Miscellaneous Programs

SEC. 621. COUNTER-ADVERTISING PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall carry out programs to reduce 
tobacco usage through media-based (such as counter-advertising 
campaigns) and nonmedia-based education, prevention and cessation 
campaigns designed to discourage the use of tobacco products by 
individuals and to encourage those who use such products to quit. Such 
programs shall include national and local campaigns and shall target, 
in a culturally and linguistically appropriate manner and utilizing 
appropriate media outlets (including newspapers and other media owned 
by and targeted to minorities), adults, children, women and minorities 
in proportion to their prevalence in the smoking population who have 
been targeted by tobacco industry advertising.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive assistance under this 
section an entity or individual shall prepare and submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received by an individual or entity 
under this section shall be used to carry out activities under the 
programs established under subsection (a). Such amounts may be used to 
design and implement such activities and to conduct research concerning 
the effectiveness of such programs.
 (d) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 25 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

SEC. 622. NATIONAL TOBACCO CESSATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a program to be known as 
the ``National Tobacco Cessation Program''. The Secretary may award 
grants to, and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with, 
public and private entities for the purpose of expanding the 
availability and utilization of tobacco use cessation services. The 
program established under this section shall ensure that cessation 
programs will be conducted in a manner that targets minorities and 
women in proportion to their prevalence in the smoking population.
 (b) Use of Funds.--Amounts made available under a grant, contract 
or cooperative agreement under subsection (a) shall be used for the 
planning, establishment, or administration of tobacco use cessation 
programs approved in accordance with subsection (c).
 (c) Cessation Programs.--Programs receiving assistance under this 
section shall provide a range and quality of services consistent with 
the most recent cessation service guidelines issued by the Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research. Using the best available scientific 
information, the Secretary shall promulgate such additional guidelines 
as are necessary to assure the quality, accessibility and cost 
effectiveness of services receiving funds under this section.
 (d) Cessation Programs in Minority Communities.--The Secretary 
shall ensure programs established under subsection (a) are directed to 
targeted populations and minorities in proportion to their prevalence 
in the smoking population. Programs operating in the minority community 
should be culturally and linguistically appropriate, and operated by 
minority education institutions, public health or community-based 
organizations.
 (e) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 33 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

SEC. 623. ASSISTANCE FOR THOSE SUFFERING FROM TOBACCO-RELATED 
 ILLNESSES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to provide 
assistance and compensation to individuals (and entities providing 
services to such individuals) suffering from tobacco-related illnesses 
and conditions. Under such program assistance shall be targeted at 
individuals who are determined to be uninsured or underinsured and who 
can demonstrate financial hardship.
 (b) Development of Plan.--The Secretary shall carry out the program 
established under subsection (a) under a plan to be developed by the 
Secretary, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
Act.
 (c) Eligibility.--
 (1) Of entities.--To be eligible to receive assistance 
 under this section an entity shall--
 (A) be a public or nonprofit private entity;
 (B) prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require;
 (C) provide assurances that amounts received under 
 the grant will be used in accordance with subsection 
 (d)(1); and
 (D) meet any other requirements determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (2) Of individuals.--To be eligible to receive assistance 
 under this section an individual shall--
 (A) prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require;
 (B) provide assurances that amounts received under 
 the grant will be used only in accordance with 
 subsection (d)(2); and
 (C) meet any other requirements determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (d) Use of Funds.--Assistance provided under this section shall be 
used--
 (1) in the case of an entity eligible under subsection 
 (c)(1), to provide treatment for tobacco-related illnesses; or
 (2) in the case of an individual eligible under subsection 
 (c)(2), to pay for the receipt of treatments for tobacco-
 related illnesses.
 (e) Additional Requirements.--In providing assistance under this 
section, the Secretary shall ensure that such assistance is not used to 
duplicate any payments made under any health insurance plans but rather 
to cover uncompensated care provided to individuals with tobacco-
related illnesses.
 (f) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 3 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

SEC. 624. INTERNATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL.

 (a) Governmental Activities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary (in consultation with the 
 Secretary of State) may provide bilateral assistance, including 
 technical assistance through the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention, to foreign countries and multilateral 
 assistance to reduce and prevent the use of tobacco in foreign 
 countries. Such assistance shall be focused on preventing the 
 use of tobacco products by minors.
 (2) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out 
 this subsection an amount equal to 2 percent of the amounts 
 made available under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year. 
 Such amount shall be split equally between bilateral and 
 multilateral assistance.
 (b) Nongovernmental Activities.--
 (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to 
 establish the American Center on Global Health and Tobacco 
 (referred to in this subsection as ``ACT''). ACT shall assist 
 organizations in other countries to reduce and prevent the use 
 of tobacco. Activities ACT supports shall include--
 (A) public education programs that inform the 
 public about the hazards of tobacco use and of 
 environmental tobacco smoke;
 (B) mass media campaigns, including paid counter-
 tobacco advertisements, to reverse the image appeal of 
 pro-tobacco messages, especially those that glamorize 
 and ``Westernize'' tobacco use to young people; and
 (C) education about the economic and societal costs 
 of tobacco use, and effective tobacco use prevention 
 and cessation strategies that are appropriate for the 
 country involved.
 (2) Establishment.--
 (A) In general.--There is hereby established in the 
 District of Columbia a private, nonprofit corporation 
 to be known as the American Center on Global Health and 
 Tobacco. ACT shall--
 (i) not be an agency or establishment of 
 the United States; and
 (ii) except as otherwise provided in this 
 section, be subject to, and have all the powers 
conferred upon a nonprofit corporation by the District of Columbia 
Nonprofit Corporation Act (D.C. Code section 29-501 et seq.).
 (B) Relation to united states.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as making ACT an agency 
 or establishment of the United States, or as making the 
 members of the Board of ACT, or its employees, officers 
 or employees of the United States.
 (C) Relation to nongovernmental organizations.--ACT 
 shall have a limited staff, and, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, utilize the available experience and 
 talents of nongovernmental organizations with 
 specialized experience in health, education, media, and 
 tobacco.
 (D) Governing board.--The Secretary shall appoint a 
 governing board of up to 25 members including--
 (i) on a bipartisan basis, Members of the 
 Senate and of the House of Representatives;
 (ii) the heads of United States public 
 health organizations;
 (iii) the heads of United States media, 
 marketing, and other nongovernment institutions 
 and corporations; and
 (iv) individuals active in education, 
 public health, and other relevant activities.
 (E) International advisory council.--An 
 International Advisory Council consisting of 
 representatives from key global, regional, and national 
 public health organizations, and leading individual 
 educators and health professionals shall provide 
 advisory assistance to ACT.
 (3) Funding.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall on 
 October 1 of each fiscal year beginning after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, transfer an amount equal to 1 percent of 
 the amounts made available under section 101(d)(5)(C) for the 
 fiscal year to ACT to carry out this subsection.
 (4) Requirements for eligibility for annual transfers from 
 the trust fund.--
 (A) Oversight.--ACT and its grantees shall be 
 subject to the oversight and supervision of Congress.
 (B) Compliance.--
 (i) Funding contingent on compliance.--
 Annual payments from the Trust Fund may be made 
 to ACT under this subsection only if ACT 
 complies with the requirements specified in 
 this subsection.
 (ii) Use of funds.--ACT may only fund 
 programs for private sector groups, and may not 
 carry out programs directly. ACT may provide 
 funding only for programs which are consistent 
 with the purposes of this subsection.
 (C) Salaries and compensation.--
 (i) No other source of compensation.--
 Officers and employees of ACT may not receive 
 any salary or other compensation from any 
 source other than ACT for services performed 
 for ACT.
 (ii) United states officers and 
 employees.--An individual who is an officer or 
 employee of the United States who also serves 
 on the Board of Directors or as an officer or 
 employee of ACT, may not receive any 
 compensation or travel expenses in connection 
 with services performed for ACT.
 (D) Stocks and dividends.--ACT shall not issue any 
 shares of stock or declare or pay any dividends.
 (E) Audits.--
 (i) Public accounts.--The accounts of ACT 
 shall be audited annually in accordance with 
 generally accepted auditing standards.
 (ii) Comptroller general.--The financial 
 transactions of ACT for each fiscal year may be 
 audited by the Comptroller General. A report of 
 each audit shall be made by the Comptroller 
 General to Congress. A copy of each report 
 shall be furnished to the President and to ACT 
 at the time the report is submitted to 
 Congress.
 (F) Recordkeeping.--ACT shall ensure that each 
 recipient of assistance from ACT under this subsection 
 keeps such records as may be reasonably necessary to 
 fully disclose the amount and the disposition by such 
 recipient of the proceeds of such assistance, the total 
 cost of the project or undertaking in connection with 
which such assistance is given or used, and the amount and nature of 
that portion of the cost of the project or undertaking supplied by 
other sources, and such other records as will facilitate an effective 
audit. ACT shall ensure that it, or any of its duly authorized 
representatives, shall have access for the purpose of audit and 
examination to any books, documents, papers, and records of each 
recipient of assistance from ACT that are pertinent to assistance 
provided through ACT under this subsection.

SEC. 625. NATIONAL EVENT SPONSORSHIP PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a program to be 
known as the ``National Event Sponsorship Program'' under which the 
Secretary may award grants to eligible entities or individuals for the 
sponsorship of activities described in subsection (c).
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section an entity or individual shall--
 (1) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require, including--
 (A) a description of the event, activity, team, or 
 entry for which the grant is to be provided;
 (B) documentation that the event, activity, team, 
 or entry involved was sponsored or otherwise funded by 
 a tobacco manufacturer or distributor prior to the date 
 of the application; and
 (C) a certification that the applicant is unable to 
 secure funding for the event, activity, team, or entry 
 involved from sources other than those described in 
 paragraph (2);
 (2) provide assurances that amounts received under the 
 grant will be used in accordance with subsection (d); and
 (3) meet any other requirements determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (c) Permissible Sponsorship Activities.--Events, activities, teams, 
or entries for which a grant may be provided under this section 
include--
 (1) an athletic, musical, artistic, educational, or other 
 social or cultural event or activity that was sponsored in 
 whole or in part by a tobacco manufacturer or distributor prior 
 to the date of enactment of this Act with particular emphasis 
 on smaller community-based events and activities;
 (2) the participation of a team that was sponsored in whole 
 or in part by a tobacco manufacturer or distributor prior to 
 the date of enactment of this Act, in an athletic event or 
 activity; and
 (3) the payment of a portion or all of the entry fees of, 
 or other financial or technical support provided to, an 
 individual or team by a tobacco manufacturer or distributor 
 prior to the date of enactment of this Act, for participation 
 of the individual in an athletic, musical, artistic, or other 
 social or cultural event.
 (d) Use of Funds.--Amounts received under a grant under this 
section shall be used to--
 (1)(A) pay the costs associated with the sponsorship of an 
 event or activity described in subsection (c)(1);
 (B) provide for the sponsorship of an individual or team;
 (C) pay the required entry fees associated with the 
 participation of an individual or team in an event or activity 
 described in subsection (c)(3);
 (D) provide financial or technical support to an individual 
 or team in connection with the participation of that individual 
 or team in an activity described in subsection (c)(3); or
 (E) for any other purposes determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary; and
 (2) promote images or activities to discourage individuals 
 from using tobacco products or encourage individuals who use 
 such products to quit.
 (e) Allocation of Unexpended Funds.--Amounts available for purposes 
of carrying out this section and remaining available at the end of the 
10-year period following the date of the establishment of the program 
under this section, shall be used as follows:
 (1) 50 percent of such amounts shall be used to supplement 
 amounts available for multi-media campaigns under section 621;
 (2) 25 percent of such amounts shall be used to supplement 
 amounts available for Federal or State tobacco product 
 enforcement purposes; and
 (3) 25 percent of such amounts shall be used to supplement 
 amounts available for community-based programs under this 
 subtitle or subtitle B.
 (f) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 1 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.
 (g) Sunset.--The program established under this section shall 
terminate on the date that is 10-years after the date of enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 626. PROGRAMS TO REDUCE ALCOHOL AND ILLICIT DRUG USE BY MINORS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program under 
which grants are awarded to States to augment funding for existing 
programs that are designed to reduce alcohol and illicit drug use by 
individuals under 18 years of age and that have been proven effective.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section a State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require, including a State plan (that 
is subject to approval by the Secretary) that describes--
 (1) the types of programs that the State will fund under 
 the grant;
 (2) the manner in which the State will ensure that the 
 programs will be age-appropriate;
 (3) the manner in which the State will monitor the 
 effectiveness of such programs; and
 (4) the manner in which the State program will be targeted 
 at populations that are most at risk to use alcohol or illicit 
 drugs.
 (c) Use of Funds.--Amounts received by a State under this section 
shall be used to expand and enhance existing programs to discourage the 
use of alcohol and illicit drugs and to encourage those who use such 
products to quit such use.
 (d) Additional Requirements.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this section a State shall provide assurances to the Secretary 
that--
 (1) the State will annually report to the Secretary on the 
 effectiveness of the programs implemented by the State;
 (2) adequate records will be maintained with respect to 
 such assistance; and
 (3) amounts provided to the individual or entity will be 
 subject to independent audit.
 (e) Funding.--There shall be made available to carry out this 
section an amount equal to 5 percent of the amounts made available 
under section 101(d)(5)(C) for a fiscal year.

 TITLE VII--LIABILITY PROTECTION; CONSENT DECREES; NATIONAL PROTOCOL

 Subtitle A--Liability Protection and Attorney Fees

SEC. 701. DISMISSAL OF AND LIMITATIONS ON CIVIL CLAIMS.

 (a) State Attorney General Actions.--
 (1) Pending claims.--With respect to a State, to be 
 eligible to receive funds under section 111, the attorney 
 general for such State shall resolve any civil claim that has 
 not already been reduced to judgment seeking recovery for 
 expenditures attributable to the treatment of tobacco-related 
 illnesses and conditions that has been commenced by the State 
 against a manufacturer, distributor, or retailer of a tobacco 
 product and is pending on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Future claims based on prior conduct.--With respect to 
 a State, to be eligible to receive funds under section 111, the 
 attorney general for such State shall agree that the State will 
 not commence any new civil claim after the date of enactment of 
 this Act other than to enforce the terms of a previous judgment 
 that is based on the conduct of a participating manufacturer, 
 distributor or retailer of a tobacco product that occurred 
 prior to the date of enactment of this Act seeking recovery for 
 expenditures attributable to the treatment of tobacco induced 
 illnesses and conditions against such a manufacturer, 
 distributor or retailer.
 (3) Application to local governmental entities.--The 
 requirements described in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to 
 civil claims commenced by or on behalf of local governmental 
 entities for the recovery of costs attributable to tobacco-
 related illnesses if such localities are within a State whose 
 attorney general has elected to resolve claims under paragraph 
 (1) and enter into the agreement described in paragraph (2). 
 Such provisions shall not apply to those local governmental 
 entities that are within a State whose attorney general has not 
 resolved such claims or entered into such agreements.
 (b) State and Local Option for One-Time Opt Out.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish procedures 
 under which the attorney general of a State may, not later than 
 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, elect not to 
 resolve a claim described in subsection (a)(1) or not enter 
 into an agreement under subsection (a)(2). A State whose 
 attorney general makes such an election shall not be eligible 
 to receive payments from the Trust Fund under paragraphs (1), 
 (2), and (3) of section 101(d) and section 111. Procedures 
 under this paragraph shall permit such a State to make such an 
 election on a one-time basis.
 (2) Extension.--In the case of a State that has secured a 
 judgment against a manufacturer, distributor or retailer of a 
 tobacco product in a claim described in subsection (a)(1) prior 
 to or during the period described in paragraph (1), and such 
 judgment has been appealed by such manufacturer, distributor, 
 or retailer, such period shall be extended during the pendency 
 of the appeal and for an additional period as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (3) Application to certain states.--A State that has 
 resolved a claim described in subsection (a)(1) with a 
 manufacturer, distributor or retailer of a tobacco product 
 prior to the date of enactment of this Act may not make an 
 election described in paragraph (1) if, as part of the 
 resolution of such claim, the State agreed that the enactment 
 of any national tobacco settlement legislation would supersede 
 the provisions of the resolution.
 (4) Local governmental entity option for one-time opt 
 out.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures under which the attorney for a local 
 governmental entity which commenced a civil claim prior 
 to June 20, 1997 against a manufacturer, distributor, 
 or retailer of a tobacco product seeking recovery for 
 expenditures attributable to the treatment of tobacco 
 related illnesses and conditions, not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, may elect not 
 to resolve any claim described in subsection (a)(3). A 
 local governmental entity whose attorney makes such an 
 election shall not be eligible to receive payments from 
 the Trust Fund under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of 
 section 101(d) and section 111. Procedures under this 
 paragraph shall permit such a local governmental entity 
 to make such an election on a one-time basis.
 (B) Extension.--In the case of a local governmental 
 entity that has secured a judgment against a 
 manufacturer, distributor, or retailer of a tobacco 
 product in a claim described in subsection (a)(3) prior 
 to or during the period described in subparagraph (A), 
 and such judgment has been appealed by such 
 manufacturer, distributor, or retailer, such period 
 shall be extended during the pendency of the appeal and 
 for an additional period as determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (C) Application to certain local governmental 
 entities.--A local governmental entity that has 
 resolved a claim described in subsection (a)(3) with a 
 manufacturer, distributor, or retailer of a tobacco 
 product prior to the date of enactment of this Act may 
 not make an election described in subparagraph (A) if, 
 as part of the resolution of such claim, the local 
 governmental entity agreed that the enactment of any 
 national tobacco settlement legislation would supersede 
 the provisions of the resolution.
 (c) Federal Claims.--The Federal Government is barred from 
commencing a civil claim against a participating manufacturer, 
distributor, or retailer of a tobacco product seeking recovery for 
expenditures attributable to the treatment of tobacco-related illnesses 
associated with the conduct of a manufacturer that occurred prior to 
the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Rules of Construction.--
 (1) Post enactment claims.--Nothing in this title shall be 
 construed to limit the ability of a government, entity, or 
 person to commence an action against a participating 
 manufacturer, distributor or retailer of a tobacco product with 
 respect to a claim that is based on the conduct of such 
 manufacturer, distributor or retailer that occurred after the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) No limitation on persons.--Nothing in this title shall 
 be construed to limit the right of a person to commence any 
 civil claim for past, present, or future conduct by 
 manufacturers, distributors or retailers of tobacco products.
 (3) Criminal prosecution.--Nothing in this title shall be 
 construed to limit the criminal prosecution of tobacco 
 manufacturers, retailers, or distributors or their officers, 
 directors, employees, successors, or assigns.
 (e) Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``participating 
manufacturer'' means a manufacturer of tobacco products that has 
entered into a consent decree under section 711 and that is a signatory 
to the Protocol under section 721.

SEC. 702. ATTORNEY'S FEES AND EXPENSES.

 (a) Source and Payment of Awards.--In no event shall any award of 
the Arbitration Panel established under subsection (b) be paid from, 
credited against, or otherwise affect in any way fee payments that are 
required to be made by any participating manufacturer under section 102 
or under any other provision of this Act. Any such award shall be paid 
by the participating manufacturers that are signators to the June 1997 
proposed resolution with certain State attorneys general pursuant to an 
allocation agreement among such manufacturers.
 (b) Arbitration Panel.--
 (1) Establishment.--For the purpose of awarding of 
 attorneys' fees and expenses relating to litigation affected 
 by, or legal services that resulted in whole or in part in, or 
 created a model for programs in, this Act, there is established 
 an Arbitration Panel which shall consist of--
 (A) 4 members to be appointed by the Attorney 
 General in consultation with the Trustees;
 (B) 1 member to be appointed by the manufacturers;
 (C) 1 member to be appointed by the Attorneys 
 General of the States; and
 (D) 1 member to be appointed by the private 
 attorneys.
 (2) Operation.--
 (A) Establishment.--The members of the Arbitration 
 Panel shall be appointed not later than 30 days after 
 the effective date of this Act.
 (B) Procedures.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 date on which all members of the Arbitration Panel are 
 appointed under paragraph (1), the Panel shall 
 establish the procedures under which the Panel will 
 operate which shall include--
 (i) a requirement that any finding by the 
 Arbitration Panel must be in writing and 
 supported by written reasons;
 (ii) procedures for the exchanging of 
 exhibits and witness lists by the various 
 claimants for awards;
 (iii) to the maximum extent practicable, 
 requirements that proceedings before the Panel 
 be based on affidavits rather than live 
 testimony; and
 (iv) a requirement that all claims be 
 submitted to the Arbitration Panel not later 
 than 3 months after the effective date of this 
 Act and a determination made by the Panel with 
 respect to such claims not later than 7 months 
 after such date of enactment.
 (3) Right to petition.--Any individual attorney or group of 
 attorneys involved in litigation affected by this Act shall 
 have the right to petition the Arbitration Panel for attorneys' 
 fees and expenses.
 (4) Criteria.--In making any award pursuant to this 
 section, the Arbitration Panel shall consider the following 
 criteria:
 (A) The time and labor required by the claimant.
 (B) The novelty and difficulty of the questions 
 involved in the action for which the claimant is making 
 a claim.
 (C) The skill requisite to perform the legal 
 service involved properly.
 (D) The preclusion of other employment by the 
 attorney due to acceptance of the action involved.
 (E) Whether the fee is fixed or a percentage.
 (F) Time limitations imposed by the client or the 
 circumstances.
 (G) The amount involved and the results obtained.
 (H) The experience, reputation, and ability of the 
 attorneys involved.
 (I) The undesirability of the action.
 (J) Such other factors as justice may require.
 (5) Appeal and enforcement.--The findings of the 
 Arbitration Panel shall be final, binding, nonappealable, and 
 payable within 30 days after the date on which the finding is 
 made public, except that if an award is to be paid in 
 installments, the first installment shall be payable within 
 such 30 day period and succeeding installments shall be paid 
 annually thereafter.
 (6) Sense of the house.--It is the sense of the House of 
 Representatives that the legal services rendered by attorneys 
 in the various class actions filed by the Castano Plaintiffs 
 Legal Committee against certain tobacco manufacturers provided 
 public benefits, including many of the specific public health 
 programs in the proposed resolution date June 20, 1997, upon 
 which the programs in title IV of this Act are in part modeled. 
 It is further the sense of the House of Representatives that 
 such programs do not constitute an exclusive remedy for claims 
 based on addiction or dependence on tobacco products and that 
 such programs do not operate to preclude or otherwise limit any 
 litigation premised on, or otherwise depending on, addiction to 
 or dependence on tobacco products and do not in any way affect 
 the interpretation of section 701(d) of this Act
 (c) Validity and Enforceability of Private Agreements.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, nothing in this 
section shall be construed to abrogate or restrict in any way the 
rights of any parties to mediate, negotiate, or settle any fee or 
expense disputes or issues to which this section applies, or to enter 
into private agreements with respect to the allocation or division of 
fees among the attorneys party to any such agreement.

 Subtitle B--Consent Decrees

SEC. 711. CONSENT DECREES.

 (a) Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), to be 
 eligible to receive payments under section 111, a State, and to 
 be eligible to receive liability protections under subtitle A, 
 a tobacco manufacturer shall enter into consent decrees under 
 this section to be effective on the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (2) Good faith efforts.--The limitation described in 
 paragraph (1) with respect to payments under section 111 shall 
 not apply to a State if the attorney general of the State 
 certifies to the Secretary that--
 (A) the State has made good faith efforts to enter 
 into a consent decree in accordance with this subtitle; 
 and
 (B) such State is willing to be bound by such 
 decree but such decree does not exist because--
 (i) of the refusal on the part of a tobacco 
 manufacturer to enter into such decree; or
 (ii) the appropriate court has not entered 
 the decree even though the parties have lodged 
 such a decree with the court.
 (b) Terms and Conditions.--
 (1) In general.--The consent decrees described in 
 subsection (a) shall resolve the State action (or potential 
 action in the case of a manufacturer that was not a defendant 
 in a State action but that desires to become a participating 
 manufacturer or in the case of a State that does not have a 
 suit pending against a manufacturer) for claims associated with 
 the conduct of the manufacturer that occurred prior to the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (2) General terms and conditions.--The terms and conditions 
 contained in the consent decrees described in subsection (a) 
 shall contain the following provisions relating to--
 (A) restrictions on tobacco product advertising and 
 marketing and youth access to such products;
 (B) the termination, establishment, and operation 
 of trade associations;
 (C) the disclosure of tobacco smoke constituents;
 (D) the disclosure of nontobacco constituents and 
 ingredients found in tobacco products;
 (E) the disclosure of existing and future documents 
 relating to health, toxicity, and addiction related to 
 tobacco product usage;
 (F) the obligation of manufacturers to make 
 payments for the benefit of States, private litigants 
 and the general public;
 (G) the obligation of manufacturers to enter into 
 the Protocol under subtitle C;
 (I) the obligation of manufacturers to interact 
 only with distributors and retailers that operate in 
 compliance with the applicable provisions of Federal, 
 State, or local law regarding the marketing and sale of 
 tobacco products;
 (J) requirements for warnings, labeling, and 
 packaging of tobacco products;
 (K) the resolution of pending litigation (or 
 potential future litigation for misconduct that 
 occurred prior to the date of enactment of this Act) as 
 required under subtitle A and as agreed to by the 
 parties to the decree; and
 (L) any other matter determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary or the parties involved.
 (3) Limitations.--The terms and conditions contained in the 
 consent decrees described in subsection (a) shall not contain 
 provisions relating to--
 (A) tobacco product design, performance, or 
 modification;
 (B) manufacturing standards and good manufacturing 
 practices;
 (C) testing and regulation with respect to toxicity 
 and ingredients approval; and
 (D) the tobacco usage reduction requirement 
 described in section 303.
 (4) Enforceability.--The terms and conditions contained in 
 the consent decrees described in subsection (a) shall be 
 enforceable by the signatories, as well as the Attorney 
 General, and shall include a provision that prohibits 
 signatories from challenging the enforceability of the consent 
 decrees.
 (5) Construction.--The terms and conditions contained in 
 the consent decrees described in subsection (a) shall provide 
 that the terms of the decree will be construed in a manner that 
 is consistent with the provision of this Act.
 (c) Approval.--
 (1) In general.--Prior to the entry of a consent decree by 
 a court under this section the court must find that the 
 provisions of the consent decree--
 (A) have been approved by the Secretary and the 
 Attorney General;
 (B) are fair and reasonable; and
 (C) are in the public interest.
 (2) Determination by secretary.--To approve a consent 
 decree under paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary and the Attorney 
 General shall have determined whether the provisions of the 
 decree are consistent with this Act and the Food, Drug and 
 Cosmetic Act or the rules and regulations promulgated under 
 such Acts.
 (3) Notice to public.--With respect to the approval of a 
 consent decree under this section, the court shall ensure that 
 the public has been given not less than 60 days notice of the 
 filing of the decree by the parties and any objections thereto 
 must be addressed to the satisfaction of the court.
 (d) Enforcement.--The provisions of a consent decree entered under 
this section shall remain in effect and enforceable in the court in 
which the decree is entered, even if the underlying action is 
dismissed.

SEC. 712. NON-PARTICIPATING MANUFACTURERS.

 With respect to a manufacturer that elects not to enter into a 
consent decree under section 711, such manufacturer shall not be 
eligible to receive the liability protections under section 701.

 Subtitle C--National Tobacco Control Protocol

 CHAPTER 1--ESTABLISHMENT

SEC. 721. NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROTOCOL.

 (a) Requirement.--To be eligible to receive the liability 
protections provided for in subtitle A, each tobacco manufacturer to 
which this Act applies shall, not later than 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, enter into a National Tobacco Control Protocol 
with the Attorney General of the United States and the attorney general 
of each State that does not elect to opt out under section 701(b)(1).
 (b) Terms and Conditions.--The Protocol referred to in subsection 
(a) shall be--
 (1) developed by the Attorney General, in consultation with 
 the Secretary, the State attorneys' general, the Federal Trade 
 Commission and other individuals determined appropriate by the 
 Attorney General, as a binding and enforceable contract that 
 embodies the terms of this subtitle; and
 (2) designed to be enforceable in Federal or State courts 
 as provided for in this subtitle.
 (c) Contracts.--As part of the Protocol under this section, a 
manufacturer shall agree, with respect to any contract entered into by 
the manufacturer with an entity that is a distributor or retailer of 
tobacco products, to include in such contract as a term and condition a 
requirement that such distributor or retailer comply with the 
provisions of the Protocol.

 CHAPTER 2--TERMS AND CONDITIONS

SEC. 725. APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.

 The provisions of this chapter shall be considered as part of the 
Protocol.

SEC. 726. AGREEMENT TO PROHIBIT CERTAIN ADVERTISING.

 (a) Prohibition on Outdoor Advertising.--
 (1) In general.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer 
 may use any form of outdoor tobacco product advertising, 
 including billboards, posters, or placards.
 (2) Stadia and arenas.--Except as otherwise provided in 
 this Act, a manufacturer, distributor, or retailer shall not 
 advertise tobacco products in any arena or stadium where 
 athletic, musical, artistic or other social or cultural events 
 or activities occur.
 (b) Prohibition on Use of Human Images and Cartoons.--No 
manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use a human image or a 
cartoon character or cartoon-type character in its advertising, 
labeling or promotional material with respect to a tobacco product.
 (c) Prohibition on Advertising on the Internet.--No manufacturer, 
distributor, or retailer may use the Internet to advertise tobacco 
products unless such an advertisement is inaccessible in or from the 
United States.
 (d) Prohibition on Point of Sale Advertising.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, no manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use 
 point of sale advertising of tobacco products.
 (2) Adult only stores and tobacco outlets.--Paragraph (1) 
 shall not apply to point of sale advertising at adult only 
 stores and tobacco outlets.
 (3) Permissible advertising.--
 (A) In general.--Each manufacturer of tobacco 
 products may display not more than 2 separate point of 
 sale advertisements in or at each location at which 
 tobacco products are offered for sale.
 (B) Retailers.--No manufacturer, distributor, or 
 retailer may enter into any arrangement with a retailer 
 to limit the ability of the retailer to display any 
 form of permissible point of sale advertisement or 
 promotional material originating with another 
 manufacturer, distributor, or retailer.
 (4) Limitations.--
 (A) In general.--A point of sale advertisement 
 permitted under this subsection shall be comprised of a 
 display area that is not larger than 576 square inches 
 (either individually or in the aggregate) and shall 
 consist only of black letters on a white background or 
 other recognized typographical marks. Such 
 advertisement shall not be attached to nor located 
 within 2 feet of any fixture on which candy is 
 displayed for sale.
 (B) Audio and video formats.--Audio and video 
 advertisements otherwise permitted under this Act may 
 be distributed to individuals who are 18 years of age 
 or older at point of sale but may not be played or 
 viewed at such point of sale.
 (C) Display fixtures.--Display fixtures in the form 
 of signs consisting of brand name and price and not 
 larger than 2 inches in height are permitted.
 (5) Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term 
 ``point of sale advertising'' means all printed or graphical 
 materials bearing the brand name (alone or in conjunction with 
 any other word), logo, motto, selling message, recognizable 
 color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia of product 
 identification similar or identical to those used for tobacco 
 products, which, when used for its intended purpose, can 
 reasonably be anticipated to be seen by customers at a location 
 at which tobacco products are offered for sale.

SEC. 727. CONSENSUAL RESTRICTIONS.

 (a) Restriction on Product Names.--A manufacturer shall not use a 
trade or brand name of a nontobacco product as the trade or brand name 
for a cigarette or smokeless tobacco product, except for a tobacco 
product whose trade or brand name was on both a tobacco product and a 
nontobacco product that were sold in the United States on January 1, 
1998.
 (b) Advertising Limit Actions.--
 (1) In general.--A manufacturer, distributor, or retailer 
 may in accordance with this Act, disseminate or cause to be 
 disseminated advertising or labeling which bears a tobacco 
 product brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other 
 word) or any other indicia of tobacco product identification 
 only in newspapers, in magazines, in periodicals or other 
 publications (whether periodic or limited distribution), on 
 billboards, posters and placards in accordance with section 
 726(a), in nonpoint of sale promotional material (including 
 direct mail), in point-of-sale promotional material, and in 
 audio or video formats delivered at a point-of-sale.
 (2) Limitation.--A manufacturer, distributor, or retailer 
 that intends to disseminate, or to cause to be disseminated, 
 advertising or labeling for a tobacco product in a medium that 
 is not described in paragraph (1) shall notify the Secretary 
 not less than 30 days prior to the date on which such medium is 
 to be used. Such notice shall describe the medium and discuss 
 the extent to which the advertising or labeling may be seen by 
 individuals who are under 18 years of age.
 (3) Action by secretary.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary receives a notice under paragraph 
 (2), the Secretary shall make a determination with respect to 
 the action to be taken concerning such notice.
 (c) Restriction on Placement in Entertainment Media.--
 (1) In general.--No payment shall be made by any 
 manufacturer, distributor, or retailer for the placement of any 
 tobacco product or tobacco product package or advertisement--
 (A) as a prop in any television program or motion 
 picture produced for viewing by the general public; or
 (B) in a video or on a video game machine.
 (2) Video game.--The term ``video game'' means any 
 electronic amusement device that utilizes a computer, 
 microprocessor, or similar electronic circuitry and its own 
 cathode ray tube, or is designed to be used with a television 
 set or a monitor, that interacts with the user of the device.
 (3) Video.--The term ``video'' means an audiovisual work 
 produced for viewing by the general public, such as a 
 television program, a motion picture, a music video, and the 
 audiovisual display of a video game.
 (d) Restrictions on Glamorization of Tobacco Products.--No direct 
or indirect payment shall be made, or consideration given, by any 
manufacturer, distributor, or retailer to any entity for the purpose of 
promoting the image or use of a tobacco product through print, film or 
broadcast media that appeals to individuals under 18 years of age or 
through a live performance by an entertainment artist that appeals to 
such individuals.

SEC. 728. AGREEMENT ON FORMAT AND CONTENT REQUIREMENTS FOR LABELING AND 
 ADVERTISING.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), 
each manufacturer, distributor, or retailer advertising or causing to 
be advertised, disseminating or causing to be disseminated, any 
labeling or advertising for a tobacco product shall use only black text 
on a white background.
 (b) Certain Advertising Excepted.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to 
 advertising--
 (A) in any facility where vending machines and 
 self-service displays are permitted under this title if 
 the advertising involved--
 (i) is not visible from outside of the 
 facility; and
 (ii) is affixed to a wall or fixture in the 
 facility;
 (B) that appears in any publication (whether 
 periodic or limited distribution) that is an adult 
 publication.
 (2) Adult publication.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
 the term ``adult publication'' means a newspaper, magazine, 
 periodical, or other publication--
 (A) whose readers under 18 years of age constitute 
 15 percent or less of the total readership as measured 
 by competent and reliable survey evidence; and
 (B) that is read by fewer than 2,000,000 
 individuals who are under 18 years of age as measured 
 by competent and reliable survey evidence.
 (c) Audio or Video Formats.--Each manufacturer, distributor or 
retailer advertising or causing to be advertised any advertising for a 
tobacco product in an audio or video format shall comply with the 
following:
 (1) With respect to an audio format, the advertising shall 
 be limited to words only with no music or sound effects.
 (2) With respect to a video format, the advertising shall 
 be limited to static black text only on a white background. Any 
 audio with the video advertising shall be limited to words only 
 with no music or sound effects.

SEC. 729. AGREEMENT TO BAN ON NONTOBACCO ITEMS AND SERVICES, CONTESTS 
 AND GAMES OF CHANCE, AND SPONSORSHIP OF EVENTS.

 (a) Ban on All Non-Tobacco Merchandise.--No manufacturer, importer, 
distributor, or retailer shall market, license, distribute, sell or 
cause to be marketed, licensed, distributed or sold any item (other 
than tobacco products) or service, which bears the brand name (alone or 
in conjunction with any other word), logo, symbol, motto, selling 
message, recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia 
of product identification similar or identifiable to those used for any 
brand of tobacco products.
 (b) Gifts, Contests, and Lotteries.--No manufacturer, distributor, 
or retailer shall offer or cause to be offered to any person purchasing 
tobacco products any gift or item (other than a tobacco product) in 
consideration of the purchase of such products, or to any person in 
consideration of furnishing evidence, such as credits, proofs-of-
purchase, or coupons, of such a purchase.
 (c) Sponsorship.--
 (1) In general.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer 
 shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored any athletic, musical, 
 artistic or other social or cultural event, or any entry or 
 team in any event, in which the brand name (alone or in 
 conjunction with any other word), logo, motto, selling message, 
recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia of 
product identification similar or identical to those used for tobacco 
products is used.
 (2) Use of corporate name.--A manufacturer, distributor, or 
 retailer may sponsor or cause to be sponsored any athletic, 
 musical, artistic or other social or cultural event in the name 
 of the corporation which manufactures the tobacco product if--
 (A) both the corporate name and the corporation 
 were registered and in use in the United States prior 
 to January 1, 1995; and
 (B) the corporate name does not include any brand 
 name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), 
 logo, symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable 
 color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia or 
 product identification identical or similar to, or 
 identifiable with, those used for any brand of tobacco 
 products.

 CHAPTER 3--ENFORCEMENT

SEC. 731. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROTOCOL.

 (a) Actions.--The Attorney General may bring an action for the 
enforcement, or to restrain any breach, of the Protocol in the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia or in the district 
court of the United States for the district in which the breach 
occurred.
 (b) Remedy.--In any action under subsection (a), the district court 
involved--
 (1) shall restrain the conduct that is the subject of the 
 breach of the Protocol;
 (2) shall order specific performance of the obligations set 
 forth in the Protocol;
 (3) may order civil penalties against any manufacturer who 
 violates a requirement of the Protocol in an amount not more 
 than $250,000 per violation per day; and
 (4) with respect to officers of manufacturers who knowingly 
 violate the protocol, may impose appropriate criminal 
 penalties, including incarceration.
 (c) Contracts With State Agencies.--The Secretary may award grants 
to or enter into contracts with an agency of any State to assist in the 
enforcement of the provisions of the Protocol.
 (d) Action by Attorney General.--With respect to the funding of any 
activities under subsection (a), the Attorney General shall use amounts 
available in the Trust Fund under section 102. If the Attorney General 
determines that amounts available in the Trust Fund are insufficient, 
the Attorney General may use amounts available for the activities of 
the Department of Justice.

SEC. 732. STATE ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROTOCOL.

 (a) Civil Action.--The attorney general of a State may bring an 
action for the enforcement, or to restrain a breach, of the Protocol if 
the alleged violation that is the subject of the proceedings occurred 
in that State.
 (b) Concurrent Jurisdiction.--Both Federal and State courts shall 
have jurisdiction over a proceeding described in subsection (a). If 
such a proceeding is commenced in a district court of the United 
States, the court shall take into consideration the size and scope of 
any State penalties that have been applied for the identical 
violations.
 (c) Remedies.--In any proceeding described in subsection (b) the 
remedies available shall be those described in section 731(b).

SEC. 733. PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT OF PROTOCOL.

 (a) In General.--A manufacturer may seek a declaration of the 
rights and obligations of the manufacturer under the Protocol by filing 
an action pursuant to section 2201 of title 28, United States Code.
 (b) Civil Action.--Any person may bring a civil action against a 
manufacturer to enforce, or restrain breaches of, the Protocol by such 
manufacturer, except that--
 (1) no such action may be commenced or maintained if the 
 Secretary has settled a proceeding pertaining to such alleged 
 breach; and
 (2) the court, in any such action, shall restrain conduct 
 in breach of the Protocol and order specific performance of the 
 obligations set forth in the Protocol, and may award damages 
 which at a minimum will recover any economic benefit derived as 
 a result of the noncompliance involved together with an amount 
 awarded as a suitable penalty associated with such breach.
Any damages awarded under this subsection shall be remitted to the 
Treasury.
 (c) Right of Intervention.--In any proceeding described in section 
731(a) or 732(a), any manufacturer may intervene as a matter of right.

 TITLE VIII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 801. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS TO FACILITATE THE EXPORTATION OR 
 PROMOTION OF TOBACCO.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
funds made available by appropriations or otherwise made available may 
be used by any officer, employee, department, or agency of the United 
States--
 (1) to promote or encourage the export, reexport, sale, 
 manufacture, advertising, promotion, distribution, or use of 
 tobacco or tobacco products to or in a foreign country; or
 (2) to seek, through negotiation or otherwise, the removal 
 or reduction by any foreign country of any restriction or 
 proposed restriction in that country on the importation, 
 export, reexport, sale, manufacture, advertising, promotion, 
 distribution, packaging, labeling, use, content, imposition of 
 tariffs, or taxation, of tobacco or tobacco products.
 (b) Exception.--Subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to any 
restriction or proposed restriction by a foreign country if--
 (1) the restriction is applied in a manner which 
 constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable 
 discrimination between countries;
 (2) the Secretary of Commerce certifies in writing to 
 Congress that the restriction is being applied in a manner that 
 constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable 
 discrimination between countries; and
 (3) the Secretary of Health and Human Services certifies to 
 Congress in writing that the restriction is not a reasonable 
 means of protecting the public health.
 (c) Definition.--In this section, the term ``arbitrary or 
unjustifiable discrimination'' means a restriction or proposed 
restriction by a foreign country that--
 (1) is arbitrary or unjustifiable; and
 (2) does not adhere to the principle of national treatment 
 and applies less favorable treatment to goods that are imported 
 into that country than the country applies to like goods that 
 are the product, growth, or manufacture of that country.

SEC. 802. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Prohibition of Reprisals.--An employee of any manufacturer, 
distributor, or retailer of a tobacco product may not be discharged, 
demoted, or otherwise discriminated against (with respect to 
compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment) as a 
reprisal for disclosing to an employee of the Food and Drug 
Administration, the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
Department of Justice, the Congress, or any State or local regulatory 
or enforcement authority, information relating to a violation of law 
related to this Act or a State or local law that furthers the purposes 
of this Act.
 (b) Enforcement.--Any employee or former employee who believes that 
such employee has been discharged, demoted, or otherwise discriminated 
against in violation of subsection (a) may file a civil action in the 
appropriate United States district court before the end of the 2-year 
period beginning on the date of such discharge, demotion, or 
discrimination.
 (c) Remedies.--If the district court determines that a violation 
has occurred, the court may order the manufacturer, distributor, or 
retailer involved to--
 (1) reinstate the employee to the employee's former 
 position;
 (2) pay compensatory damages; or
 (3) take other appropriate actions to remedy any past 
 discrimination.
 (d) Limitation.--The protections of this section shall not apply to 
any employee who--
 (1) deliberately causes or participates in the alleged 
 violation of law or regulation; or
 (2) knowingly or recklessly provides substantially false 
 information to the Food and Drug Administration, the Department 
 of Health and Human Services, the Department of Justice, or any 
 State or local regulatory or enforcement authority.
 (e) Application of False Claims Act.--Section 3730(d) of title 31, 
United States Code, shall apply with respect to any employee to which 
this section applies if the disclosure of such employee results in a 
payment of any fee or fine to the Federal Government by the 
manufacturer, distributor or retailer involved, regardless of whether 
such employee ever commenced an action concerning the disclosure.

SEC. 803. PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND CHILDREN.

 (a) In General.--Chapter VIII of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 381 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 804. PROHIBITION ON SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO 
 CHILDREN.

 ``(a) General Rule.--It shall be unlawful for any domestic concern 
or any officer, director, employee, or agent of such concern to make 
use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce 
to cause or contribute, either directly or through a foreign 
subsidiary, joint venture, affiliate, or licensee, to--
 ``(1) the sale or distribution of tobacco products in a 
 foreign country to children; or
 ``(2) the advertising or promotion of tobacco products in a 
 foreign country in a manner that appeals to children.
 ``(b) Interpretation.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
advertising or promotion of tobacco products shall be considered to be 
in a manner that appeals to children if the advertising or promotion is 
carried out in a manner that would not be permissible under the 
regulations referred to in section 202 of the Healthy Kids Act if it 
occurred in the United States.

``SEC. 805. LABELING.

 ``It shall be unlawful for any domestic concern or any officer, 
director, employee, or agent of such concern, either directly or 
through a foreign subsidiary, joint venture, affiliate, or licensee, to 
make use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate 
commerce to cause or contribute to the export from the United States or 
the sale or distribution in, or export from, any other country any 
tobacco product the package of which does not contain a warning label 
that--
 ``(1) is in the primary language or languages of the 
 country in which the tobacco product is sold or distributed to 
 consumers; and
 ``(2) except for the requirement of paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) complies with Federal requirements for 
 labeling of similar tobacco products manufactured, 
 imported, or packaged for sale or distribution in the 
 United States; or
 ``(B) complies with the labeling requirements of 
 the foreign country in which the product is sold or 
 distributed to consumers and which labeling 
 requirements the Secretary determines are substantially 
 similar to Federal requirements and are adequately 
 enforced by such country.''.
 (b) Enforcement.--Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 331) as amended by section 203(e), is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(cc) To carry out an act made unlawful by section 804 or 805.
 (c) Reward.--Section 303(b)(5) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 333)(b)(5)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following: ``If a person provides information leading to the 
institution of a criminal proceeding against, and conviction of, a 
person for a violation of section 301(cc), such person shall be 
entitled to one-half of the criminal fine imposed and collected for 
such violation but not more than $125,000.''.
 (d) Definitions.--Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321) as amended by section 203(a)(3), is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ll) The term `domestic concern' means--
 ``(1) any individual who is a citizen, national, or 
 resident of the United States; and
 ``(2) any corporation, partnership, association, joint-
 stock company, business trust, unincorporated organization, or 
 sole proprietorship which has its principal place of business 
 in the United States or which is organized under the laws of a 
 State of the United States or a territory, possession, or 
 commonwealth of the United States.
 ``(mm) The term `children' means an individual under the age of 
18.''.

SEC. 804. PRESERVATION OF STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY.

 Except as otherwise provided for in this Act (or an amendment made 
by this Act), nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting a 
State or political subdivision of a State from imposing requirements, 
prohibitions, penalties or other measures, whether by statute, rule, 
regulation, ordinance, judicial decree, consent decree, or settlement 
agreement, to further the purposes of this Act that are in addition to 
the requirements, prohibitions, or penalties required under this Act. 
Nothing in this Act (or an amendment made by this Act) shall preclude 
or deny the right of any State or political subdivision of a State to 
adopt or enforce any requirements, prohibitions, or penalties relating 
to tobacco products to the extent that such requirements, prohibitions 
or penalties are not less stringent than those required under this Act 
(or amendments).

SEC. 805. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, 
the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions 
of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.

 TITLE IX--PROVISIONS RELATING TO NATIVE AMERICANS

SEC. 901. PROVISIONS RELATING TO NATIVE AMERICANS.

 (a) In General.--The provisions of this Act (or an amendment made 
by this Act) shall apply to the manufacture, distribution, and sale of 
tobacco products in any area within the jurisdiction of an Indian tribe 
or tribal organization.
 (b) Religious Practice Exception.--In recognition of the religious, 
traditional and ceremonial uses of tobacco and tobacco products by many 
Indian tribes and the members of such tribes, nothing in this Act (or 
an amendment made by this Act) shall be construed to infringe upon the 
rights of such tribes or members to transfer, acquire, possess, or use 
any tobacco or tobacco products for such purposes. The preceding 
sentence shall only be construed to apply to those quantities of 
tobacco products necessary to fulfill recognized religious, traditional 
or ceremonial purposes and not to permit the general marketing of 
tobacco products not in compliance with subchapter F of chapter V of 
the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) Payments to Trust Fund.--Any Indian tribe or tribal 
organization that engages in the manufacturer of tobacco products shall 
be subject to liability for an assessment under section 102.
 (d) Application of Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act 
Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Interior, shall promulgate regulations to 
 provide for the application of any requirements of the Food, 
 Drug and Cosmetic Act with respect to tobacco products 
 manufactured, distributed, or sold in any area within the 
 jurisdiction of an Indian tribe or tribal organization as 
 appropriate to comply with subsections (a) and (b).
 (2) Eligibility for assistance.--Under the regulations 
 promulgated under paragraph (1), the Secretary, after 
 consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, may provide 
 assistance to an Indian tribe or tribal organization in meeting 
 and enforcing the requirements under such regulations if--
 (A) the tribe or organization has a governing body 
 that has powers and carries out duties that are similar 
 to the powers and duties of State or local governments 
 and requests such assistance by application to the 
 Secretary;
 (B) the functions to be exercised through the use 
 of such assistance relate to activities within the 
 exterior boundaries of the reservation or other areas 
 within the jurisdiction of the tribe involved; and
 (C) the tribe or organization is reasonably 
 expected to be capable of carrying out the functions 
 required by the Secretary.
 (3) Determinations.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of the Interior, shall make determinations 
 concerning the eligibility of an Indian tribe or tribal 
 organization for assistance under regulations under paragraph 
 (1) not later than 90 days after the date on which such tribe 
 or organization submits an application for such assistance.
 (4) Implementation by secretary.--If the Secretary 
 determines that the Indian tribe or tribal organization is not 
 willing or qualified to administer the requirements of the 
 regulations promulgated under this subsection, the Secretary, 
 in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall 
 implement and enforce such regulations on behalf of the tribe 
 or organization.
 (e) Retail Licensing Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements of section 577 of the 
 Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (as added by section 204 of 
 this Act) shall apply to retailers that sell tobacco products 
 in any area within the jurisdiction of an Indian tribe or 
 tribal organization.
 (2) Self-regulation.--In order to be eligible for funds 
 under subsection (f), an Indian tribe or tribal organization 
 shall implement a tribal licensing program within the exterior 
 boundaries of the reservation and other areas within the 
 jurisdiction of the tribe consistent with the regulations 
 promulgated under section 577 of the Federal Food, Drug and 
 Cosmetic Act.
 (3) Implementation by secretary.--If the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, determines 
 that the Indian tribe or tribal organization is not qualified 
 to administer the requirements of section 577 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, the Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of the Interior, shall implement such 
 requirements on behalf of the tribe or organization.
 (f) Eligibility for Public Health Payments.--
 (1) In general.--For each fiscal year the Secretary shall 
 pay to each Indian tribe that has an approved tribal anti-
 smoking plan a tribal grant for the fiscal year in an amount 
 equal to the amount determined under paragraph (3), and shall 
 reduce the amounts payable under section 111 to any State in 
 which the service area or areas of the Indian tribe are located 
 by the amount so determined.
 (2) Plan.--To be eligible to receive a payment under 
 paragraph (1), an Indian tribe shall prepare and submit to the 
 Secretary for approval an anti-smoking plan and shall otherwise 
 meet the requirements of subsection (e).
 (3) Amount determined.--The amount of any funds for which 
 an Indian tribe is eligible under paragraph (1) shall be 
 determined by the Secretary based on the ratio of the total 
 number of Indians residing on such tribe's reservation or in 
 areas within the jurisdiction of the tribe in the State to the 
 total population of the State multiplied by the amount 
 allocated to State under section 111.
 (4) Use.--Amounts provided to a tribe or organization under 
 this paragraph shall be used to reimburse the tribe for 
 smoking-related health expenditures, to further the purposes of 
 this Act, and in accordance with a plan submitted by the tribe 
 or organization and approved by the Secretary as being in 
 compliance with this Act. Tribes and tribal organizations shall 
 have the flexibility to utilize such amounts to meet the unique 
 health needs of such tribes within the context of tribal health 
 programs if such programs meet the fundamental Federal 
 requirements under this Act as determined by the Secretary.
 (5) Reallotment.--Any amounts set-aside and not expended 
 under this paragraph shall be reallotted among other eligible 
 tribes and organizations.
 (g) Obligation of Manufacturers.--A participating manufacturer 
shall not engage in any activity in an area within the jurisdiction of 
an Indian tribe or tribal organization that is prohibited under the 
Protocol.
 (h) Indian Health Service.--Amounts made available under section 
101(d)(5)(B) shall be provided to the Indian Health Service to be used 
for anti-tobacco-related consumption and cessation activities 
including--
 (1) clinic and facility design, construction, repair, 
 renovation, maintenance and improvement;
 (2) provider services and equipment;
 (3) domestic and community sanitation associated with 
 clinic and facility construction and improvement;
 (4) inpatient and outpatient services; and
 (5) other programs and services provided through the Indian 
 Health Service or through tribal contracts, compacts, grants or 
 cooperative agreements with the Indian Health Service and which 
 are deemed appropriate to raising the health status of Indians.
 (i) Preemption.--
 (1) General preemption.--Except as otherwise provided for 
 in this section, nothing in this Act shall be construed as 
 prohibiting an Indian tribe or tribal organization from 
 imposing requirements, prohibitions, penalties or other 
 measures to further the purposes of this Act that are in 
 addition to the requirements, prohibitions, or penalties 
 required under this Act.
 (2) Public exposure to smoke.--Nothing in the amendment 
 made by title V shall be construed to preempt or otherwise 
 affect any Indian tribe or tribal organization rule or practice 
 that provides greater protection from the health hazards of 
 environmental tobacco smoke.
 (3) Native Americans.--A State may not impose obligations 
 or requirements relating to the application of this Act to 
 Indian tribes and tribal organizations.

 TITLE X--TOBACCO ASBESTOS TRUST

SEC. 1001. TOBACCO ASBESTOS TRUST FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the 
United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Tobacco Asbestos Trust 
Fund'', consisting of the amounts appropriated or credited to it 
pursuant to section 102.
 (b) Trustees.--Within 60 days of the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Labor shall appoint as trustees of the fund one 
representative of asbestos claimants, one representative of labor 
organizations with asbestos claimants as members, one representative of 
asbestos trusts, and one representative of asbestos defendants. These 
trustees shall appoint a fifth trustee who shall be a member of the 
health care profession with experience in asbestos disease or 
disability.

SEC. 1002. FUNDING OF TRUST; ASSESSMENT FROM TOBACCO COMPANIES.

 (a) Transfers; Authorization.--There is transferred to the Tobacco 
Asbestos Trust Fund, without further appropriation, an amount equal to 
the amounts received under subsection (b). Amounts from the fund shall 
be made available each year, without further appropriation, as 
necessary to make the expenditures and allocations provided for in this 
title. There are authorized to be appropriated to the Tobacco Asbestos 
Trust Fund, in fiscal year 1999 and in any fiscal year thereafter 
through fiscal year 2014, as repayable advances, such sums as may be 
necessary to make the expenditures and allocations described in section 
1003.
 (b) Special Tobacco-Asbestos Victim Assessment.--In order to fund 
the appropriations and transfers provided for in subsection (a), for 
each calendar year beginning with fiscal year 1999, the Secretary of 
the Treasury shall assess each tobacco manufacturer, in a fashion 
consistent with this Act, an amount sufficient to provide the Tobacco 
Asbestos Trust Fund with the following amounts:
 (1) In fiscal year 1999, $1,000,000,000.
 (2) In fiscal year 2000, $1,500,000,000.
 (3) In fiscal year 2001, $3,000,000,000.
 (4) In fiscal year 2002, $3,000,000,000.
 (5) In fiscal year 2003, $3,000,000,000.
 (6) In fiscal year 2004, $3,000,000,000.
 (7) For each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2014, 
 $550,000,000 in each such year.

SEC. 1003. STRUCTURE AND OPERATION.

 (a) Division Into Two Funds.--The Tobacco Asbestos Trust Fund shall 
be divided into two equal funds, denominated as ``Fund I'' and ``Fund 
II'', and each such fund shall conform to the rules of this title. 
Funds may be paid out of each fund only to, or for the direct benefit 
of, asbestos claimants, as follows:
 (1) Fund I shall be established as a Qualified Settlement 
 Fund as permitted by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Fund I 
 represents some portion of the amount of smoking-caused harm 
 paid by asbestos trusts and defendants in the past. Fund I 
 shall be used to provide credits to asbestos trusts and 
 asbestos defendants, who settled and paid asbestos claims of 
 persons who had exposure to tobacco, for the sole purpose of 
making payment to asbestos claimants by the trustees of Fund I.
 (2) Fund II shall be established as a Qualified Settlement 
 Fund as permitted by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. The 
 purpose of this fund shall be to pay asbestos/tobacco claims 
 brought after the date of enactment of this Act for the 
 tobacco-caused portion of the claimant's harm, according to 
 rules established by the trustees.
 (b) Timing Adjustment.--The trustees may provide an advance in the 
form of a loan from funds available in Fund II to Fund I as may be 
necessary to serve the primary role of Fund I in paying existing or 
past claims as compared to Fund II's primary role in paying claims 
submitted after the date of enactment.

SEC. 1004. RIGHTS OF PARTIES.

 No tobacco company shall be liable in any civil suit for harm 
caused by exposure to tobacco or exposure to asbestos to any person who 
elects to receive and receives compensation from Fund II, and such 
person shall execute a release of all tobacco companies for any 
personal injury claims attributable to tobacco or asbestos. No tobacco 
company shall be liable to any asbestos trust or defendant who elects 
to receive and receives credits from Fund I in any contribution, 
indemnity, or any similar action on any claim arising from payments or 
obligations for payments to asbestos claimants made or incurred prior 
to the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1005. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title:
 (1) Asbestos claim.--The term ``asbestos claim'' means a 
 claim brought or capable of being brought in a court of 
 competent jurisdiction by a person for personal injury, 
 wrongful death, loss of consortium, or other damages arising 
 from the occupational exposure to asbestos or asbestos-
 containing products, including claims by spouses or household 
 members who were exposed to asbestos through the occupational 
 exposure of another person.
 (2) Asbestos claimant.--The term ``asbestos claimant'' 
 means a person who brings an asbestos claim.
 (3) Asbestos/tobacco claim.--The term ``asbestos/tobacco 
 claim'' means a legally justiciable asbestos claim of a person 
 who also claims injury, disease, or death arising from exposure 
 to tobacco.
 (4) Asbestos defendant.--The term ``asbestos defendant'' 
 means a person (including a partnership or corporation) who has 
 been sued in court on an asbestos claim.
 (5) Asbestos trust.--The term ``asbestos trust'' means a 
 court-supervised trust created to resolve asbestos claims 
 arising directly or indirectly from exposure to asbestos or 
 asbestos-containing products of an asbestos defendant.
 <all>