S 2831 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2831
To amend the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 to extend the
protections of such Act to employee benefits in a manner that permits and
encourages employee benefit arrangements that are beneficial to employees
generally, including older workers, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 10, 1990
Mr. HATCH (for himself and Mrs. KASSEBAUM) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 to extend the
protections of such Act to employee benefits in a manner that permits and
encourages employee benefit arrangements that are beneficial to employees
generally, including older workers, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Employee Benefits Equity Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) in Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio v. Betts, 109 S. Ct. 2854
 (1989), the Supreme Court held that the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
 of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 621 et seq.) has limited application to age discrimination
 in employee benefits;
 (2) prior to the Betts decision, the courts and administrative agencies
 charged with enforcement of such Act had adopted inconsistent and conflicting
 positions concerning the application of such Act to employee benefits;
 (3) these inconsistencies and conflicts led to litigation and uncertainty
 over the lawfulness of numerous long-standing features of employee benefits
 arrangements that are designed to meet, in a cost effective manner, the
 needs of employees at various stages of their lives, including--
 (A) arrangements that integrate or coordinate benefits available under
 one program (such as severance, supplemental unemployment, or disability
 benefits) with benefits available from other programs (such as pension
 benefits);
 (B) arrangements that integrate or coordinate benefits available from an
 employer (such as pension benefits) with benefits available from government
 sources (such as benefits available under title II or XVIII of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401 et seq.) or workers' compensation);
 (C) arrangements that provide enhancements to voluntary early retirement
 benefits; and
 (D) arrangements that calculate benefit levels with reference to age by
 using present value concepts and generally accepted actuarial practices; and
 (4) for these reasons, it is necessary to amend such Act to ensure that--
 (A) older workers are protected against arbitrary age discrimination in
 employee benefits;
 (B) bona fide employee benefits arrangements are not discouraged or
 disrupted; and
 (C) the effect of such Act on employee benefits is clarified, and consistent
 application in the future ensured.
SEC. 3. LAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 Section 4 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 623)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (2);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting `;
 or'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4) to discriminate against any individual with respect to the employee
 benefits of the individual, because of the age of the individual: Provided,
 That for income replacement benefits or other welfare benefits, an employer
 shall not be considered to have discriminated against an individual within
 each of these two categories of benefits if--
 `(A) the amount or cost of the benefits available to the individual for
 the year is no less than the amount or cost of the benefit or benefits
 available for the year to similarly situated younger individuals;
 `(B) the present value of the benefits available to the individual is no
 less than the present value of the benefits available to similarly situated
 younger individuals; or
 `(C) the individual has the option of receiving the same benefits as
 similarly situated younger individuals,
Provided further, That, an employer shall not be considered to have
discriminated against an individual with respect to employee benefits by
offering supplemental or subsidized early retirement benefits to subgroups
of employees through either an ongoing plan or a temporary arrangement, but,
in the case of such a plan or arrangement that offers a supplemental benefit
(other than an early retirement subsidy or a social security supplement),
only if the supplemental benefit serves a legitimate business purpose or
provides, or has provided in the past, a supplemental benefit to each older
employee that is at least equal in amount to the supplemental benefit that
such plan or arrangement offers to a similarly situated younger employee.'; and
 (2) in subsection (f)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and
 (B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) to observe the terms of a bona fide seniority system, except that no
 such seniority system shall require or permit the involuntary retirement
 of any individual specified by section 12(a) because of the age of the
 individual;
 `(3) to make an age-based variance in employee benefits that has a legitimate
 business purpose, through arrangements such as--
 `(A) an employee benefit arrangement that was permissible under section
 1625.10 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on June
 22, 1989);
 `(B) an arrangement under which long-term disability benefits are reduced
 by--
 `(i) any pension benefits for which an employee is eligible and that are
 not reduced on account of the age of the employee; or
 `(ii) any pension benefits that an employee actually receives;
 `(C) an arrangement under which long-term disability benefits are reduced
 by any pension benefits that the employee is eligible to receive and under
 which long-term disability benefits are payable for life (or, if earlier,
 until the termination of the disability); or
 `(D) supplemental unemployment benefits that cease not later than when an
 individual becomes eligible to receive a pension that is not reduced on
 account of the age of an employee,
except that no such age-based variance in employee benefits shall excuse
the failure to hire any individual, or require or permit the involuntary
retirement of any individual specified by section 12(a), because of the age
of the individual; or'.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 11 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29
 U.S.C. 630) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(l) The term `cost of the employee benefit or benefits' means the cost
 attributable to the benefit or benefits as determined in accordance with
 professionally recognized actuarial principles.
 `(m) The term `employee benefit' or `employee benefits' includes the total
 remuneration provided pursuant to--
 `(1) one or more pension, severance, supplemental unemployment benefit,
 disability, or health insurance plans or programs, or other employee benefit
 plan or plans (as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(3));
 `(2) special layoff, disability, or plant closure arrangements, such as
 severance payments and early retirement enhancements; or
 `(3) one or more government-sponsored benefit programs, such as programs
 established under the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), workers'
 compensation, or State or local government retirement programs.
 `(n) The term `government' means the government of the United States or a
 State or political subdivision thereof, or any agency or instrumentality
 thereof.
 `(o) The term `income replacement benefits' means employee benefits
 that take the place of wages, such as pension, disability, severance,
 supplemental unemployment, or social security benefits, social security
 supplements, and workers compensation.
 `(p) The term `other welfare benefits' means benefits provided pursuant to a
 welfare plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)) and similar government-sponsored
 benefits, other than income replacement benefits.
 `(q) The term `present value' means the current equivalent value of any
 stream of current or future payments or receipts, discounted on the basis
 of assumptions consistent with generally accepted practice in the actuarial
 profession.
 `(r) The term `similarly situated individuals' means individuals similar
 in all other relevant aspects of the employment relationship.'.
SEC. 5. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
 Notwithstanding section 9 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1967 (29
 U.S.C. 628), the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission may issue such
 rules and regulations as it may consider necessary or appropriate for
 carrying out this Act, and the amendments made by this Act, only after
 consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Labor.
SEC. 6. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, this Act and
 the amendments made by this Act shall apply only to conduct occurring more
 than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Collective Bargaining Agreements-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In the case of employee benefits that are provided pursuant
 to one or more collective bargaining agreements, this Act and the amendments
 made by this Act shall not apply to conduct occurring before the earlier of--
 (A) the date of expiration of the last to expire of the collective bargaining
 agreements pursuant to which the benefits are provided and that are in
 effect on the date of enactment of this Act; or
 (B) the date that is 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) BENEFITS PROVIDED TO MEMBERS AND NONMEMBERS- For the purposes of this
 subsection, employee benefits provided pursuant to a plan that covers both
 employees who are members of a collective bargaining unit and employees
 who are not members of a collective bargaining unit shall be considered
 to be maintained pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement if at least
 25 percent of the plan participants are members of one or more collective
 bargaining units to which an applicable collective bargaining agreement
 applies.
 (c) STATE EMPLOYEE BENEFIT ARRANGEMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In case of employee benefit arrangements in effect under
 State law on the date of enactment of this Act, except as provided in
 paragraph (2), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply
 beginning on the earlier of--
 (A) the adjournment sine die of the second subsequent session of the
 appropriate State legislature; or
 (B) the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) DISABILITY BENEFITS- In the case of any change required by this Act
 or an amendment made by this Act in a State or local government plan that
 provides disability or disability benefits, the change shall apply only
 to an individual hired after the change becomes effective.
 (d) CONTINUED BENEFIT PAYMENTS- Notwithstanding any provision of this
 section, on and after the effective date of this Act and the amendments
 made by this Act (as determined in accordance with subsections (a), (b),
 and (c)), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not apply to
 a series of benefit payments that began prior to the effective date and
 that continue after the effective date pursuant to an arrangement that
 was in effect on the effective date.