B37 2-28-89 [OC's]
HR 1122 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1122
To provide an affordable, secure and decent home and suitable living
environment for every American family, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 27, 1989
Mr. DELLUMS introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To provide an affordable, secure and decent home and suitable living
environment for every American family, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `National Comprehensive
 Housing Act'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
(a) Short title.
(b) Table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and principles.
(a) Findings.
(b) Principles.
Sec. 3. General Provisions.
TITLE I--NATIONAL TENANT PROTECTION AND PRIVATE RENTAL HOUSING CONVERSION ACT
Sec. 101. Statement of purpose.
Subtitle A--Protecting Tenants and Preserving Affordable Rental Housing
Sec. 102. Use and occupancy protections.
Sec. 103. Management standards.
Sec. 104. Financial and technical assistance.
Sec. 105. Responsibilities of units of general local government.
Sec. 106. Purchase price.
Sec. 107. Permanent offer of purchase.
Sec. 108. Purchase of properties subject to foreclosure.
Sec. 109. Rehabilitation of properties.
Subtitle B--Converting Private Rental Housing to Social Ownership
Sec. 110. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 111. Regulations.
TITLE II--THE NATIONAL HOMEOWNER PROTECTION ACT
Sec. 201. Statement of purpose.
Subtitle A--Protecting Existing Homeowners and Converting Private Homes
Sec. 202. Protected ownership.
Sec. 203. Mortgage or property tax foreclosure protection.
Sec. 204. Annuities for elderly homeowners.
Sec. 205. Home improvement grants.
Sec. 206. Authorization of appropriations.
Subtitle B--Expanding Homeownership Opportunities
Sec. 207. In general.
Sec. 208. Owner-occupied homes.
Sec. 209. Rental housing.
Sec. 210. Regulations.
Sec. 211. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE III--THE SUBSIDIZED HOUSING PRESERVATION ACT
Sec. 301. Purposes.
Subtitle A--Protecting Tenants and Improving Existing Subsidized Housing
Sec. 302. In general.
Sec. 303. Affordability.
Sec. 304. Livability.
Sec. 305. Security of tenure.
Sec. 306. Resident control.
Sec. 307. Management.
Subtitle B--Preserving Subsidized Housing for Lower-Income Families and
Expanding Social Ownership
Sec. 308. Eligibility restrictions.
Sec. 309. Prohibition on removal from social housing stock.
Subtitle C--Conversion from Privately Owned Subsidized Housing to Social
Ownership
Sec. 310. Subsidy incentives.
Sec. 311. Enforcement.
Sec. 312. Tenant ownership.
Sec. 313. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 314. Regulations.
TITLE IV--THE SOCIAL HOUSING PRODUCTION AND FINANCING ACT
Sec. 401. Purposes.
Subtitle A--Producing Housing for Social Ownership
Sec. 402. General authority.
Sec. 403. National social housing production goals.
Sec. 404. Eligible Applicants for assistance.
Sec. 405. Direct grants.
Sec. 406. Assistance for public site acquisition.
Sec. 407. Operating subsidies.
Sec. 408. Limitation.
Sec. 409. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 410. Regulations.
TITLE V--FEDERALLY MANDATED LOCAL HOUSING PROGRAMS
Sec. 501. Statement of purpose.
Sec. 502. Federal responsibilities.
Sec. 503. State responsibilities.
Sec. 504. Local responsibilities.
Sec. 505. Regulations.
TITLE VI--INTERIM REFORM MEASURES
Sec. 601. Displacement prohibition.
Sec. 602. Prohibition of demolition.
Sec. 603. Prohibition of conversion to private ownership.
Sec. 604. Transfer to social ownership.
Sec. 605. Elderly congregate housing.
Sec. 606. Interim authorization of appropriations.
TITLE VII--GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 701. Employment and job training opportunities.
Sec. 702. Affirmative action principles.
Sec. 703. Wages and materials.
Sec. 704. Residents of social housing.
Sec. 705. Annual reports.
Sec. 706. Regulations.
Sec. 707. Minimum authorization level.
Sec. 708. Effective date.
TITLE VIII--DEFINITIONS
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PRINCIPLES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the goal of the National Housing Act of 1949, `a decent home and a
 suitable living environment for every American family', continues to be
 the policy of the Federal Government;
 (2) it is vital to the Nation that sufficient housing be made available
 that is decent, safe, sanitary, affordable, compatible with the needs of
 the residents, and under resident control;
 (3) the attainment of the national housing goal is a priority of the
 highest order;
 (4) the Federal Government, the States, and units of general local government
 have a responsibility to use their powers to meet the housing needs of
 all segments of the community;
 (5) the market economy, through its profit oriented provision and tenure
 forms, has failed to provide such housing to those most in need;
 (6) in order to meet the needs of the growing numbers of households who
 are ill-served by the marketplace, and to supplement the existing systems
 of private owner occupied and rental housing, an alternative sector must
 be created and developed of socially provided, nonmarket housing; and
 (7) resolving the present housing crisis is an essential element of our
 national security, and is of such high priority that, if sufficient funds
 are not otherwise authorized, the amounts required by this legislation
 are to be made available from other national security accounts.
 (b) PRINCIPLES- The basic principles of this Act are--
 (1) expand the amount of housing under social ownership;
 (2) expand social production and increase social control over the housing
 production process;
 (3) expand direct public financing of housing production and ownership,
 thereby reducing the dependence of housing on privately controlled debt
 and equity capital;
 (4) control speculative private use and disposition of land;
 (5) increase resident control over housing and neighborhood decisions;
 (6) eliminate the discriminatory and exclusionary uses of housing, and
 affirmatively address the housing needs of special groups; and
 (7) allocate housing resources on an equitable basis, and provide adequate
 resources to meet housing needs.
SEC. 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 The Secretary shall require all states and units of general local government,
 as a condition of receiving assistance under this Act, to adopt all
 ordinances required by this Act and otherwise fully conform to the provisions
 of this Act. Eligibility for Federal funds for housing, highway and sewer
 construction, economic development (including small business programs),
 urban development action grants, community development block grants, and
 other Federal programs that directly and indirectly affect housing, will be
 contingent on adoption of, and demonstrated compliance with, these measures.
TITLE I--NATIONAL TENANT PROTECTION AND PRIVATE RENTAL HOUSING CONVERSION ACT
SEC. 101. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
 It is the purpose of this title--
 (1) to preserve affordable decent rental housing;
 (2) to protect tenants from unreasonable rent increases, inadequate
 maintenance, and arbitrary evictions;
 (3) to assure adequate and responsive management of all private rental
 housing; and
 (4) to provide mechanisms and procedures to facilitate the phased conversion
 of a significant portion of the private rental housing stock to various
 forms of social ownership.
Subtitle A--Protecting Tenants and Preserving Affordable Rental Housing
SEC. 102. USE AND OCCUPANCY PROTECTIONS.
 (a) MANDATED ORDINANCES- The Secretary shall require all States and units
 of general local government, as a condition of receiving assistance under
 this Act, to adopt all ordinances required by this Act and otherwise fully
 conform to the provisions of this Act. All States and units of general
 local government must by ordinance or statute require the following:
 (1) ANTIDISCRIMINATION- It shall be unlawful to discriminate against any
 person in the sale or lease of residential property on the basis of race,
 national origin, religion, sex, age, source of income, physical disability,
 marital status, sexual preference, family size, or presence of children.
 (2) WARRANTY OF HABITABILITY- All rental housing must comply with minimum
 standards of health, safety, and livability.
 (A) Five years after the effective date of this Act, these standards will
 also require adequate levels of residential amenity with regard to energy
 efficiency, space utilization, security, and resident services such as
 child care.
 (3) EVICTION CONTROLS- (A) Tenants may only be evicted for `just cause,'
 such as nonpayment of rent, willful destruction of property, and gross
 violation of community standards and must be afforded full due process
 prior to eviction.
 (B) EXCEPTIONS- Evictions for luxury rehabilitation, condominium conversion,
 and demolitions will be permitted only where a compelling public purpose
 is served and adequate relocation assistance is provided. Other exceptions
 may be established based on local needs, subject to Federal approval.
 (b) DURATIONAL ORDINANCES- Whenever, in accord with regulations to be
 issued by the Secretary, it is determined that a local housing emergency
 exists, all States and units of general local government must by ordinance
 or statute require the following:
 (1) RENT CONTROL- (A) Rent adjustments cannot exceed reasonable operating
 cost increases, based on a fixed net operating income formula; and (B)
 until the emergency conditions which triggered this subject are determined
 to be over, controls will be retained on all units subject to the ordinance
 regardless of changes in tenancy.
 (2) CONVERSION CONTROLS- Conversion of rental housing to condominiums or
 nonresidential use shall be prohibited.
 (A) EXCEPTIONS- (i) Conversions to social ownership; and
 (ii) conversions approved by at least three-quarters of the existing
 residents.
 (B) Adequate notice, relocation benefits, and other safeguards must be
 provided for tenants being displaced pursuant to (A).
 (3) DEMOLITION- Demolitions of rental housing are prohibited.
 (A) EXCEPTIONS- Where a compelling public purpose exists.
 (B) PRIOR TO ANY DEMOLITION PERMITTED PURSUANT TO (a) THE FOLLOWING
 ARE ALL REQUIRED- (i) One-for-one replacement of equivalent units, (ii)
 adequate tenant notice, and (iii) adequate relocation benefits provided
 to displaced tenants.
SEC. 103. MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
 (a) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- (1) Units of general local government must
 demonstrate the existence of performance standards for private rental
 housing management firms.
 (2) Such standards will govern compliance with local building codes,
 treatment of tenants, discriminatory rental practices, and cooperation
 with tenant organizations.
 (3) Units of general local government must monitor compliance.
 (b) COLLECTIVE BARGAINING- (1) Units of general local government must
 establish collective-bargaining rights and procedures for democratically
 organized tenant associations, based on Federal minimum standards.
 (2) Private housing owners and managers are required to bargain with tenants
 over performance standards and policy, including selection and removal of
 the management agent.
 (c) MANAGEMENT POLICY- Management firms must develop project-specific
 management plans that comply with the policy objectives contained in
 the housing plan prepared in accordance with title V, with regard to
 collective-bargaining procedures, tenant selection and assignment, leasing
 and occupancy terms, rent disputes, grievance procedures, and compliance
 with Federal, State, and local fair housing laws.
Subtitle B--Converting Private Rental Housing to Social Ownership
SEC. 104. FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall, to the extent approved
 in appropriation Acts, provide financial and technical assistance to units
 of general local government in accordance with the provisions of this
 title to enable such units of general local government to establish goals
 for the conversion of privately owned rental housing to social housing as
 part of their federally mandated local housing plans developed under title V.
SEC. 105. RESPONSIBILITIES OF UNITS OF GENERAL LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
 Units of general local government shall take such actions as may be
 necessary--
 (1) to administer assistance received under this title;
 (2) to provide technical assistance to organizations undertaking conversions
 under this title;
 (3) to grant the right of first option to purchase to tenant organizations,
 community groups, government entities, or other social owners;
 (4) to establish a formula for determining the maximum purchase price that
 may be paid using public funds, in order to discourage purchases that are
 excessively costly, such as luxury dwelling units and speculatively priced
 dwelling units;
 (5) to specify procedures for determining the proportion of tenants
 required for first option purchases, while protecting tenants who choose
 not to buy into the conversion;
 (6) to require permanent social ownership once transfer is completed,
 unless a public purpose is served by terminating social ownership;
 (7) to establish procedures for expeditious local tax and title searches,
 to enable units of general local government to obtain control of housing
 that is in tax arrears; and
 (8) to provide a legal definition of the various social ownership forms
 that will qualify for funding under the provisions of this title.
SEC. 106. PURCHASE PRICE.
 The purchase price for conversions shall be determined by the market value
 of the property involved. Units of general local government shall establish
 maximum purchase prices for different types of dwelling units.
SEC. 107. PERMANENT OFFER OF PURCHASE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish additional procedures for the
 making of a permanent offer to purchase, at a reasonable price, any low-
 and moderate-income rental property in which the mortgage has been paid
 in full and to which the owner holds clear title.
 (b) PROCEDURES- Each unit of general local government, using funds provided
 by the Secretary, shall be the principal purchasing agency and shall,
 after purchase, transfer such housing to an appropriate social owner or
 administer such housing through the local housing authority.
SEC. 108. PURCHASE OF PROPERTIES SUBJECT TO MORTGAGE OR PROPERTY TAX
FORECLOSURE.
 (a) NOTICE OF FORECLOSURE- Notice of impending foreclosure proceedings
 against low- and moderate-income rental properties shall be provided to
 the appropriate local housing authority.
 (b) Offer To Purchase-
 (1) If the market value of the property being foreclosed exceeds the
 back taxes or debt, the unit of general local government shall offer to
 purchase the property from the owner for an amount not to exceed the market
 value. Such an offer shall be subject to the maximum price limitations
 for conversions established under section 203.
 (2) If the back taxes or debt exceeds the market value of the property
 being foreclosed, the unit of general local government or other social
 entity shall have first option to purchase the property from the bank or
 the tax collector for not more than the amount of the remaining debt.
SEC. 109. REHABILITATION OF PROPERTIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any low- and moderate-income rental property that is in
 substandard condition as determined by the relevant unit of general local
 government shall be rehabilitated in compliance with applicable local
 health and safety codes.
 (b) PURCHASE OF NONREHABILITATED PROPERTIES- Any owner who cannot afford
 to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) may elect to sell the
 property to a social owner, at a price not to exceed the market value.
 (c) Rehabilitation Grants-
 (1) The Secretary may make direct capital grants to the owner of any low-
 and moderate-income rental property that is in substandard condition,
 to enable such owner to rehabilitate such property in a manner to ensure
 compliance with applicable local health and safety codes.
 (2) The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if the owner
 agrees--
 (A) to sell the property to a social owner within a specified period of time;
 (B) to control the rents on the property, subject to the provisions of
 title IV; and
 (C) to subject the property to such other safeguards and regulations as
 the unit of general local government deems necessary to comply with the
 requirements of its federally mandated local housing plan.
 (3) The price for purchase under paragraph (2)(A) shall be determined by
 negotiation between the unit of general local government and the owner,
 and shall reflect the current utilization value of the dwelling unit
 excluding the amount of the improvement grant. The length of the specified
 time period until the dwelling unit transfers to social ownership shall
 reflect the cost of improvements relative to the value of the dwelling unit.
SEC. 110. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of this
 title $5,600,000,000 for fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding fiscal year.
SEC. 111. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this title.
TITLE II--THE NATIONAL HOMEOWNER PROTECTION ACT
SEC. 201. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
 It is the purpose of this title--
 (1) to promote affordable homeownership through foreclosure protection
 for existing homeowners;
 (2) to encourage the voluntary transfer of homes to the social sector; and
 (3) to create an alternative tenure form which facilitates the positive,
 and eliminates the negative, aspects of conventional homeownership.
Subtitle A--Protecting Existing Homeowners and Converting Private Homes
SEC. 202. PROTECTED OWNERSHIP.
 (a) All low- and moderate-income homeowners shall have the option of deeding
 their dwelling units to a social entity, in exchange for lifetime security
 of tenure at an affordable monthly cost.
 (b) Monthly housing costs for the protected owner shall be determined
 on the basis of ability to pay, with the ceiling being market rent as
 determined by the unit of general local government.
 (c) The owner shall have the option of buying back the dwelling unit from
 the unit of general local government within one year, at a value equal to
 the interest of the unit of general local government in the property.
 (d) The owner, including any surviving spouse, shall enjoy lifetime security
 of tenure in the property, after which the property shall revert to social
 ownership.
 (e) Surviving occupants, siblings, children or parents, meeting conditions
 established by the Secretary, shall have the first preference in occupying
 the housing unit.
SEC. 203. MORTGAGE OR PROPERTY TAX FORECLOSURE PROTECTION.
 (a) When foreclosure proceedings begin, the lender shall notify the owner
 of the provisions of the program established in this subtitle.
 (b) If the owner elects to participate in such program, the unit of general
 local government or other social housing entity shall assume and retire
 the loan, and pay the overdue mortgage debts and taxes, if the market value
 of the property is greater than the sum of such payments. If the loans and
 debts exceed the market value, the unit of general local government shall
 offer to pay off the debts and retire the loans up to an amount equivalent
 to market value. In no case shall the unit of general local government
 agree to retire combined loans and debts in excess of market value. A
 ceiling shall be set in accord with regulations issued by the Secretary
 on the amount that may be paid for a dwelling unit under this subtitle.
SEC. 204. ANNUITIES FOR ELDERLY HOMEOWNERS.
 (a) Elderly homeowners may deed their home to a social owner in exchange
 for an annuity based on the amount of the equity, but in any case not less
 than an amount sufficient to permit an adequate standard of living.
 (b) The owner, including any surviving spouse, shall enjoy lifetime security
 of tenure in the property, after which the property shall revert to social
 ownership.
 (c) Surviving occupants, siblings, children or parents, meeting conditions
 established by the Secretary, shall have first preference in occupying
 the housing unit.
SEC. 205. HOME IMPROVEMENT GRANTS.
 The Secretary may make home improvement grants in exchange for deeding
 property to a social entity within a specified period of time. The
 program under this section shall be operated in a manner similar to the
 rehabilitation grant program for rental property described in section
 109(c). The terms of the exchange shall be governed by the amount of the
 grant relative to the current value of the property.
SEC. 206. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of this
 subtitle such funds as may be necessary but not to exceed $8,000,000,000
 for fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding fiscal year.
Subtitle B--Expanding Homeownership Opportunities
SEC. 207. IN GENERAL.
 Expansion of resident ownership will result from the social acquisition
 of private owner-occupied homes and of rental housing.
SEC. 208. OWNER-OCCUPIED HOMES.
 (a) Once acquired by a social entity, and vacated by the previous owners,
 homes previously owner-occupied will be made available by the social entity
 to low- and moderate-income purchasers for nonspeculative resident ownership.
 (b) PURCHASE TERMS- New residents may purchase their unit at a nominal
 price determined by the unit of general local government, with restricted
 resale provisions allowing for limited-equity appreciation.
 (c) GRANTS- Rehabilitation grants and operating subsidies will be provided
 as needed to improve housing conditions and affordability.
SEC. 209. RENTAL HOUSING.
 (a) Once acquired by the social entity, tenants residing in such rental
 housing units may purchase their units individually or collectively,
 for nonspeculative resident ownership.
 (b) PURCHASE TERMS- Residents may purchase their unit for a nominal price
 determined by the unit of general local government, with restricted resale
 provisions allowing for limited-equity appreciation.
 (c) GRANTS- Rehabilitation grants and operating subsidies will be provided
 as needed to improve housing conditions and affordability.
 (d) EQUITY GRANTS- In addition to the grants described in paragraph (c),
 equity grants will be available to facilitate purchase as described in
 paragraph (b).
 (e) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- States and units of general local government
 are required to provide funds for technical assistance to assist tenants
 in the conversion process.
SEC. 210. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this title.
SEC. 211. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of this
 subtitle such funds as may be necessary but not to exceed $3,000,000,000
 for fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding year.
TITLE III--THE SUBSIDIZED HOUSING PRESERVATION ACT
SEC. 301. PURPOSES.
 It is the purpose of this title--
 (1) to protect the enormous investment in Government-assisted housing;
 (2) to improve the livability of the present stock of subsidized housing;
 (3) to avoid the loss of present stock of subsidized housing through
 conversion to market-rate housing, private resale, lack of maintenance,
 and demolition;
 (4) to improve the affordability and livability of the subsidized housing
 stock, assure security of tenure, and increase resident control for existing
 and future low- and moderate-income tenants; and
 (5) to provide mechanisms to assure the permanent retention of existing
 subsidized units, enhance existing public and nonprofit ownership, and
 facilitate conversion of privately owned subsidized units to forms of
 nonspeculative social ownership.
Subtitle A--Protecting Tenants and Improving Existing Subsidized Housing
SEC. 302. IN GENERAL.
 Existing subsidized units will be made increasingly affordable and
 livable, with enhanced security of tenure and resident control for low-
 and moderate-income residents, through the following.
SEC. 303. AFFORDABILITY.
 (a) Public Housing-
 (1) Operating subsidies will be provided to make up the difference between
 the new tenant rent shares, determined to reflect the household's ability
 to pay, and the cost of operating the housing.
 (2) Subsidy formulas will recognize that what a family can afford to
 pay for housing will vary with the extent of its essential nonshelter
 expenditures (for example, food, clothing, and medical care) as well as
 with the aggregate amount of its disposable income.
 (3) Allowable deductions for basic nonshelter expenditures will initially
 be set at $1,200 per dependent plus extraordinary medical expenses and
 childcare.
 (4) The level of subsidy will eventually be based on progressive
 implementation of a variable affordability standard based on household
 size and essential nonshelter expenditures in accord with regulations
 issued by the Secretary.
 (b) Other Federally Subsidized Housing-
 (1) Rents in federally subsidized projects owned by qualified nonprofit
 sponsors, will be converted to the income-based formula described in (a).
 (2) Nonprofit projects with defaulted mortgages held by the government will
 receive a permanent mortgage writedown plus operating subsidies as needed,
 to provide a level of affordability equivalent to that in (a).
 (3) Other privately owned subsidized projects will be eligible for rent
 adjustments, operating subsidies, and mortgage writedowns if to be converted
 to social ownership.
SEC. 304. LIVABILITY.
 (a) CODE AND REGULATORY ENFORCEMENT- Local housing codes and Federal
 regulatory provisions governing the habitability of public and other
 subsidized housing will be strictly enforced to bring substandard units
 into compliance.
 (b) UPGRADING OF MINIMAL STANDARDS- Existing minimal standards will be
 upgraded over time, and owners of public and other subsidized housing
 will be required to renovate their projects to achieve adequate levels of
 residential amenity with regard to unit layout, apartment configuration,
 site and building design, operating efficiency, and resident security.
 (c) Facilities and programs for residential services such as day care and
 elder care will also be required, as appropriate.
 (d) GRANTS FOR SOCIAL OWNERSHIP CONVERSION- Direct Federal grants will be
 provided to public and nonprofit owners and to other private owners who
 agree to convert to social ownership within a specified timeframe.
 (e) DEFAULT FOR NON-COMPLIANCE- Private owners who fail to comply with
 maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation obligations will face regulatory
 default and foreclosure.
SEC. 305. SECURITY OF TENURE.
 (a) LEASE AND GRIEVANCE PROTECTIONS- Lease and grievance protections for
 tenants in subsidized housing will be strengthened to enhance their rights.
 (b) GROUNDS FOR EVICTION- Grounds for eviction, presently more limited than
 for private housing tenants, will be restricted to voluntary nonpayment,
 willful destruction of property, and gross violation of community standards.
 (c) DUE PROCESS PROTECTION FOR EVICTION PROCEEDINGS- Where it is believed
 such violations have occurred, residents will be protected by due process,
 under procedures secured by Federal statute. Eviction will not be permitted
 because of any temporary inability to pay rent that results from involuntary
 loss of income.
SEC. 306. RESIDENT CONTROL.
 (a) TENANT RIGHTS- As established in regulations by the Secretary, Social
 housing tenants shall have the right through collective bargaining to
 meaningfully participate in all areas of management policy, including--
 (1) the terms and conditions of tenancy,
 (2) physical and financial management,
 (3) the hiring and firing of management, and
 (4) the delivery of housing services.
 (b) GRANT PROGRAM FOR TENANT COUNCILS- The Secretary shall establish a
 program of grants to establish and provide technical assistance to social
 housing tenant councils.
SEC. 307. MANAGEMENT.
 (a) MANAGEMENT STANDARDS- Management plans for public and other subsidized
 housing will be required to conform to the policy requirements set forth
 in title V.
 (b) LICENSING- Managers of subsidized housing must meet local licensing
 and certification requirements.
 (c) GRANT PROGRAM FOR SOCIAL MANAGEMENT- The Secretary shall establish
 a program of grants to encourage the development of alternative
 forms of management for social housing, including community-based
 management corporations, mutual management associations, and tenant
 self-management. Joint venture arrangements between private management
 companies and residents or community-based housing sponsors will also
 be facilitated.
 (d) PRIORITY FOR SOCIAL MANAGEMENT- Owners of subsidized housing must give
 preference in management contracts, where possible, to social management
 entities.
Subtitle B--Preserving Subsidized Housing for Lower Income Families and
Expanding Social Ownership
SEC. 308. ELIGIBILITY RESTRICTIONS.
 (a) NEW TENANTS- Admission to public and other subsidized housing will be
 restricted to low- and moderate-income households until such time as the
 size of the social housing sector is adequate to accommodate families with
 less pressing housing needs.
 (b) EXISTING TENANTS- Existing tenants who become overincome will be
 permitted to stay in their units and pay a higher rent, determined on the
 basis of the ability-to-pay formula.
SEC. 309. PROHIBITION ON REMOVAL FROM SOCIAL HOUSING STOCK.
 (a) PROHIBITION OF CONVERSION TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP- Conversion of existing
 public and other nonprofit subsidized units to private ownership is
 prohibited. Ownership transfer to or within the social sector (for example,
 from public to nonprofit or cooperative ownership) will be permitted so
 long as the current residents are not adversely impacted.
 (b) PROHIBITION OF DEMOLITION OR OTHER REMOVAL- (1) Removal of units
 from the subsidized housing inventory through demolition, conversion to
 nonhousing use, or conversion to market-rate housing is prohibited, except
 for a compelling public purpose. Any removal from the social housing stock
 under this subsection shall be accomplished with prior replacement with
 requivalent housing and the provision of adequate relocation benefits to
 the affected tenants.
 (2) When a unit temporarily added to the social housing stock through a
 subsidy certificate (such as section 8) is lost because the owner fails to
 renew the lease or subsidy contract, the owner similarly will be required
 to provide adequate relocation benefits. The tenant holding the certificate
 will be offered an equivalent unit in the social sector on a priority basis.
Subtitle C--Conversion From Privately Owned Subsidized Housing to Social
Ownership
SEC. 310. SUBSIDY INCENTIVES.
 Grants and subsidies available to nonprofit owners of subsidized housing
 will also be made available to private owners in good standing who agree to
 deed their properties to existing tenants or to another social owner. The
 Secretary shall establish standards governing price and time limitations.
SEC. 311. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Debt collection and regulatory requirements for subsidized
 non-public housing will be strictly enforced.
 (b) NONCOMPLIANCE- Private owners who default on their mortgages or who fail
 to comply with standards for property maintenance, management services,
 and tenant involvement will face foreclosure, unless they agree to deed
 their properties to a social entity. Foreclosed properties will be resold
 by HUD to their tenants or to another social owner.
SEC 312. TENANT OWNERSHIP.
 (a) RIGHT OF FIRST OPTION TO PURCHASE- Subsidized housing tenants will
 have a right of first option to purchase their projects from existing
 private owners whenever those projects may be offered for sale, subject
 to Federal standards governing maximum buyout prices. Tenants will have
 the same right with respect to housing acquired by the government through
 foreclosure. The purchase right will be transferred to another social
 entity if not exercised by existing tenants.
 (b) GRANTS AND SUBSIDIES- Direct grants for rehabilitation and technical
 assistance, as well as equity grants and necessary operating subsidies,
 will be provided to facilitate acquisition of subsidized projects by
 tenants and other social entities and units of general local government,
 in exchange for permanent resale restrictions.
SEC. 313. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of
 this title, $6,200,000,000 for the fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding
 fiscal year.
SEC. 314. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this title.
TITLE IV--THE SOCIAL HOUSING PRODUCTION AND FINANCING ACT
SEC. 401. PURPOSES.
 It is the purpose of this title to--
 (1) create a reliable, predictable stream of funding for the production
 and maintenance of permanently affordable, resident-controlled housing;
 (2) set national goals and provide Federal assistance for the production
 and rehabilitation of affordable housing that will be exclusively owned
 by the social sector and financed by direct Government grants;
 (3) provide funding for converting existing privately owned units to
 social ownership;
 (4) develop a process by which new and rehabilitated housing will be
 subject to public and community control;
 (5) provide substantial and other necessary incentives to substantially
 increase the participation of nonprofit and public developers;
 (6) provide sufficient Federal grant funding such that all housing produced
 under this title would be financed by means of direct Federal capital grants;
 (7) provide Federal funding for universal operating subsidies sufficient
 to bridge the gap between what tenants in the social sector can afford to
 pay and the ongoing cost of operating the housing;
 (8) provide Federal funding for the acquisition, upgrading, and operating
 of existing homes and rental units converted from private to social
 ownership; and
 (9) require localities to utilize the programs specified in this title
 to meet their federally mandated local housing programs requirements,
 especially where there is a shortage of existing affordable units; to
 create a growing stream of acquisitions from the private housing stock to
 establish a vital, substantial social housing sector.
Subtitle A--Producing Housing for Social Ownership
SEC. 402. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
 The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall provide for the
 construction, rehabilitation, and financing in accord with the provisions
 of this title.
SEC. 403. NATIONAL SOCIAL HOUSING PRODUCTION GOALS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish national social housing
 production goals that take into account the quality of the existing housing
 stock, preservation and upgrading of existing social housing dwelling
 units, objectives for converting private rental dwelling units to the
 public sector, and shortages confronted by specific population groups.
 (b) PERIODIC REASSESSMENT- The Secretary shall evaluate and, if necessary,
 revise the national social housing production goals established under
 subsection (a) not less than every four years, on the basis of actual
 performance in the production of social housing.
 (c) Transition Provisions-
 (1) Prior to the completion of the needs assessments conducted by units
 of general local governments under title V, the national social housing
 production goals established under subsection (a) shall be based on a
 national housing needs survey conducted by the Secretary.
 (2) Prior to the completion of a national needs assessment and the
 adopting of local housing plans, the Secretary shall provide for the annual
 construction of two hundred thousand new social housing dwelling units and
 the annual rehabilitation of four hundred thousand housing dwelling units.
SEC. 404. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS FOR ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Development of social housing under this Act may be
 undertaken by for-profit companies, nonprofit organizations, and public
 agencies.
 (b) PRIORITY- Priority in the allocation of funds and other assistance
 under this Act shall go to social developers including public, nonprofit,
 or cooperatively owned firms.
 (c) DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS- Development proposals shall be solicited as
 part of the local housing planning process set forth in title V.
 (d) ADDITIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR NONPROFIT DEVELOPERS AND PUBLIC AGENCIES-
 In order to maximize the development of social housing by nonprofit
 developers and public agencies, the Secretary shall, to the extent approved
 in appropriation Acts, provide technical assistance and additional funding
 to such developers and agencies.
Subtitle B--Financing of Social Housing Production
SEC. 405. DIRECT GRANTS.
 The Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriation Acts, make
 and contract to make grants for the construction and rehabilitation of
 social housing. Such grants shall be made to social housing entities,
 units of general local government, or to State or regional agencies, when
 appropriate, in accordance with local housing plans developed under title V.
SEC. 406. ASSISTANCE FOR PUBLIC SITE ACQUISITION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall ensure that a portion of the assistance
 provided under this title shall be utilized for the acquisition of sites
 for social housing.
 (b) DETERMINATION OF PORTION- The portion of assistance provided under
 this title to be utilized in any fiscal year for the activity described in
 subsection (a) shall be determined in accordance with the general planning
 process, with the objective of reducing future costs of social housing
 production by acquiring suitable land as it becomes available.
SEC. 407. OPERATING SUBSIDIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriation
 Acts, enter into contracts to provide operating subsidies with respect to--
 (1) each dwelling unit in social housing; and
 (2) privately owned rental dwelling units in the process of conversion to
 socially owned housing located in units of general local government that
 have adopted stringent regulations on private rental housing, in accordance
 with title I.
 (b) Calculation-
 (1) The operating subsidy for any month for any dwelling unit shall be
 equal to the difference between the actual monthly cost of operating such
 dwelling unit and the monthly rent paid for such dwelling unit.
 (2) The monthly rent paid for shall be 25 per centum of the monthly adjusted
 income of the family residing in such dwelling unit. For purposes of this
 paragraph, monthly adjusted income shall be determined by subtracting from
 monthly gross income the following:
 (A) $1,200 deduction for each household member;
 (B) child care expenses; and
 (C) extraordinary medical expenses.
 (3) Not later than one year after the effective date of this Act, the
 Secretary shall revise the formula established in paragraph (2) for
 the computation of monthly adjusted income to take into account actual
 nonshelter expenses. The level of subsidy will eventually be based on
 progressive implementation of a variable affordability standard based
 on household size and essential nonshelter expenditures in accord with
 regulations issued by the Secretary.
SEC. 408. LIMITATION.
 For fiscal year 1991 and each succeeding fisal year, no amount approved in
 appropriation Acts, may be utilized for the construction or rehabilitation
 of housing other than social housing or privately owned housing that is
 converting to social housing.
SEC. 409. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the provisions of
 this title, $33,000,000,000 for the fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding
 fiscal year as follows:
 (1) for new construction, $12,000,000,000 for each such fiscal year;
 (2) for rehabilitation, $8,000,000,000 for each such fiscal year; and
 (3) for operating subsidies, $13,000,000,000 for each such fiscal year.
SEC. 410. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this title.
TITLE V--FEDERALLY MANDATED LOCAL HOUSING PROGRAMS
SEC. 501. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
 It is the purpose of this title--
 (1) to ensure that States recognize their responsibilities in helping to
 meet the national social housing production goals;
 (2) to ensure that States implement housing plans that further the attainment
 of the national social housing production goals;
 (3) to recognize that each unit of general local government is best
 capable of determining the actions required of it, provided that local
 determinations of appropriate actions are compatible with the national
 social housing production goals and State and regional housing needs; and
 (4) to establish that it is the responsibility of each unit of general
 local government to develop a local housing plan that represents a
 maximum effort to meet the housing needs of its residents who are low-
 and moderate-income families.
SEC. 502. FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall take
 such actions as may be necessary to ensure the proper implementation of
 the provisions of this Act.
 (b) REQUIRED ACTIONS- The actions referred to in subsection (a) shall
 include--
 (1) certification that the State housing plan law satisfies the intent
 and requirements of this Act;
 (2) providing assistance under the provisions of this Act at an adequate
 level;
 (3) withholding significant Federal funds for housing, highway and sewer
 construction, economic development (including small businesses), urban
 development action grants, community development block grants, and other
 Federal programs that directly and indirectly affect housing, from States
 in which units of general local government containing not less than 50
 percent of the State population are not in compliance with the provisions
 of this Act; and
 (4) bypassing such States if necessary, by allocating funds directly to units
 of general local government with adequate local housing plans located within
 States that fail to enact or implement an adequate State housing plan law.
SEC. 503. STATE RESPONSIBILITIES.
 Each State shall--
 (1) adopt a State housing plan law in compliance with the provisions of
 this Act, with which units of general local government shall comply;
 (2) designate a State agency to carry out the various duties of the State
 housing plan law, including monitoring and reviewing adoption of an adequate
 local housing plan and local implementation of the housing programs set
 forth in the State and local housing plans;
 (3) provide for primary enforcement responsibilities;
 (4) allocate Federal funds only to units of general local government that
 are in compliance with this Act and the State and local housing plans;
 (5) establish a State housing authority to carry out low- and moderate-income
 housing activities in units of general local government that are too small,
 inexperienced, or otherwise unable or unwilling to carry out the State
 and local housing plans themselves;
 (6) provide that if a court, the State, or the Secretary finds a local
 housing plan inadequate, social housing conversion programs and related
 infrastructure shall be automatically approved in order to further the
 housing goals of this program; and
 (7) empower regional entities to determine the fair share of regional
 housing needs of each unit of general local government, which fair share
 estimates shall be subject to approval by the State housing authority.
SEC. 504. LOCAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
 (a) LOCAL HOUSING PLAN- Each unit of general local government shall establish
 a local housing plan that provides for the existing and projected needs
 of all segments of the community and for adequate sites for new construction.
 (b) NEEDS ASSESSMENT- Each local housing plan established under subsection
 (a) shall contain an assessment of the housing needs of all income levels
 of the unit of general local government involved and the fair share of
 regional housing needs of the unit of general local government. The needs
 assessment shall contain an analysis of housing characteristics, including--
 (1) overcrowding, deterioration, and undermaintenance;
 (2) an inventory of land suitable for residential development;
 (3) an inventory of privately owned dwelling units that are suitable for
 conversion to social ownership;
 (4) an analysis of governmental constraints imposed on the maintenance,
 improvement, or development of housing, including land use controls,
 displacement, building codes, fees and exactions, development projects,
 and rehabilitation and preservation programs;
 (5) an analysis of the impacts of public sector redevelopment activities,
 private sector development, and gentrification; and
 (6) an analysis of special housing needs, including the special housing
 needs of handicapped persons, single parents, large households, farmworkers,
 elderly persons, and low- and moderate-income households.
 (c) GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND POLICIES- After a unit of general local government
 assesses its housing needs, it shall include within its local housing plan
 a statement of the goals, quantified objectives, and policies of the unit
 of general local government relative to the maintenance, preservation,
 and development of social housing that satisfy the identified housing needs.
 (d) Housing Program-
 (1) The local housing plan shall contain a four-year schedule of actions
 that will enable the unit of general local government to achieve its housing
 goals and objectives. The schedule of actions shall rely on the land use
 and development control powers of the unit of general local government,
 regulatory concessions and incentives, and the use of Federal, State,
 and local financing.
 (2) The local housing plan shall--
 (A) provide adequate sites with appropriate zoning and development standards
 to develop a variety of housing for different groups, ensuring a balance
 between jobs and housing;
 (B) minimize governmental constraints to maintenance, rehabilitation, and
 development of housing, including a review of such constraints as minimum
 lot sizes, design controls, parking requirements, second dwelling unit
 restrictions, exclusions against manufactured housing, and open space
 requirement;
 (C) mitigate the effects of any public or private development activities;
 (D) assist in the development of adequate socially owned housing for low-
 and moderate-income households, under the provisions of titles I and II,
 including conversion from private to social ownership and the regulation
 of private rental housing;
 (E) regulate privately owned rental housing in accordance with the provisions
 of title IV; and
 (F) obtain meaningful public participation in the preparation of the local
 housing plan and any amendments to the local housing plan.
 (e) REVISION OF LOCAL HOUSING PLAN- Each unit of general local government
 shall establish a set of performance indicators for evaluating fulfillment
 of its local housing plan, revising it annually as necessary. A complete
 review and revision shall be completed not less than every four years.
 (f) INDIVIDUAL STANDING- Individuals and groups shall have standing
 to administratively or judicially challenge the adequacy of the local
 housing plan in State and Federal court, and to require the Secretary to
 examine the local housing plan prior to approval or disbursement of Federal
 funds. In any lawsuit or administrative hearing under this provision, the
 unit of general local government shall bear the burden of demonstrating
 the adequacy of its local housing plan, and Federal or State courts shall
 have the authority equivalent to that of the Secretary to prohibit or
 delay the making of grants to State or units of general local government
 that are not in compliance with the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 505. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this title.
TITLE VI--INTERIM REFORM MEASURES
SEC. 601. DISPLACEMENT PROHIBITION.
 The displacement of low- and moderate-income tenants from housing supported
 through Farmers Home Administration programs and through Department of
 Housing and Urban Development housing programs under section 221(d)(3),
 section 8, and section 236 is prohibited.
SEC. 602. PROHIBITION OF DEMOLITION.
 Public housing, housing supported under programs listed in section 601, and
 housing supported under HUD section 202 may not be demolished or otherwise
 allowed to become uninhabitable, except for a public purpose in accord
 with regulations issued by the Secretary. Any removal from the housing
 stock under this subsection shall be accomplished with prior replacement
 of such housing with equivalent social housing units.
SEC. 603. PROHIBITION OF CONVERSION TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP.
 (a) Social housing, including housing supported under any of the programs
 listed in section 602, may not be sold, leased, or otherwise converted to
 private ownership, except for a public purpose in accord with regulations
 issued by the Secretary.
 (b) A moratorium on the pre-payment of mortgages for programs in (a)
 is effective upon the effective date of this Act.
SEC. 604. TRANSFER TO SOCIAL OWNERSHIP.
 The Secretary shall, in accord with the provisions of this Act, facilitate
 the transfer of ownership of housing units supported by the programs
 delineated in section 602 to social ownership.
SEC. 605. ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING.
 The Secretary shall give increased priority to funding congregate housing
 opportunities for the elderly. Such opportunities are to include, in addition
 to housing construction and rehabilitation, other necessary services to
 assist low- and moderate-income elderly individuals and households in
 avoiding institutionalization.
TITLE VII--GENERAL PROVISIONS
 The Secretary shall ensure that each program of social housing production
 complies with the following requirements.
SEC. 701. EMPLOYMENT AND JOB TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES.
 New construction, renovation, rehabilitation and other activities supported
 under this Act should, to the extent practicable, seek to maximize employment
 and job training opportunities.
SEC. 702. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PRINCIPLES.
 Affirmative action principles shall be required to encourage the hiring
 of groups traditionally excluded from construction, especially women
 and minorities.
SEC. 703. WAGES AND MATERIALS.
 (1) Prevailing wages shall be paid, except in the case of self-help,
 community-based, sweat-equity projects, or other special programs authorized
 by the unit of local government.
 (2) The provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act (42 U.S.C. 276a et seq.) shall
 apply to all construction work financed in whole or in part under this Act.
 (3) Materials and equipment financed under this Act shall be purchased
 from union shops or worker-owned businesses, to the extent practicable.
SEC. 704. RESIDENTS OF SOCIAL HOUSING.
 The Secretary shall ensure that dwelling units in social housing are
 targeted toward low- and moderate-income families.
SEC. 705. ANNUAL REPORTS.
 The Secretary shall prepare annual reports for the Congress detailing
 actions taken under this Act including recommendations for expansion of
 programs supported under this Act and for additional programs for achieving
 the policy of the Federal Government, `a decent home and a suitable living
 environment for every American family'.
SEC. 706. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 707. MINIMUM AUTHORIZATION LEVEL.
 Notwithstanding the amounts authorized to be appropriated in titles I, II,
 III, and IV, the total amount authorized to be appropriated under this
 Act for each fiscal year shall not be less than the sum of the amounts
 of Federal tax expenditures for `deductibility of mortgage interest on
 owner-occupied homes', `deductibility of property tax on owner-occupied
 homes', `exclusion of interest on state and local housing bonds', and
 `deferral of capital gains on home sales' as detailed in the annual Budget
 of the United States for fiscal year 1990 (pages 5-81) and in succeeding
 Budgets of the United States for the respective succeeding fiscal years.
SEC. 708. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act is effective immediately.
TITLE VIII--DEFINITIONS
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) the term `dwelling unit' includes manufactured homes, condominiums,
 and cooperatives;
 (2) the term `low- and moderate-income households' means--
 (a) households with annual incomes of less than 80 per centum of the
 median income as established in regularly issues Federal guidelines; or
 (b) households meeting other criteria in accord with regulations issued
 by the Secretary.
 (3) the term `Secertary' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development;
 (4) the term `social housing' includes social ownership, social financing,
 social production, and social management and means housing which is owned,
 financed, produced, and managed in ways oriented toward use rather than
 profit;
 (5) the term `social ownership' includes: direct public ownership by
 government or quasi-public entities; ownership by tenant, community, or
 other nonprofit corporations; collective ownership by resident-controlled
 corporations or neighborhood councils; non-equity or limited-equity
 cooperatives; and limited-equity ownership of single-family homes;
 (6) the term `social financing' means provision of direct public grants
 to social producers and owners for building, rehabilitating, and acquiring
 housing, free from the distortions caused by tax shelters, the instability
 of the capital markets, priorities of mortgage lenders, and free from the
 burden of debt;
 (7) the term `social production' encompasses development and construction of
 housing by community development corporations, local housing authorities,
 worker cooperatives, labor unions, and other nonprofit development and
 construction firms; on land held in public ownership or community trust;
 with materials provided increasingly through cooperatively owned and
 nonprofit suppliers; and in accordance with democratically determined plans;
 (8) the term `social management' means operation of housing, under resident
 control, for the benefit of the residents.
 (9) the term `subsidized housing' means all housing financed in whole or
 in part by direct expenditure of Federal funds.
 (10) the term `State' means each of the several States, the District of
 Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American
 Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific
 Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States; and
 (11) the term `unit of general local government' means any borough, city,
 county, parish, town, township, village, or other general purpose political
 subdivision of a State.