S 3186 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3186
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 11 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Mr. JEFFORDS introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. AMENDMENTS.
 Section 401(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1341)
 is amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (1), amend the first sentence to read as follows:
 `(1) Any applicant for a Federal license or permit to conduct any activity
 including, but not limited to, the construction or operation of facilities,
 which may result in any discharge into the navigable waters, or may,
 with respect to such waters, result in any water quality degradation
 or impairment of designated uses recognized under State law, shall
 provide the licensing or permitting agency, in the case of a discharge,
 a certification from the State in which the discharge originates or will
 originate, or if appropriate, from the interstate water pollution control
 agency having jurisdiction over the navigable waters at the point where
 the discharge originates, or will originate, that any such discharge will
 comply with the applicable provisions of sections 301, 302, 306, and 307
 of this Act, and in the case of any such activity which may result in any
 such water quality degradation or impairment of designated uses recognized
 under the laws of such State, shall provide the licensing or permitting
 agency a certification from such affected State that such activity will
 not result in any water quality degradation or impairment of designated
 uses recognized under the laws of such State, but will achieve, maintain,
 and protect such water quality and the designated uses identified in the
 State's water quality standards.'.
 (2) In paragraph (3), amend clause (B) in the first sentence to read as
 follows: `(B) the characteristics of the waters into which such discharge is
 made, or the waters affected by such quality degradation or imprisonment,'.
 (3) In the first sentence of paragraph (4), immediately after `navigable
 waters' insert the following: `or which may result in such degradation
 or impairment,'.