HR 1914 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1914
To provide for the acquisition and publication of data on police brutality
complaints, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 17, 1991
Mr. MFUME introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide for the acquisition and publication of data on police brutality
complaints, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Police Brutality Accountability Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. ACQUISITION AND PUBLICATION OF DATA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Under the authority of section 534 of title 28, United
 States Code, the Attorney General shall acquire national data on--
 (1) the number, nature, and disposition of police brutality complaints; and
 (2) the procedures employed by the Federal Government and State and local
 governments to investigate and resolve police brutality complaints.
 (b) PUBLICATION- The Attorney General shall publish an annual summary of
 the data acquired pursuant to subsection (a).
 (c) APPLICABILITY- The Attorney General shall acquire the data referred
 to in subsection (a) for each calendar year that begins after the 90-day
 period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 3. RECOMMENDATIONS AND REPORT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Attorney General shall submit to the President, the
 Congress, and the chief executive officer of each State, and shall make
 available to the chief executive officers of local governments--
 (1) annual recommendations specifying the methods by which the Federal
 Government and State and local governments can improve the investigation
 and resolution of police brutality complaints, including methods that
 discourage the suppression and summary dismissal of police brutality
 complaints after inadequate investigation; and
 (2) a report detailing model procedures for the investigation and resolution
 of police brutality complaints.
 (b) DISSEMINATION- The Attorney General shall make such recommendations
 and report available to the public at a reasonable cost and publish notice
 of such availability in the Federal Register.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `local government' means a political subdivision of a State.
 (2) The term `police brutality complaint' means any complaint of police use
 of excessive force involving any law enforcement officer of the Federal
 Government or a State or local government, including any complaint that
 involves police use of excessive force based on race, religion, or ethnicity.
 (3) The term `State' means each of the several States and the District
 of Columbia.