S 413 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 413
To reform, recapitalize, and consolidate the Federal deposit insurance
system, to enhance the regulatory and enforcement powers of Federal financial
institutions regulatory agencies, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 22 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. RIEGLE (for himself, Mr. GARN, Mr. GRAMM, and Mr. SHELBY) (by request)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To reform, recapitalize, and consolidate the Federal deposit insurance
system, to enhance the regulatory and enforcement powers of Federal financial
institutions regulatory agencies, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS
 SECTION 1. (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Financial
 Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--PURPOSE
Sec. 101. Purpose.
TITLE II--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION AUTHORITIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
Sec. 201. Financial institutions.
Sec. 202. Duties of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Sec. 203. FDIC Board members.
Sec. 204. Definitions.
Sec. 205. Insured savings associations.
Sec. 206. Application process; insurance fees.
Sec. 207. Insurability factors.
Sec. 208. Assessments.
Sec. 209. FDIC corporate powers.
Sec. 210. Administration of corporation.
Sec. 211. Insurance Funds; Corporation Powers as Receiver.
Sec. 212. FSLIC Resolution Fund.
Sec. 213. Amendments to section 12.
Sec. 214. Amendments to section 13.
Sec. 215. Borrowing authority.
Sec. 216. Limitation on borrowing.
Sec. 217. Reports.
Sec. 218. Regulations governing insured financial institutions.
Sec. 219. Nondiscrimination.
TITLE III--SAVINGS ASSOCIATION SUPERVISION IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Supervision of savings associations.
Sec. 303. Applicability.
Sec. 304. Conforming name changes.
Sec. 305. Safety and soundness.
Sec. 306. Deposits.
Sec. 307. Supervisory revisions.
Sec. 308. Receiverships.
Sec. 309. Technical amendment.
Sec. 310. Technical amendment.
Sec. 311. Amendment to section 5.
Sec. 312. Technical amendment.
Sec. 313. Conversions.
Sec. 314. Capital standards.
Sec. 315. Technical amendments.
Sec. 316. Repeal.
Sec. 317. Recovery regulations repealed.
Sec. 318. Cost of examination and reports.
Sec. 319. Savings and loan holding companies.
Sec. 320. Transactions with affiliates; loans to insiders.
Sec. 321. Advertising.
TITLE IV--DISSOLUTION AND TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS, PERSONNEL AND PROPERTY OF
THE FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION
Sec. 401. Dissolution.
Sec. 402. Continuation of rules.
Sec. 403. Personnel.
Sec. 404. Division of property and personnel.
Sec. 405. Repeals.
Sec. 406. Report.
TITLE V--FINANCING FOR THRIFT RESOLUTIONS
Subtitle A--Resolution Trust Corporation
Sec. 501. Resolution Trust Corporation established.
Subtitle B--Resolution Funding Corporation
Sec. 502. Resolution Funding Corporation established.
Sec. 503. Financing Corporation.
Sec. 504. Mixed Ownership Government Corporation.
TITLE VI--THRIFT ACQUISITION ENHANCEMENT PROVISIONS
Sec. 601. Acquisition of thrifts by bank holding companies.
Sec. 602. Investments by savings and loan holding companies in unaffiliated
thrift institutions.
Sec. 603. Technical amendment to Bank Holding Company Act.
TITLE VII--FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK SYSTEM REFORMS
Subtitle A--Federal Home Loan Bank Act Amendments
Sec. 701. Definitions.
Sec. 702. Federal Home Loan Bank System Chairman.
Sec. 703. Election of bank directors.
Sec. 704. Federal Home Loan Bank lending.
Sec. 705. Chief supervisory officers.
Sec. 706. Thrift Advisory Council.
Sec. 707. Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation Industry Advisory
Committee.
Sec. 708. Rate of interest.
Sec. 709. Liquidity requirements.
Sec. 710. Advances.
Sec. 711. Conforming Federal Home Loan Bank Act amendments.
Subtitle B--Conforming Amendments
Sec. 712. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act amendment.
Sec. 713. Repeal of limitation of obligation for administrative expenses.
Sec. 714. Amendment of additional powers of chairman.
Sec. 715. Amendment of title 5, United States Code.
Sec. 716. Amendment of title 31, United States Code.
Sec. 717. Amendment of Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
provisions.
Sec. 718. Amendment of title 18, United States Code.
TITLE VIII--BANK CONSERVATION ACT AMENDMENTS
Sec. 801. Definitions.
Sec. 802. Appointment of conservator.
Sec. 803. Examinations.
Sec. 804. Termination of conservatorship.
Sec. 805. Conservator; powers and duties.
Sec. 806. Liability protection.
Sec. 807. Rules and regulations.
Sec. 808. Repeals.
Sec. 809. Conforming amendment.
TITLE IX--REGULATORY AUTHORITY AND CRIMINAL ENHANCEMENTS
Sec. 901. Short title.
Subtitle A--Regulation of Financial Institutions
Sec. 902. Amendments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Sec. 903. Parallel increases in civil penalty provisions.
Sec. 904. Penalty for violation of `Change in Bank Control Act'.
Sec. 905. Reports.
Subtitle B--Regulation by the Federal Home Loan Bank System
Sec. 906. Examination authority.
Sec. 907. Reports of condition and penalties.
Sec. 908. Savings and loan holding companies.
Sec. 909. Continuity of authority for ongoing litigation.
Sec. 910. Temporary extension of authority.
Subtitle C--Credit Unions
Sec. 911. Amendments to section 206.
Sec. 912. Amendments to section 205.
Sec. 913. Amendments to section 202.
Subtitle D--Right to Financial Privacy Act
Sec. 914. Amendments to Right to Financial Privacy Act.
Subtitle E--Criminal Enhancements
Sec. 915. Increased criminal penalties and civil penalties for certain
financial institution offenses.
Sec. 916. Miscellaneous revisions to title 18.
Sec. 917. Civil and criminal forfeiture.
Sec. 918. Grand jury amendments.
Sec. 919. Litigation authority.
Sec. 920. Department of Justice appropriation.
TITLE X--STUDY OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND BANKING REGULATION
Sec. 1001. Study.
Sec. 1002. Topics.
Sec. 1003. Final report.
TITLE XI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1101. Amendment to section 202 of the Federal Credit Union Act.
Sec. 1102. Amendment to section 203 of the Federal Credit Union Act.
Sec. 1103. Amendment to section 5240 of the Revised Statutes.
Sec. 1104. Separability of provisions.
TITLE I--PURPOSE
 SEC. 101. PURPOSE- The purposes of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 are: to promote a safe and stable
 system of affordable housing finance through regulatory reform; to
 improve supervision by strengthening capital, accounting, and other
 supervisory standards; to establish a relationship of general oversight
 by the Treasury Department over the Federal Home Loan Bank System similar
 to that of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; to establish
 an independent insurance agency to provide deposit insurance for savers;
 to put the Federal Deposit Insurance System on a sound financial basis
 for the future; to create a new corporation to contain, manage, and
 resolve failed thrift institutions; to provide the necessary private and
 public financing to resolve failed institutions in an expeditious manner;
 to provide for improved supervision and enhanced enforcement powers; to
 increase criminal and civil money penalties for crimes of fraud against
 financial institutions and depositors; and for other purposes.
TITLE II--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION AUTHORITIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
 SEC. 201. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS- Except as otherwise hereinafter provided,
 the terms `insured bank', `insured banks', and `insured bank's' in the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.),
 are hereby deleted and the terms `insured financial institution',
 `insured financial institutions', and `insured financial institution's',
 respectively, are inserted in lieu thereof: Provided, however, That where
 the term `insured bank' is preceded by the word `member' or by the word
 `nonmember' such substitution of the term shall not be made; and the term
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' is deleted and the term `Federal Home Loan
 Bank System' is inserted in lieu thereof.
 SEC. 202. DUTIES OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION- Section 1 of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811) is hereby amended by adding
 `and savings associations' after `banks'.
 SEC. 203. FDIC BOARD MEMBERS- Section 2 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1812) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) In the first sentence, by deleting `three' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `five', by adding after the second comma the phrase `one of whom shall be
 the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System', and by deleting `two'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `three';
 (2) In the second sentence by deleting everything up to and including the
 word `members' the second time it appears therein, and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following: `One of the appointive members shall be designated
 by the President to serve from time to time as Chairman of the Board of
 Directors of the Corporation, and one shall be designated by the President
 to serve from time to time as Vice Chairman of the Board, and not more
 than two of the appointive members';
 (3) The fifth sentence shall be amended to read as follows: `In the event
 of a vacancy in the office of the Comptroller of the Currency, or the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, and pending the appointment
 of a successor, or during the absence or disability of any such member,
 the Acting Comptroller of the Currency, or the Acting Chairman of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank System, shall be a member of the Board of Directors
 in the place and stead of the Comptroller of the Currency or the Chairman
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, respectively.';
 (4) In the sixth sentence, by deleting `Comptroller of the Currency'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Vice Chairman of the Board';
 (5) In the last sentence, by adding `or Federal Home Loan bank' after
 `Federal Reserve bank', and by adding `or financial institution holding
 company' before the semicolon; and
 (6) By adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof:
 `The members of the Board of Directors on the date of enactment of the
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 shall
 continue to serve in office until the fulfillment of their existing terms;
 the Chairman of the Board of Directors shall continue to serve until a
 successor has been appointed and qualified.'.
 SEC. 204. DEFINITIONS- Section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1813) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) Notwithstanding section 201 of this Act, subsection (h) shall not be
 amended to delete the term `insured bank' and insert the term `insured
 financial institution';
 (2) Subsection (j) is amended by adding `conserving assets or' before
 `winding up', and by adding before the period therein the following phrase,
 ', or of a savings association';
 (3) Subsection (1) is amended as follows:
 (a) by adding the phrase `or savings association' after the phrases `a bank',
 `the bank', `receiving bank', or `such bank' each time such phrases appear
 in the subsection; and by adding the phrase `or savings association's'
 after the word `bank's' each time it appears in the subsection;
 (b) by striking out the word `and' at the end of subparagraph (5)(A) and
 by replacing the period at the end of subparagraph (5)(B) with '; or'; and
 (c) by adding a new subparagraph (5)(C) reading as follows:
 `(C) any money denominated in any currency other than that of the United
 States, and any obligation otherwise equivalent to money but which is not
 expressed in terms of the currency of the United States.'.
 (d) in paragraph (5), by adding ', Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 System' after `Comptroller of the Currency';
 (4) Subsection (m) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(3) In the case of a savings association that becomes an insured
 financial institution as a result of the operation of section 4(a),
 the term `insured deposit' shall include any liability of that financial
 institution which constituted an `insured account' within the meaning of
 section 401(c) of the National Housing Act immediately prior to enactment
 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989
 (hereinafter referred to as `FIRREA'), Provided: That in the case of any
 such liability that would not otherwise be eligible for insurance provided
 by the Corporation--
 `(A) if the liability has one or more fixed maturity dates, the liability
 shall cease to be included within the term `insured deposit' upon the
 earliest maturity date occurring after the expiration of six months from
 the date of enactment of FIRREA;
 `(B) if the liability has a minimum required notice period, the required
 notice period shall be deemed to be initiated on the date of enactment of
 FIRREA and the liability shall cease to be included within the term `insured
 deposit' upon expiration of the required notice period or upon the expiration
 of six months after the date of enactment of FIRREA, whichever is later; or
 `(C) if the liability has no fixed maturity date or required notice period,
 the liability shall cease to be included within the term `insured deposit'
 upon the expiration of six months from the date of enactment of FIRREA.';
 (5) Subsection (q) is amended to read as follows:
 `(q) The term `appropriate Federal banking agency' shall mean--
 `(1) the Comptroller of the Currency in the case of a national banking
 association, a District bank, or a Federal branch or agency of a foreign
 bank;
 `(2) The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System--
 `(A) in the case of a State member insured bank (except a District bank),
 `(B) in the case of any branch or agency of a foreign bank with respect
 to any provision of the Federal Reserve Act which is made applicable under
 the International Banking Act of 1978: Provided, That for the purposes of
 subsections (b) through (n) of section 8 of this Act, the term `insured
 financial institution' includes an uninsured branch or agency of a foreign
 bank or a commercial lending company owned or controlled by a foreign bank,
 `(C) in the case of any foreign bank which does not operate an insured
 branch,
 `(D) in the case of any agency or commercial lending company other than
 a Federal agency, and
 `(E) in the case of supervisory or regulatory proceedings arising from
 the authority given to the Board of Governors under section 7(c)(1) of
 the International Banking Act of 1978, including such proceedings under
 the Financial Institutions Supervisory Act;
 `(3) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the case of a State
 nonmember insured bank (except a District bank) or a foreign bank having
 an insured branch; and
 `(4) the Federal Home Loan Bank System in the case of a savings association
 or of a savings and loan holding company.
Under the rule set forth in this subsection, more than one agency may be an
appropriate Federal banking agency with respect to any given institution.';
 (6) by deleting the provisions of subsection (t) and reserving such
 subsection;
 (7) by adding new subsections at the end thereof to read as follows:
 `(u) The term `savings association' means any institution that was supervised
 by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation immediately prior
 to the enactment of the FIRREA, a Federal savings and loan association or
 Federal savings bank, or a building and loan, savings and loan, homestead
 association, or cooperative bank organized and operating according to
 the laws of the State (as defined in the text of subsection (a) hereof)
 in which it is chartered or organized, or a corporation that the Board of
 Directors determines to be operating substantially in the same manner as
 a savings and loan association.
 `(v) The term `bank' means all banks as defined in subsections (a) through
 (g) hereof.
 `(w)(1) The term `financial institution' means a bank or savings association.
 `(2) The term `insured financial institution' means a bank or savings
 association insured pursuant to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(x)(1) The term `default' with respect to an insured financial institution
 means an adjudication or other official determination of a court of
 competent jurisdiction, the appropriate Federal banking agency, or other
 public authority pursuant to which a conservator, receiver, or other
 legal custodian is appointed for an insured financial institution or,
 in the case of a foreign bank having an insured branch, for such branch.
 `(2) The term `in danger of default' with respect to an insured financial
 institution means that the appropriate Federal banking agency or State
 chartering authority has advised the Corporation with respect to such
 institution (or in the case of a foreign bank having an insured branch,
 with respect to such insured branch) that, in its opinion--
 `(i)(I) the financial institution or insured branch is not likely to be
 able to meet the demands of its depositors or pay its obligations in the
 normal course of business, and
 `(II) there is no reasonable prospect that the financial institution or
 insured branch will be able to meet such demands or pay such obligations
 without Federal assistance; or
 `(ii)(I) the financial institution or insured branch has incurred or is
 likely to incur losses that will deplete all or substantially all of its
 capital, and
 `(II) there is no reasonable prospect for the replenishment of the capital
 of the financial institution or insured branch without Federal assistance.
 `(y)(1) The term `financial institution holding company' means a bank
 holding company or a savings-and-loan holding company.
 `(2) The term `bank holding company' has the meaning prescribed in section
 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.).
 `(3) The term `savings and loan holding company' has the meaning prescribed
 in section (10)(a)(1)(D) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C.).'.
 SEC. 205. INSURED SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS- Section 4 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1814) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) subsection (a) is amended by adding the following new sentence at
 the end thereof: `Every savings association, the deposits of which were
 insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation on the date
 immediately preceding the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, shall be, without application
 or approval, an insured financial institution as of the date of enactment
 of that Act, and shall be subject to the provisions of this Act.';
 (2) subsection (b) is amended by adding the following phrase prior to
 the first period therein: `: Provided, however, That any application or
 notice for membership or to commence or resume business must be promptly
 provided by the appropriate Federal banking agency to the Corporation
 and the Corporation shall have a reasonable period to provide comments
 with respect thereto which must be considered by the appropriate Federal
 banking agency in making its findings thereon and with respect to the
 statutory factors in section 6 of this Act.';
 (3) by deleting the last two sentences of subsection (b) and all of
 subsection (c) and inserting the following new subsections in lieu thereof:
 `(c) Except as provided in subsection 5(d), a State financial institution
 resulting from the conversion of an insured Federal financial institution
 shall continue as an insured financial institution.
 `(d) Except as provided in subsection 5(d), a State financial institution
 resulting from the merger or consolidation of insured financial institutions,
 or from the merger or consolidation of a noninsured financial institution
 with an insured financial institution, shall continue as an insured
 financial institution.'.
 SEC. 206. APPLICATION PROCESS; INSURANCE FEES- Section 5 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1815) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) by adding the following new paragraph at the end of subsection (a)
 thereof:
 `Subject to the provisions of this Act, any Federal savings association
 that is authorized by the Federal Home Loan Bank System to engage in the
 business of receiving deposits, other than trust funds as herein defined,
 upon application by the association to the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 may become an insured financial institution following submission of such
 application to the Corporation together with a certificate issued to the
 Corporation by the Federal Home Loan Bank System, unless insurance is
 denied by the Board of Directors: Provided, however, That with respect
 to any interim Federal savings association chartered by the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System, and which will not open for business, such insurance
 shall be automatically granted upon issuance of such association's charter
 by the Federal Home Loan Bank System. Such certificate shall state that
 the savings association is authorized to transact business as a savings
 association and that consideration has been given to the factors enumerated
 in section 6 of this Act. Upon Corporation review of such certificate and
 application, and any appropriate examination by the Corporation, the Board
 of Directors shall give consideration to factors (1), (2), (3), (4), and
 (5) of section 6 of this Act in determining whether to deny insurance. If
 the Board of Directors, after giving due deference to the determination of
 the Federal Home Loan Bank System with respect to such factors, does not
 concur with the determination thereof, the Board of Directors shall promptly
 notify the Federal Home Loan Bank System that insurance has been denied,
 giving specific reasons in writing for the Corporation's determination with
 reference to factors (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) of section 6 of this Act
 and no charter or insurance shall be granted. Determination by the Board
 of Directors to deny insurance under this subsection may not be delegated.';
 (2) the first sentence of subsection (a) is amended, by deleting the comma
 following `State nonmember bank' and adding thereafter `and State savings
 association,'; and
 (3) the second sentence of subsection (a) is amended, by deleting the
 comma following `State nonmember bank' and adding thereafter `or such
 State savings association,', and by deleting the comma after `such bank'
 and adding thereafter `or savings association,', and by adding before the
 period at the end of the sentence `or savings association';
 (4) subsection (b) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (5), (6), and
 (7) as paragraphs (6), (7), and (8) respectively; and by inserting a new
 paragraph (5) to read as follows:
 `(5) the risk presented to the Deposit Insurance Fund, the Bank Insurance
 Fund and the Savings Association Insurance Fund;';
 (5) new subsections (d) and (e) are added at the end thereof to read
 as follows:
 `(d) Insurance Fees-
 `(1) Uninsured institutions-
 `(A) Every noninsured financial institution that becomes insured by the
 Corporation, and every noninsured branch that becomes insured by the
 Corporation, shall pay the Corporation any such fees as the Corporation
 may by regulation prescribe: Provided, That a financial institution that
 becomes an insured financial institution as a result of the operation of
 section 4(a) of this Act shall not pay any fee.
 `(B) The fee paid by the financial institution shall be credited to the
 Bank Insurance Fund if the financial institution becomes a Bank Insurance
 Fund member, and to the Savings Association Insurance Fund if the financial
 institution becomes a Savings Association Insurance Fund member.
 `(2) Conversions-
 `(A) No insured financial institution may participate in a conversion
 transaction without the prior consent of the Corporation. Except as
 provided in paragraph (C), the Corporation shall not provide its consent
 to any conversion transaction occurring before the expiration of five
 years from the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989.
 `(B) A `conversion transaction' means--
 `(i) the change of status of an insured financial institution, whether as
 a result of a charter conversion or otherwise, from a Bank Insurance Fund
 member to a Savings Association Insurance Fund member or from a Savings
 Association Insurance Fund member to a Bank Insurance Fund member;
 `(ii) the merger or consolidation of a Bank Insurance Fund member with a
 Savings Association Insurance Fund member;
 `(iii)(I) the assumption on the part of a Bank Insurance Fund member of
 liability to pay any deposits in a Savings Association Insurance Fund member;
 `(II) the assumption on the part of a Savings Association Insurance Fund
 member of liability to pay any deposits in a Bank Insurance Fund member;
 `(iv)(I) the transfer on the part of a Bank Insurance Fund member of assets
 to any Savings Association Insurance Fund member in consideration of the
 assumption of liabilities for any portion of the deposits in such Bank
 Insurance Fund member; or
 `(II) the transfer on the part of a Savings Association Insurance Fund
 member of assets to any Bank Insurance Fund member in consideration of the
 assumption of liabilities for any portion of the deposits in such Savings
 Association Insurance Fund member.
 `(C) The Corporation may provide its consent at any time to a conversion
 transaction if--
 `(i) the conversion transaction affects an insubstantial portion, as
 determined by the Corporation, of the insured liabilities of each financial
 institution participating in the conversion transaction; or
 `(ii) the Corporation and, during the existence of the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, the Resolution Trust Corporation Oversight Board determine
 that the conversion transaction is in the best interests of the Bank
 Insurance Fund and the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
 `(D) Every financial institution participating in a conversion transaction
 shall pay--
 `(i) in the case of a conversion transaction in which the resulting or
 acquiring financial institution is a Bank Insurance Fund member, an exit
 fee to be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, which fee shall be
 paid to the Resolution Trust Corporation or to such agency as the Secretary
 of the Treasury may specify; and
 `(ii) an entrance fee to be determined by the Corporation, provided--
 `(I) that in the case of a conversion transaction in which the resulting or
 acquiring financial institution is a Bank Insurance Fund member, the fee
 shall be in an amount necessary to prevent dilution of the Bank Insurance
 Fund, and shall be paid to the Bank Insurance Fund; and
 `(II) that in the case of a conversion transaction in which the resulting
 or acquiring financial institution is a Savings Association Insurance Fund
 member, the fee shall be in an amount necessary to prevent dilution of
 the Savings Association Insurance Fund, and shall be paid to the Savings
 Association Insurance Fund.
 `(e) Liability of Commonly-Controlled Financial Institutions-
 `(1) REQUIRED- Notwithstanding any provision of law, State or Federal, or
 the constitution of any State, or of any contract or other instrument or
 security, on and after the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, whenever the Corporation
 incurs a loss in connection with the default of an insured financial
 institution, or in connection with providing assistance to an insured
 financial institution in danger of default, any other commonly-controlled
 insured financial institution shall be liable to the Corporation following
 notice to the institution as provided below and on request shall reimburse
 the Corporation for any such loss. No such liability shall arise under this
 subsection if the Corporation fails to provide notice within two years of
 the date the Corporation incurs such loss.
 `(2) Amount of compensation; procedures-
 `(A) USE OF ESTIMATES- When an insured financial institution is in default or
 requires assistance to prevent default, the Corporation shall in good faith
 estimate its prospective losses resulting from such default or assistance,
 shall advise any commonly-controlled financial institution of the amount
 of its liability in connection with such losses, and if there is more
 than one such commonly-controlled financial institution, determine such
 commonly-controlled financial institution's share of such liability.
 `(B) PROCEDURES; IMMEDIATE PAYMENT- The Corporation, after consultation
 with the appropriate Federal banking agency, may specify the procedures
 and schedule by which each such commonly-controlled financial institution
 must reimburse the Corporation for its liability under this subsection on a
 case-by-case basis. The Corporation may compel any or all commonly-controlled
 financial institutions to make immediate payment of any compensation
 required under paragraph (1).
 `(C) PRIORITY- The liability established pursuant to the provisions of
 this subsection shall be--
 `(i) superior to the following obligations and liabilities of the financial
 institution:
 `(I) any obligation subordinated to depositors or other general creditors;
 `(II) any obligation to shareholders arising as a result of their status
 as shareholders (including a bank holding company or savings and loan
 holding company or any shareholder or creditor of such company);
 `(III) any obligation or liability owed to any other commonly-controlled
 company or commonly-controlled insured financial institution; or
 `(IV) any liability which is a contingent liability on the date the
 liability of the financial institutions to the Corporation is determined; and
 `(ii) subordinate in right or payment to the following obligations and
 liabilities of the financial institution:
 `(I) deposit liabilities other than those to commonly-controlled financial
 institutions;
 `(II) secured obligations; and
 `(III) other general liabilities, except to the extent specified in (i)
 above; and
 `(iii) pari passu with other liabilities and obligations of the financial
 institution.
 `(D) Adjustment of estimated payment-
 `(i) OVERPAYMENT- If the amount of compensation estimated by and paid
 to the Corporation by one or more such commonly-controlled financial
 institutions is greater than the actual loss incurred by the Corporation,
 the Corporation shall reimburse each such commonly-controlled financial
 institution its pro-rata share of any overpayment.
 `(ii) UNDERPAYMENT- If the amount of compensation estimated by and paid
 to the Corporation by one or more such commonly-controlled financial
 institutions is less than the actual loss incurred by the Corporation,
 the Corporation shall redetermine in its discretion the liability of each
 such commonly-controlled financial institution to the Corporation and
 shall require each such commonly-controlled institution to make payment
 of any additional liability to the Corporation.
 `(3) Review-
 `(A) ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW- The Corporation shall by regulation establish
 an administrative procedure for review of the amount of losses, the
 liability of individual commonly-controlled financial institutions, and
 the schedule of payments to be made by such commonly-controlled financial
 institutions. The regulations shall provide for a hearing on the part of
 any such commonly-controlled financial institution.
 `(B) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Determination made by the Corporation of the amount
 of losses, the liability of commonly-controlled financial institutions, or
 the procedures or scheduling of the payments required, shall be reviewable
 by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit or the Court
 of Appeals for the circuit where the financial institution in default or
 is located, and shall be upheld unless found to be arbitrary or capricious.
 `(4) LIMITATION ON RIGHTS OF PRIVATE PARTIES- No court shall give effect to
 any rights or powers conferred on any person, whether such rights or powers
 are conferred by State constitution or statute or by Federal statute or by
 the articles or bylaws of a financial institution, a financial institution
 holding company or any subsidiary thereof or by any debt or equity security
 of any such financial institution, financial institution holding company or
 subsidiary thereof or by any other contact or other instrument or otherwise,
 and any provision of any such statute or security or article or bylaw or
 contract or instrument shall be void, insofar as giving effect to any such
 rights or powers would impair the ability of the financial institution to
 perform its obligations under this subsection.
 `(5) LIMITATION- For a period of five years from the date of enactment of
 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989,
 no Savings Association Insurance Fund member shall have any liability to the
 Corporation under this subsection arising out of assistance provided to or
 loss incurred as a result of the default of a Bank Insurance Fund member,
 and no Bank Insurance Fund member shall have such liability with respect
 to assistance provided to or loss incurred as a result of the default of
 a Savings Association Insurance Fund member.
 `(6) DEFINITIONS- For the purpose of this section:
 `(A) COMMONLY-CONTROLLED INSTITUTIONS- Financial institutions are
 `commonly-controlled' whenever:
 `(i) one financial institution is controlled by or under common control
 with any company that controls or is under common control with another
 financial institution, or
 `(ii) one financial institution controls or is controlled by another
 financial institution.
 `(B) DEFINITIONS- The terms `company' and `control' have the meanings
 specified in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1841
 et seq.).'.
 SEC. 207. INSURABILITY FACTORS- Section 6 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1816) is hereby amended to read as follows:
 `Except as otherwise provided, the factors to be considered and enumerated
 in the certificate required under section 4 hereof and to be considered
 by the Board of Directors under section 5 shall be the following:
 `(1) The financial history and condition of the financial institution;
 `(2) the adequacy of its capital structure;
 `(3) its future earnings prospects;
 `(4) the general character and fitness of its management;
 `(5) the risk presented to the Deposit Insurance Fund, the Bank Insurance
 Fund and the Savings Association Insurance Fund;
 `(6) the convenience and needs of the community to be served; and
 `(7) whether or not its corporate powers are consistent with the purposes
 of this Act.'.
 SEC. 208. ASSESSMENTS- Section 7 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1817) is amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (2) of subsection (a) thereof is amended as follows:
 (a) the words `or the Federal Home Loan Bank System or any Federal Home Loan
 Bank' are added after `Comptroller of the Currency' each time they appear;
 (b) the word `either' is deleted and `any' is inserted in lieu thereof;
 (c) the words `State nonmember bank (except a District bank)' are deleted
 and the words `financial insititution' are inserted in lieu thereof; and
 (d) subparagraph (B) is deleted and in lieu thereof the following shall
 be inserted:
 `(B) The Board of Directors may from time to time require any or all insured
 financial institutions to file such additional reports as the Corporation,
 after agreement with the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System, and the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 as appropriate, may deem advisable for insurance purposes.'.
 (2) Paragraph (3) of subsection (a) thereof is amended by--
 (a) deleting everything prior to the words `four reports' and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following: `Each insurance financial institution shall
 make to the appropriate Federal banking agency';
 (b) adding after the word `bank' each time it appears in the second, fifth,
 and sixth sentences, the words `or savings association'; and
 (c) by adding after the words `member bank' in the seventh sentence the
 words `and each insured savings association'; and
 (d) paragraphs (4) and (7) are amended by adding after the words `bank',
 `bank's', or `banks' the words `or savings association', `or savings
 association's', or, `or savings associations', respectively, except that no
 words shall be added after the words `insured bank' or `insured financial
 institution' or `foreign banks'.
 (3) By replacing `bank' with `financial institution' and `bank's' with
 `financial institution's' respectively everywhere those words appear in
 paragraphs (3) through (8) of subsection (b), except that the phrases
 `foreign bank' and `foreign bank's' shall not be amended; and by deleting
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b) and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `(1) ASSESSMENT RATES-
 `(A) ANNUAL ASSESSMENT RATES PRESCRIBED- The Corporation shall set assessment
 rates for insured financial institutions annually. The Corporation shall fix
 the annual assessment rate for Bank Insurance Fund members independently from
 the annual assessment rate for Savings Association Insurance Fund members.
 `(B) ASSESSMENT RATE FOR BANK INSURANCE FUND MEMBERS- The annual assessment
 rate for Bank Insurance Fund members shall be--
 `(i) until December 31, 1989, one-twelfth of 1 per centum;
 `(ii) from January 1, 1990, through December 31, 1990, twelve one-hundredths
 of 1 per centum; and
 `(iii) on and after January 1, 1991, fifteen one-hundredths of 1 per centum.
 `(C) ASSESSMENT RATES FOR SAVINGS ASSOCIATION INSURANCE FUND MEMBERS-
 The annual assessment rate for Savings Association Insurance Fund members
 shall be--
 `(i) until December 31, 1990, 20.8 one-hundredths of 1 per centum;
 `(ii) from January 1, 1991, through December 31, 1993, twenty-three
 one-hundredths of 1 per centum; and
 `(iii) from January 1, 1994, and thereafter, eighteen one-hundredths of
 1 per centum.
 `(D) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN ADJUSTING RATE- The Corporation shall have
 authority and discretion to fix the annual assessment rates for insured
 financial institutions above the levels described in paragraphs (B) and (C)
 provided the Corporation makes the findings herein prescribed: Provided,
 That except as otherwise expressly provided herein the Corporation shall
 not fix any such annual assessment rates that exceed the maximum levels
 specified in paragraph (E): And provided further, That before increasing
 the annual assessment rates, the Corporation determines that one or more
 of the following conditions exist:
 `(i) BANK INSURANCE FUND- In the case of Bank Insurance Fund members,
 the factors shall be the following--
 `(I) that the Bank Insurance Fund has experienced a net loss during any
 one of the prior three years;
 `(II) that the Bank Insurance Fund reserve ratio or the Deposit Insurance
 Fund reserve ratio is less than 1.20 per centum; or
 `(III) that, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, extraordinary
 circumstances exist that raise a reasonable risk of serious future losses
 to the Bank Insurance Fund or to the Deposit Insurance Fund as a whole.
 `(ii) SAVINGS ASSOCIATION INSURANCE FUND- In the case of Savings Association
 Insurance members, the factors shall be the following--
 `(I) That the Savings Association Insurance Fund has experienced a net
 loss during any one of the prior three years;
 `(II) That the Savings Association Insurance Fund reserve ratio or the
 Deposit Insurance Fund ratio is less than 1.20 per centum; or
 `(III) That, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, extraordinary
 circumstances exist that raise a reasonable risk of serious future losses
 to the Savings Association Insurance Fund or to the Deposit Insurance Fund
 as a whole.
 `(iii) MAXIMUM ANNUAL INCREASE- The maximum annual increase in the annual
 assessment rate with respect to each fund shall not exceed a 50 per centum
 annual increase over the annual assessment rate of the prior year.
 `(E) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (B), (C) and (D) of this paragraph
 (1), the Corporation may in its discretion set a lower minimum annual
 assessment rate for the Bank Insurance Fund or the Savings Association
 Insurance Fund if the respective fund has a reserve ratio greater than 1.25
 per centum and it is likely that such reserve ratio will not decrease over
 the following five-year period; (ii) each insured financial institution
 shall pay a minimum annual assessment of $500, or such higher amount as
 may be calculated by the Corporation to cover direct expenses incurred
 by the Corporation related to such institutions, or a lower amount if
 the conditions provided in (i) of this subparagraph (E) exist; and (iii)
 the annual assessment rate shall not exceed thirty-five one-hundredths of
 1 per centum, except as provided in (ii) of this subparagraph (E).
 `(F) FINANCING CORPORATION AND FUNDING CORPORATION ASSESSMENTS-
 Notwithstanding any authority provided herein, with respect to Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members, amounts assessed by the Financing
 Corporation and the Funding Corporation under section 21 and 21b,
 respectively, of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, as amended, shall be
 substracted from the amounts authorized to be assessed by the Corporation
 hereunder.
 `(2) ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES-
 `(A) SEMIANNUAL ASSESSMENTS- Except as provided in subsection (c)(2)
 of this section--
 `(i) the semiannual assessment due from any Bank Insurance Fund member for
 any semiannual period shall be equal to one-half the annual categorical
 assessment rate applicable to such Bank Insurance Fund member multiplied
 by such Bank Insurance Fund member's average assessment base for the
 immediately preceding semiannual period; and
 `(ii) the semiannual assessment due from any Savings Association Insurance
 Fund member for any semiannual period shall be equal to one-half the annual
 categorical assessment rate applicable to such Savings Association Insurance
 Fund member multiplied by such Savings Association Insurance Fund member's
 average assessment base for the immediately preceding semiannual period.
 `(B) For the purpose of this section the term `semiannual period' means
 a period beginning on January 1 of any calendar year and ending on June
 30 of the same year, or a period beginning on July 1 of any calendar year
 and ending on December 31 of the same year.';
 (4) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
 `(d) ASSESSMENT CREDITS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- As of December 31, 1990, and as of December 31 of each
 calendar year thereafter, the Corporation shall compute the aggregate
 amount to be credited to insured financial institutions.
 `(2) AMOUNT OF ASSESSMENT CREDIT-
 `(A) CREDIT BARRED- Whenever the Board of Directors determines that the Bank
 Insurance Fund reserve ratio is equal to or less than 1.25 per centum,
 the Board of Directors shall not credit any amount to Bank Insurance
 Fund members.
 `(B) CREDIT AUTHORIZED-
 `(i) AGGREGATE CREDIT- Whenever the Board of Directors determines that
 the Bank Insurance Fund reserve ratio exceeds 1.25 per centum, or such
 higher level as the Board of Directors in its discretion may determine,
 the Board of Directors may in its discretion credit the smaller of the
 following amounts to Bank Insurance Fund members--
 `(I) The amount necessary to reduce the Bank Insurance Fund reserve ratio
 to 1.25 per centum or such higher level as the Board of Directors may
 determine; or
 `(II) 60 per centum of the net assessment income received from Bank
 Insurance Fund members the prior year.
 `(ii) The Corporation shall deduct any outstanding obligations owed to
 the Corporation by an individual insured financial institution from any
 assessment credit to be credited to such financial institution.
 `(C) CREDIT BARRED- Whenever the Board of Directors determines that
 the Savings Association Insurance Fund reserve ratio is equal to or
 less than 1.25 per centum, the Board of Directors shall not credit any
 amount to Savings Association Insurance Fund members: Provided, That no
 credit shall be made as long as the Financing Corporation is authorized
 to assess on Savings Association Insurance Fund members an assessment to
 cover Financing Corporation interest obligations pursuant to section 21
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.
 `(D) CREDIT AUTHORIZED-
 `(i) AGGREGATE CREDIT- Whenever the Board of Directors determines that the
 Savings Association Insurance Fund reserve ratio exceeds 1.25 per centum of
 such higher level as the Board of Directors in its discretion may determine,
 the Board of Directors may in its discretion credit the smaller of the
 following amounts to Savings Association Insurance Fund members--
 `(I) the amount necessary to reduce the Savings Association Insurance
 Fund reserve ratio to 1.25 per centum, or such higher level as the Board
 of Directors may determine; or
 `(II) 60 per centum of the net assessment income received from Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members the prior year.
 `(ii) The Corporation shall deduct any outstanding obligations owed to
 the Corporation by an individual insured financial institution from any
 assessment credit to be credited to such financial institution.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF ASSESSMENT CREDIT- Each year any such credit shall
 be applied by the Corporation toward the payment of the total assessment
 becoming due for the semiannual assessment period beginning the next ensuing
 July 1 and any excess credit shall be applied upon the assessments next
 becoming due.
 `(4) `NET ASSESSMENT INCOME' DEFINED- The term `net assessment income'
 as used herein means the total assessments which become due during the
 calendar year less:
 `(A) the operating costs and expenses of the Corporation for the calendar
 year;
 `(B) additions to reserve to provide for insurance losses during the
 calendar year, except that any adjustments to reserve which result in a
 reduction of such reserve shall be added;
 `(C) the insurance losses sustained in said calendar year plus losses from
 any preceding years in excess of such reserves; and
 `(D) any lending costs for the calendar year, which costs shall be equal
 to the amount by which the amount of interest earned, if any, from each
 loan made by the Corporation under section 13 of this Act after January
 1, 1982, is less than the amount which the Corporation would have earned
 in interest for the calendar year if interest had been paid on such loan
 during such calendar year at a rate equal to the average current value of
 funds to the United States Treasury for such calendar year.
If the above deductions exceed in amount the total assessments which become
due during the calendar year, the amount of such excess shall be restored
by deduction from total assessments becoming due in subsequent years.';
 (6) by replacing `bank' wherever it appears in subsections (e), (f),
 (g) and (i) with `financial institution';
 (7) by amending subsection (j) as follows:
 (a) The last sentence in paragraph (1) is amended by inserting before the
 words `any bank holding company' the numeral `(1)' and by inserting before
 the period the following: `; (2) any `savings and loan holding company'
 which has control of any insured financial institution, and the appropriate
 Federal banking agency in the case of savings and loan holding companies
 shall be the Federal Home Loan Bank System; and (3) any other company
 that controls an insured financial institution that is not a bank holding
 company or a savings and loan holding company.'.
 (b) In subparagraph (2)(A), the word `failure' is deleted and `default'
 is inserted in lieu thereof; and the word `bank' is deleted and the word
 `financial institution' is inserted in lieu thereof.
 (c) In subparagraph (2)(D), the words `unless it finds that an emergency
 exists,' are added after the comma following the word `shall';
 (d) In paragraph (7), the word `or' at the end of subparagraph (D) and
 the period at the end of subparagraph (E) are deleted and the word `;
 or' is added at the end of subparagraph (E), and a new subparagraph (F)
 is added to read as follows:
 `(F) the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the proposed
 transaction would result in an adverse effect on the Bank Insurance Fund,
 the Savings Association Insurance Fund, or the Deposit Insurance Fund.';
 (e) Deleting paragraph (17) and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(17) This subsection shall not apply to a transaction subject to section
 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842) or section 18
 of this Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) or section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933, as amended.';
 (f) Inserting the following new subsection (1) to read as follows:
 `(l) For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the `Deposit Insurance Fund reserve ratio' is the ratio of the net
 worth of the Deposit Insurance Fund to the value of the aggregate insured
 deposits held in all insured financial institutions;
 `(2) the `Bank Insurance Fund reserve ratio' is the ratio of the net worth
 the Bank Insurance Fund of the Deposit Insurance Fund to the value of the
 aggregate insured deposits held in all Bank Insurance Fund members;
 `(3) the `Savings Association Insurance Fund reserve ratio' is the ratio
 of the value of the net worth of the Savings Association Insurance Fund of
 the Deposit Insurance Fund to the value of the aggregate insured deposits
 held in all Savings Association Insurance Fund members;
 `(4) `Bank Insurance Fund member' means any insured financial institution
 other than a Savings Association Insurance fund member;
 `(5) `Savings Association Insurance Fund member' means any financial
 institution that was insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation immediately prior to the enactment of FIRREA, and any insured
 savings association other than a Federal savings bank chartered pursuant
 to section 5(o) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933; and
 `(6) the `Deposit Insurance Fund' is comprised of the Bank Insurance Fund
 and Savings Insurance Fund.'.
 SEC. 209. FDIC CORPORATE POWERS- Section 9 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1819) is hereby amended--
 (1) by striking out the words `bank' and `banks' wherever they appear and
 inserting `financial institution' or `financial institutions', respectively,
 in lieu thereof;
 (2) by inserting `other than as received under the provisions of section
 11(e)(2) or 11(e)(3)' immediately before the words `and which involves'
 in paragraph Fourth; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `Eleventh. To define any terms used in the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
 as amended, that are not specifically defined in such Act, and to interpret
 the definitions of any terms that are not so defined: Provided, That no
 such definition shall be binding on any other Federal banking agency as
 it may implement or enforce the provisions of this Act.'.
 SEC. 210. ADMINISTRATION OF CORPORATION- Subsection 10(b) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1820) is hereby amended as follows:
 (a) In the first sentence, by adding after `or other institution,' a comma
 and the phrase `including a State savings association'.
 (b) In the second sentence, by deleting `insured Federal savings bank'
 and by inserting in lieu thereof `insured savings association'.
 SEC. 211. INSURANCE FUNDS; CORPORATION POWERS AS RECEIVER- Section 11 of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) Subsection (a) is amended as follows:
 (a) Paragraph (1) is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) On and after the effective date of the `Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989' the Corporation shall insure
 the deposits of all insured financial institutions as provided in this
 Act. Except as provided in paragraph 2, maximum amount of the insured
 deposit of any depositor shall be $100,000.'.
 (b) In subparagraph (2)(B), the words `time and savings' are deleted.
 (c) By adding a new paragraph (4) to read as follows:
 `(4) There are hereby established two insurance funds both to be operated
 and administered by the Corporation and to be separately maintained and
 not commingled, which shall be used by the Corporation for the purposes
 of carrying out the insurance purposes of this chapter in the manner set
 forth below:
 `(A) As of the effective date of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, there is hereby established a fund
 to be designated the Bank Insurance Fund. On that date, the Permanent
 Insurance Fund shall be dissolved and all the assets, debts, obligations,
 contracts, and other liabilities of the Permanent Insurance Fund, matured
 or unmatured, accrued, absolute, contingent, or otherwise shall hereby
 be transferred in their entirety to the Bank Insurance Fund. Money in
 the Bank Insurance Fund shall be available to the Corporation for the
 uses and purposes herein provided with respect to the Bank Insurance Fund
 members. All amounts assessed Bank Insurance Fund members by the Corporation
 shall be deposited into the Bank Insurance Fund.
 `(B)(i) As of the effective date of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, there is hereby established a fund to
 be designated the Savings Associations Insurance Fund. All amounts assessed
 Savings Associations Insurance Fund members from the date of enactment of
 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989,
 and not required for the Financing Corporation or for the Resolution
 Funding Corporation pursuant to section 21 and 21b, respectively, of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank Act, or for the FSLIC Resolution Fund pursuant to
 section 11A of this Act, shall be covered into the Savings Association
 Insurance Fund: Provided, however, That beginning in 1992, no amounts
 assessed Savings Association Insurance Fund members shall be provided to
 the FSLIC Resolution Fund.
 `(ii) Beginning in fiscal year 1991, in order to provide funding to the
 Savings Association Insurance Fund, the Secretary of the Treasury shall,
 subject to the availability of appropriations, pay to the Fund the amounts
 per fiscal year, less the assessment paid by the savings associations to
 the Fund for such fiscal year, as set forth in the table below: Provided,
 however, That at such time as the Savings Association Insurance Fund reserve
 ratio is equal to 1.25 per centum no further amounts shall be paid to the
 Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury:
 `Fiscal year beginning October 1
--Dollars in billions
1991
--$2.0
1992
--3.4
1993
--4.6
1994
--3.0
1995
--4.0
1996
--4.0
1997
--4.0
1998
--4.0
1999
--3.0
Provided further, That the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay to the
Savings Association Insurance Fund such additional funds as necessary, if
any, to ensure that such Fund has the minimum net worth, as determined by
the Corporation and the Secretary of the Treasury, set forth in the table
below in each respective fiscal year as specified therein (subject to the
above proviso that at such time as the Savings Association Insurance Fund
reserve ratio is equal to 1.25 per centum no further amounts shall be paid
to the Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury).
 Fiscal year beginning October 1
--Dollars in billions
1991
--$0.0
1992
--1.0
1993
--2.1
1994
--3.2
1995
--4.3
1996
--5.4
1997
--6.5
1998
--7.6
1999
--8.8
 `(iii) There are hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of
 the Treasury, without fiscal year limitation, such sums as may be necessary
 for payments to individual funds as authorized by this Act.
 `(iv) The Corporation is hereby authorized to borrow from the Federal Home
 Loan Banks, with the concurrence of the Chairman of the System, such funds
 as the Corporation deems necessary for the use of the Savings Association
 Insurance Fund, which borrowings shall be a direct liability of such Fund
 and shall be subject to the limitations in paragraph (b) of section 15 of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1825(b)).
 `(v) Money in the Savings Association Insurance Fund shall be available to
 the Corporation for the uses and purposes herein provided with respect to
 Savings Association Insurance Fund members. All amounts assessed Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members by the Corporation which do not include
 those required for the Financing Corporation or the Resolution Funding
 Corporation pursuant to the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, or for the FSLIC
 Resolution Fund pursuant to section 11A of this Act, shall be deposited
 into the Savings Association Insurance Fund.'.
 (2) Subsection (c) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) CORPORATION AS RECEIVER OR CONSERVATOR- (1) Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, State or Federal, or the constitution of any State,
 the Corporation is authorized to accept appointment and act as receiver
 or conservator for financial institutions in default upon appointment as
 set out in subsection (d) or (e) hereof.
 `(2) As such receiver or conservator, the Corporation shall have the
 following authorities and duties--
 `(A) the Corporation is authorized--
 `(i) to take over the assets of and operate the financial institution
 with all the powers of the member or shareholders, the directors, and the
 officers of the financial institution and shall be authorized to conduct
 all business, including taking deposits, and perform all functions of the
 financial institution in its own name,
 `(ii) to take such action as may be necessary to put the financial
 institution in a sound and solvent condition,
 `(iii) to merge the financial institution with another insured financial
 institution,
 `(iv) to organize, with respect to savings associations, by application to
 the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System a new Federal Savings
 Association to take over such assets and/or such liabilities as the
 Corporation may deem appropriate, or with respect to any insured financial
 institution, to organize a bridge bank under subsection (i) hereof or a
 new national bank under subsection (h) hereof,
 `(v) to transfer any assets or liabilities of the financial institution
 in default (including assets and liabilities associated with any trust
 business), such transfer to be effective without any further approval,
 assignment or consent with respect thereto: Provided, That when the
 transfer is another financial institution, the transfer must be approved
 by the appropriate Federal banking agency for the acquiring institution,
 `(vi) to place the financial institution in liquidation and to proceed to
 realize upon the assets of the financial institution, having due regard
 to the condition of credit in the locality,
 `(vii) to determine claims under the provisions set forth under subsection
 (1),
 `(viii) to exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted by the
 provisions of this Act and such incidental powers as shall be necessary
 to carry out the powers so granted, and to take any actions authorized by
 this Act, or
 `(ix) to exercise any combination of the powers enumerated in clauses
 (2)(A)(i) through (2)(A)(viii),
whichever shall appear to be in the best interests of the financial institution
in default, of its depositors, or the Corporation;
 `(B) the Corporation shall pay all valid credit obligations of the financial
 institution in accordance with the prescriptions and limitations set forth
 in this Act;
 `(C) in cases of liquidation, or other closing or winding up of the affairs
 of a closed financial institution, the Corporation--
 `(i) shall promptly publish a notice to the financial institution's
 creditors to present their claims, with proof thereof, to the receiver
 by a date specified in the notice (at least ninety days after first
 publication). The notice shall be published again approximately one month
 and two months respectively after first publication. Claims filed after the
 specified date shall be disallowed. The receiver shall mail a similar notice
 at the time of first publication to any creditor shown on the financial
 institution's books at the creditor's last address appearing thereon or
 upon discovery of the name and address of a claimant not appearing on the
 financial institution's books within thirty days of discovery;
 `(ii) shall allow any claim seasonably received and proved to its
 satisfaction. The receiver may wholly or partly disallow any creditor claim
 or claim of security, preference, or priority not so proved, and shall
 notify the claimant of the disallowance and the reason therefore. Mailing
 notice of the disallowance to the claimant's last address appearing
 on the financial institution's books or on the proof of claim shall be
 sufficient notice. Unless, within thirty days after notice is mailed,
 the claimant files a written objection to the disallowance, disallowance
 shall be final. Those claims to which an objection is properly and timely
 filed shall be decided in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1).
 `(iii) may pay creditor claims which are allowed by the receiver or approved
 by a final determination by the receiver in accordance with subsection
 (1), from time to time, in the receiver's discretion, to the extent funds
 are available, in such manner and amounts as are authorized under this Act;
 `(D) the Corporation shall pay to itself for its own account such portion
 of the amounts realized from any liquidation as it shall be entitled to
 receive on account of its subrogation to the claims of depositors, and it
 shall pay to depositors and other creditors the net amounts available for
 distribution to them;
 `(E) the Corporation may, in its discretion, pay dividends on proved claims
 at any time, and no liability shall attach to the Corporation itself or as
 such receiver by reason of any such payment for failure to pay dividends
 to a claimant whose claim is not proved at the time of any such payment;
 `(F) the Corporation may request a stay for a period of up to ninety days
 after the appointment of the receiver as to any legal action or proceeding to
 which the receiver or the financial institution in default is or may become
 a party. Upon petition, the court shall grant such stay as to all parties;
 `(G) the Corporation is authorized to disaffirm or repudiate any contract or
 lease the performance of which the Corporation in its discretion considers
 to be burdensome, or in its discretion considers the disaffirmance
 or repudiation of which will promote the orderly administration of the
 financial institution's affairs. So long as the Corporation disaffirms or
 repudiates the contract within ninety days from the date the Corporation
 is appointed conservator or receiver or discovers the existence of the
 contract or lease subject to disaffirmance or repudiation, neither the
 Corporation nor the estate of the financial institution will incur any
 liability with respect to such contract or lease, except that lessors shall
 be entitled to the contractual rent for the period from the appointment
 of the receiver to the date the notice of disaffirmance or repudiation
 is mailed or effective: Provided, That nothing herein is intended in any
 way to limit the authority of the Corporation as receiver to disaffirm or
 repudiate such contract or lease after the ninety-day period set out above;
 `(H) the Corporation may enforce any contract entered into by the financial
 institution to the same extent as the financial institution in default,
 notwithstanding any provision of the contract to the contrary, which it deems
 in its discretion to be necessary for the orderly execution of its duties;
 `(I) the Corporation shall keep a full accounting of each receivership estate
 and conservatorship estate or other disposition of institutions in default
 and make such accounting available to the shareholders of the financial
 institution, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Comptroller General;
 `(J) in any case in which funds remain after all depositors, creditors,
 other claimants, and administrative expenses are paid, the Corporation
 shall distribute such funds to the financial institution's shareholders
 or members along with the accounting specified in paragraph (I); and
 `(K) the Corporation may, any time five years after its appointment as
 receiver of a Federal financial institution, destroy any records of
 such institution which the Corporation in its discretion deems to be
 unnecessary.'.
 (3) Subsection (d) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) CORPORATION AS RECEIVER OR CONSERVATOR OF FEDERAL FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS- (1) Except as provided in section 21a of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act notwithstanding any other provison of law, State or Federal,
 or the constitution of any State, whenever a receiver or conservator is
 appointed for an insured Federal or District financial institution by
 the authority having supervision of such financial institution for the
 purpose of liquidation or winding up its affairs, the Corporation shall be
 appointed, and shall accept appointment, as such receiver or conservator. The
 Corporation may, at the discretion of the supervisory authority, be appointed
 conservator not for the purpose of liquidation or winding up the financial
 institution's affairs, and the Corporation may accept such appointment.
 `(2) As such receiver or conservator, the Corporation shall have all
 powers and duties set forth in this Act, and such other powers and duties
 possessed by receivers and conservators for Federal financial institutions
 under any other provisions of law, in addition to and not in derogation
 of the powers conferred in this Act;
 `(3) As such receiver or conservator, the Corporation shall not be subject
 to the direction or supervision of any other agency or Department in the
 exercise of its rights, powers, and privileges as receiver or conservator:
 Provided, That, in cases in which the financial institution continues to
 operate in conservatorship the institution shall remain subject to the
 supervision of its primary regulator.'.
 (4) Subsection (e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) CORPORATION AS RECEIVER OR CONSERVATOR OF STATE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS-
 (1)(A) Whenever the authority having supervision of any insured State
 financial institution (except a District financial institution) appoints
 a receiver or conservator for such State financial institution and tenders
 appointment to the Corporation, the Corporation may accept appointment as
 receiver or conservator.
 `(B) The Corporation as such receiver or conservator shall possess all
 the rights, powers, and privileges granted by State law to a receiver or
 conservator of a State financial institution of any kind, in addition to
 and not in derogation of the powers conferred upon the Corporation under
 subsection (c).
 `(C) As such receiver or conservator, the Corporation shall not be subject
 to the direction or supervision of any other agency or Department, State
 or Federal, in the exercise of its rights, powers, and privileges.
 `(2) Whenever the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System appoints
 a conservator or receiver under the provisions of section 5(d)(2)(C) of
 the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(2)(C),
 the Corporation shall be appointed.
 `(3) The Corporation shall have power and jurisdiction to appoint itself
 as sole conservator or receiver of an insured State financial institution
 in the event the Corporation determines--
 `(A) that--
 `(i) a conservator, receiver, or other legal custodian has been or is
 hereafter appointed for an insured State financial institution other than
 by the Federal Home Loan Bank System or by the Comptroller of the Currency
 and that the appointment of such conservator, receiver, or custodian, or any
 combination thereof, has been outstanding for a period of at least fifteen
 consecutive days, and that one or more of the depositors in such institution
 is unable to obtain a withdrawal of this deposit, in whole or in part; or
 `(ii) an insured State financial institution has been closed by or under
 the laws of any State; and
 `(B) that one or more of the grounds specified in paragraph (2)(A)
 of section 5(d) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 1464(d)) existed with respect to such financial institution at the
 time a conservator, receiver, or other legal custodian was appointed, or at
 the time such financial institution was closed, or exists thereafter during
 the appointment of the conservator, receiver, or other legal custodian or
 while the institution is closed.
 `(4) In any case where the Corporation is appointed conservator or receiver
 of an insured State financial institution--
 `(A) the provisions of this Act shall be applicable in the same manner
 and to the same extent as if such institution were a Federal financial
 institution with respect to which the Corporation had been appointed
 conservator or receiver; and
 `(B) the Corporation shall have authority to liquidate such financial
 institution in an orderly manner or to make such other disposition of
 the matter as it deems to be in the best interests of the institution,
 its savers, and the Corporation.
 `(5) The authority conferred by paragraphs (2) and (3) shall be in addition
 to, and not a limitation upon, appointment under paragraph (1).'.
 (5) Subsection (f) is amended to read as follows:
 `(f) PAYMENT OF INSURED DEPOSITS- (1) In cases of the liquidation, or
 other closing or winding up of the affairs of a closed insured financial
 institution or insured branch of a foreign bank, payment of the insured
 deposits in such financial institution or branch shall be made by the
 Corporation as soon as possible, subject to the provisions of subsection (g)
 of this section either by cash or by making available to each depositor a
 transferred desposit in a new financial institution in the same community
 or in another insured financial institution in an amount equal to the
 insured deposit of such depositor: Provided, however, That all payments
 made pursuant to this section on account of a closed bank or insured branch
 of a foreign bank shall be made only from the Bank Insurance Fund, and
 all payments made pursuant to this section on account of a closed savings
 association shall be made only from the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
 `(2) The Corporation, in its discretion, may require proof of claims to
 be filed and may approve or reject such claims. In the case of a disputed
 claim, the Corporation shall have the power to adjudicate such dispute
 according to rules and regulations established for that purpose. Final
 determination made by the Corporation shall be reviewable by the Court
 of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit or the Court of Appeals
 for the circuit where the financial institution is located and shall be
 upheld unless found to be arbitrary or capricious. In the absence of rules
 and regulations, the Corporation may require the final determination of
 a court of competent jurisdiction before paying such claim.'.
 (6) Subsection (g) is amended to read as follows:
 `(g) SUBROGATION- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, State
 or Federal, or the constitution of any State, the Corporation, upon the
 payment to any depositor as provided in subsection (f) of this section, or
 the assumption of any deposit pursuant to section 13, shall be subrogated to
 all rights of the depositor against the financial institution or branch to
 the extent of such payment. Such subrogation shall include the right on the
 part of the Corporation to receive the same dividends from the proceeds of
 the assets of such financial institution or branch and recoveries on account
 of stockholders' liability as would have been payable to the depositor on
 a claim for the insured deposit, but such depositor shall retain such claim
 for any uninsured or unassumed portion of the deposit: Provided, That, with
 respect to any bank which closes after May 25, 1938, the Corporation shall
 waive, in favor only of any person against whom stockholders' individual
 liability may be asserted, any claim on account of such liability in excess
 of the liability, if any, to the bank or its creditors, for the amount unpaid
 upon his stock in such bank; but any such waiver shall be effected in such
 manner and on such terms and conditions as will not increase recoveries or
 dividends on account of claims to which the Corporation is not subrogated:
 Provided further, That if the Corporation determines not to invoke the
 authority conferred in subsection (e)(3), the rights of depositors and
 other creditors of any State financial institution shall be determined in
 accordance with the applicable provisions of State law.'.
 (7) Subsection (h) is amended as follows--
 (a) the term `closed bank' is deleted, and the term `financial institution
 in default' is inserted in lieu thereof wherever it appears;
 (b) in paragraph (1), the words `closing of an insured bank' are deleted
 and the words `default of an insured financial institution' are inserted
 in lieu thereof;
 (c) in paragraph (2), the words, `State or Federal, or the constitution of
 any State,' are added after `Nothwithstanding any other provision of law'
 in the last sentence; and
 (d) in paragraph (4), the words `closed insured bank' are deleted, and
 the words `financial institution in default' are inserted in lieu thereof.
 (8) Subsection (i) is amended to read as follows:
 `(i) BRIDGE BANKS- (1) Organization-
 `(A) PURPOSE- When one or more insured financial institutions are in default
 or in anticipation of its or their becoming in default, the Corporation may,
 in its discretion, organize a bridge bank or banks with respect thereto
 and upon the granting of a charter to such bridge bank, the bridge bank may--
 `(i) assume such deposits of such insured financial institution or
 institutions that is or are in default or in danger of default as the
 Corporation may, in its discretion, determine to be appropriate;
 `(ii) assume such other liabilities (including liabilities associated with
 any trust business) of such insured financial institution or institutions
 that is or are in default or in danger of default as the Corporation may,
 in its discretion, determine to be appropriate;
 `(iii) purchase such assets (including assets associated with any trust
 business) of such insured financial institution or institutions that is
 or are in default or in danger of default as the Corporation may, in its
 discretion, determine to be appropriate; and
 `(iv) perform any other temporary function which the Corporation may,
 in its discretion, prescribe in accordance with this Act.
 `(B) ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION- The articles of association and organization
 certificate of a bridge bank as approved by the Corporation shall be
 executed by three representatives designated by the Corporation.
 `(C) NATIONAL BANK- A bridge bank shall be organized as a national bank.
 `(D) INTERIM DIRECTORS- A bridge bank shall have an interim board of
 directors consisting of not fewer than five nor more than ten members
 appointed by the Corporation.
 `(2) Chartering-
 `(A) CONDITIONS- A bridge bank shall be chartered by the Comptroller of the
 Currency as a national bank only if the Board of Directors determines that--
 `(i) the amount which is reasonably necessary to operate such bridge bank
 will not exceed the amount which is reasonably necessary to save the cost of
 liquidating, including paying the insured accounts of, one or more insured
 financial institutions in default with respect to which the bridge bank
 is chartered;
 `(ii) the continued operation of such insured financial institution or
 financial institutions in default with respect to which the bridge bank
 is chartered is essential to provide adequate banking services in the
 community where each such financial institution in default is located; or
 `(iii) the continued operation of such insured financial institution or
 institutions in default with respect to which the bridge bank is chartered
 is in the best interest of the depositors of such financial institution
 or institutions in default or the public.
 `(B) INSURED NATIONAL BANK- A bridge bank shall be an insured bank from
 the time it is chartered as a national bank.
 `(C) BRIDGE BANK TREATED AS BEING IN DEFAULT FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES-
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, State or Federal, or the
 constitution of any State, any bridge bank shall be treated as a financial
 institution in default at such times and for such purposes as the Corporation
 may, in its discretion, determine.
 `(D) MANAGEMENT- A bridge bank, upon the granting of its charter, shall
 be under the management of a board of directors consisting of not fewer
 than five nor more than ten members appointed by the Corporation.
 `(E) BYLAWS- The board of directors of a bridge bank shall adopt such
 bylaws as may be approved by the Corporation.
 `(3) TRANSFER OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Upon the granting of a charter to a bridge bank pursuant
 to this subsection, the Corporation, as receiver, or any other receiver
 appointed with respect to any insured financial institution in default with
 respect to which the bridge bank is chartered may, transfer any assets
 and liabilities of such financial institution in default to the bridge
 bank in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection. Thereafter, the
 Corporation, as receiver, or any other receiver appointed with respect
 to an insured financial institution in default may transfer any assets
 and liabilities of such insured financial institution in default as
 the Corporation may, in its discretion, determine to be appropriate in
 accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection. For purposes of this
 paragraph of this subsection, the trust business, including fiduciary
 appointments, of any insured financial institution in default, is included
 among its assets and liabilities. The transfer of any assets or liabilities
 associated with any trust business of an insured financial institution in
 default transferred to a bridge bank shall be effective without any further
 approval, assignment or consent with respect thereto, notwithstanding any
 other provision of law, State or Federal, or the constitution of any State.
 `(B) INTENT OF CONGRESS REGARDING CONTINUING OPERATIONS- It is the intent
 of the Congress that, in order to prevent unnecessary hardship or losses to
 the customers of any insured financial institution in default with respect
 to which a bridge bank is chartered, especially creditworthy farmers,
 small businesses, and households, the Corporation should--
 `(i) continue to honor commitments made by the financial institution in
 default to creditworthy customers, and
 `(ii) not interrupt or terminate adequately secured loans which are
 transferred under subparagraph (A) and are being repaid by the debtor in
 accordance with the terms of the loan instrument.
 `(4) POWERS OF BRIDGE BANKS- Each bridge bank chartered under this subsection
 shall have all corporate powers of, and be subject to the same provisions
 of law as, a national bank, except as otherwise provided in this subsection
 and except that--
 `(A) the Corporation may--
 `(i) remove the interim directors and directors of a bridge bank;
 `(ii) fix the compensation of members of the interim board of directors
 and the board of directors and senior management, as determined by the
 Corporation in its discretion, of a bridge bank; and
 `(iii) waive any requirement established under section 5145, 5146, 5147,
 5148, or 5149 of the Revised Statutes (relating to directors of national
 banks) or section 31 of the Banking Act of 1933 which would otherwise
 be applicable with respect to directors of a bridge bank by operation of
 paragraph (2)(B);
 `(B) the Corporation may idemnify the representatives for purposes of
 subparagraph (1)(B) and the interim directors, directors, officers,
 employees and agents of a bridge bank on such terms as the Corporation
 determines to be appropriate;
 `(C) no requirement under section 5138 of the Revised Statutes or any
 other provision of law relating to the capital of a national bank shall
 apply with respect to a bridge bank;
 `(D) the Comptroller of the Currency may establish a limitation on the
 extent to which any person may become indebted to a bridge bank without
 regard to the amount of the bridge bank's capital or surplus;
 `(E)(i) the board of directors of a bridge bank shall elect a chairperson
 who may also serve in the position of chief executive officer: Provided,
 That such person shall not serve either as chairperson or as chief executive
 officer without the prior approval of the Corporation;
 `(ii) the board of directors of a bridge bank may appoint a chief executive
 officer who is not also the chairperson: Provided, That such person shall
 not serve as chief executive officer without the prior approval of the
 Corporation;
 `(F) a bridge bank shall not be required to purchase stock of any Federal
 Reserve bank;
 `(G) the Comptroller of the Currency shall waive any requirement for
 a fidelity bond with respect to a bridge bank at the request of the
 Corporation;
 `(H) any action to which a bridge bank becomes a party by virtue of its
 acquisition of any assets or assumption of any liabilities of a financial
 institution in default shall be stayed from further proceedings for a
 period of up to ninety days at the request of the bridge bank;
 `(I) no agreement which tends to diminish or defeat the right, title or
 interest of a bridge bank in any asset of an insured financial institution
 in default acquired by it shall be valid against the bridge bank unless
 such agreement--
 `(i) shall be in writing,
 `(ii) shall have been executed by such insured financial institution in
 default and the person or persons claiming an adverse interest thereunder,
 including the obligor, contemporaneously with the acquisition of the asset
 by such insured financial institution in default,
 `(iii) shall have been approved by the board of directors of such insured
 financial institution in default or its loan committee, which approval
 shall be reflected in the minutes of said board or committee, and
 `(iv) shall have been, continuously from the time of its execution, an
 official record of such insured financial institution in default; and
 `(J) except with the prior approval of the Corporation, a bridge bank may
 not, in any transaction or series of transactions, issue capital stock
 or be a party to any merger, consolidation, disposition of assets or
 liabilities, sale or exchange of capital stock, or similar transaction,
 or change its charter.
 `(5) CAPITAL-
 `(A) NO CAPITAL REQUIRED- The Corporation shall not be required to--
 `(i) issue any capital stock on behalf of a bridge bank chartered under
 this subsection; or
 `(ii) purchase any capital stock of a bridge bank: Provided, That
 notwithstanding any other provision of law, State or Federal, or the
 constitution of any State, the Corporation may purchase and retain capital
 stock of a bridge bank in such amounts and on such terms as the Corporation,
 in its discretion, determines to be appropriate.
 `(B) OPERATING FUNDS IN LIEU OF CAPITAL- Upon the organization of a bridge
 bank, and thereafter, as the Board of Directors may, in its discretion,
 determine to be necessary or advisable, the Corporation may make available
 to the bridge bank, upon such terms and conditions and in such form and
 amounts as the Corporation may in its discretion determine, funds for the
 operation of the bridge bank.
 `(C) AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CAPITAL STOCK- Whenever the Board of Directors
 determines it is advisable to do so, the Corporation shall cause capital
 stock of a bridge bank to be issued and offered for sale in such amounts
 and on such terms and conditions as the Corporation may, in its discretion,
 determine.
 `(6) NO FEDERAL STATUS-
 `(A) AGENCY STATUS- A bridge bank is not an agency, establishment, or
 instrumentality of the United States.
 `(B) EMPLOYEE STATUS- Representatives for purposes of subparagraph (1)(B),
 interim directors, directors, officers, employees, or agents of a bridge
 bank are not, solely by virtue of service in any such capacity, officers or
 employees of the United States for purposes of title 5, United States Code,
 or any other provision of law. Any employee of the Corporation or of any
 Federal instrumentality who serves at the request of the Corporation as
 a representative for purposes of subparagraph (1)(B), interim director,
 director, officer, employee or agent of a bridge bank shall not--
 `(i) solely by virtue of service in any such capacity lose any existing
 status as an officer or employee of the United States for purposes of
 title 5, United States Code, or any other provision of law, or
 `(ii) receive any salary or benefits for service in any such capacity
 with respect to a bridge bank in addition to such salary or benefits
 as are obtained through employment with the Corporation or such Federal
 instrumentality.
 `(7) ASSISTANCE AUTHORIZED- The Corporation may, in its discretion, provide
 assistance under section 13(c) to facilitate any transaction contemplated
 in subparagraph (10)(A) (i), (ii) or (iii) with respect to a bridge bank in
 the same manner and to the same extent as such assistance may be provided
 under such section with respect to an insured financial institution in
 default, or to facilitate a bridge bank's acquisition of any assets or the
 assumption of any liabilities of an insured financial institution in default.
 `(8) ACQUISITION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any transaction with respect to the merger or sale of
 a bridge bank requiring approval under section 18(c), unless immediate
 action is necessary to prevent the probable failure of an insured financial
 institution, shall be deemed to be an emergency requiring expeditious
 action. The responsible agency shall notify the Attorney General thereof
 and if a report on competitive factors is requested within ten days,
 such transaction may not be consummated before the fifth calendar day
 after the date of approval by the responsible agency with respect thereto.
 `(B) BY OUT-OF-STATE HOLDING COMPANY- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, State or Federal, or the constitution of any State, any financial
 institution, including an out-of-State financial institution, or any
 out-of-State financial institution holding company may acquire and retain
 the capital stock or assets of, or otherwise acquire and retain a bridge
 bank: Provided, That the bridge bank at any time had assets aggregating
 $500,000,000 or more, as determined by the Corporation on the basis of the
 bridge bank's reports of condition or on the basis of the last available
 reports of condition or thrift financial reports of any insured financial
 institution in default, which institution has been acquired, or whose
 assets have been acquired, by the bridge bank: And provided further,
 That the acquiring entity may acquire the bridge bank only in the same
 manner and to the same extent as such entity may acquire an insured bank
 in default under section 13(f)(2).
 `(9) CORPORATE EXISTENCE OF BRIDGE BANK- Subject to paragraphs (10) and
 (11) of this subsection, the corporate existence of a bridge bank shall
 not exceed the period of two years from the date it is granted a charter:
 Provided, That the Board of directors may, in its discretion, extend the
 corporate existence of the bridge bank for additional three one-year periods.
 `(10) TERMINATION OF BRIDGE BANK STATUS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A bridge bank shall terminate its status as such upon
 the earliest to occur of the following--
 `(i) the merger or consolidation of the bridge bank with a financial
 institution that is not a bridge bank: Provided, That in connection with
 such a transaction, the bridge bank may request conversion of its charter
 to that of a financial institution that is not a bridge bank;
 `(ii) the sale of all or substantially all of the capital stock of the
 bridge bank to an entity other than the Corporation and other than another
 bridge bank;
 `(iii) the assumption of all or substantially all of the deposits and other
 liabilities of the bridge bank by a financial institution holding company
 or a financial institution that is not a bridge bank, or the acquisition of
 all or substantially all of the assets of the bridge bank by a financial
 institution holding company, a financial institution that is not a bridge
 bank, or other entity as permitted under applicable law;
 `(iv) the dissolution of the bridge bank by the Corporation in accordance
 with paragraph (11) of this subsection prior to the initial two-year period
 of corporate existence of the bridge bank and any extension thereof in
 accordance with paragraph (9) of this subsection; and
 `(v) the expiration of the initial two-year period of corporate existence
 of the bridge bank and any extension thereof in accordance with paragraph
 (9) of this subsection.
 `(11) DISSOLUTION OF BRIDGE BANK-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, State or
 Federal, or the constitution of any State--
 `(i) the Board of Directors may, in its discretion, dissolve a bridge bank
 in accordance with this paragraph (11) at any time during the corporate
 existence of a bridge bank if the Board of Directors determines that the
 amount which is reasonably necessary to dissolve the bridge bank will not
 exceed the amount which is reasonably necessary to either continue operation
 of the bridge bank or effect a transaction with respect to the bridge bank
 as contemplated in subparagraph (10)(A)(i), (ii) or (iii) of this subsection;
 `(ii) the Board of Directors may, in its discretion, commence such
 dissolution proceedings in accordance with this paragraph (11) with respect
 to a bridge bank as the Board of Directors determines to be necessary
 following the consummation of a transaction contemplated in subparagraph
 (10)(A)(ii) or (iii); and
 `(iii) the Board of Directors shall commence dissolution proceedings in
 accordance with this paragraph (11) upon the expiration of the period
 of corporate existence of a bridge bank as provided in paragraph (9)
 of this subsection.
 `(B) PROCEDURES- The Comptroller of the Currency shall appoint the
 Corporation receiver for a bridge bank upon certification by the Board
 of Directors to the Comptroller of the Currency of its determination to
 dissolve the bridge bank. The Corporation as such receiver shall wind
 up the affairs of the bridge bank in conformity with the provisions of
 law relating to the liquidation of closed national banks. With respect to
 any such bridge bank, the Corporation as such receiver shall have all the
 rights, powers and privileges now possessed or hereafter granted by law to a
 receiver of a national bank or a District bank and notwithstanding any other
 provision of law in the exercise of such rights, powers, and privileges
 the Corporation shall not be subject to the direction or supervision of
 the Secretary of the Treasury or the Comptroller of the Currency.
 `(12)(A) Each bridge bank established under this subsection may operate
 branches in only one state.
 `(B) The Corporation may, in the Corporation's discretion, organize two or
 more bridge banks under this subsection to assume any deposits of, assume
 any other liabilities of, and purchase any assets of a single financial
 institution in default.'.
 (9) Subsection (j) is amended by deleting the term `closed bank' and
 inserting `financial institution in default' in lieu thereof.
 (10) By adding new subsections (k), (l) and (m) at the end thereof to read
 as follows:
 `(k) VALUATION OF CLAIMS AGAINST FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN DEFAULT-
 Notwithstanding any other law, State or Federal, or the constitution of
 any State, and regardless of the method which the Corporation determines
 to utilize with respect to an insured financial institution in default or
 in danger of default, including but not limited to transactions authorized
 under subsection (i) and under section 13(c)(2)(A), the following provisions
 shall govern the rights of the creditors (other than insured depositors)
 of such financial institution:
 `(1) MAXIMUM LIABILITY- The maximum liability of the Corporation to
 any person having a claim against the estate of an insured financial
 institution in default shall be equal to the amount such claimant would have
 received from the estate of the financial institution if the Corporation
 had liquidated such estate. In the case of an insured financial institution
 which the Corporation elects to operate, the point in time for determining
 what such claimant will receive from the estate of the financial institution
 had the Corporation liquidated such estate shall be the date the receiver
 ceases operating the financial institution, and begins to wind up the
 affairs of the financial institution, and the Corporation shall not be
 liable to any such claimant should the estate of the financial institution
 be diminished from the time the Corporation begins operating the financial
 institution to the time the Corporation ceases operating the financial
 institution and begins to wind up the affairs of the financial institution,
 absent a finding of bad faith on the part of the Corporation; and
 `(2) ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS AUTHORIZED- The Corporation may, in its discretion,
 use its own resources to make additional payments or credit additional
 amounts to or with respect to or for the account of any claimant or category
 of claimants: Provided, That the Corporation shall not be obligated,
 as a result of having made any such payment or credited any such amount
 to or with respect to or for the account of any claimant or category of
 claimants, to make payments to any other claimant or category or claimants:
 And provided further--
 `(A) That if the financial institution in default is a Bank Insurance Fund
 member, the Corporation may only make such payments out of fund held in
 the Bank Insurance Fund of the Deposit Insurance Fund; and
 `(B) That if the financial institution in default is a Savings Association
 Insurance Fund member, the Corporation may only make such payments out
 of funds held in the Savings Association Insurance Fund of the Deposit
 Insurance Fund.
 `(3) The Corporation may make the payments or credit the amounts specified
 in paragraph (2) directly to the claimants or may make such payments or
 credit such amounts to an open insured financial institution to induce
 the open insured financial institution to accept liability for such claims.
 `(l) RULE-MAKING AND CLAIMS DETERMINATION AUTHORIZED- (1) The Corporation
 shall have power to make rules and regulations for the conduct of
 conservatorships and of receiverships and the Corporation may, by regulation
 or order, provide for the exercise of functions by members or stockholders,
 directors, or officers of a financial institution during conservatorship
 or receivership. The Corporation shall also have the power to determine
 claims in accordance with rules and regulations it shall prescribe and
 subject to judicial review as herein provided.
 `(2) The authority to determine claims shall only be exercised after the
 Corporation has established rules or regulations governing the processing
 of claims, the accounting of estate funds, and the distributing of residual
 funds to shareholders. Final determinations made by the Corporation with
 respect to claims asserted against the estate of a financial institution
 shall be reviewable by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
 Circuit or the Court of Appeals for the circuit where the financial
 institution is located and shall be upheld unless found to be arbitrary
 or capricious.
 `(3) In the absence of rules and regulations established by the Corporation
 for the resolution of claims against the estate of the financial institution,
 any action or proceeding against a financial institution for which the
 Corporation has been appointed receiver, or against the Corporation as
 receiver of such financial institution, shall be brought in the district or
 territorial court of the United States held within the district in which
 that financial institution's principal place of business is located, or,
 in the event any State, county, or municipal court has jurisdiction over
 such an action or proceeding, in such court in the county or city in which
 the financial institution's principal place of business is located.
 `(m) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Except as provided in this section, no court may take
 any action, except at the request of the Board of Directors by regulation
 or order, to restrain or affect the exercise of powers or functions of
 the Corporation as a conservator or receiver.'.
 SEC. 212. FSLIC RESOLUTION FUND- There is hereby added after Section 11
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act a new section 11A (12 U.S.C. 1821A)
 to read as follows:
 `SEC. 11A. FSLIC RESOLUTION FUND- (a) ESTABLISHED- There is hereby
 established a separate fund to be designated as the FSLIC Resolution Fund
 which shall be managed by the Corporation and separately maintained and
 not commingled. On the date of the dissolution of the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation in accordance with section 401 of the Financial
 Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, all reserves
 and all other assets of any kind, and debts, obligations, contracts and
 other liabilities of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,
 matured or unmatured, accrued, absolute, contingent, or otherwise shall
 hereby be transferred in their entirety to the FSLIC Resolution Fund;
 provided however that such liabilities transferred to the FSLIC Resolution
 Fund shall not include liabilities specifically transferred pursuant
 to section 21a of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act. Such reserves assets,
 debts, obligations, contracts, or other liabilities as are so transferred
 shall be exclusive assets and liabilities of the FSLIC Resolution Fund and
 not of the Corporation and shall not be consolidated with the assets and
 liabilities of the Deposit Insurance Fund or the Corporation for accounting
 or reporting or any other purpose.
 `(b) SOURCE OF FUNDS- The FSLIC Resolution Fund shall be funded from the
 following sources in the listed priority to the extent funds are needed:
 (i) miscellaneous income from assets of the Federal Savings and Loan
 Insurance Corporation that were transferred to the FSLIC Resolution Fund on
 the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
 Enforcement Act of 1989; (ii) the proceeds of the resolution of insolvent
 thrift institutions which became insolvent prior to December 31, 1988,
 to the extent such funds are not required by the Resolution Funding
 Corporation pursuant to section 21b of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act;
 (iii) proceeds from borrowings by the Financing Corporation pursuant to
 section 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act; (iv) all amounts assessed
 Savings Association Insurance Fund members by the Corporation pursuant to
 section 7 from the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, and not required by the Financing
 Corporation pursuant to section 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, or
 for the Resolution Trust Corporation pursuant to section 21 of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Act, which shall be covered into the FSLIC Resolution Fund
 until December 31, 1991.
 `(c) TREASURY BACKUP- In the event that all the above funds are insufficient
 for the purposes of the FSLIC Resolution Fund, the Secretary of the Treasury
 shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, provide such excess
 funds determined by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the
 Secretary to be necessary for FLSIC Resolution Fund purposes. There are
 hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury,
 without fiscal year limitation, such sums as may be necessary to carry
 out the provisions of this paragraph.
 `(d) LEGAL PROCEEDINGS- Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 any judgment resulting from civil action, suit, or proceeding to which
 the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation was a party prior to
 its dissolution hereunder, or which is initiated against the Corporation
 or its assets thereafter, shall be limited to the assets of the FSLIC
 Resolution Fund.
 `(e) DISSOLUTION- The FSLIC Resolution Fund shall be dissolved upon
 satisfaction of all debts and liabilities and sale of all assets acquired in
 case resolutions and otherwise. Upon dissolution any remaining funds shall
 be covered into the Treasury: Provided, That any tangible assets, including
 offices and office supplies, shall be transferred to the Corporation for
 use by and to be held as asset of the Savings Association Insurance Fund.'.
 SEC. 213. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 12- Section 12 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1822) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) The words `closed bank' are deleted wherever they occur, and the words
 `financial institution in default' are inserted in lieu thereof.
 (2) Subsection (a) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) BOND NOT REQUIRED; AGENTS; FEE- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, State or Federal, or the constitution of any State, the Corporation
 as receiver of an insured financial institution or branch of a foreign
 bank shall not be required to furnish bond and shall have the right to
 appoint an agent or agents to assist it in its duties as such receiver,
 and all fees, compensation, and expenses of liquidation and administration
 thereof shall be fixed by the Corporation, and may be paid by it out of
 funds coming into its possession as such receiver.'.
 (3) In subsection (d), the words `as a stockholder or the closed bank, or
 of any liability of such depositor' are deleted; and the words `such bank'
 are deleted and `such financial institution' are inserted in lieu thereof.
 SEC. 214. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 13- Section 13 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1823) is amended as follows:
 (1) Subsection (a) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) INVESTMENT OF CORPORATION FUNDS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- Funds belonging to the Corporation and held in either the
 Bank Insurance Fund or the Savings Association Insurance Fund that are not
 otherwise employed shall be invested in obligations of the United States
 or in obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United
 States: Provided, That funds held in the Bank Insurance Fund and the Savings
 Association Insurance Fund shall be invested separately and not commingled.
 `(2) LIMITATION- The Corporation shall not sell or purchase any such
 obligations for its own account and in its own right and interest, at any
 one time aggregating in excess of $100,000, without the approval of the
 Secretary of the Treasury. The Secretary of the Treasury may waive the
 requirement of his approval with respect to any transaction or classes of
 transactions subject to the provisions of this subsection for such period
 of time and under such conditions as he may determine.'.
 (2) Subsection (b) is amended as follows:
 (a) by deleting the words `banking and checking' wherever they occur,
 and inserting the word `depository' in lieu thereof;
 (b) by deleting the word `bank' wherever it occurs, and inserting the words
 `financial institution' in lieu thereof, except that the phrase `Federal
 Reserve bank' shall remain unchanged.
 (3) Subsection (c) is amended as follows--
 (a) the words `closing' or `closed' are deleted wherever they occur, and the
 words `default' or `in default' are inserted in lieu thereof respectively;
 (b) notwithstanding Section 201 of this Act, the term `closed insured bank'
 is deleted wherever it occurs and the term `insured financial institution
 in default' is inserted in lieu thereof;
 (c) in subparagraph (2)(A), the words `insured institution' are deleted
 wherever they occur and the words `another insured financial institution'
 are inserted in subparagraph (2)(A) in lieu thereof, and the words `such
 other insured financial institution' are inserted in subparagraph (2)(A)
 (ii) and (iii) in lieu thereof;
 (d) in paragraph (2), a new subparagraph (2)(C) is added to read as follows:
 `(C) Any action to which the Corporation is or becomes a party by virtue
 of its acquisition of any asset or exercise of any other authority set
 forth in this section shall be stayed for a period of ninety days at the
 request of the Corporation.';
 (e) in paragraph (3) the words `section 13(f) of this Act' are deleted,
 and the words `subsections (f) and (g) hereof' are inserted in lieu thereof;
 (f) in paragraph (4), the word `banking' is deleted and the word `financial'
 is inserted in lieu thereof, and the following new sentences are inserted
 immediately after the period at the end of paragraph (A): `In determining
 the cost of assistance, the Corporation shall consider the immediate and
 long-term obligations of the Corporation with respect to such assistance,
 including contingent liabilities. The Corporation shall also consider
 the Federal tax revenues foregone by the government, to the extent
 reasonably ascertainable, as a result of the provisions of the Technical
 and Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988 providing specific tax benefits to
 acquirers of financial institutions in default or in danger of default or
 to such institutions as a result of assistance provided by the Corporation,
 or any similar statutory provision.'; and
 (g) by redesignating existing paragraph (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7)
 and (8); and by deleting existing paragraph (8); and by inserting a new
 paragraph (6) to read as follows:
 `(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, State or Federal, or
 the constitution of any State, the transfer of any assets or liabilities
 associated with any trust business of an insured financial institution in
 default under subparagraph (2)(A) shall be effective without any further
 approval, assignment, or consent with respect thereto.'.
 (4) Subsections (d) and (e) are amended to read as follows:
 `(d) SALE OF ASSETS TO CORPORATION- Conservators, receivers, or liquidators
 of insured financial institutions in default shall be entitled to offer the
 assets of such financial institutions for sale to the Corporation or as
 security for loans from the Corporation. The proceeds of every such sale
 or loan shall be utilized for the same purposes and in the same manner as
 other funds realized from the liquidation of the assets of such financial
 institutions. The Corporation, in its discretion, may make loans on the
 security of or may purchase and liquidate or sell any part of the assets of
 an insured financial institution which is now or may hereafter be in default.
 `(e) AGREEMENTS AGAINST INTERESTS OF CORPORATION- No agreement which tends
 to diminish or defeat the right, title or interest of the Corporation in any
 asset acquired by it under this section or section 11, either as security for
 a loan or by purchase or as receiver of any insured financial institution,
 shall be valid against the Corporation unless such agreement (1) shall be
 in writing, (2) shall have been executed by the financial institution and
 the person or persons claiming an adverse interest thereunder, including
 the obligor, contemporaneously with the acquisition of the asset by
 the financial institution, (3) shall have been approved by the board
 of directors of the financial institution or its loan committee, which
 approval shall be reflected in the minutes of said board or committee,
 and (4) shall have been, continuously, from the time of its execution,
 an official record of the financial institution.'.
 (5) Subsection (f) is amended as follows:
 (a) notwithstanding section 201 of this Act, subsection (f) shall not be
 amended to delete the term `insured bank' and insert the term `insured
 financial institution';
 (b) the words `closed' and `closing' are deleted wherever they occur and the
 words `in default' or `default' are inserted in lieu thereof respectively;
 (c) in subparagraph (2)(B)(iii) the phrase `a unanimous vote' is replaced by
 `a vote of 75 per centum of';
 (d) the word `depository' is deleted wherever it occurs and the word
 `financial' is inserted in lieu thereof;
 (e) in subparagraph (3)(E) the word `relevant' is added before the words
 `State supervisor'; and a new sentence is added at the end thereof to read as
 follows: `The `relevant State supervisor' means the State supervisor having
 authority to supervise the financial institution in danger of default.'.
 (f) in subparagraph (6)(A) the words `the offeror which made the initial
 lowest acceptable offer and' are inserted after `the Corporation shall
 permit';
 (g) paragraph (7) is amended by adding a new subparagraph (7)(C) to read
 as follows:
 `(C) if in the opinion of the Corporation the acquisition threatens the
 safety and soundness of the acquiror or does not result in the future
 viability of the resulting financial institution.';
 (h) in paragraph (8), subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), (D), (F), and (G)
 are deleted and subparagraph (E) is redesignated to become paragraph (8); and
 (i) paragraph (9) is amended as follows: (i) in the paragraph heading the
 word `nonbank' is deleted and the word `certain' is inserted in lieu thereof;
 (ii) in subparagraph (9)(A), the words `, other than a subsidiary that
 is an insured bank,' are added after the word `subsidiary' and the phrase
 `which is not an insured bank' is deleted, and (iii) in subparagraph (9)(B)
 the words `or an affiliate of an insured bank' are added after the words
 `intermediate holding company;' in the sentence.
 (6) In subsection (h), the terms `a closed insured bank', `closing'
 and `insurance fund' are deleted, and the terms `an insured financial
 institution in default,' `default' and `Bank Insurance Fund' are inserted
 in lieu thereof respectively.
 (7) Subsection (i) is amended:
 (a) by inserting the word `financial' before the word `institution'
 wherever it occurs;
 (b) in subparagraph (1)(C) by deleting the words `chartered bank' and
 inserting `financing institution' in lieu thereof, by adding the words `a
 savings association,' after `State member bank,' and by adding `Chairman
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank System,' after `Federal Reserve System,'; and
 (c) in paragraph (5)(C) by deleting the words `greater than zero and'.
 (8) Section 408(m) of the National Housing Act, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 1730a(m)), is hereby transferred to and shall become part of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as amended, at section 13 and shall
 become subsection (k) thereof (12 U.S.C. 1823(k)), and is further amended
 as follows:
 (a) after transfer to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, the term
 `Corporation' shall mean the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 (b) by deleting the words `insured institution', `an insured institution' and
 `insured institutions' wherever they appear and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Savings Association Insurance Fund member', `a Savings Association Fund
 member' and `Savings Association Insurance Fund members' respectively;
 (c) by deleting the words `depository institution' and `depository
 institutions' wherever they occur and inserting in lieu thereof `financial
 institution' and `financial institutions' respectively;
 (d) notwithstanding section 201 of this Act, subparagraph (A)(i) of paragraph
 (1) shall not be amended to delete the term `insured bank' and insert the
 term `insured financial institution'.
 (e) in subparagraph (1)(A)(i), the phrase `this section' is deleted and
 the phrase `section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended,'
 is inserted in lieu thereof, and the words `section 1729(f) of this title'
 are deleted, and the words `subsection (c)' are inserted in lieu thereof;
 (f) in subparagraph (1)(A)(iii), the words `the party thereto that is not
 an insured institution' are deleted, and the words `every party thereto'
 are inserted in lieu thereof;
 (g) the language in subparagraph (1)(A)(iv) is deleted and the following
 language is inserted in lieu thereof: `In authorizing any transactions under
 this subsection, the Corporation must obtain the prior concurrence of (i)
 the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System in connection with the
 override of any provisions of the laws or constitution of any State or any
 provision of Federal law other than section 10(e)(3) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933, as amended; and (ii) the Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System in connection with the override of the provisions
 of the Federal Reserve Act or the Bank Holding Company Act.';
 (h) subparagraph (1)(B)(iii) is amended--
 (i) by deleting in the first sentence everything after the words `only by',
 and inserting in lieu thereof the words `a vote of 75 per centum or more
 of the voting members of the Board of Directors.'; and
 (ii) by deleting in the second sentence the words `Federal Home Loan Bank
 Board' and inserting in lieu thereof the words `the Corporation';
 (i) subparagraph (3)(A) is amended--
 (i) by deleting the words `savings and loan holding company' and inserting
 `holding company that controls a Savings Association Insurance Fund member'
 in lieu thereof; and
 (ii) by inserting after the words `shall permit' the words `the offer or
 which made the lowest acceptable offer and';
 (j) in subparagraph (3)(C), insert the word `financial' before the words
 `institution' and `institutions';
 (k) amend paragraph (4)--
 (i) by deleting the language in subparagraph (A) and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following language: `the term `of the same type' means financial
 institutions that are `savings associations' as defined in section 10(a)
 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended, or holding companies
 thereof; and'; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by deleting the words `the term `in-State
 depository institution or in-State depository institution holding company'
 means' and inserting in lieu thereof the words `a financial institution is
 `within the same State' where the financial institution is'.
 SEC. 215. BORROWING AUTHORITY- Section 14 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1824) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) by deleting `$3,000,000,000' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `$5,000,000,000, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury';
 and
 (2) by adding at the end of the section the following: `The Corporation may
 employ such funds for purposes of the Bank Insurance Fund or the Savings
 Association Insurance Fund and the borrowing shall become a liability of
 each such fund to the extent funds are employed therefore.'.
 SEC. 216. LIMITATION ON BORROWINGS- Section 15 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1825) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) by redesignating the existing paragraph as subsection (a) and by adding
 at the end thereof the following: `and such State, territorial, county,
 municipal or local taxation shall be the only type of State, territorial,
 county, municipal, or local tax to which the Corporation for itself or as
 receiver of an insured financial institution shall be subjected. Further,
 the failure of an insured financial institution to pay or remit any State,
 territorial, county, municipal, or other local tax shall not subject the
 Corporation as receiver or conservator of that financial institution to any
 penalty, forfeiture, or limitation with respect to the enforceability of
 any right, title, or interest the Corporation as receiver or conservator
 may have and such failure to pay the tax shall only result in a claim for
 such tax against the estate of the financial institution.'; and
 (2) by adding a new subparagraph (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) All notes, debentures, bonds, or other similar obligations including
 estimated losses for guarantees or other liabilities, of the Bank Insurance
 Fund or the Savings Association Insurance Fund (other than obligations to the
 Treasury) outstanding at any one time, may not exceed 50 per centum of the
 adjusted net worth of the Bank Insurance Fund or the Savings Association
 Insurance Fund, respectively, as calculated based on the most recent
 audit by the General Accounting Office, or $10,000,000,000 to each fund,
 whichever is less.'.
 SEC. 217. REPORTS- Section 17 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1827) is hereby amended--
 (1) by striking out subsection (a) and inserting in lieu thereof the
 following:
 `(a) The Corporation shall annually submit a full report of its operations,
 activities, budget, receipts and expenditures for the preceding twelve-month
 period. Such report shall be submitted to the President of the Senate and
 the Speaker of the House of Representatives, who shall cause the same to
 be printed for the information of Congress, and the President as soon as
 practicable after the first day of January each year.'; and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d) as (c), (d), and (e)
 respectively, and by adding a new subsection (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) As soon as practicable, prior to the beginning of each fiscal quarter,
 the Corporation shall submit a report to the Secretary of the Treasury and
 the Director of the Office of Management and Budget with respect to the
 Corporation's financial operating plans and forecasts (including estimates
 of actual and future spending, and estimates of actual and future non-cash
 obligations) taking into acccount the Corporation's financial commitments,
 guarantees and other contingent liabilities. Nothing herein implies in
 and of itself any obligation on the part of the Corporation to obtain
 the consent or approval of the Secretary or the Director of the plans and
 forecasts provided pursuant hereto.'.
 SEC. 218. REGULATIONS GOVERNING INSURED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS- Section
 18 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is hereby amended
 as follows:
 (1) Subsection (a) is amended by adding before the period in the first
 sentence the following: `; Provided further, That such signs displayed
 by financial institutions will further represent whether the financial
 institution is a Bank Insurance Fund member or a Savings Association
 Insurance Fund member.'.
 (2) Subsection (c) is amended--
 (a) in paragraph (2), by deleting subparagraph (C) and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following:
 `(C) the Corporation if the acquiring, assuming, or resulting bank is to
 be a State nonmember insured bank (except a District bank or a savings
 bank supervised by the Federal Home Loan Bank System); and
 `(D) the Federal Home Loan Bank System if the acquiring, assuming, or
 resulting institution is to be a savings association.';
 (b) by deleting subparagraph (12);
 (c) in subparagraphs (3), (4), (6), (7), and (9), by adding after the word
 `bank' or `banks' each time it appears, the words `or savings association'
 or `or savings associations', respectively;
 (d) in subparagraph (3), the word `failure' is deleted, and the word
 `default' is added in lieu thereof.
 (3) Subsection (d) is amended by adding after `(except a District bank)'
 each time they appear, the words `or savings bank supervised by the Federal
 Home Loan Bank System.
 (4) Subsection (i) is amended--
 (a) in paragraph (1) by deleting the words `nonmember bank (except a District
 bank)' and replacing in lieu thereof the words `financial institution
 (except a member bank or a District bank)';
(b) in paragraph (2):
 (i) by adding before the period the following: `; (D) the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System if the resulting institution is to be a State savings
 association or a savings bank to be supervised by the Federal Home Loan
 Bank System; and '; and
 (ii) in subsection (C), by adding after the words `resulting bank' the
 words `or savings association', and by adding after the words `(except a
 District bank)' the words `a savings bank to be supervised by the Federal
 Home Loan Bank System).';
 (5) By inserting the following new subsections after subsection (1) therein:
 `(m) Activities of Savings Associations Subsidiaries-
 `(1) PROCEDURES- Whenever an insured savings association establishes or
 acquires control of a company or whenever an insured savings association
 elects to conduct any new activity through a company that the insured
 savings association controls, the insured savings association:
 `(A) shall notify the Corporation and the Federal Home Loan Bank System not
 less than thirty days prior to the establishment, or acquisition, of any
 such new company, and not less than thirty days prior to the commencement
 of any such activity, and in either case shall provide at that time such
 information as each such agency may, by regulation, require;
 `(B) except as provided in subsection 5(t)(1) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act, as amended, shall deduct its entire investment in and loans and
 other financial accommodations to the company from its own capital for
 the purposes of determining capital adequacy if the company is engaged in
 activities not permissible for a national bank; and
 `(C) shall conduct the activities of the company in accordance with such
 rules, regulations and orders as may be established by the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System.
 `(2) ENFORCEMENT POWERS- With respect to any company controlled by an
 insured savings association:
 `(A) the Corporation and the Federal Home Loan Bank System shall each have,
 with respect to such company, the respective powers and authorities that
 each may possess with respect to the insured savings association pursuant
 to this section or to section 8; and
 `(B) the Federal Home Loan Bank System shall have authority to determine,
 after notice and opportunity for hearing, that the continuation by
 the insured savings association of its ownership or control of, or its
 relationship to, the company constitutes a serious risk to the financial
 safety, soundness or stability of the insured savings association is
 inconsistent with sound banking principles or with the purposes of this Act,
 and upon making any such determination the agency shall have authority to
 order the insured savings association to divest itself of control of the
 company; the Federal Home Loan Bank System shall also have the authority to
 take any other corrective measures with respect to the company, including
 the authority to have the company terminate the activities or operations
 posing such risks, as the agency may deem appropriate.
 `(3) Activities incompatible with deposit insurance-
 `(A) The Corporation shall have authority to determine by regulation of
 general applicability to all State-chartered Savings Association Insurance
 Fund members that any specific activity after determination by the Board
 of Directors poses a serious threat to the Savings Association Insurance
 Fund: Provided, That prior to adopting any such regulation, the Corporation
 shall consult with the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System and
 shall provide appropriate State supervisors the opportunity to review such
 regulation and comment thereon, and the Corporation shall specifically
 take such comments into consideration. Upon issuing such a regulation
 with respect to an activity, the Corporation may order that no Savings
 Association Insurance Fund member may engage in any activity directly that
 is not permissible for a federal savings and loan association under the
 Home Owners' Loan Act. In addition, no Savings Association Insurance Fund
 member shall be or become liable for the liabilities or obligations arising
 out of any such activity conducted indirectly, except to the extent such
 liability or obligation (i) is in writing, (ii) shall have been executed by
 the member and person or entity to whom the liability or obligation is owed
 either contemporaneously with the creation of the liability or obligation,
 or if the liability or obligation was created prior to the effective date
 of the FIRREA, within one hundred and twenty days of the effective date
 of the FIRREA, (iii) has been approved by the Board of Directors or an
 official committee of the member, and (iv) shall have been, continuously,
 from the time of its creation, an offical record of the bank.
 `(B) Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System to issue regulations to promote safety and soundness or
 to enforce compliance with other applicable laws.
 `(4) `COMPANY' DEFINED- As used in this subsection (m), the term `company'
 shall not include an insured financial institution.
 `(5) Nothing contained in subsection (m) shall derogate from the rights
 and authorities of the Corporation under other provisions of law.'.
 SEC. 219. NONDISCRIMINATION- Section 22 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1830) is hereby amended to read as follows: `It is not
 the purpose of this chapter to discriminate in any manner against State
 nonmember banks or State savings associations and in favor of national
 or member banks or Federal savings associations, respectively; but the
 purpose is to provide all banks and savings associations with the same
 opportunity to obtain and enjoy the benefits of this chapter.'.
TITLE III--SAVINGS ASSOCIATION SUPERVISION IMPROVEMENTS
 SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS- Section 2 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933
 (12 U.S.C. 1462) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(a) The term `Chairman' means the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank System.';
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) The term `System' means the `Federal Home Loan Bank System',
 (3) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 `(c) The term `savings association' means any institution that was
 supervised by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation immediately
 prior to the enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery,
 and Enforcement Act of 1989, a Federal savings and loan association or
 Federal savings bank, a building and loan, savings and loan or homestead
 association, a cooperative bank or state savings bank that is a member of
 the Savings Association Insurance Fund, the deposits of which are insured
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 (4) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
 `(d) The term `federal savings association' means a Federal savings and
 loan association or a Federal savings bank chartered under section 5 of
 this title.',
 (5) by adding new subsection (e) to read as follows:
 `(e) The term `Federal banking agencies' means the Office of the Comptroller
 of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
 and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.'.
 SEC. 302. SUPERVISION OF SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS- (a) The Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933, as amended, is hereby further amended by inserting a new
 section 3 as follows:
 `Sec. 3- SUPERVISION OF SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS- (a) The Chairman is authorized
 to provide for the examination, safe and sound operation, and regulation
 of savings associations. The Chairman may issue rules and regulations,
 including regulations defining the terms used in this chapter, to carry
 out the responsibilities of the Chairman, or the System. The authorities
 conferred by this section are intended to encourage savings associations to
 maintain their role of providing credit for housing in a manner consistent
 with principles of safe and sound operation.
 `(b) The Chairman shall by regulation prescribe uniform accounting and
 disclosure standards for all savings associations to be used in determining
 their compliance with all applicable rules and regulations. These uniform
 accounting standards shall incorporate generally accepted accounting
 principles to the same degree that generally accepted accounting principles
 are used to determine compliance with rules and regulations issued by the
 Federal banking agencies, shall require full compliance therewith no later
 than the schedule provided in 12 CFR section 563, and shall be coordinated
 with the capital standards established by the Chairman pursuant to section
 5(t)(1) of this Act: Provided, That there will be no deviation from full
 compliance with the uniform accounting standards after December 31, 1993.
 `(c) The rules, regulations and policies of the Chairman governing the safe
 and sound operation of savings associations, including policies governing
 asset classification and appraisals, shall be no less stringent than those
 of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
 `(d) No savings association shall make loans beyond one hundred miles
 from its principal office except (1) loans in the area beyond such one
 hundred mile limit in which it was operating prior to June 27, 1934, and (2)
 loans which are made pursuant to regulations of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 System: Provided, That any loan made beyond fifty miles from the savings
 association's principal office and outside the territory in which it was
 operating on such date also shall be subject to such regulations.'.
 (b) Section 409 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730b) relating to
 investment of certain funds in accounts of savings associations is hereby
 transferred to and shall become a part of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933
 as new section 3(e) hereof and is further amended by replacing the words
 `institutions insured by the Corporation,' with `savings associations,
 to the extent they are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'.
 (c) Section 410 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730c) relating to
 participation by savings associations in lotteries and related activities
 is hereby transferred to and shall become part of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933, amended, at section 3(f), and is further amended by deleting
 the term `insured institution' and `institution' each time they appear
 and inserting in lieu thereof the term `savings association'.
 (d) Section 413 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730f) relating to
 disclosures with respect to certain federally related mortgage loans is
 hereby transferred to and shall become a part of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 as new section 3(g) thereof and is further amended by replacing
 the words `insured institution' and `institution,' wherever they appear
 in that section, with the words `savings associations'.
 (e) Section 414 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730g) relating to
 state usury override for certain loans is hereby transferred to and shall
 become a part of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 as new section 3(h)
 hereof and is further amended by--
 (1) replacing the terms `insured institution' and `institution,' wherever
 they appear in that section, with the term `savings association'; and
 (2) deleting the words `(which, for the purpose of this section, shall
 include a Federal association the deposits of which are insured by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation)'.
 (f) Section 403 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1726(b)) relating
 to the form and maturity of securities is hereby transferred to and shall
 become a part of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 as a new section 3(i)
 hereof to provide as follows:
 `(i) No savings association shall issue securities which guarantee a
 definite maturity except with the specific approval of the System, or
 issue any securities the form of which has not been approved by the System.'.
 SEC. 303. APPLICABILITY- The Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended,
 is further amended by adding new section 4 as follows:
 `SEC. 4. APPLICABILITY- (a) The following sections of this Act apply to
 all savings associations: sections 3, 5(d), 5(f), 5(i), 5(o), 5(p), 5(q),
 5(s), 5(t), 5(u), 5(v), 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
 `(b) The following sections of this Act apply to Federal savings
 associations: sections 5(b), 5(c), 5(e), 5(g), 5(h), 5(j), 5(l), 5(m),
 5(n), 5(r), and 8.'.
 SEC. 304. CONFORMING NAME CHANGES- Section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464) is hereby amended, as follows':
 (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all references to
 `association,' `Federal association,' or `Federal savings and loan
 association' shall be replaced with `Federal savings associations,'
 in the following subparts: 5 (b), (c), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n),
 (p), and (r), (12 U.S.C. 1464 (b), (c), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n),
 (p), and (r), respectively).
 (2) All references to `association' shall be replaced with `savings
 association,' in the following subparts: (5) (d), (f), (k), (o), (q), and
 (s) (12 U.S.C. 1464 (d), (f), (k), (o), (q), and (s), respectively).
 (3) The following miscellaneous changes and exceptions to the foregoing
 portions of this section are as follows:
 (A) References to `associations' in subsections 5(c)(1) (D), and (F)
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(1) (D), (F)) shall remain unchanged.
 (B) References to `savings and loan association' in subpart 5(c)(1)(R)
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(1)(R)) shall be amended by deleting `and loan'.
 (C) References to `association' in subparts 5(i)(3)(A)(iv)-(v) and
 5(i)(3)(B)(ii) (12 U.S.C. 1464(i)(3)(A)(iv)-(v), (B)(ii)) shall be replaced
 with `savings associations'.
 (D) The reference to `building and loan' in subpart 5(m) (12 U.S.C. 1464(m))
 shall be replaced with `savings'.
 (E) The reference to `mutual savings and loan association' in subpart 5(p)(1)
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(p)(1)) shall be replaced with `mutual savings association'.
 (F) The reference to `domestic building and loan association' in subpart
 5(r)(1) (12 U.S.C. 1464(r)(1)) shall remain unchanged.
 SEC. 305. SAFETY AND SOUNDNESS- Section 5(a) of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(a)), is hereby amended by inserting after the words
 `credit for housing' the words `consistent with the safe and sound operation
 of Federal savings associations'.
 SEC. 306. DEPOSITS- Section 5(c) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933,
 as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464(c)), is hereby amended by revising paragraph
 (c)(1)(G) to read as follows:
 `(G) DEPOSITS- Investments in time deposits, savings accounts certificates,
 or accounts of any financial institution, the deposits of which are insured
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.'.
 SEC. 307. SUPERVISORY REVISIONS- (a) Section 5(d) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act is amended by deleting paragraphs 2 through 5, 7 through 10,
 12(a), 13, and 15.
 (b) Section (5)(d)(1) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 shall be hereby
 redesignated as (5)(d)(1)(A).
 (c) Section 407(m) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730(m)) is
 hereby transferred to and shall become a part of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933, as amended, at section (5)(d)(1)(B) and is further amended by
 substituting the term `savings association' for the terms `institution' and
 `insured institution', and the term `savings associations' for the terms
 `institution' and `insured institutions', deleting the phrase `on behalf
 of the Corporation' and substituting the term `System' for `Corporation'
 everywhere else it appears and is further amended by redesignating paragraphs
 (m)(1) through (m)(4) as clauses (5)(d)(1)(B)(i) through (5)(d)(1)(B)(iv)
 respectively.
 SEC. 308. RECEIVERSHIPS- Section 5(d)(6) of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(6)) is redesignated as Section 5(d)(2) and is
 hereby amended--
 (1) by deleting the words `the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation
 or' from subparagraph (B) thereof;
 (2) subsections (C), (D), and (E) of section 5(d)(2) as redesignated of
 the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 are hereby redesignated as (D), (E),
 and (F) and a new subsection (C) is added to read as follows:
 `(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, State or Federal, or
 the constitution of any State, or of this section, the System shall have
 power and jurisdiction to appoint the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 as sole conservator or receiver of an insured State savings association,
 in the event that the System determines that any of the following grounds
 for the appointment of a conservator or receiver exist with respect to
 such financial institution:
 `(i) insolvency in that the assets of the financial institution are less
 than its obligations to its creditors and others,
 `(ii) substantial dissipation of assets or earnings due to any violation
 or violations of law, rules, or regulations, or to any unsafe or unsound
 practice or practices, or
 `(iii) an unsafe or unsound condition to transact business.
 `(D) In such cases the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall have
 powers and duties specified in subsection (c) and in subsection (1) of
 section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(E)(i) The authority conferred by this paragraph (2) shall not be exercised
 without the written approval of the State official having jurisdiction
 over the insured State financial institution that the grounds specified
 for such exercise exist.
 `(ii) If such approval has not been received within thirty days of receipt
 of notice to the State that the System has determined such grounds exist,
 and the System has responded in writing to the State's written reasons,
 if any, for withholding approval, then the System may proceed without
 State approval.'.
 (3) by deleting the words `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'
 from redesignated subparagraph (E) thereof and substituting the words
 `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'; and
 (4) by deleting the last sentence of redesignated subparagraph (E) thereof.
 SEC. 309. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 5(d)(11) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933 is redesignated as section 5(d)(3).
 SEC. 310. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 5(d)(12) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 is redesignated as (5)(d)(4) and is further amended by
 redesignating existing paragraphs (A) and (B) as (B) and (C) respectively.
 SEC. 311. AMENDMENT TO SECTION 5- Section 5(d)(14) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 is redesignated as section 5(d)(5) and is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(3)(A) As used in this subsection, the term `savings association' includes
 any former savings association that retains deposits insured by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation notwithstanding termination of its status as
 an institution insured by such corporation and any Federal savings bank
 whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 and any former Federal savings bank that retains deposits insured by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation notwithstanding termination of its
 status as an insured bank.
 `(B) References in this subsection to savings account holders and to members
 of savings associations shall be deemed to be references to holders of
 withdrawable accounts in savings institutions over which the System has any
 statutory power of examination or supervision as provided in this paragraph,
 and references therein to boards of directors of savings associations
 shall be deemed to be references to boards of directors or other governing
 boards of such associations. The System shall have power by regulation to
 define, for the purposes of this paragraph, terms used or referred to in
 the preceding sentence and other terms used in this subsection.'.
 SEC. 312. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 5(d)(16) of the Home Owners' Loan
 Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(16) is redesignated as section 5(d)(6)
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)(6)).
 SEC. 313. CONVERSIONS- Section 5(i) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(i)) is hereby amended by deleting paragraph (2) and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(2)(A) No savings association may convert from the mutual to the stock
 form, or from the stock form to the mutual form, except in accordance with
 the rules and regulations of the System.
 `(B) Any aggrieved person may obtain review of a final action of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank System which approves, with or without conditions,
 or disapproves a plan of conversion pursuant to this subsection only by
 complying with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 10 of this Act
 within the time limit and in the manner therein prescribed, which provisions
 shall apply in all respects as if such final action were an order the review
 of which is therein provided for, except that such time limit shall commence
 upon publication of notice of such final action in the Federal Register or
 upon the giving of such general notice of such final action as is required
 by or approved under regulations of the System, whichever is later.
 `(C) Any Federal savings association may change its designation from a
 Federal savings and loan association to a Federal savings bank, or the
 reverse.'.
 SEC. 314. CAPITAL STANDARDS- Section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of
 1933 as amended (12 U.S.C. 1464) is hereby further amended by adding the
 following new subsection (t) at the end thereof to read as follows:
 `(t)(1) Not later than ninety days after enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, the Chairman
 shall by regulation establish uniformly applicable capital standards for
 savings associations. Such standards shall be not less stringent than the
 capital standards applicable to national banks: Provided, That any deviation
 from such standards shall not result in materially lower capital standards
 than are applicable to national banks: Provided further, That the standard
 may include, as a component of capital, goodwill (limited to goodwill
 existing on the date of the enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform,
 Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989) to be amortized on a straightline basis
 over a ten-year period or over such shorter period as may be determined by
 the Chairman with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Treasury. For
 purposes of determining such capital adequacy, the savings association's
 entire investment in, and loans to, any subsidiary engaged in activities
 not permissible for a national bank shall be deducted from the capital of
 the savings association. In any event, any investments in, and loan to,
 a subsidiary engaged solely in mortgage banking activities shall not be
 deducted from the capital of the associations. The standards established
 under the subsection shall include all relevant substantive definitions
 established by the appropriate Federal banking agency for national
 banks. The Chairman shall prescribe a timetable for the implementation
 of these capital standards that requires their full implementation by no
 later than June 1, 1991.
 `(2) Until June 1, 1991, the Chairman may restrict the asset growth
 of any savings association not in compliance with capital standards
 established pursuant to this subsection. After June 1, 1991, the Chairman
 shall prohibit the asset growth of any savings association or class of
 savings associations not in compliance with capital standards established
 pursuant to this subsection. The Chairman may restrict the asset growth of
 any savings association that the Chairman determines is taking excessive
 risks or is paying excessive rates for deposits.
 `(3) For purposes of this subsection, the term `national bank' shall have
 the same meaning as it has in section 3(d) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(d)).'.
 SEC. 315. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 8 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of
 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1466a), is hereby amended by replacing all references to
 `association' with `savings association', except with respect to references
 to `Federal savings and loan association', which shall be replaced with
 `Federal savings association'.
 SEC. 316. REPEAL- Section 9 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 as amended
 (12 U.S.C. 1467) is repealed.
 SEC. 317. RECOVERY REGULATIONS REPEALED- (a) Section 10 of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1467a) is hereby repealed effective on the date
 of enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement
 Act of 1989, provided that associations that had entered into a plan approved
 by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board shall be grandfathered hereunder as
 long as the association adheres to the plan and continues to submit to the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System regular and complete reports on
 the association's progress in meeting the association's goals under the plan.
 (b) Section 416 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730i) is hereby
 repealed effective on the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989: Provided, That insured
 institutions which had entered into a plan approved by the Federal Savings
 and Loan Corporation shall be grandfathered hereunder as long as the
 insured institution adheres to the plan and continues to submit to the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System regular and complete reports
 on the insured institutions progress in meeting the insured institutions
 goals under the plan. For the purpose of this section, the term `insured
 institution' shall have the same meaning as in section 1730a(a)(1)(A)
 of title 12, United States Code.
 SEC. 318. COST OF EXAMINATION AND REPORTS- A new section 9 is added to
 the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 as amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 9. EXPENSES OF EXAMINATIONS OF SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS OR AFFILIATES-
 (a) The expense of examination of savings associations provided for by
 section 5 of this chapter shall be assessed by the Chairman upon savings
 associations in proportion to their assets or resources.
 `(b) The expense of examinations of an affiliate of a savings association
 provided for by this Act may be assessed by the Chairman upon the affiliates
 examined in proportion to assets or resources held by the affiliates on
 the dates of such examination.
 `(c) If any affiliate shall refuse to pay such expense, or other expense
 imposed pursuant to this section, or shall fail to do so within sixty days
 after the date of such assessment, then such expenses may be assessed
 against the affiliated savings association and when so assessed, shall
 be paid by such association: Provided, however, That, if the affiliation
 is with two or more savings associations or affiliates, such expenses
 may be assessed against, and collected from, any or all of such savings
 associations in such proportions as the Chairman prescribe.
 `(d) If any affiliate of a savings association shall refuse to permit
 an examiner to make an examination of the affiliate or shall refuse
 to give any information required in the course of any examination, the
 savings association with which it is affiliated shall be subject to a
 penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day that any such refusal shall
 continue. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations made with reckless
 disregard for the safety and soundness of the financial institution,
 the Corporation may, in its discretion, assess a penalty of not more than
 $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues. Such
 penalty may be assessed by the Chairman, and collected for the use of the
 System and deposited in the same manner as expenses of examinations.
 `(e) The Funds derived from such assessments may be deposited by the
 Chairman as provided in sections 1439 and 1439a, as amended, of this title,
 or upon the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, in any Federal
 Reserve Bank or other Government depository under the same provisions as
 apply in section 192 of this title to the Comptroller of the Currency. The
 funds derived from such assessments shall not be construed to be Government
 or public funds or appropriated monies.
 `(f) The Chairman, is authorized and empowered to prescribe regulations
 governing the computation and assessment of the expenses of examinations
 herein provided for and the collection of such assessments from the savings
 associations of affiliates examined.
 `(g) In addition to the expense of examination to be assessed by the
 Chairman, as provided in this section, all savings associations exercising
 fiduciary powers and all savings associations or similar institutions in
 the District of Columbia exercising fiduciary powers, shall be assessed
 by the Chairman for the examination of their fiduciary activities a fee
 adequate to cover the expenses thereof, and which fee shall be treated,
 paid, and deposited in the same manner as an assessment for expenses of
 examination provided for in this section.
 `(h) In addition to the expense of examinations to be assessed by the
 Chairman in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b), savings associations
 or affiliates of savings associations examined more frequently than twice
 in one calendar year shall be assessed the expense of those additional
 examinations. Funds from such assessment shall be treated, paid, and
 deposited in the same manner as an assessment for expenses of examination
 provided for in this section.
 `(i) All savings associations and affiliates shall provide the System with
 access to any information or report with respect to any examination made
 by any public regulatory authority and furnish any additional information
 with respect thereto as the System may require.'.
 SEC. 319. SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES- Section 408 of the National
 Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a) is hereby transferred to and shall become
 new section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended, and is
 further amended as follows:
 (1) by deleting the words `insured and institution', `insured institutions',
 and `institution' wherever they occur and inserting in lieu thereof `savings
 association', `savings associations' and `association', respectively;
 (2) by deleting the word `Corporation' wherever it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `System';
 (3) by deleting all references to subsection (m) and section 1729(f)
 of this title wherever they occur and inserting in lieu thereof `section
 1823(c) of this title' and `section 1823(k) of this title', respectively;
 (4) by deleting subparagraph (a)(1)(A) and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `(A) `savings association' means a Federal savings and loan association or
 Federal savings bank, a building and loan, savings and loan or homestead
 association, a cooperative bank or a State savings bank that is a member of
 the Savings Association Insurance Fund, the deposits of which are insured by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and shall include a savings bank
 which is deemed by the System to be a savings association under subsection
 (m)';
 (5) by deleting subparagraph (a)(1)(B) and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following:
 `(B) `uninsured institution' means any financial institution the deposits
 of which are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;';
 (6) by striking out `and' at the end of subparagraph (a)(1)(K) thereof;
 by striking out the period at the end of subparagraph (a)(1)(L) thereof
 and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon; and by adding a new subparagraph
 (a)(1)(M) to read as follows:
 `(M) `System' means the Federal Home Loan Bank System and';
 (7) by deleting subsections (d), (g), (m), (p), and (t), by redesignating
 subsections (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (n), (o), (q), (r), and (s) as
 paragraphs (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), and (q),
 respectively, and by inserting the following new subsection (d) to read
 as follows:
 `(d) TRANSACTIONS WITH AFFILIATES- Transactions between any subsidiary
 savings associations of a savings and loan holding company and any affiliate
 (of such savings association subsidiary) shall be subject to the limitations
 and prohibitions specified in section 11 of this Act.';
 (8) by deleting paragraph (e)(4) thereof and by redesignating paragraph
 (e)(5) as new paragraph (e)(4);
 (9) by amending subsection (2)(i) by striking out `(A), except with the
 prior approval of the Board, to serve at the same time as a director,
 officer, or employee of an insured institution or another savings and
 loan holding company, not a subsidiary of such holding company, or (B)',
 and inserting a comma in lieu thereof;
 (10) by deleting paragraph (4) of redesignated subsection (n) and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following:
 `(4) FAILURE TO ACHIEVE AND MAINTAIN QUALIFIED THRIFT LENDER STATUS-
 `(A) A savings association that fails to achieve or maintain its status as
 a qualified thrift lender shall, within three years of the date on which
 the association loses its status as a qualified thrift lender, convert its
 charter to one or more bank charters, unless during the one year period
 following the date it loses its status as a qualified thrift lender, the
 association becomes a qualified thrift lender and does not thereafter lose
 its status as a qualified thrift lender.
 `(B) Until such conversion is complete, such savings association shall not:
 `(i) after three years from the date it loses its qualified thrift lender
 status, be eligible to obtain advances from any Federal Home Loan Bank
 and shall repay any outstanding advances promptly;
 `(ii) expand its activities beyond those conducted on the date the savings
 association loses its status as a qualified thrift lender;
 `(iii) open any additional branch offices; or
 `(iv) after three years from the date it loses its qualified thrift lender
 status, engage directly or through a subsidiary in an activity unless such
 activity is permissible for either a bank or a state bank (other than a
 savings bank) located in the State in which the association is located.
 `(C) Any company that controls a savings association identified in
 paragraph (A) shall, after three years following the date on which the
 savings association loses its status as a qualified thrift lender, be
 subject to all of the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956,
 as amended, and other applicable statutes as if the company were a bank
 holding company and the savings association were a bank as those terms
 are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended.
 `(D) Any bank chartered as a result of the requirements of this section
 shall be obligated until December 31, 1993, to pay the assessments assessed
 on savings associations under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Such
 institution shall also be assessed the exit fee provided in section 5(d)(2)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(E) as used in this subsection, `bank' shall mean a national member bank
 or a State bank (other than a savings bank), as defined in section 3 of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'; and
 (11) by deleting paragraph (7) of redesignated subsection (n).
 SEC. 320. TRANSACTIONS WITH AFFILIATES; LOANS TO INSIDERS- The Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 as amended is further amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new section 11:
 `SEC. 11. TRANSACTIONS WITH AFFILIATES; LOANS AND EXTENSIONS OF CREDIT
 TO EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, DIRECTORS AND CONTROLLING PERSONS- (a) Except to
 the extent that the System determines for reasons of safety and soundness
 that additional restrictions should apply the provisions of section 23A
 and section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act shall be applicable to every
 savings association in the same manner and to the same extent as if such
 savings association were a member bank as defined in that Act and for this
 purpose any company which would be an affiliate of a savings association
 for the purposes of section 23A and section 23B of the Federal Reserve
 Act if such savings association were a member bank as defined in that Act
 shall be deemed to be an affiliate of such savings association.
 `(b) Except to the extent that the System determines for reasons of safety
 and soundness that additional restrictions should apply, the provisions
 of section 22(h) of the Federal Reserve Act relating to limits on loans
 and extensions of credit by a member bank to its executive officers or
 directors or to any person who directly or indirectly owns, controls,
 or has the power to vote more than 10 per centum of any class of voting
 securities of such member bank shall be applicable to every savings
 association in the same manner and to the same extent as if such savings
 association were a member bank as defined in that Act.
 `(c) Violations of this section shall be enforced by the System in accordance
 with section 8 of this Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 SEC. 321. ADVERTISING- The Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended,
 is hereby amended by adding a new section 12 to read as follows:
 SEC. 12. ADVERTISING- No savings association shall carry on any sale, plan,
 or practices, or any advertising, in violation of regulations promulgated
 by the System.'.
TITLE IV--DISSOLUTION AND TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS, PERSONNEL, AND PROPERTY OF
FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION
 SEC. 401. DISSOLUTION- Sixty days after enactment of this Act, except
 as otherwise provided in it, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation, shall cease to exist and shall for all purposes be considered
 dissolved. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, after its enactment,
 all insurance and receivership functions previously performed by the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation shall be performed as appropriate,
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Resolution Trust
 Corporation. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall also have the
 power to take any action necessary on behalf of the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation in connection with its dissolution in accordance
 with this Act.
 SEC. 402. CONTINUATION OF RULES- (a) All rules, regulations, and orders of
 the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Board as operating head thereof, in effect on the date of enactment of
 this Act and relating to (i) the provision, rates, cancellation, or payment
 of insurance of accounts, (ii) administration of the insurance fund, or
 (iii) conduct of conservatorships or receiverships, including the handling
 of claims against receiverships, shall remain effective and enforceable
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, as appropriate, unless otherwise determined by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation after consultation with the Chairman of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank System.
 (b) All other rules, regulations, and orders of the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation shall remain effective and enforceable by the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System.
 (c) Within sixty days after enactment of this Act, the Chairman of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank System and the Chairman of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation shall identify the rules, regulations, and orders
 referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section in accordance
 with the allocation of authority between them under this Act and promptly
 publish notice thereof in the Federal Register.
 (d) The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall have the power to
 promulgate and enforce rules, regulations, or orders to prevent actions
 or practices of savings associations that pose a serious threat to the
 Savings Association Insurance Fund or the Bank Insurance Fund.
 SEC. 403. PERSONNEL- (a) The Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 jointly with the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 shall identify those employees of the Board and the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation who, on the date of enactment of this Act,
 were engaged in functions or activities (hereinafter, `functions') related
 primarily to the functions which are transferred from the Board and/or
 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation to the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation. The employees so identified shall be entitled to
 the following rights:
 (1) Each employee identified in a transferred function shall be transferred
 to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for employment and shall be
 guaranteed a position. All Board and Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation employees electing to transfer with their function shall be
 transferred to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation no later than sixty
 days after the date of enactment of this Act. For purposes of determining
 assignment rights, any transfer from the Board and/or Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 shall be deemed to be a transfer of function as defined by the regulations
 promulgated by the Office of Personnel Management pursuant to section
 3503 of title 5, United States Code, and transferring employees shall be
 entitled to all rights and benefits under the regulations promulgated by
 the Office of Personnel Management pursuant to section 3502 of title 5,
 United States Code. All Board and Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation employees who agree to transfer with their functions shall
 be placed in a competitive area of their own at Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation separate and apart from the competitive areas in existence at
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for purposes of placement under this
 section. In placing transferring employees under section 351 of title
 5, Code of Federal Regulations procedures, Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation may provide for the assignment of a transferred employee in
 an excepted service position to a position in the competitive service. In
 addition Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation may elect to bring into the
 competitive service any or all excepted service positions transferred from
 the Board or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. Transferring
 employees who are in the excepted service and are placed by Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation in a competitive service position will have their
 appointments converted to career or career conditional in accordance with
 section 315.701 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations. Transferring
 employees shall receive notice of their assignment rights pursuant to
 section 351 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, and this section no
 later than 90 days after the effective date of their transfer to Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation. Transferring employees shall be entitled
 to pay and grade retention in accordance with the principles reflected in
 the regulations promulgated by the Office of Personnel Management pursuant
 to section 5361-66 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Any employee who declines to transfer with his or her function to the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be entitled to severance pay
 in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the Office of Personnel
 Management pursuant to section 5595 of title 5, United States Code, and
 shall be entitled to placement assistance under the Office of Personnel
 Management's Displaced Employee Program as defined at section 330 of title
 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart C. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
 severance pay shall in no event be less than ninety days pay. All such
 severance pay shall be paid by the Federal Home Loan Bank System. Each
 employee in an excepted service position who declines to transfer shall be
 entitled to placement assistance under the Office of Personnel Management's
 Interagency Placement Assistance Program for a period of one hundred and
 twenty days after receipt of their termination notice.
 (3) A transferred Board or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation
 employee who declines an offer of employment by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation which is not considered a reasonable offer under
 regulations promulgated by the Office of Personnel Management pursuant to
 section 8336(d)(1) of title 5, United States Code, shall be entitled to
 the benefits specified in paragraph 2 of this subsection for employees
 declining to transfer and any such employee who is otherwise eligible
 shall be entitled to early optional retirement under section 8336(d)(2)
 of title 5, United States Code. Within one year after the transfer of
 functions to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is completed, should
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation determine that a reorganization of
 the combined workforce is required, that reorganization shall be deemed a
 `major reorganization' for purposes of affording employees early optional
 retirement under section 8336(d)(2) of title 5, United States Code.
 (4) Any employee accepting employment with the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation as a result of this transfer may retain any benefit of or
 continue membership in any employee benefit program of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Board, including insurance, to which he or she belongs on the
 date of enactment of this Act: Provided, That the employee does not elect
 to give up the benefit or membership in the program: Provided further, That
 the benefit or program is continued by the Federal Home Bank System. The
 difference in the costs between the benefits which would have been provided
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and those provided by this
 section shall be paid by the Federal Home Loan Bank System.
 SEC. 404. DIVISION OF PROPERTY AND PERSONNEL- Within sixty days after
 enactment of this Act, the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 jointly with the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, shall
 divide between the Federal Home Loan Bank System and the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation in accordance with the division of responsibilities
 effected by this Act, all personnel and all property of the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation previously employed to perform its functions
 and those of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. Any disagreement between them
 in so doing shall be resolved by the Director of the Office of Management
 and Budget.
 SEC. 405. REPEALS- Except as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 401,
 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 411, 415, and 416 of the National Housing
 Act are hereby repealed.
 SEC. 406. REPORT- Immediately prior to its dissolution, the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation shall provide by written report to
 the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management
 and Budget and to the Congress, a final accounting of its finances and
 operations, and shall thereafter cease operations.
TITLE V--FINANCING FOR THRIFT RESOLUTIONS
Subtitle A--Resolution Trust Corporation
 SEC. 501. RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION ESTABLISHED- The Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 144 et seq.) is hereby amended by inserting after
 section 21 the following new section:
 `SEC. 21a. RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION ESTABLISHED- (a) ESTABLISHMENT-
 There is hereby established the Resolution Trust Corporation (hereinafter
 in this section also referred to as the Corporation) with the powers,
 authorities and purposes herein provided. The Oversight Board and the
 Corporation shall not be an `agency' or `executive agency' for purposes
 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(b) PURPOSES- (1) The purpose of the Corporation shall be to carry out a
 program, under the direction of the Oversight Board, to manage and resolve
 all cases involving institutions, the accounts of which were insured by
 the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, prior to enactment of
 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989,
 for which a receiver or liquidating conservator has been appointed or is
 appointed within the three-year period following the date of the enactment of
 that Act; to manage the assets of the Federal Asset Disposition Association;
 and to perform such other functions as authorized under this Act. In its
 resolution activities, the Resolution Trust Corporation is authorized
 to take warrants, voting and nonvoting equity, or other participation
 interests in resolved institutions or assets or properties acquired in
 connection with resolution.
 `(2) In carrying out its obligations, the Corporation shall possess all
 of the rights and powers provided in sections 11, 12 or 13 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act, or otherwise granted herein; provided that it shall
 not have the power to obligate the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or
 its funds (except as otherwise specifically provided); and in connection with
 providing assistance to or liquidating or otherwise resolving an institution
 as provided above, it shall consider and be subject to the limitations
 set forth in section 13(c)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(c) OVERSIGHT BOARD-
 `(1) MEMBERSHIP- The Oversight Board of the Resolution Trust Corporation,
 which shall serve as the board of directors thereof, shall consist of
 three members: the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Federal
 Reserve Board, and the Attorney General of the United States, or their
 respective designees.
 `(2) CHAIRMAN- The Chairman of the Oversight Board shall be the Secretary
 of the Treasury.
 `(3) TERMS OF OFFICE, SUCCESSION, DELEGATION, AND VACANCIES- The term of
 each member of the Oversight Board shall expire when the Resolution Trust
 Corporation is terminated. Vacancies on the Oversight Board shall be filed
 in the same manner as the vacant position was previously filled.
 `(4) COMPENSATION- Members of the Oversight Board shall receive reasonable
 allowances for necessary expenses of travel, lodging, and subsistence
 incurred in attending meetings and other activities of the Oversight Board,
 as set forth in the bylaws issued by the Oversight Board, except that such
 level shall not exceed the maximum fixed by subchapter 1 of chapter 57 of
 title 5, United States Code, for officers and employees of the United States.
 `(5) DUTIES- The Oversight Board shall review and have overall responsibility
 over the work, progress, management and activities of the Resolution
 Trust Corproation and may disapprove, in its discretion, any and all
 regulations, policies, procedures, guidelines, statements, contracts,
 and other actions of the Resolution Trust Corporation and shall approve
 or disapprove, in its discretion, any and all agreements for the purchase
 of assets and assumption of liabilities, any and all agreements for the
 acquisition, consolidation or merger, or any other transaction proposed
 by the Resolution Trust Corporation by which any person or entity will
 acquire an institution subject to the provisions of this title.
 `(6) QUORUM REQUIRED- A quorum shall consist of two members of the Oversight
 Board and all decisions of the Board shall require an affirmative vote of
 at least a majority of the members voting.
 `(7) The Oversight Board is authorized to emply such staff as it deems
 necessary and appropriate to fulfill its obligations under this Act, which
 shall be subject to the terms and conditions of employment applicable to
 the Resolution Trust Corporation: Provided, how- ever, That the Oversight
 Board as it considers necessary shall utilize the personnel of the agencies
 of the three members of the Oversight Board, without additional compensation
 to carry out the Oversight Board's staff functions.
 `(8) RULES AND RECORDS- The Oversight Board shall adopt such rules as it may
 deem appropriate for the transaction of its business and the accomplishment
 of its duties hereunder, and shall keep permanent and accurate records of
 its acts and proceedings.
 `(d) CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER- A chief executive officer of the Resolution
 Trust Corporation shall be selected by the Oversight Board and shall serve
 at the pleasure of the Board.
 `(e) CORPORATE POWERS- The Resolution Trust Corporation shall be a body
 corporate that shall have the power to--
 `(1) operate under the direction of the Oversight Board;
 `(2) adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal, which shall be judicially noted;
 `(3) issue capital certificates as provided in this Act;
 `(4) provide for one or more vice presidents, a secretary, a treasurer and
 such other officers, employees, and agents, as may be necessary, define
 their duties, and require surety bonds or make other provisions against
 losses occasioned by acts of such persons;
 `(5) subject to the approval of the Oversight Board, hire, promote,
 compensate, and discharge officers and employees of the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, without regard to title 5, United States Code, provided that
 compensation and benefits of such employees shall be consistent with those
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 `(6) prescribe by the Oversight Board its bylaws that shall be consistent
 with law and that shall provide for the manner in which--
 `(A) its officers, employees, and agents are selected;
 `(B) its property is acquired, held and transferred;
 `(C) its general operations are to be con- ducted;
 `(D) the privileges granted by law are exercised and enjoyed;
 `(7) with the consent of any executive department or agency, use the
 information, services, staff, and facilities of such in carrying out
 this title;
 `(8) enter into contracts and make advance, progress, or other payments
 with respect to such contracts;
 `(9) acquire, hold, lease, mortgage, or dispose of, at public or private
 sale, real and personal property, and otherwise exercise all the usual
 incidents of ownership of property necessary and convenient to its
 operations;
 `(10) obtain insurance against loss;
 `(11) modify or consent to the modification of any contract or agreement
 to which it is a party or in which it has an interest under this title;
 `(12) deposit its securities and its current funds under the terms and
 conditions applicable to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation under
 section 13(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and pay fees therefor
 and receive interest thereon as may be agreed; and
 `(13) exercise such other powers as set forth in this title, and such
 incidental powers as are necessary to carry out its powers, duties, and
 functions in accordance with this title.
 `(f) SPECIAL POWERS- (a) IN GENERAL- The Resolution Trust Corporation
 is authorized--
 `(1) to enter into contracts with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 and with such other persons or entities, public and private, as it deems
 advisable and necessary in order to manage the institutions for which it is
 responsible and their assets: Provided, however, That the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation shall be the primary manager of the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, in accordance with an agreement between the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation and the Oversight Board, except in such case where
 the Oversight Board shall specifically contract with another person or
 entity on a case by case basis: Provided further, That all contracts with
 persons or entities other than the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 must be subject to a competitive bid process;
 `(2) to set the policy on credit standards to be used by the institution
 for which it is responsible;
 `(3) to require a merger or consolidation of an institution for which it
 is responsible;
 `(4) to organize one or more Federal mutual savings associations, which
 shall be chartered by the Federal Home Loan Bank System and the deposits
 of which shall be insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 through the Savings Association Insurance Fund;
 `(5) to review and analyze all insolvent institution cases resolved
 by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation since January 1,
 1988, through the date of enactment of this Act, and to actively review
 all means by which it can reduce costs under existing Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation agreements, including through the exercise of
 rights to restructure such agreements, subject only to the monitoring
 of the Oversight Board. The Corporation shall report to the Oversight
 Board the results and conclusions of its examination, and thereafter the
 Corporation, as permitted by the terms of any resolution agreement and
 upon the express concurrence of the Oversight Board, shall restructure
 such agreements where savings would be realized therefrom, the costs of
 which restructuring shall be a liability of the Corporation;
 `(6) to exercise all resolution powers and activities authorized to be
 exercised by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation under the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation
 under title IV of the National Housing Act including but not limited to the
 powers and authorities with respect to receiverships or conservatorships,
 to engage in assistance transactions, to collect indebtedness, to enforce
 liabilities and obligations, and to exercise the incidental powers and
 authorities provided the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation all of which
 may be performed and exercised by the Corporation under this section as
 may be necessary to fulfill its obligations and duties under this Act; and
 `(7) to take such other incidental powers as the Resolution Trust Corporation
 determines as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this title.
 `(g) INSTITUTIONS MANAGED BY THE CORPORATION- (1) All insured savings
 associations organized by the Corporation under this section shall be
 subject to such limitations, restrictions, and conditions as determined
 by the Corporation with respect to the following activities:
 `(A) growth of assets;
 `(B) lending activities;
 `(C) asset acquisitions (except as necessary to serve its existing customer
 base with residential mortgages or consumer loans;
 `(D) use of brokered deposits; and
 `(E) payment of deposit rates.
 `(2) All insured savings associations organized by the Corporation under
 this section shall be subject to all laws, rules, and regulations otherwise
 applicable to them as insured savings associations.
 `(3) Any insured savings association organized by the Corporation under
 this section that holds deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation shall continue to be subject to supervision by the Federal
 Home Loan Bank System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as othewise
 provided by law.
 `(h) FADA- The Corporation shall convert the Financial Asset Disposition
 Association to a corporation or other business entity and sell such other
 corporate entity or business entity, or wind down such Association or
 dissolve it no later than one hundred and eighty days after the enactment
 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989:
 Provided, That in connection with any such sale, no contract rights to
 manage savings association resolution shall be transferred.
 `(i) CAPITAL CERTIFICATES- The Resolution Trust Corporation shall be
 authorized to issue capital certificates to the Resolution Funding
 Corporation consistent with the provisions of section 21b of this Act--
 `(1) AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE- IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, the Resolution Trust Corporation is hereby authorized to issue to
 the Resolution Funding Corporation nonvoting capital certificates.
 `(2) REQUIREMENT RELATING TO THE AMOUNT OF CERTIFICATES- The amount of
 certificates issued by the Resolution Trust Corporation under paragraph (A)
 shall be equal to the aggregate amount of funds provided by the Resolution
 Funding Corporation to the Resolution Trust Corporation under section 21b
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.
 `(3) CERTIFICATES MAY BE ISSUED ONLY TO THE RESOLUTION FUNDING CORPORATION-
 Capital certificates issued under subparagraph (A) may be issued only to
 the Resolution Funding Corporation in the manner and to the extent provided
 in section 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act and this subsection.
 `(4) NO DIVIDENDS- The Resolution Trust Corporation shall pay no dividends
 on any capital certificates issued under this paragraph.
 `(j) EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION- The Resolution Trust Corporation, the capital,
 reserves, and surplus thereof, and the income derived therefrom, shall
 be exempt from Federal, State, municipal, and local taxation except taxes
 on real estate held by the Resolution Trust Corporation, according to its
 value as other similar property held by other persons is taxed.
 `(k) TERMINATION-
 `(1) RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION- The Resolution Trust Corporation shall
 terminate five years after the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989.
 `(2) CASE RESOLUTIONS- Simultaneously with the termination of the Resolution
 Trust Corporation as provided in subsection (1), all assets and liabilities
 of the Corporation would be transferred to the FSLIC Resolution Fund to be
 managed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with the proceeds of
 the net assets being provided to the Resolution Funding Corporation.
 `(l) POWER TO REMOVE: JURISDICTION- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, any civil action, suit or proceeding to which the Corporation is
 a party shall be deemed to arise under the laws of the United States,
 and the United States district courts shall have original jurisdiction
 over such. The Resolution Trust Corporation may, without bond or security,
 remove any such action, suit, or proceeding from a State court to the United
 States District Court for the District of Columbia, or if the action, suit
 or proceeding arises out of the actions of the Corporation with respect to
 an institution for which a receiver or liquidating conservator has been
 appointed, the United States district court for the district where the
 institution is located.
 `(m) GUARANTEES OF FSLIC- (1) Guarantees issued by the Federal Savings and
 Loan Insurance Corporation after January 1, 1989, and before the date of
 enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement
 Act of 1989, made in connection with loans made to savings associations
 extended by the Federal Reserve Banks and Federal Home Loan Banks (the
 `Lenders') and guaranteed by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation during such period, shall by operation of law and without
 further action by the Federal Home Loan Bank System, the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation, or any court, become and be converted into
 obligations, entitlements, and instruments of the Corporation.
 `(2) Obligations under the guarantees to the Lenders, assumed by the
 Corporation under (1) above, shall be paid by the Corporation one year
 after the date of enactment of this title, to the extent that the loans
 referred to in (1) above have not previously been paid, using any funds
 or other assets available to the Corporation; and, in any event, the
 Corporation shall draw upon the resources available to it through borrowing
 by Resolution Funding Corporation.
 `(n) ISSUE REGULATIONS- The Corporation may issue such regulations, policies,
 procedures, guidelines, or statements as that Corporation considers
 necessary or appropriate to carry out this title, all of which shall be
 promulgated and enforced without regard to subchapter II of chapter 5 of
 title 5, United States Code.
 `(o) BORROWING- The Corporation is authorized to borrow from the Treasury,
 and the Secretary of the Treasury authorized and directed to loan to the
 Corporation on such terms as may be fixed by the Secretary of the Treasury
 not exceeding in the aggregate $5,000,000,000 outstanding at any one time:
 Provided, That each such loan shall bear interest at a rate determined
 by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration the current
 average rate on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States
 as of the last day of the month preceding the making of such loan: For
 purposes of this subsection, the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to
 use as a public-debt transaction the proceeds of the sale of any securities
 hereafter issued under the Second Liberty Bond Act, as now or hereafter
 in force, and the purposes for which securities may be issued under the
 Second Liberty Bond Act, as now or hereafter in force, are hereby extended
 to include such loans.'.
Subtitle B--Resolution Funding Corporation
 SEC. 502. RESOLUTION FUNDING CORPORATION ESTABLISHED- The Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1421 et seq.) is hereby amended by inserting
 after new section 21a the following new section:
 `SEC. 21b. RESOLUTION FUNDING CORPORATION ESTABLISHED- `(a) PURPOSE- The
 purpose of the Resolution Funding Corporation is to provide funds to the
 Resolution Trust Corporation in order for that corporation to carry out
 its purposes under this Act.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT- Notwithstanding any other provision of law and not
 later than five days after the enactment of this title, the Chairman
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank System shall be authorized to and shall
 charter a corporation to be known as the Resolution Funding Corporation
 (hereinafter referred to in this Act as the `Funding Corporation').
 `(c) MANAGEMENT OF THE FUNDING CORPORATION-
 `(1) DIRECTORATE- The Funding Corporation shall be under the management
 of a directorate composed of three members as follows:.
 `(A) The director of the Office of Finance of the Federal Home Loan Banks
 (or the head of any successor office to such office); and
 `(B) Two members selected by the Oversight Board from among the presidents
 of the Federal Home Loan Banks.
 `(2) TERMS- Of the two members appointed under (1)(b) with respect to
 initial terms, one shall be appointed for a term of two years and one shall
 be appointed for a term of three years, and thereafter, each member appointed
 under paragraph (1)(b) shall be appointed for a term of three years.
 `(3) VACANCY- If any member leaves the office in which such member was
 serving when appointed to the Directorate--
 `(A) such member's service on the Directorate shall terminate on the date
 such member leaves such office; and
 `(B) the successor to the office of such member shall serve the remainder
 of such member's term.
 `(4) EQUAL REPRESENTATION OF BANKS- No president of a Federal Home Loan
 Bank may be appointed to serve an additional term on the Directorate until
 such time as the presidents of each of the other Federal Home Loan Banks
 have served as many terms on the Directorate as the president of such bank
 (before the appointment of such president to such additional term).
 `(5) CHAIRPERSON- The Oversight Board shall select the chairperson of the
 Directorate from among the three members of the Directorate.
 `(6) STAFF-
 `(A) NO PAID EMPLOYEES- The Funding Corporation shall have no paid employees.
 `(B) POWERS- The Directorate may, with the approval of the Chairman of
 the Federal Home Loan Bank System, authorize the officers, employees,
 or agents of the Federal Home Loan Banks to act for and on behalf of the
 Funding Corporation in such manner as may be necessary to carry out the
 functions of the Funding Corporation.
 `(7) Administrative expenses, insurance costs, and custodian fees-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- All administrative expenses issuance costs (as defined
 in subsection (k)(4)) and custodian fees (as defined in subsection (k)(5))
 of the Funding Corporation shall be paid by the Federal Home Loan Banks.
 `(B) PRO RATA DISTRIBUTION- The amount each Federal Home Loan Bank shall
 pay shall be determined by the Oversight Board by multiplying the total
 administrative expenses, issuance costs and custodian fees for any period
 by the percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(i) the aggregate amount the Oversight Board required such bank to invest
 in the Funding Corporation (as of the time of such determination) under
 paragraphs (4) and (5) of subsection (e) (as computed without regard to
 paragraphs (3) or (6) of such subsection); by
 `(ii) the aggregate amount the Oversight Board required all Federal Home Loan
 Banks to invest (as of the time of such determination) under such paragraphs.
 `(C) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES DEFINED- For purposes of this paragraph,
 the term `administrative expenses' does not include any interest on (and
 any redemption premium with respect to) any obligation of the Funding
 Corporation.
 `(8) REGULATION BY OVERSIGHT BOARD- The Directorate of the Funding
 Corporation shall be subject to such regulations, orders, and directions
 as the Oversight Board may prescribe.
 `(9) NO COMPENSATION FROM FUNDING CORPORATION- Members of the Directorate
 of the Funding Corporation shall receive no pay, allowances, or benefits
 from the Funding Corporation by reason of their service on the Directorate.
 `(d) POWERS OF THE FUNDING CORPORATION- The Funding Corporation shall
 have only the following powers, subject to the other provisions of this
 section and such regulations, orders, and directions as the Oversight
 Board may prescribe--
 `(1) to issue nonvoting Capital Stock to the Federal Home Loan Banks;
 `(2) to purchase capital certificates issued by the Resolution Trust
 Corporation under section 21a of this Act;
 `(3) to issue debentures, bonds, or other obligations and to borrow, to
 give security for any amount borrowed, and to pay interest on (and any
 redemption premium with respect to) any such obligation or amount;
 `(4) to impose assessments in accordance with subsection (e)(7);
 `(5) to adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal;
 `(6) to have succession until dissolved;
 `(7) to enter into contracts;
 `(8) to sue and be sued in its corporate capacity, and to complain and
 defend in any action brought by or against the Funding Corporation in any
 State or Federal court of competent jurisdiction; and
 `(9) to exercise such incidental powers not inconsistent with the provisions
 of this section or section 21a(i) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act as
 are necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this section.
 `(e) CAPITALIZATION OF THE FUNDING CORPORATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Purchase of capital stock by Federal Home Loan Banks. Each
 Federal Home Loan Bank shall invest in nonvoting capital stock of the
 Funding Corporation at such times and in such amounts as the Oversight
 Board may prescribe under this subsection.
 `(2) PAR VALUE; TRANSFERABILITY- Each share of stock issued by the Funding
 Corporation to a Federal Home Loan Bank shall have a par value in an amount
 determined by the Oversight Board and shall be transferable only among the
 Federal Home Loan Banks in the manner and to the extent prescribed by the
 Oversight Board at not less than par value.
 `(3) MAXIMUM INVESTMENT AMOUNT LIMITATION FOR EACH FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK-
 The cumulative amount of funds invested in nonvoting capital stock of the
 Funding Corporation by each Federal Home Loan Bank shall not exceed the
 aggregate amount of--
 `(A) the sum of--
 `(i) the reserves maintained by such bank on December 31, 1988, pursuant
 to the requirement contained in the first two sentences of section 16 of
 this Act (12 U.S.C. 1436); and
 `(ii) the undivided profits (as defined in paragraph (8) hereof) of such
 bank on such date; minus
 `(iii) the amounts used to invest in the capital stock of the Financing
 Corporation pursuant to the requirement contained in section 21 of this Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1441); and
 `(B) for the period December 31, 1988, through December 31, 1991, or such
 later date as necessary to fund the Funding Corporation Principal Fund
 pursuant to this Act, the sum of--
 `(i) the amounts added to reserves after December 31, 1988, pursuant to the
 requirement contained in the first two sentences of section 16 of this Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1436); and
 `(ii) the undivided profits of such bank accruing after December 31,
 1988; minus
 `(iii) the amounts required to be used to invest in the capital stock of
 the Financing Corporation pursuant to the requirement contained in section
 21 of this Act (12 U.S.C. 1441) after December 31, 1988.
 `(4) PRO RATA DISTRIBUTION OF FIRST $1,000,000,000 INVESTED IN THE FUNDING
 CORPORATION BY THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS- With respect to the first
 $1,000,000,000 which the Oversight Board may require the Federal Home
 Loan Banks to invest in capital stock of the Funding Corporation under
 this subsection, the amount which each Federal Home Loan Bank (or any
 successor to such bank) shall invest shall be determined by the Oversight
 Board by applying to the total amount of such investment by all such banks
 the percentage appearing in the following table for each such bank:
`Bank
--Percentage
1.8629
9.1006
4.2702
14.4007
8.2653
5.2863
9.6886
6.9301
8.8181
5.2706
19.9644
6.1422
 `(5) PRO RATA DISTRIBUTION OF AMOUNTS REQUIRED TO BE INVESTED IN EXCESS
 OF $1,000,000,000- With respect to any amount in excess of $1,000,000,000
 which the Oversight Board may require the Federal Home Loan Banks to invest
 in capital stock of the Funding Corporation under this subsection, the
 amount which each Federal Home Loan Bank (or any successor to such bank)
 shall invest shall be determined by the Oversight Board by multiplying
 such excess amount by the percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(A) the sum of the total assets (as of the most recent December 31)
 held by all insured savings associations which are members of such bank; by
 `(B) the sum of the total assets (as of such date) held by all insured
 savings associations which are members of any Federal Home Loan Bank.
 `(6) SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MAXIMUM AMOUNT LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the amount any Federal Home Loan Bank is required
 to invest in capital stock of the Funding Corporation pursuant to
 a determination by the Oversight Board under paragraph (5) (or under
 subparagraph (B) of this paragraph) exceeds the maximum investment amount
 applicable with respect to such bank under paragraph (3) at the time
 of such determination (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as the
 `excess amount')--
 `(i) the Oversight Board shall require each remaining Federal Home Loan
 Bank to invest (in addition to the amount determined under paragraph
 (5) for such remaining bank and subject to the maximum investment amount
 applicable with respect to such remaining bank under paragraph (3) at the
 time of such determination) in such capital stock on behalf of the bank
 in the amount determined under subparagraph (B);
 `(ii) the Oversight Board shall require the bank to subsequently purchase
 the excess amount of capital stock from the remaining banks in the manner
 described in subparagraph (C); and
 `(iii) the requirements contained in subparagraphs (D) and (E) relating
 to the use of net earnings available for dividends shall apply to such
 bank until the bank has purchased all of the excess amount of capital stock.
 `(B) ALLOCATION OF EXCESS AMOUNT AMONG REMAINING HOME LOAN BANKS- The
 amount each remaining Federal Home Loan Bank shall be required to invest
 under subparagraph (A)(i) is the amount determined by the Oversight Board
 by multiplying the excess amount by the percentage arrived at by dividing--
 `(i) the amount of capital stock of the Funding Corporation held by such
 remaining bank at the time of such determination; by
 `(ii) the aggregate amount of such stock held by all remaining banks at
 such time.
 `(C) PURCHASE PROCEDURE- The bank on whose behalf an investment in capital
 stock is made under subparagraph (A)(i) shall purchase, annually and at
 such issuance price, from each remaining bank an amount of such stock
 determined by the Oversight Board by multiplying the amount available
 for such purchases (at the time of such determination) by the percentage
 determined under subparagraph (B) with respect to such remaining bank until
 the aggregate amount of such capital stock has been purchased by the bank.
 `(D) LIMITATION ON DIVIDENDS- The amount of dividends which may be paid for
 any year by a bank on whose behalf an investment is made under subparagraph
 (A)(i) shall not exceed an amount equal to one-quarter of the net earnings
 available for dividends of the bank for the year.
 `(E) TRANSFER TO ACCOUNT FOR THE PURCHASE OF STOCK REQUIRED- Of the
 net earnings available for dividends for any year of a bank on whose
 behalf an investment is made under subparagraph (A)(i), such amount as
 is necessary to make the purchases of stock required under subparagraph
 (A)(ii) shall be placed in a reserve account (established in such manner
 as the Oversight Board shall prescribe by regulations) the balance in
 which shall be available only for such purchases.
 `(F) NET EARNINGS AVAILABLE FOR DIVIDENDS DEFINED- For purposes of this
 paragraph, the term `net earnings available for dividends' means the net
 earnings of a bank for any period as computed after reducing the amount
 of earnings for such period by the amount required to be carried (for
 such period) to reserves maintained by such bank pursuant to the first
 two sentences of section 16 of this Act (U.S.C. 1436).
 `(7) ADDITIONAL SOURCES- In the event that each Federal Home Loan Bank
 has exhausted the investment amount applicable with respect to such bank
 under paragraph (3) with respect to investments under paragraphs (4),
 (5), and (6), then the amounts necessary to provide additional funding
 for the Funding Corporation Principal Fund shall be obtained as follows:
 `(A) First, the Funding Corporation, with the approval of the Board of
 Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, shall assess each
 insured savings association an assessment as if such assessment was assessed
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with respect to Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members pursuant to section 7 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act, as amended; provided that the maximum amount of the
 aggregate amount assessed shall be the amount of additional funds necessary
 to fund the Funding Corporation Principal Fund; provided that the amount
 assessed hereunder and the amount assessed by the Financing Corporation
 under section 21 of this Act shall not exceed the amount authorized to
 be assessed pursuant to section 7 noted above and that the Financing
 Corporation shall have first priority to make such assessments; all such
 amounts shall be subtracted from the amounts authorized to be assessed by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation pursuant to section 7 noted above.
 `(B) To the extent funds available pursuant to paragraph (A) are insufficient
 to capitalize the Funding Corporation so as to provide funds for the Funding
 Corporation Principal Fund, then the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 shall transfer to the Funding Corporation from the proceeds of the FSLIC
 Resolution Fund the remaining amount of funds necessary for such purpose.
 `(8) UNDIVIDED PROFITS DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (3), the term
 `undivided profits' means retained earnings minus the sum of--
 `(A) that portion required to be added to reserves maintained pursuant to
 the first two sentences of section 16 of this Act (12 U.S.C. 1436); and
 `(B) the dollar amounts held by the respective Federal Home Loan Banks
 in special dividend stabilization reserves on December 31, 1985, as
 determined by the table set forth in section 21(d)(7) of this Act (12
 U.S.C. 1441(d)(7)).
 `(9) AGGREGATE ANNUAL FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS CONTRIBUTION- Notwithstanding
 any other provision in sections 21, 21a, and 21b of this Act, the aggregate
 annual amount contributed by the Federal Home Loan Banks under subsections
 (e)(3)(B) and (f)(2)(B) of this section (for the period from the date of
 enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement
 Act of 1989, until such time as the Funding Corporation has no more
 liabilities) for Funding Corporation principal and interest payments
 and Financing Corporation principal payments under section 21 of this
 Act shall be $300,000,000: Provided, however, That such aggregate annual
 amount shall be such lesser number equal to all the amounts needed for
 the purposes above if such total amounts shall be less than $300,000,000.
 `(f) OBLIGATIONS OF THE FUNDING CORPORATION-
 `(1) ISSUANCE- The Funding Corporation, subject to the direction of the
 Resolution Trust Corporation, may issue bonds, notes, debentures, and
 similar obligations, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $50,000,000,000.
 `(2) INTEREST PAYMENTS- The Funding Corporation shall pay the interest
 due on (and any redemption premium with respect to) such obligations from
 funds obtained for such interest payments from the following sources.
 `(A) The Resolution Trust Corporation shall pay to the Funding Corporation
 the net proceeds received by the Resolution Trust Corporation from the
 liquidation of institutions under its management pursuant to section 21a
 of this Act to the extent they are determined by the Oversight Board to
 be in excess of funds necessary for resolution costs in the near future
 and any proceeds from warrants and participations of the Resolution Trust
 Corporation; and
 `(B) To the extent the funds available pursuant to clause (A) are
 insufficient to cover the amount of interest payments, then the Federal
 Home Loan Banks shall pay to the Funding Corporation the aggregate
 annual amount of $300,000,000 minus the amounts needed by the Financing
 Corporation pursuant to section 21 of this Act and for the purchase of
 Funding Corporation capital certificates, with each bank's individual share
 to be determined pursuant the formulation and limitations of paragraphs
 (3) through (6) of subsection (e);
 `(C) The proceeds of all net assets of the Resolution Trust Corporation, upon
 its dissolution, which shall be transferred to the Funding Corporation; and
 `(D) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, to the extent that the
 Directorate determines after consultation with and approval of the Secretary
 of the Treasury that the Funding Corporation is unable to pay the interest on
 any obligation issued under this subsection from the sources of funds under
 (A), (B), and (C), the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay to the Funding
 Corporation the additional amount due which shall be used by the Funding
 Corporation to pay such interest. In each such instance where the Secretary
 of the Treasury is required to make a payment under this paragraph to the
 Funding Corporation, the amount of the payment shall become a liability
 of the Funding Corporation to be repaid to the Secretary of the Treasury
 upon dissolution of the Funding Corporation to the extent that the Funding
 Corporation may have any remaining assets. There is authorized to be
 appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury, for fiscal year 1989 and
 each fiscal year thereafter, such sums as may be necessary to carry out
 this paragraph.
 `(3) PRINCIPAL PAYMENTS- On maturity of an obligation issued under this
 subsection, the obligation shall be repaid by the Funding Corporation from
 the liquidation of noninterest bearing instruments held in the Funding
 Corporation Principal Fund established by subsection (g)(2). The Funding
 Corporation shall obtain funds for such Principal Fund from the funds
 obtained pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, all of which such
 funds shall be invested in noninterest bearing instruments described in
 subsection (g)(1).
 `(4) PROCEEDS TO BE INVESTED IN CAPITAL CERTIFICATES OF THE RESOLUTION TRUST
 CORPORATION- Subject to such terms and conditions as may be approved by
 the Oversight Board, the proceeds of any obligation issued by the Funding
 Corporation shall be used to--
 `(A) purchase the capital certificates issued by the Resolution Trust
 Corporation under section 21a of this Act; or
 `(B) refund any previously issued obligation the net proceeds of which
 were invested in the manner described in subparagraph (A).
 `(5) INVESTMENT OF UNITED STATES FUNDS IN OBLIGATIONS- Obligations
 issued under this section by the Funding Corporation, with the approval
 of the Oversight Board shall be lawful investments, and may be accepted
 as security, for all fiduciary, trust, and public funds the investment
 or deposit of which shall be under the authority or control of the United
 States or any officer of the United States.
 `(6) MARKET FOR OBLIGATIONS- All persons having the power to invest in,
 sell, underwrite, purchase for their own accounts, accept as security, or
 otherwise deal in obligations of the Federal Home Loan Banks shall also have
 the power to do so with respect to obligations of the Funding Corporation.
 `(7) TAX EXEMPT STATUS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), obligations of
 the Funding Corporation shall be exempt from tax both as to principal and
 interest to the same extent as any obligation of a Federal Home Loan Bank
 is exempt from tax under section 13 of this Act (12 U.S.C. 1433).
 `(B) EXCEPTION- The Funding Corporation, like the Federal Home Loan Banks,
 shall be treated as an agency of the United States for purposes of the first
 sentence of section 3124(b) of title 31, United States Code (relating to
 determination of tax status of interest on obligations).
 `(8) OBLIGATIONS ARE EXEMPT SECURITIES- Notwithstanding paragraph (10)
 below, obligations of the Funding Corporation shall be deemed to be exempt
 securities (within the meaning of the laws administered by the Securities
 and Exchange Commission) to the same extent as securities which are direct
 obligations of the United States or are guaranteed as to principal or
 interest by the United States.
 `(9) MINORITY PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC OFFERINGS- The Oversight Board and the
 Directorate shall ensure that minority owned or controlled commercial banks,
 investment banking firms, underwriters, and bond counsels throughout the
 United States have an opportunity to participate to a significant degree
 in any public offering of obligations issued under this section.
 `(10) NO FULL FAITH AND CREDIT OF THE UNITED STATES- Obligations of the
 Funding Corporation shall not be obligations of, or guaranteed as to
 principal by, the Federal Home Loan Bank System, the Federal Home Loan
 Banks, the United States, or the Resolution Trust Corporation and the
 obligations shall so plainly state. The Secretary of the Treasury shall
 pay interest on such obligations as required pursuant to subsection (f).
 `(g) USE AND DISPOSITION OF ASSETS OF THE FUNDING CORPORATION NOT INVESTED
 IN RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to such regulations, restrictions, and limitations
 as may be prescribed by the Oversight Board, assets of the Funding
 Corporation, which are not invested in capital certificates issued by the
 Resolution Trust Corporation under section 21a of this Act and which are
 not needed for current interest payments, shall be invested in--
 `(A) direct obligations of the United States;
 `(B) obligations, participations, or other instruments of, or issued by,
 the Federal National Mortgage Association or the Government National
 Mortgage Association;
 `(C) mortgages, obligations, or other securities for sale by, or which
 have been disposed of by, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
 under section 305 or 306 of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1454 or 1455); or
 `(D) any other security in which it is lawful for fiduciary and trust
 funds to be invested under the laws of any State.
 `(2) SEGREGATED ACCOUNTS FOR ZERO COUPON INSTRUMENTS HELD TO ASSURE
 PAYMENT OF PRINCIPAL- The Funding Corporation shall invest funds from
 sources specified in subsection (e) in, and hold in a segregated account
 (the `Funding Corporation Principal Fund'), noninterest bearing instruments--
 `(A) which are securities described in paragraph (1); and
 `(B) the total of the face amounts (the amount of principal payable at
 maturity) of which is approximately equal to the aggregate amount of
 principal on the obligations of the Funding Corporation.
 `(h) Miscellaneous Provisions Relating to the Funding Corporation-
 `(1) TREATMENT FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES- Except as provided in subsection
 (f)(7)(b), the Funding Corporation shall be treated as a Federal Home
 Loan Bank for purposes of sections 13 and 23 of this Act (12 U.S.C. 1433
 and 1443).
 `(2) FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS AS DEPOSITARIES AND FISCAL AGENTS- The Federal
 Reserve banks are authorized to act as depositaries for or fiscal agents
 or custodians of the Funding Corporation.
 `(3) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO GOVERNMENT CORPORATIONS-
 Notwithstanding the fact that no Government funds may be invested in the
 Funding Corporation, the Funding Corporation shall be treated, for purposes
 of sections 9105, 9107, and 9108 of title 31, United States Code, as a
 mixed-ownership Government corporation which has capital of the Government.
 `(4) POWER TO REMOVE AND JURISDICTION- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, any civil action, suit, or proceeding to which the Resolution
 Funding Corporation is a party shall be deemed to arise under the laws of
 the United States, and the United States District Court for the District
 of Columbia shall have original jurisdiction over such. The Resolution
 Funding Corporation may, without bond or security, remove any such action,
 suit, or proceeding from a State court to the United States District Court
 for the District of Columbia.
 `(i) Termination of the Funding Corporation-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Funding Corporation shall be dissolved, as soon as
 practicable, after the date by which all capital certificates purchased
 by the Funding Corporation in the Resolution Trust Corporation have been
 retired.
 `(2) OVERSIGHT BOARD AUTHORITY TO CONCLUDE THE AFFAIRS OF THE FUNDING
 CORPORATION- Effective on the date of the dissolution of the Funding
 Corporation under paragraph (1), the Oversight Board may exercise on behalf
 of the Funding Corporation, any power of the Funding Corporation which
 the Oversight Board determines to be necessary to settle and conclude the
 affairs of the Funding Corporation.
 `(j) REGULATIONS- The Oversight Board may prescribe such regulations as
 may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, including
 regulations defining terms used in this section.
 `(k) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) INSURED SAVINGS ASSOCIATION- The term `insured savings association'
 means a savings association as such term is defined by section 3(u) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act and which is insured by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation.
 `(2) OVERSIGHT BOARD- The term `Oversight Board' means the Oversight Board
 of the Resolution Trust Corporation under section 21a of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank Act, and after the termination of said Corporation the term
 shall mean the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Federal
 Reserve Board and the Attorney General.
 `(3) DIRECTORATE- The term `Directorate' means the directorate established in
 the manner provided in subsection (c)(1) to manage the Funding Corporation.
 `(4) ISSUANCE COSTS- The term `issuance costs'--
 `(A) means issuance fees and commissions incurred by the Funding Corporation
 in connection with the issuance or servicing of any obligation of the
 Funding Corporation; and
 `(B) includes legal and accounting expenses, trustee and fiscal paying
 agent charges, costs incurred in connection with preparing and printing
 offering materials, and advertising expenses, to the extent that any such
 cost or expense is incurred by the Funding Corporation in connection with
 issuing any obligation; and
 `(5) CUSTODIAN FEES- The term `custodian fee' means--
 `(A) any fee incurred by the Funding Corporation in connection with the
 transfer of any security to, or the maintenance of any security in, the
 segregated accounts established under subsection (g); and
 `(B) any other expense incurred by the Funding Corporation in connection
 with the establishment or maintenance of such accounts.'.
 SEC. 503. FINANCING CORPORATION- Section 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1441) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) By deleting the term `insured institution' and `institution' each
 time they appear and inserting `insured savings association' and `savings
 association' in lieu thereof respectively; and by deleting the term `Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board' and `Board' each time they appear and inserting in
 lieu thereof `Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System' and `Chairman'
 in lieu thereof respectively.
 (2) In subsection (c), in paragraph (2) by adding `prior to the date of
 the enactment of the Financial Institution Industry Reform, Recovery and
 Enforcement Act of 1989 and thereafter the FSLIC Resolution Fund' before
 the period therein; and in paragraph (9) by striking out `or section 402(b)
 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 725(b))'.
 (3) In subsection (e), in paragraph (3) by adding `prior to the enactment
 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989,
 and thereafter purchase capital certificates or capital stock issued by
 the FSLIC Resolution Fund' before the semicolon;
 (4) In subsection (e), in paragraph (7) by deleting `the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation' and inserting `the FSLIC Resolution Fund'
 in lieu thereof.
 (5) In subsection (f), by striking out everything thereunder and inserting
 the following:
 `(f) SOURCES OF FUNDS FOR INTEREST PAYMENTS; FINANCING CORPORATION
 ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY- The Financing Corporation shall obtain funds for
 interest payments on obligations issued hereunder from the following sources:
 `(1) The Financing Corporation assessments which were assessed on insured
 institutions pursuant to subsection (f) of this section prior to the
 enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement
 Act of 1989;
 `(2) The Financing Corporation, with the approval of the Board of Directors
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, shall assess on each insured
 savings association an assessment as if such assessment was assessed
 by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with respect to Savings
 Association Insurance Fund members pursuant to section 7 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act: Provided, That the amount assessed hereunder and the
 amount assessed by the Funding Corporation under section 21b of this Act
 shall not exceed the amount authorized to be assessed pursuant to section
 7 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and that the Financing Corporation
 shall have first priority to make such assessments; and Provided, further,
 That all assessments made by the Financing Corporation under this section
 and the Funding Corporation under section 21b shall be subtracted from
 the amounts authorized to be assessed by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation pursuant to section 7 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 `(3) To the extent the funds available pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2)
 are insufficient to cover the amount of interest payments, then to the
 extent the funds are not required by the Resolution Funding Corporation
 so as to provide funds for the Funding Corporation Principal Fund under
 section 21b of this Act, then the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 shall transfer to the Financing Corporation from the proceeds of the FSLIC
 Resolution Fund the remaining amount of funds necessary for the Financing
 Corporation to make interest payments.
 `(4) In subsection (g), by deleting the comma after `(12
 U.S.C. 1725(b)(1)(A))' and inserting thereafter `prior to the enactment
 of the Financial Institution Industry Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act
 of 1989 and thereafter in capital certificates or capital stock issued by
 the FSLIC Resolution Fund,'.
 (5) In subsection (1), by deleting subparagraph (1) and inserting in lieu
 thereof a new subparagraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) Insured Savings Association means a savings association as defined
 by section 3(u) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(u))
 that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.'.
 SEC. 504. MIXED OWNERSHIP GOVERNMENT CORPORATION- Section 9101(2) of
 title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(L) The Resolution Funding Corporation.'.
TITLE VI--THRIFT ACQUISITION ENHANCEMENT PROVISIONS
 SEC. 601. ACQUISITION OF THRIFTS BY BANK HOLDING COMPANIES- Section 4 of
 the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 184 is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i) ACQUISITION OF SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS- `(1) Beginning on the date two
 years following the enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery
 and Enforcement Act of 1989, the Board may approve an application by a bank
 holding company under subsection (c)(8) to acquire any savings association
 pursuant to the requirements and limitations of this section. In approving
 applications by bank holding companies to acquire a savings association,
 the Board shall not impose restrictions on transactions between the savings
 association and its holding company affiliates, except as required under
 the provisions of sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act (12
 U.S.C. 371c and 371c-1) or other applicable statute.'.
 SEC. 602. INVESTMENTS BY SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES IN UNAFFILIATED
 THRIFT INSTITUTIONS- Section 408(e)(1)(A)(iii) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730a(e)(1)(A)(iii)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(iii) to acquire, by purchase or otherwise, or to retain more than 5
 percent of the voting shares of an insured institution not a subsidiary,
 or of a savings and loan holding company not a subsidiary, or in the case
 of a multiple savings and loan holding company, to so acquire or retain
 more than 5 percent of the voting shares of any company not a subsidiary
 which is engaged in any business activity other than those specified in
 paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of this section.'.
 SEC. 603. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT TO THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT- Section
 (2)(j) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(j)) is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(j) INSURED INSTITUTION; SAVINGS ASSOCIATION- For purposes of this Act,
 the terms `insured institution' and `savings association' have the meaning
 given to the term `savings association' in section 10(a)(1)(A) of the Home
 Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. ).'
TITLE VII--FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK ACT SYSTEM REFORMS
Subtitle A--Federal Home Loan Bank Act Amendments
 SEC. 701 DEFINITIONS- (a) Add new paragraph (10) to section 2 of the
 Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1422) to read as follows:
 `(10) The term `savings association' has the same meaning as in section 2(c)
 of the Home Owners Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1462(c)).'.
 (b) Add a new paragraph (11) to Section 2 of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 Act and (12 U.S.C. 1422) to read as follows:
 `(11) The term `Chairman' means `Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 System'.'.
 (c) All provisions of Federal law are hereby amended by deleting the term
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' or `Board' where such term refers to the
 Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and inserting `Chairman of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System' or `Chairman' in lieu thereof, respectively.
 SEC. 702. FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK SYSTEM CHAIRMAN- Section 17 of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1437) is hereby amended to read as follows:
 `(a) The Federal Home Loan Bank Board is hereby abolished and all power
 and authority vested in it or its Chairman immediately prior to enactment
 of the Financial Institution Industry Reform, Recovery and Enforcement
 Act of 1989 are, except as otherwise provided in that Act, vested in the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, which System shall be a
 bureau in the Department of the Treasury. The Chairman shall supervise
 the Federal Home Loan Banks and their members and shall promulgate and
 enforce such rules, regulations, and orders, as are necessary from time
 to time for carrying out the provisions of this Act and all other laws it
 is his duty to implement. The Chairman shall perform his duties under the
 general directions of the Secretary of the Treasury.
 `(b) The Chairman, who shall be a citizens of the United States, shall be
 appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
 and shall hold office for a term of five years unless sooner removed by the
 President, upon reasons to be communicated by the President to the Senate:
 Provided, however, That the individual serving as the Chairman of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board on the date of enactment of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 shall be the Chairman until
 the date on which his term as Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board
 would have expired notwithstanding subsection (a). The Chairman may continue
 to serve until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
 `(c) Subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman
 of the Federal Home Loan Bank System may employ, direct and fix the
 compensation of such employees, attorneys and agents as he deems necessary
 to carry out his duties. In directing and fixing such compensation, the
 Chairman shall seek to maintain comparability with the compensation at
 the other Federal bank regulatory agencies. The Chairman may designate who
 shall serve in his absence; may continue or establish collective offices or
 administrative units of the Federal Home Loan Banks and, after consultation
 with the Federal Home Loan Banks, appoint the heads of such collective
 offices or administrative units; and, notwithstanding any other provisions
 of law, may delegate to any duly authorized employee, representative, or
 agent (including the Office of Finance or Office of Regulatory Affairs of
 the Federal Home Loan Banks or any other joint office or administrative
 unit of the Federal Home Loan Banks) any power vested in the Chairman by law.
 `(d) The Chairman shall have the power to suspend or remove any director,
 officer, employee, or agent of any Federal Home Loan Bank or administrative
 unit of such Banks (including the Office of Finance and the Office of
 Regulatory Affairs or any other joint office or administrative unit of
 the Federal Home Loan Banks), the fact of such suspension or removal to
 be communicated in writing forthwith to such director, officer, employee,
 or agent and to such Bank or joint office or administrative unit.
 `(e) The salaries of the Chairman and other employees of the bureau and
 all other expenses thereof shall be paid from assessments levied on the
 Federal Home Loan Banks pursuant to section 18 of this Act, and the funds
 derived from such assessments shall not be construed to be Government
 Funds or appropriated monies, or subject to Presidential apportionment
 for the purposes of chapter 15 of title 31 or any other authority. Such
 compensation, other than that of the Chairman, shall be paid without regard
 to the provisions of other laws applicable to officers or employees of
 the United States.
 `(f) It shall not be lawful for the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank System to have a financial interest, either directly or indirectly,
 in any member of a Federal Home Loan Bank.
 `(g) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Chairman shall have
 and may exercise all functions which the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Board, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation had or could exercise immediately prior
 to August 24, 1954, or immediately prior to June 24, 1954, which are not
 expressly transferred or consolidated into the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation or the Resolution Trust Corporation pursuant to this Act.
 `(h) The Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System shall make an annual
 report to Congress.'.
 SEC. 703. ELECTION OF BANK DIRECTORS- Section 7 of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1427) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) By striking out subsections (a), (b), (c), and by inserting the
 following new subsections in lieu thereof:
 `(a) NUMBER OF MEMBERS; CLASSES- The management for each Federal Home
 Loan Bank shall be vested in a board of directors selected as hereinafter
 specified and shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be citizens
 of the United States, holding office for three years, and divided into
 three classes, designated as classes A, B, and C, as follows:
 `(1) Class A shall consist of three members, without discrimination on the
 basis of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin, who shall be chosen
 by and be representative of the stockholding members.
 `(2) Class B shall consist of three members, who shall represent the public
 and who shall be elected without discrimination on the basis of race,
 creed, color, sex, or national origin, and with due consideration to the
 interests of the financial services industry and the housing industry,
 who shall be chosen by the class A and C directors.
 `(3) Class C shall consist of three members who shall be designated by the
 Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System. They shall be selected to
 represent the public, without discrimination on the basis of race, creed,
 color, sex, or national origin, and with due but not exclusive consideration
 to the interests of commerce, industry (other than the savings and loan
 industry), services, agriculture and consumers. No class C director shall
 be an officer, director, employee of stockholder of any member.
 `(b) CLASS A DIRECTORS; SELECTION- Directors of class A shall be chosen
 in the following manner:
 `(1) The System shall classify the members of a district into three general
 groups or divisions, designating each group by number. Each group shall
 consist of as nearly as may be of members of similar capitalization. Each
 member shall be permitted to nominate, in writing to the chairman of the
 board of directors of the Federal Home Loan Bank of the district, one
 candidate for director of class A. The candidates so nominated shall be
 listed by the chairman, indicating by whom nominated, and a copy of said
 list shall, within fifteen days after its completion, be furnished by the
 chairman to each member. Each member by a resolution of the board or by
 amendment to its bylaws shall authorize its president, cashier or some other
 officer to cast the vote of the member in the elections of class A directors:
 Provided, That whenever any member within the same Federal Home Loan Bank
 district are subsidiaries of the same savings and loan holding company,
 within the meaning of section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as
 amended, participation in any such nomination or election by such member,
 including such holding company if it is also a member, shall be confined
 to one of such members, which may be designated for the purpose by such
 holding company.
 `(2) Within fifteen days after receipt of the list of candidates, the duly
 authorized officer of the member shall certify to the chairman his first,
 second, and other choices for director of class A upon a preferential
 ballot upon a form furnished by the chairman of the board of directors of
 the Federal Home Loan Bank of the district. Each such officer shall make
 a cross opposite the name of the first, second, and other choices for a
 director of class A, but shall not vote more than one choice for any one
 candidate. No officer or director of a member shall be eligible to serve
 as a class A director unless nominated and elected by members which are
 of the same group as the member of which he is an officer or director.
 `(3) Any person who is an officer or director of more than one member shall
 not be eligible for nomination as a class A director except by members
 in the same group as the member having the largest aggregate resources of
 any of those of which such person is an officer or director.
 `(4) Any candidate having a majority of all votes cast in the column of
 first choice shall be declared elected. If no candidate has a majority
 of all the votes in the first column, then there shall be added together
 the votes cast by the electors for such candidates in the second column
 and the votes cast for the several candidates in the first column. The
 candidate then having a majority of the electors voting and the highest
 number of combined votes shall be declared elected. If no candidate has
 a majority of electors voting and the highest number of votes when the
 first and second choices shall have been added, then the votes cast in
 the third column for other choices shall be added together in like manner,
 and the candidate then having the highest number of votes shall be declared
 elected. An immediate report shall be declared.
 `(c) CLASS B DIRECTORS; SELECTION- Class B directors shall be chosen by
 the class A and C directors. They shall have been for at least two years
 residents of the district for which they are appointed.
 `(d) CLASS C DIRECTORS; SELECTION- Class C directors shall be appointed
 by and serve at the pleasure of the Chairman of the System. They shall
 have been for at least two years residents of the district for which they
 are appointed. One class C director shall be designated by the Chairman
 of the System as chairman of the board of directors of the Federal Home
 Loan Bank. The chairman of the board of directors shall be a person of
 tested experience and shall be required to maintain, under regulations
 established by the System, a local office of said board on the premises of
 the Federal Home Loan Bank. The chairman of the board shall make regular
 reports to the Chairman of the System and receive an annual compensation
 to be fixed by the Chairman of the System and paid monthly by the Federal
 Home Loan Bank to which the chairman of the board is designated. One other
 class C director shall be appointed by the Chairman of the System as deputy
 chairman of the board to exercise the powers of the chairman of the board
 when necessary. In case of the absence of the chairman and deputy chairman,
 the third class C director shall preside at meetings of the board.'.
 (2) Renumber subsection (d) as (e), and strike out the first two sentences
 thereof;
 (3) Delete existing subsection (e) and inserting in lieu thereof the
 following new subsection as subsection (f):
 `(f) ESTABLISHMENT OF TERMS- At the first meeting of the full board of
 directors of each Federal Home Loan Bank, it shall be the duty of the
 class A, B, and C directors, respectively to designate one of the members
 of each class whose term of office shall expire in one year from the 1st
 of January nearest to the date of such meeting, one whose term of office
 shall expire at the end of two years from said date, and one whose term of
 office shall expire at the end of three years from said date. Thereafter
 every director of a Federal Home Loan Bank chosen as hereinbefore provided
 shall hold office for a term of three years.'; and
 (4) Renumber existing subsection (f) as (g) and delete subsections (g)
 and (h), and redesignating (i) and (j) as (g) and (h), respectively.
 SEC. 704. FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK LENDING- Section 11(k) of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1431(k)) is hereby amended to read as follows:
 `(k) The Federal Home Loan Banks are hereby authorized, as directed by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with the concurrence of the
 Chairman of the System, to make loans to such Corporation for the use
 of the Savings Association Insurance Fund, which loans shall be a direct
 liability of such Fund.'.
 SEC. 705. CHIEF SUPERVISORY OFFICER- (a) Section 19 of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1439) is hereby amended by deleting the first sentence
 and adding a new second sentence to read as follows: `The senior supervisory
 employee of each Federal Home Loan Bank, the principal supervisory agent,
 shall report to the chief supervisory official of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank System and may be removed for cause by the Chairman.'.
 (b) The title to section 19 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12
 U.S.C. 1439) is amended to read `Supervision; Receipts and Expenditures'.
 SEC. 706. THRIFT ADVISORY COUNCIL- Section 8a of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1428a) is amended as follows:
 (1) The words `Federal Savings and Loan' are deleted from the first sentence
 and title of this section and the word `Thrift' substituted.
 (2) In paragraph (1) of section 8a delete the following words `and board
 of trustees of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation' and
 the words `and such Corporation'.
 (3) In paragraph (2) of section 8a delete the following words `and the
 board of trustees of such Corporation'.
 SEC. 707. FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN INSURANCE CORPORATION INDUSTRY ADVISORY
 COMMITTEE- Subsection (i) of section 21 of the Federal Home Bank Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1441(i)) is hereby repealed.
 SEC. 708. RATE OF INTEREST- Section 5B of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1425b) is hereby repealed.
 SEC. 709. LIQUIDITY REQUIREMENTS- Section 5A of the Federal Home Loan Bank
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1425a) is hereby amended as follows:
 (1) The first sentence of paragraph 1 of subsection (b) is amended by
 deleting the words `an insured institution as defined in section 1724(a) of
 this title' and by adding the words `a savings association' in place thereof;
 (2) Subsection (d) is hereby amended by deleting in the first sentence the
 word `its' and by substituting the word `his' in lieu thereof and in the
 second sentence by deleting the words `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation' and by substituting the words `Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation' in lieu thereof;
 (3) Subsection (f) is hereby amended by deleting the last sentence and by
 adding the following in lieu thereof: `The provisions of Section 5(d)(1)
 of the Home Owners' Loan Act as redesignated shall govern the conduct of
 any such examination or investigation.'.
 (4) Section 5A(b)(1) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12
 U.S.C. 1425a(b)(1)) is hereby amended--
 (a) by striking out `and' at the end of subparagraph (F);
 (b) by striking out the period at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting
 in lieu thereof `; and'; and
 (c) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(H) To such extent as the Chairman may approve, other assets prescribed
 by the Chairman by regulation and of a type such that their inclusion as
 liquid assets would comport with the purpose of this section as described
 in subsection (a).'.
 SEC. 710. ADVANCES- Subsection (e) of section 10 of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act is hereby amended as follows:
 (a) The words `insured institution' are deleted wherever they occur and
 the words `savings association' are added in lieu thereof;
 (b) In paragraph (3)(A), `Section 1730a(a)(1)(A)' is deleted and `Section
 1467a' is substituted in lieu thereof.
 (c) In paragraph (3)(B), `Section 1730a(o)' is deleted and `Section 1467a'
 is substituted in lieu thereof.
 (d) In paragraph (3)(c), `Section 1730a(o)(5)(A)' is deleted and `Section
 1467a' is substituted in lieu thereof.
 SEC. 711. CONFORMING FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK ACT AMENDMENTS- (a) Amend
 section 1438(c)(5) to delete everything in the first sentence after `under
 this subsection'.
 (b) Amend the first sentence of section 1438(c)(6) to delete everything
 after `budget program' and before `and (B)'.
 (c) Delete section 1438(a) entirely.
 (d) Delete the last sentence of section 1439.
 (e) Amend section 101 of title I of the Act of June 16, 1943 (12
 U.S.C. 1439a) to delete everything after `Federal Home Loan Bank
 Administration'.
 (f) Amend section 111 of title I of Public Law 93-495 (12 U.S.C. 250)
 to delete `the Federal Home Loan Bank Board'.
Subtitle B--Conforming Amendments
 SEC. 712. FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION ACT AMENDMENTS- The
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.) is
 hereby amended as follows:
 (1) Section 303 (12 U.S.C. 1452) is amended as follows:
 (a) The first sentence of subsection (a) is amended by deleting the words
 `members of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting in place thereof
 the words `three members who shall serve without additional compensation
 and who shall be the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System, the
 Secretary of the Treasury, or his designate, and the Secretary of Housing
 and Urban Development, or his designate. The Board of Directors may elect
 a Vice Chairman.'.
 (b) The second sentence of subsection (a) is amended by deleting the word
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting in place thereof the words
 `Federal Home Loan Bank System'.
 (c) the fourth sentence of subsection (a) is amended by deleting the words
 `Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting in place thereof the words
 `Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System'.
 (2) Section 305 (12 U.S.C. 1454) is amended as follows:
 (a) deleting the words `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'
 each time they appear in this section and inserting `Resolution Trust
 Corporation' in lieu thereof; and,
 (b) deleting the word `Board' in the second to last sentence of subsection
 (a)(2) and inserting the word `System' in lieu thereof.
 SEC. 713. REPEAL OF LIMITATION OF OBLIGATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES-
 Section 7 of the First Deficiency Appropriation Act of 1936 (15 U.S.C. 712a)
 is amended by deleting from subsection (b) the following enumerated entities:
 `1. Federal Home Loan Bank System; 2. Home Owners' Loan Corporation;
 11. Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation;'.
 SEC. 714. AMENDMENT OF ADDITIONAL POWERS OF CHAIRMAN- (a) Subsection (c)
 of section 502 of the Housing Act of 1948, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701c(b)),
 is amended by striking out the terms `Federal Home Loan Bank Board (which
 term as used in this section shall also include and refer to the Federal
 Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, and the Chairman of the Federal
 Home Loan Bank Board),' and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `Chairman, Federal Home Bank System,'; and
 (b) Subsection (1) of subsection (c) of said section 502 is amended by
 inserting between the term `of any' and `State or' the following term:
 `Federal'.
 SEC. 715. AMENDMENT OF TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE- (a) Section 5314 of
 title 5, United States Code (5 U.S.C. 5314) is amended by deleting the
 term `Board' from the phrase `Chairman, Federal Home Loan Bank Board'
 and inserting in lieu thereof the term `System'; and
 (b) Section 5373 of title 5, United States Code, is hereby amended by
 inserting at subparagraph (2), between the terms, `481,' and `and' the
 following terms: `1437, 1439,'.
 SEC. 716. AMENDMENT OF TITLE 31, UNITED STATES CODE- (a) Chapter 3 of
 title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting at subchapter I,
 a new section 307a to read as follows:
307a. FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK SYSTEM.
The Federal Home Loan Bank System, established under section 17 of the
Federal Home Loan Bank Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1437) is subject to the
general oversight of the Secretary of the Treasury.
 (b) Subsection (c) of section 321, title 31, United States Code (31
 U.S.C. 321), is amended by adding thereto a new subparagraph (3) as follows:
 `(3) of the Chairman, Federal Home Loan Bank System.'; and
 (c) Subsection (a) of section 714, title 31, United States Code (31
 U.S.C. 714), is amended by adding to the end of the first sentence
 the following: `and the Office of the Chairman, Federal Home Loan Bank
 System.'; and
 (d) Section 9101 of title 31, United States Code (31 U.S.C. 9101), is
 amended by striking from subsection (3) the following:
 `(E) the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.'
 SEC. 717. AMENDMENT OF BALANCED BUDGET AND EMERGENCY DEFICIT CONTROL ACT
 PROVISIONS- (a) Subsection (1)(A) of subsection (g) of section 255 of the
 Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 905)
 is amended by striking out the following terms: `Federal Home Loan Bank
 Board;' and `Federal Home Loan Bank Board, Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation;' and inserting in lieu thereof: `Federal Home Loan Bank System
 and Resolution Trust Corporation;'; and
 (b) Subsection (4) of section (b) of section 256 of the Balanced Budget
 and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 256) is amended by--
 (1) striking out the term `(C) Federal Home Loan Bank Board' and inserting
 in lieu thereof:
 `(C) Federal Home Loan Bank System and Resolution Trust Corporation.'; and
 (2) by striking out the term `(D) Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation.'
 SEC. 718. AMENDMENT OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE- (a) Sections 1008 and
 1009 of title 18, United States Code (18 U.S.C. 1008, 1009) are repealed; and
 (b) Section 1014 of title 18, United States Code (18 U.S.C. 1014)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out the term `the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Home
 Owner's Loan Corporation' and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `a Federal Savings Bank;'; and
 (2) by striking out the terms, `any institution the accounts of which are
 insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, and Bank'
 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `any financing institution
 the accounts or'; and
 (3) by amending the term `any member of the Federal Home Loan Bank System'
 by striking out the term `member' therein and inserting in lieu thereof
 the following: `component or office'; and
 (4) by striking out the term `the Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation'.
TITLE VIII--BANK CONSERVATION ACT AMENDMENTS
 SEC. 801. DEFINITIONS- Section 202 of title II of the Act of March 9, 1933
 (48 Stat. 2, 12 U.S.C. 202), the Bank Conservation Act (hereinafter `Bank
 Conservation Act'), is amended by adding the words `or any other financial
 institution chartered under Federal law and subject to the supervision of the
 Comptroller of the Currency after the words `national banking association'.
 SEC. 802. APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATOR- Section 203 of the Bank Conservation
 Act (12 U.S.C. 203) is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 203. APPOINTMENT OF CONSERVATOR- (a) APPOINTMENT- The Comptroller of
 the Currency may, without notice, appoint a conservator which may be the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to take possession and control of a
 bank whenever the Comptroller determines that one or more of the following
 circumstances exists--
 `(1) the conditions for appointment of a receiver for the bank are present;
 `(2) the bank is in danger of closing, such that the bank is not likely
 to be able to meet the demands of its depositors, or pay its obligations
 in the normal course of business, or the bank has incurred or is likely
 to incur losses that will deplete all or substantially all of its capital;
 `(3) a violation or violations of laws, rules or regulations or any unsafe
 or unsound practice or condition which is likely to cause insolvency or
 substantial dissipation of assets or earnings, or is likely to weaken the
 condition of the bank or otherwise seriously prejudice the interests of
 its depositors;
 `(4) the bank is in an unsafe and unsound condition to transact business;
 `(5) the bank's board of directors consists of less than five members;
 `(6) a willful or continuing violation of an order enforceable under the
 provisions of section 8(i) and (j) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
 as amended (12 U.S.C. 1818 (i));
 `(7) concealment of books, papers, records, or assets of the bank or refusal
 to submit books, papers, records, or affairs of the bank for inspection
 to any examiner or to any lawful agent of the Comptroller; or
 `(8) such other circumstances which, in the Comptroller's opinion,
 warrant appointment of a conservator for the benefit of depositors and
 other creditors.
 `(b) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(1) Not later than ten days after the initial appointment of a conservator
 pursuant to this section, the bank may bring an action in the United
 States District Court for the judicial district in which the home office
 of such bank is located, or in the United States District Court for the
 District of Columbia, for an order requiring the Comptroller to terminate
 the appointment of a conservator, and the court, upon the merits, shall
 dismiss such action or shall direct the Comptroller to terminate the
 appointment of such conservator. The Comptroller's decision to appoint
 a conservator pursuant to this provision shall be set aside only if the
 court shall find that such decision was arbitrary, capricious, an abuse
 of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 `(2) Upon the commencement of such an action, the court having jurisdiction
 of any other action or proceeding to which the bank, or the conservator
 thereof, is a party shall stay such action or proceeding during the pendency
 of the action for removal of the conser- vator.
 `(3) Except as provided in this subsection, no court shall have jurisdiction
 to affect by injunction or otherwise the appointment of a conservator, or to
 review, modify, suspend, terminate or set aside any order or action taken
 pursuant to such conservatorship: Provided, That a court, upon application
 by the Comptroller, shall enforce an order of the Comptroller relating
 to the conservatorship and the bank in conservatorship or restraining or
 affecting the exercise of powers of functions of a conservator.
 `(c) ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR APPOINTMENT- In addition to the foregoing
 provisions, the Comptroller may appoint a conservator for a bank in the
 event that (i) the bank, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its board
 of directors or by an affirmative vote of a majority of its shareholders,
 consents to such appointment, or (ii) in lieu of the provisions of section
 8(o) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1818(o)),
 the bank's status as an insured bank is terminated by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation. The appointment of a conservator pursuant to this
 subsection shall not be subject to review.
 `(d) EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY- The Comptroller shall have exclusive power and
 jurisdiction to appoint a conservator for a bank. Whenever the Comptroller
 appoints a conservator for any bank, he may appoint the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation conservator for such bank. The Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation, as such conservator, shall have all the powers
 granted under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and (when not inconsistent
 therewith) any other rights, powers, and privileges possessed by conservators
 or receivers of banks under this Act and any other provisions of law. The
 Comptroller may also appoint another person as conservator, who shall be
 subject to the provisions of this Act.
 `(e) The Comptroller may, without notice or hearing, replace a conservator
 with another conservator. Such replacement shall not affect the bank's
 right under subsection (b) to obtain judicial review of the Comptroller's
 original decision to appoint a conservator.'.
 SEC. 803. EXAMINATIONS- Section 204 of the Bank Conservation Act (12
 U.S.C. 204) is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 204. EXAMINATIONS- The Comptroller of the Currency, in consultation
 with the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 when the Corporation is appointed conservator, is authorized to examine
 and supervise the bank in conservatorship as long as the bank continues
 operations as an ongoing national bank. The Comptroller may use reports
 and other information provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 for this purpose.'.
 SEC. 804. TERMINATION OF CONSERVATORSHIP- Section 205 of the Bank
 Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 205) is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 205- TERMINATION OF CONSERVATORSHIP- (a) At any time the Comptroller
 becomes satisfied that it may safely be done and that it would be in
 the public interest, the Comptroller, with the agreement of the Board of
 Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation when the Corporation
 is appointed conservator, may:
 `(1) terminate the conservatorship and permit the involved bank to resume
 the transaction of its business subject to such terms, conditions and
 limitations as the Comptroller may prescribe; or
 `(2) terminate the conservatorship upon a sale, merger, consolidation,
 purchase and assumption, change in control, or voluntary liquidation of
 the involved bank.
 `(b) The Comptroller also may terminate the conservatorship upon a
 declaration that the bank is insolvent and upon the appointment of a
 receiver pursuant to section 1 of the Act of June 30, 1876 (12 U.S.C. 191).
 `(c) Such terms, conditions and limitations as prescribed by subsection
 (a)(1) of this section shall be enforceable under the provisions of
 section 8(i) and (j) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as amended (12
 U.S.C. 1818(i) and (j)) to the same extent as an effective and outstanding
 order issued pursuant to section 8(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1818(b)) that has become final: Provided, That
 the bank may bring an action in the United States district court for the
 judicial district in which the home office of such bank is located or in
 the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for an order
 requiring the Comptroller to terminate the order. An action for judicial
 review of the terms, conditions and limitations may not be commenced later
 than thirty days from the date of the termination of the conservatorship
 or the imposition of the order, whichever is later.
 `(d) Upon termination of the conservatorship under subsection (a)(2)
 of this section--
 `(1) when the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is appointed conservator,
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as conservator, shall proceed
 to wind up the affairs of the conservatorship; or
 `(2) when another person is appointed conservator, the conservator shall
 proceed to wind up the affairs of the conservatorship as follows:
 `(A) Within one hundred and eighty days of the sale, merger, consolidation,
 purchase and assumption, or voluntary liquidation, the conservator shall
 deposit all net proceeds received from the transaction, less any expenses of
 the conservatorship that are outstanding, with the United States District
 Court for the judicial district in which the home office of such bank is
 located and shall cause notice to be published for three consecutive months
 and notify by mail all known creditors and shareholders. Within sixty days
 thereafter, any depositor, creditor, or other claimant of the bank, or any
 shareholder of the bank may bring an action in interpleader in that court
 for distribution of the proceeds. The District Court shall disseminate such
 funds in an equitable manner. If no such action is instituted within one
 year of the date the funds were deposited with the District Court, title
 to such net proceeds shall revert to the United States and the District
 Court shall remit the funds to the Treasury of the United States.
 `(B) The conservator shall be deemed to have discharged all responsibility
 of the conservatorship upon the deposit of the proceeds with the District
 Court and fulfillment of the required notifications.'.
 SEC. 805. CONSERVATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES- Section 206 of the Bank
 Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 206) is amended to read as follows:
 `SECTION 206. CONSERVATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES- (a) A conservator shall
 have all the powers of the shareholders, directors, and officers of the
 bank and shall be authorized to operate the bank in its own name unless
 the Comptroller in the order of appointment limits the authority of the
 conservator.
 `(b) The conservator shall be subject to such rules, regulations, and
 orders as the Comptroller from time to time deems appropriate; and,
 except as otherwise specifically provided in such rules, regulations,
 or orders, shall be vested with or subject to the same rights privileges,
 duties, restrictions, penalties, conditions, and limitations that apply to
 directors, officers, or employees of a national bank, except as otherwise
 provided in section 209 of this Act.
 `(c) The Comptroller may require the conservator to set aside and make
 available for withdrawal by depositors and payment to other creditors such
 amounts as in the opinion of the Comptroller may safely be used for this
 purpose: Provided, That all depositors and creditors who are similarly
 situated shall be treated in the same manner.
 `(d) The conservator and professional employees appointed to represent or
 assist the conservator shall be paid amounts no greater than are payable
 for employees of the Federal Government for similar services, except that
 the Comptroller of the Currency may authorize payment at higher rates,
 not to exceed rates prevalent in the private sector, if the Comptroller
 determines that payment of such higher rates is necessary in order to
 recruit and retain competent personnel.
 `(e) All expenses of any such conservatorship shall be paid by the bank
 and shall be a lien upon the bank which shall be prior to any other lien.'.
 SEC. 806. LIABILITY PROTECTION- Section 209 of the Bank Conservation Act
 (12 U.S.C. 209) is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 209. LIABILITY PROTECTION- (a) The conservator shall not be held
 liable for damages in tort or otherwise for acts or omissions of acts
 performed pursuant to and in the course of the duties and responsibilities
 of the conservatorship unless such acts or omissions of acts are grossly
 negligent, as determined by a court.
 `(b) The Comptroller shall have authority to indemnify the conservator on
 such terms as the Comptroller deems proper.'.
 SEC. 807. RULES AND REGULATIONS- Section 211 of the Bank Conservation Act
 (12 U.S.C. 211) is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 211. RULES AND REGULATIONS- `The Comptroller of the Currency is
 hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe such rules and regulations as
 the Comptroller may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.'.
 SEC. 808. REPEALS- Sections 207 and 208 of the Bank Conservator Act (48
 Stat. 3, 12 U.S.C. 207 and 208) are hereby repealed.
 SEC. 809. CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 5373(2) of title 5, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows: `(2) sections 203, 248, 481 and 1819
 of title 12,'.
TITLE IX--REGULATORY AUTHORITY AND CRIMINAL ENHANCEMENTS
 SEC. 901. SHORT TITLE- This title may be cited as the `Enforcement Powers
 Improvement Act of 1989'.
Subtitle A--Regulation of Financial Institutions
 SEC. 902. AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- (a) Section 8
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818) is amended--
 (1) by replacing the following phrases in each place they appear with the
 phrase `institution-related party':
 (A) `director, officer, employee, agent, or other person participating in
 the conduct of the affairs of such bank';
 (B) `director, officer or other person'; and
 (C) `director, officer, employee, agent or other person';
 (2)(A) by redesignating subsection (a) as subsection 8(a)(1) and by replacing
 the words `one hundred and twenty days' with the words `sixty days';
 (B) by replacing the words `shall continue for a period of two years'
 with the words `shall continue for a period of at least six months or up
 to two years, within the discretion of the Board of Directors.'; and
 (C) by adding the following new paragraph (a)(2):
 `(2) In addition to the foregoing administrative proceedings described in
 subsection (a)(1), whenever the Board of Directors, after consultation with
 the appropriate federal banking agency, shall find that an insured financial
 institution has no tangible shareholders' equity that qualifies as tier one
 capital under the capital guidelines or regulations of the appropriate
 Federal banking agency, the Corporation may issue a temporary order
 suspending deposit insurance on all deposits received by the institution
 after the effective date of such order. Such order shall become effective
 not earlier than ten days from the date of service upon the institution
 and, unless set aside, limited or suspended by a court in proceedings
 authorized hereunder, such temporary order shall remain effective and
 enforceable pending completion of the administrative proceedings or until
 the Corporation shall dismiss such administrative proceedings. Within
 ten days after the temporary order has been served upon the institution
 as hereinabove provided, the institution may apply to the United States
 District Court for the District of Columbia, or the United States district
 court for the judicial district in which the home office of the institution
 is located, for an injunction setting aside, limiting or suspending the
 enforcement, operation or effectiveness of such order, and such court
 shall have jurisdiction to issue such injunction. The insured deposits of
 each depositor in such financial institution on the effective date of the
 order issued under this paragraph (8), less all subsequent withdrawals from
 any deposits of such depositor, shall continue to be insured, subject to
 the administrative proceedings as provided in this Act. In addition, the
 Corporation may publish notice of any order issued under this paragraph (8)
 and the financial institution shall give notice of such order to each of
 its depositors in such manner and at such times as the Board of Directors
 may find to be necessary and may order for the protection of depositors. In
 the event the Corporation determines that the financial institution has
 not substantially complied with the notice to depositors required by the
 Board of Directors, the Corporation may provide such notice in such manner
 as the Board of Directors may find to be necessary and appropriate. The
 failure of a depositor to receive notice shall not affect the effectiveness
 of any order issued under this paragraph.';
 (3) at the end of paragraph (1) of subsection (b), by striking the period
 and inserting: `including, without limitation, reimbursement, restitution,
 indemnification, rescission, the disposal of loans or assets, prohibitions
 or restrictions on growth of the institution, guarantees against loss, or
 other action the appropriate Federal banking agency deems appropriate. Such
 order may place limitations on the activities or functions of the financial
 institution or any institution-related party necessary to correct the
 conditions resulting from any such violation or practice.';
 (4) in paragraph (3) of subsection (b), by striking out `Nothing' in the
 second sentence thereof and inserting in lieu thereof `Except as provided
 in subsection (b)(6) of this section, nothing';
 (5) at the end of subsection (b), by adding the following new paragraph:
 `(6) This subsection and subsections (c) through (n) of this section shall
 apply to any savings and loan holding company and to any subsidiary (other
 than a bank or subsidiary of that bank) of a savings and loan holding
 company, to any service corporation of a savings association and to any
 subsidiary of such service corporation, whether wholly or partly owned,
 in the same manner as they apply to a savings association.';
 (6) in paragraph (1) of subsection (c), by striking the words `substantial'
 and `seriously' and by inserting the following sentence after the first
 sentence: `Such order may place limitations on the activities or functions
 of the financial institution or prohibitions or restrictions on the growth
 of the institution or any institution-related party.';
 (7) at the end of subsection (c), by adding the following new paragraph:
 `(3) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that an insured financial
 institution's books and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that
 the appropriate Federal banking agency is unable with reasonable effort
 to determine the financial condition of that financial institution
 or the details or purpose of any transaction or transactions that may
 have a substantial effect on the financial condition of that financial
 institution, the agency may issue a temporary order requiring cessation
 of any activities the agency deems appropriate, including prohibitions or
 restrictions on the growth of the institution, or affirmative action to
 restore such books and records to a complete and accurate state, or both,
 until completion of proceedings conducted under paragraph (1) of subsection
 (b) of this section. Such order shall become effective upon service, and
 unless set aside, limited, or suspended by a court in proceedings authorized
 by paragraph (2) of this subsection, shall remain effective and enforceable
 pending completion of the administrative proceeding initiated under such
 notice or until the Federal banking agency determines by examination or
 otherwise that the financial institution's books and records are accurate and
 capable of reflecting the financial condition of the financial institution.';
 (8) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (2) and amending paragraph
 (1) to read as follows:
 `(1)(A) Whenever the appropriate Federal banking agency determines that any
 institution-related party, directly or indirectly, has violated any law,
 rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist order which has become final, or has
 engaged or participated in any unsafe or unsound practice in connection
 with any insured financial institution or business institution, or has
 committed or engaged in any act, omission, or practice which constitutes
 a breach of fiduciary duty, and
 `(B) such insured financial institution or business institution has
 suffered or will probably suffer financial loss or other damage, or the
 interests of its depositors have been or could be prejudiced by reason of
 such violation, practice, or breach, or the institution-related party has
 received financial gain by reason of such violation, practice, or breach, and
 `(C) such violation, practice, or breach involves personal dishonesty
 on the part of such institution-related party or demonstrates willful or
 continuing disregard for the safety or soundness of such insured financial
 institution or business institution,
the agency may serve upon such institution-related party a written notice of
its intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit the party's
further participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any
insured financial institution.';
 (9) in subsection (e), by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as
 paragraphs (2) through (5), respectively, and by amending paragraph (3),
 as redesignated, to read as follows:
 `(3) In respect to any institution-related party referred to in paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection, the appropriate Federal banking agency may,
 if it deems it necessary for the protection of the financial institution
 or the interests of its depositors, by written order to such effect served
 upon such party, suspend such party from office or prohibit such party
 from further participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of
 the financial institution. Such suspension or prohibition shall become
 effective upon service of such order on the institution-related party
 and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings authorized by subsection
 (f) of this section, shall remain in effect pending the completion of the
 administrative proceedings pursuant to the notice served under paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection and until such time as the agency shall
 dismiss the charges specified in such notice, or, if an order of removal
 or prohibition is issued against such party, until the effective date of
 any such order. Copies of any order issued pursuant to this paragraph shall
 also be served upon any financial institution where the party involved is
 presently associated.';
 (10) after paragraph (5) of subsection (e), as redesignated, by inserting
 the following new paragraph:
 `(6) Any person who is subject to a removal, suspension, or prohibition
 order pursuant to this subsection or subsection (g) shall also be removed,
 suspended, or prohibited from participation in the conduct of the affairs
 of--
 `(A) any insured financial institution,
 `(B) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956),
 `(C) any organization organized and operated under section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 `(D) any service corporation or subsidiary of a service corporation whether
 wholly or partly owned of any insured financial institution,
 `(E) any savings and loan holding company or any subsidiary of a savings
 and loan holding company (as those terms are defined in the Home Owners'
 Loan Act),
 `(F) any depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National
 Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, and
 `(G) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971,
unless the party involved has received the prior written approval of the
appropriate Federal regulatory agency to continue such affiliation or to
continue participating in the affairs of such institution.';
 (11) in subsection (f), by striking `(e)(4)' in subsection (f) and inserting
 `(e)(3)', and by striking `(e)(1), (e)(2), or (e)(3)' and inserting `(e)(1)
 or (e)(2)';
 (12) in subsection (i), by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as paragraphs
 (2) and (3), respectively, and by inserting after `(i)' the following
 new paragraph:
 `(1) The jurisdiction and authority of the appropriate Federal banking
 agency to proceed under this section against any institution-related
 party shall not be affected by the resignation, termination of employment,
 or other separation of such person from an insured financial institution.';
 (13) by amending redesignated subsection (i)(3)(i) by replacing the words
 `$1,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues'
 with the words `$25,000 for each day during which such violation
 continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations made with reckless
 disregard for the safety and soundness of the financial institution,
 the Corporation may, in its discretion, assess a penalty of not more than
 $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues.';
 (14) by adding paragraph (i)(4) as follows:
 `(4)(A) Any insured financial institution and any institution-related party
 which has violated any law or regulation relating to financial institutions,
 or any condition imposed in writing by the appropriate Federal banking agency
 in connection with the grant of any application or other request by such
 insured bank, or has breached any fiduciary duty or engaged in any unsafe
 or unsound practice where such breach or practice has resulted in a loss
 to the financial institution or pecuniary gain to the institution-related
 party, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day
 during which such violation continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
 for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness
 of the financial institution, the Corporation may, in its discretion,
 assess a penalty of not more than $1,000,000 per day for each day during
 which such violation continues.
 `(B) Any penalty imposed under subparagraph (A) shall be assessed,
 determined, reviewed, and collected in the manner provided in paragraph
 (3) for any penalty imposed under such paragraph.
 `(c)(i) The assessment of any penalty under subparagraph (A) with respect
 to any violation shall not preclude the appropriate Federal banking agency
 from issuing any order under subsection (b), (c), (e), (g), or (s) with
 respect to such violation, or taking any other action authorized by law
 with respect to such violation.
 `(ii) No civil penalty may be imposed under subparagraph (A) for any
 violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under paragraph (3) or any
 other provision of law.';
 (15) in (i)(2)(vi), by removing the period at the end thereof and by adding
 the words `and shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to define
 any term not otherwise defined in this section.';
 (16) by amending subsection (j) to read as follows:
 `(j) PENALTY- Any institution-related party against whom there is any
 outstanding and effective order served upon such person under paragraph
 (3) or (4) of subsection (e) or under subsection (g) who, directly or
 indirectly, without the prior written approval of the appropriate Federal
 regulatory agency--
 `(1) participates in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured
 financial institution, any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank
 holding company (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act
 of 1956), any organization organized and operated under section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve
 Act, any service corporation or subsidiary of a service corporation of
 any insured financial institution, any savings and loan holding company
 or subsidiary of a savings and loan holding company (as those terms are
 defined in the Home Owners' Loan Act), any depository institution whose
 accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund,
 or any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, from which
 he has been suspended, removed, or prohibited, or solicits or procures,
 or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes or attempts to vote any
 proxies, consents, or authorization in respect to any voting rights in
 such institution; or
 `(2) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any manner in the conduct
 of the affairs of any insured institution, any bank holding company or
 subsidiary thereof or any other institution described in paragraph (1)
 of this subsection shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 for each day
 the violation continues or imprisoned for not more than five years, or
 both. Any order issued under subsection (e) of this section may prohibit
 any act that would violate this subsection.';
 (17) by amending subsection (k) to read as follows:
 `(k) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) the term `appropriate Federal regulatory agency' means--
 `(A) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as provided in subsection
 (g) of section 3 (12 U.S.C. 1813);
 `(B) the National Credit Union Administration Board in the case of a
 depository institution whose accounts are insured by the National Credit
 Union Share Insurance Fund; and
 `(C) the Farm Credit Administration in the case of an institution chartered
 under the Farm Credit Act of 1971;
 `(2) the terms `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and `order
 which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other order
 issued by the appropriate Federal banking agency (i) with the consent of
 the financial institution or the institution-related party concerned;
 (ii) with respect to which no petition for review of the action of the
 agency has been filed and perfected in a court of appeals as specified
 in paragraph (2) of subsection (h) of this section; (iii) with respect
 to which the action of the court in which such a petition is so filed is
 not subject to further review by the Supreme Court of the United States
 in proceedings provided for in that paragraph; or (iv) under paragraph
 (1) or (3) of subsection (g) of this section;
 `(3) the term `controlling shareholder' means a person that directly or
 indirectly, or acting through or in concert with one or more persons,
 owns or controls a financial institution. Shares owned or controlled by
 a member of an individual's immediate family are considered to be held
 by the individual. For the purpose of this paragraph, a `person' means
 an individual or a corporation, partnership, trust, association, joint
 venture, pool, syndicate, sole proprietorship unincorporated organization,
 or any form of entity not specifically listed herein;
 `(4) the term `institution-related party' means a director, officer,
 employee, agent, independent contractor, controlling shareholder (other
 than a holding company), or other person participating in the conduct
 of the affairs of an insured financial institution or a subsidiary of an
 insured financial institution, or any person who has filed or is required
 to file a change-in-control notice with the appropriate Federal banking
 agency under section 7(j); and
 `(5) the term `violation' includes without limitation any action (alone or
 with another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating
 in, counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.';
 (18) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(t)(1) An appropriate Federal banking agency, within its discretion,
 after notification to the Attorney General, may pay a reward to a person
 who provides original information which leads directly to recovery which
 exceeds $50,000, of a criminal fine, restitution or civil penalty under
 this title or under section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, 1344,
 or 3663 or a forfeiture under section 983 or 984 of title 18, United States
 Code, or of a penalty under this section.
 `(2) An appropriate Federal banking agency may not pay a reward of more
 than 25 per centum of the amount of the fine, penalty, restitution, or
 forfeiture or $100,000, whichever is less.
 `(3) An officer or employee of the United States, State or local government
 who provides information described in subsection (a), obtained in the
 performance of official duties, is not eligible for a reward under this
 section.
 `(4) A reward decision, or decision not to give a reward, made pursuant
 to this section by the appropriate Federal banking agency is final and
 not reviewable by any court.
 `(u)(1) No federally insured financial institution may discharge or otherwise
 discriminate against any employee with respect to compensation, terms,
 conditions or privileges of employment because the employee (or any person
 acting pursuant to the request of the employee) provided information to
 any financial institution regulatory authority or to the Department of
 Justice regarding a possible violation of any law or regulation by the
 financial institution or its officers, directors or employees.
 `(2) Any employee or former employee who believes he has been discharged
 or discriminated against in violation of paragraph (1) may file a civil
 action in Federal district court within two years from the date of such
 discharge or discrimination.
 `(3) If the district court determines that a violation of paragraph (1)
 has occurred, it shall order the financial institution who committed the
 violation to reinstate the employee to his former position together with
 compensatory damages and otherwise remedy any past discrimination.
 `(4) The protections of this subsection do not apply to any employee who
 deliberately causes the alleged violation of law or regulation.
 `(v) The Corporation, based on an examination of a savings association
 by the Corporation or by the Federal Home Loan Bank System, may recommend
 that the System take any enforcement action authorized under this section
 with respect to any savings association. If the System fails to take the
 recommended action or to provide an acceptable plan for addressing the
 concerns of the Corporation as set forth in its recommendation within
 sixty days of receipt of the formal recommendation from the Corporation,
 the Board of Directors may order the Corporation to take such action if the
 Board determines that the association is in an unsafe or unsound condition
 to continue as an insured financial institution or that failure to take the
 recommended action will result in continuance of unsafe or unsound practices
 in conducting the business of the savings association. Notwithstanding
 the above, the Board of Directors may order the Corporation to exercise
 its authority without regard to the time period set forth, in exigent
 circumstances upon notification of the System. The Corporation shall, by
 agreement with the System, set forth those exigent circumstances in which
 the Corporation may act without regard to the time period set forth above.
 `(w) The authority granted to the appropriate Federal banking agencies
 under this section shall be in addition to, and not be restricted by,
 any other authority provided by Federal or State law.
 `(x) Any decision by the Board of Directors to--
 `(1) issue a notice of intention to terminate insured status;
 `(2) issue a temporary order terminating deposit insurance;
 `(3) issue a final order terminating deposit insurance; or
 `(4) initiate an enforcement action against an ongoing association pursuant
 to subsection (v) shall be made by the Board of Directors and may not
 be delegated.'.
 (b) Section 19 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 1829. PENALTY FOR PARTICIPATION- Except with the prior written consent
 of the Corporation, no person who has been convicted, or who is hereafter
 convicted, of any criminal offense involving dishonesty or a breach of
 trust shall act or serve as an institution-related party of an insured
 financial institution or shall participate in the conduct of the affairs
 of any insured financial institution. For each knowing violation of this
 section, the financial institution or the individual involved each shall be
 fined not more than $1,000,000 for each day such prohibition is violated
 or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both, and be subject to a
 civil penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each day such prohibition
 is violated. The Corporation may recover the costs of assessment and
 collection of such penalty for its use.'.
 SEC. 903. PARALLEL INCREASES IN CIVIL PENALTY PROVISIONS- (a) Section 29(a)
 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 504(a)) is amended by replacing
 the words `$1,000 per day for each day during which such violation
 continues' with the words `$25,000 for each day during which such violation
 continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations made with reckless
 disregard for the safety and soundness of the financial institution,
 the Corporation may, in its discretion, assess a penalty of not more than
 $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues.'.
 (b) Section 8 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1847)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending section 1847(a) to read as follows:
 `Any company which willfully violates any provision of this chapter,
 or any regulation or order issued by the Board pursuant thereto shall be
 subject to a fine of $1,000,000 for each day during which such violation
 continues. Any individual who willfully participates in a violation of
 any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order thereunder,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,000 for each day during
 which such violation continues or shall be imprisoned for not more than
 five years, or both.'; and
 (2) in section 1847(b)(1)--
 (A) by replacing the first sentence with the following:
 `Any company which or individual who willfully participates in a violation of
 any provision of this chapter, or any regulation or order issued pursuant
 thereto, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $1,000,000 per day for
 each day during which such violation continues and for all other violations
 shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per day for each day
 during which such violation continues.'; and
 (B) by adding at the end thereof the following sentence:
 `Criminal and civil penalties under this section are cumulative.'.
 (c) Section 106(b)(2)(F)(i) of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of
 1970 (12 U.S.C. 1972(2)(F)(i)) is amended by replacing the words `$1,000
 per day for each day during which such violation continues:' with the words
 `$25,000 for each day during which such violation continues. Notwithstanding
 the foregoing, for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety
 and soundness of the financial institution, the agency having authority
 to impose a penalty may, in its discretion, assess a penalty of not more
 than $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues.'.
 (d) Section 5239 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 93) is amended in
 subsection (b)(1) by replacing the words `$1,000 per day for each day
 during which such violation continues' with the words `$25,000 for each
 day during which such violation continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
 for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness
 of the financial institution, the Corporation may, in its discretion,
 assess a penalty of not more than $1,000,000 per day for each day during
 which such violation continues.'.
 (e) Section 5240 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 481) is amended by
 replacing the words `$100 for each day such refusal shall continue'
 with the words `not more than $25,000 for each day such refusal
 continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations made with reckless
 disregard for the safety and soundness of the bank, the Comptroller may,
 in his discretion, assess a penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each
 day during which such refusal continues.'.
 SEC. 904. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF `CHANGE IN BANK CONTROL ACT'- Section
 7(j)(16) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(j)(16))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(16)(A) Any person who violates any provision of this subsection, or
 any regulation or order issued by the appropriate Federal banking agency
 pursuant thereto, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000
 for each day during which such violation continues. Notwithstanding the
 foregoing, for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety and
 soundness of the financial institution, the agency having authority to
 impose a civil money penalty, in its discretion, may assess a penalty of
 not more than $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation
 continues. The agency having authority to impose a civl money penalty
 may, in its discretion, compromise, modify, or remit any civil money
 penalty which is subject to imposition or has been imposed under such
 authority. The penalty may be assessed and collected by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency by written notice. As used in this paragraph, the
 term `violates' includes without any limitation any action (alone or with
 another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating in,
 counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.
 `(B) In determining the amount of the penalty, the appropriate Federal
 banking agency shall take into account the appropriateness of the penalty
 with respect to the size of financial resources and good faith of the person
 charged, the gravity of the violation, the history of previous violations,
 and such other matters as justice may require.
 `(C) The person assessed shall be afforded an opportunity for an agency
 hearing upon request made within ten days after receipt of the notice
 of assessment. In such hearing all issues shall be determined on the
 record pursuant to section 554 of title 5, United States Code. The agency
 determination shall be made by final order which may be reviewed only as
 provided in subparagraph (D). If no hearing is requested as herein provided,
 the assessment shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
 `(D) Any financial institution or person against whom an order imposing a
 civil money penalty has been entered after an agency hearing under this
 section may obtain review by the United States court of appeals for the
 circuit in which the home office of the insured financial institution is
 located, or the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
 Circuit, by filing a notice of appeal in such court within twenty days from
 the date of such order and simultaneously sending a copy of such notice by
 registered or certified mail to the appropriate Federal banking agency. The
 agency shall promptly certify and file in such court the record upon which
 the penalty was imposed, as provided in section 2112 of title 28, United
 States Code. The findings of the agency shall be set aside if found to
 be unsupported by substantial evidence as provided by section 706(2)(E)
 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(E) If any person fails to pay an assessment after it has become a final
 and unappealable order, or after the court of appeals has entered final
 judgment in favor of the agency, the agency shall refer the matter to the
 Attorney general, who shall recover the amount assessed by action in the
 appropriate United States district court. In such action, the validity
 and appropriateness of the final order imposing the penalty shall not be
 subject to review.
 `(F) All penalties collected under authority of this section shall be paid
 into the Treasury of the United States.'.
 SEC. 905. REPORTS- (a) Section 3 of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12
 U.S.C. 1882) is amended by striking in the first sentence of subsection
 (b) the phrase `and shall require the submission of periodic reports with
 respect to the installation, maintenance, and operation of security devices
 and procedures'.
 (b) Section 5211 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 161) is amended--
 (1) by striking, in the fifth sentence of subsection (a), `within ten
 days after the receipt of a request thereof from him;' and inserting
 `within the period of time specified by him;';
 (2) by striking `; penalties' in the heading of subsection (c); and
 (3) by striking the last sentence of subsection (c).
 (c) NATIONAL BANKS- Section 5213 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 164)
 is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the following:
 `Every association which fails to make, obtain, transmit or publish any
 report or information required by the Comptroller under section 5211 of the
 Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 161) or which submits any false, misleading,
 or incomplete report or information shall be subject to a penalty for
 such failure, submission, or publication of not more than $25,000 for each
 day during which such failure continues or for each day from the time of
 submission or publication until such false, misleading, or incomplete report
 or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations
 made with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness of the financial
 institution, the Comptroller may, in his discretion, assess a penalty of
 not more than $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such failure
 continues or for each day from the time of submission or publication until
 such false, misleading, or incomplete report or information is corrected.'.
 (d) STATE NONMEMBER BANKS- Section 7(a)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(a)(1)) is amended by striking the last sentence and
 inserting the following:
 `Every such bank which fails to make or publish any such report within the
 period of time specified by the Corporation or which submits or publishes
 any false, misleading, or incomplete report or information shall be subject
 to a penalty for such failure, submission, or publication of not more than
 $25,000 for each day during which such failure continues or for each day
 from the time of submission or publication until such false, misleading,
 or incomplete report or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the
 foregoing, for such failure, submission or publication resulting from
 reckless disregard for the safety and soundness of the institution, such
 bank shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each
 day during which such failure continues or for each day from the time
 of submission or publication until such false, misleading, or incomplete
 information is corrected. Such penalty may be collected by the Corporation
 by suit or otherwise and the costs of assessment and collection for such
 penalty retained by the Corporation for its own use.'.
 (e) Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 324) is amended by
 striking the fourth sentence and inserting `Every bank which fails to make
 such reports within the period of time specified by the Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System or which submits or publishes any false,
 misleading, or incomplete report or information shall be subject to a penalty
 for such failure, submission, or publication of not more than $25,000 for
 each day during which such failure continues or for each day from the time
 of submission or publication until such false, misleading, or incomplete
 report or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for
 such failure, submission or publication resulting from reckless disregard
 for the safety and soundness of the bank, such bank shall be subject to a
 penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each day during which such failure
 continues or for such day from the time of submission or publication until
 such false, misleading or incomplete information is corrected, and for
 all other such failures, submissions, or publications a penalty shall be
 assessed and collected in the same manner as prescribed by section 8(i)(3)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.'.
 (f) Section 8(b) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1847(b))
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (b)(1) as subsection (b) and redesignating
 sections (b)(2) through (6) as sections (d)(1) through (5); and
 (2) by adding a new subsection (c) as follows:
 `(c) Any company which fails to make such reports as are required by this
 chapter or any regulation or order issued pursuant thereto within the
 period of time specified by the Board or which submits or publishes any
 false, misleading or incomplete report or information shall pay a civil
 penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day during which such failure
 continues or for each day from the time of submission or publication
 until such false, misleading, or incomplete report or information is
 corrected. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for such failure, submission or
 publication made with reckless disregard, the company shall be subject to a
 penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each day during which such failure
 continues or for each day from the time of submission or publication until
 such false or misleading report or submission is corrected.
Subtitle B--Regulation by the Federal Home Loan Bank System
 SEC. 906. EXAMINATION AUTHORITY- Section (5)(d)(1) of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)) is redesignated as (5)(d)(1)(A)
 and section 407(m) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730(m)) is
 redesignated as section 5(d)(1)(B) of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933
 and is further amended by substituting the term `savings association'
 or `savings associations' for the terms `institution' and `insured
 institutions', by deleting the phrase `on behalf of the Corporation' and
 by substituting the term `System' for `Corporation' everywhere it appears
 and a new subparagraph (5)(d)(1)(C) is added as follows:
 `(C) References in this subsection to savings account holders and to members
 of associations shall be deemed to be references to holders of withdrawable
 accounts in institutions over which the System has any statutory power of
 examination or supervision as provided in this paragraph, and references
 therein to boards of directors of associations shall be deemed to be
 references to boards of directors or other governing boards of such
 institutions. The System shall have power by regulation to define, for
 the purposes of this paragraph, terms used or referred to in the preceding
 sentence and other terms used in this subsection.'.
 SEC. 907. REPORTS OF CONDITION AND PENALTIES- Section 5 of the Home
 Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464) is amended by inserting after
 new subsection (t) the following new subsection:
 `(u)(1) Each association shall make reports of condition to the System
 which shall be in such form and shall contain such information as the
 System may require.
 `(2) The System may require reports of condition to be published in such
 manner as the System may direct.
 `(3) Any association which fails to submit or publish any report or
 information required by the System under paragraph (1) or (2) within the
 period of time specified by the System, or submits or publishes any false,
 misleading or incomplete report or information shall be subject to a penalty
 for such failure, submission or publication of not more than $25,000 for
 each day during which such failure continues, or for each day from the time
 of submission or publication until such false, misleading, or incomplete
 report or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for
 violations resulting from reckless disregard for the safety and soundness
 of an association, the system may, in its discretion, assess a penalty of
 not more than $1,000,000 for each day during which such failure continues
 or for each day from the time of submission or publication until such
 false or misleading report or information is corrected.
 `(4) Any penalty imposed under paragraph (3) shall be assessed, and
 collected by the System in the manner provided in section 8(i) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(i)) and any such assessment
 (including the determination of the amount of the penalty) shall be subject
 to the provisions of such section.
 `(5) The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall have access to reports
 of condition made to the System pursuant to paragraph (1) and any revision
 made to any such report.'.
 SEC. 908. SAVINGS AND LOAN HOLDING COMPANIES- (a) Redesignated sections
 10(j)(1) and (2) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (formerly 12 U.S.C. 1730a(j)(1)
 and (2)) are amended to read as follows:
 `(j)(1) Any company which willfully violates any provisions of this section,
 or any regulation or order issued by the System pursuant thereto shall be
 subject to a fine of $1,000,000 for each day during which such violation
 continues. Any individual who willfully participates in a violation of
 any provision of this section or any rule, regulation or order thereunder,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,000 for each day during
 which such violation continues or shall be imprisoned for not more than
 five years, or both.'; and
 `(2) Any company which or individual who willfully participates in a
 violation of any provision of this section, or any regulation or order
 issued pursuant thereto, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than
 $1,000,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues
 and for all other violations, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than
 $25,000 per day for each day during which such violation continues.'.
 (b) Section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464) is
 amended by inserting after new subsection (u) the following new subsection:
 `(v)(1) Any savings and loan holding company, and any subsidiary of such
 holding company, which fails to submit or publish any report or information
 required under section 5 of the National Home Owners' Loan Act or regulations
 prescribed by the System within the period of time specified by the System,
 or submits or publishes any false, misleading or incomplete report or
 information shall be subject to a penalty for such failure, submission or
 publication, or false, misleading or incomplete submission of not more than
 $25,000 for each day during which such failure continues or for each day
 from the time of submission or publication until such false, misleading,
 or incomplete report or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the
 foregoing, for violations resulting from reckless disregard for the safety
 and soundness of the association, of not more than $1,000,000 for each
 day during which such failure continues or for each day from the time of
 submission or publication until such false or misleading, or incomplete
 report or information is corrected.
 `(2) Any penalty imposed under paragraph (1) shall be assessed and
 collected by the System in the manner provided in section 8(i) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(i)) and any such assessment
 (including the determination of the amount of the penalty) shall be subject
 to the provisions of such section.'.
 SEC. 909. CONTINUITY OF AUTHORITY FOR ONGOING LITIGATION- All ongoing
 litigation in which the Federal Home Loan Bank Board or the Federal Savings
 and Loan Insurance Corporation are named parties, shall be pursued after
 the effective date of this Act by the Federal Home Loan Bank System or
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as appropriate under this Act.
 SEC. 910. TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY- Any administrative hearing or
 proceeding initiated prior to the effective date of this Act or any order
 issued, agreement entered, condition imposed, memorandum of understanding
 entered, penalty assessed or capital directive issued pursuant to
 those provisions in section 5(d) of the Federal Home Owners' Loan Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1464(d)), repealed by section 307 of this Act, or pursuant
 to section 407 (e) through (h), (k) or (p) of the National Housing Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1730) shall be continued by the Federal Home Loan Bank System
 as if those provisions remained in effect.
Subtitle C--Credit Unions
 SEC. 911. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 206- Section 206 of the Federal Credit
 Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786) is amended--
 (1) by striking the following phrases:
 (A) `director, officer, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such a credit union';
 (B) `director, officer, committee member, employee, agent, or other person';
 (C) `director, officer, committee member, or employee';
 (D) `director, officer, or committee member';
 (E) `director, committee member, or officer';
 (F) `director, committee member, officer, or other person';
 (G) `officer, director, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such a credit union';
 (H) `officer, director, committee member, employee, agent, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of such a credit union';
 (I) `director, committee member, officer or other person';
 (J) `director, officer, committee member, or other person'; and
 (K) `director, committee member, or officer of an insured credit union,
 or other person participating in the conduct of the affairs of such
 credit union';
each place they appear and inserting `institution-related party';
 (2) in section (b)(1) by replacing the words `one hundred and twenty days'
 with the words `sixty days';
 (3) in section (c), by replacing the words `one year' with the words
 `a minimum of six months up to two years';
 (4) at the end of section (e)(1) by striking the period and inserting the
 following: `including, without limitation, reimbursement, restitution,
 indemnification, rescission, the disposal of loans or assets, prohibitions
 or restrictions on growth of the institution, guarantees against loss, or
 other action the Board deems appropriate. Such order may place limitations on
 the activities or functions of the credit union or any institution-related
 party necessary to correct the conditions resulting from any such violation
 or practice.';
 (5) after the first sentence of paragraph (1) of subsection (f), by inserting
 the following sentence: `Such order may place limitations on the activities
 or functions of the credit union or any institution-related party.';
 (6) in subsection (f), by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph
 (1) the following new paragraph:
 `(2) Whenever a notice of charges specifies that any insured credit
 union's books and records are so incomplete or inaccurate that the Board
 is unable with reasonable effort to determine the financial condition of
 that credit union or the details or purpose of any transactions that may
 have a substantial effect on the financial condition of that credit union,
 the Board may issue a temporary order requiring cessation of any activities
 the Board deems appropriate, including prohibitions or restrictions on the
 growth of the institution, or affirmative action to restore such books
 and records to a complete and accurate state, or both, until completion
 of proceedings conducted under paragraph (1) of subsection (e) of this
 section. Such order shall become effective upon service, and, unless
 set aside, limited, or suspended by a court in proceedings authorized by
 paragraph (3) of this subsection, shall remain effective and enforceable
 pending completion of the administrative proceeding initiated under such
 notice or until the Board determines by examination or otherwise that the
 credit union's books and records are accurate and capable of reflecting
 the financial condition of the credit union.';
 (7) by striking paragraph (2) and amending paragraph (1) of subsection
 (g), to read as follows:
 `(1) Whenever the Board determines that--
 `(A) any institution-related party, directly or indirectly, has violated any
 law, rule, regulation, or cease-and-desist order which has become final, or
 has engaged or participated in any unsafe or unsound practice in connection
 with any insured credit union or other business institution, or has committed
 or engaged in any act, omission, or practice which constitutes a breach of
 fiduciary duty, or by conduct or practice has evidenced such party's personal
 dishonesty or unfitness to continue as an institution-related party; and
 `(B) such insured credit union or other business institution has suffered
 or will probably suffer financial loss or other damage, or the interests
 of its insured members have been or could be prejudiced by reason of
 such violation, practice, or breach, or the institution-related party has
 received financial gain by reason of such violation, practice, or breach
the Board may serve upon such institution-related party a written notice of
its intention to remove such party from office or to prohibit such party's
further participation in any manner in the conduct of the affairs of any
insured credit union.'
 (8) in subsection (g), by striking subparagraph (7) and by redesignating
 paragraphs (3) through (6) of subsection (g) as paragraphs (2) through
 (5), respectively, and by amending paragraph (3) (as so redesignated)
 to read as follows:
 `(3) In respect to any institution-related party referred to in paragraph
 (1) or (2) of this subsection, the Board may, if it deems necessary for
 the protection of the credit union or the interests of its members, by
 written order to such effect served upon such party, suspend that party
 from office or prohibit that party from further participation in any
 manner in the conduct of the affairs of the credit union. Such suspension
 or prohibition shall become effective upon service of such order on the
 institution-related party and, unless stayed by a court in proceedings
 authorized by paragraph (5) of this subsection, shall remain in effect
 pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the
 notice served under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection and until
 such time as the Board shall dismiss the charges specified in such notice,
 or, if an order of removal or prohibition is issued against such party,
 until the effective date of any such order. Copies of any order issued
 pursuant to this paragraph also shall be served upon any institution where
 the party involved is presently associated.';
 (9) in subsection (g)(5), as redesignated, by striking `(4)' and inserting
 `(3)', and by striking `(1), (2), or (3)' and inserting `(1) or (2)';
 (10) in subsection (k)(2)(A), by replacing the words `$1,000 per day during
 which such violation continues' with the words `$25,000 for each day such
 violation continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing for violations made with
 reckless disregard for the safety and soundness of the institution, the
 Board, in its discretion may assess a penalty of not more than $1,000,000
 per day for each day such violation continues.';
 (11) by adding the following new subparagraphs (3) and (4) to subsection (k):
 `(3)(A) Any insured credit union which, and any director or officer of such
 credit union or other person participating in the conduct of the affairs
 of such credit union who, has violated any law or regulation on which no
 civil penalty has been assessed under any other provision of law, or any
 condition imposed in writing by the Board in connection with the grant of
 any application or other request by such credit union, or has breached any
 fiduciary duty or engaged in any unsafe or unsound practice, where such
 breach or practice has lead to a loss to the credit union or pecuniary gain
 to the institution-related party, shall pay a civil penalty of not more than
 $25,000 for each day such violation continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
 for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness
 of the institution, the Board, in its discretion, may assess a penalty of
 not more than $1,000,000 per day for each day such violation continues.
 `(B) Any penalty imposed under subparagraph (A) shall be assessed,
 determined, reviewed, and collected in the manner provided in paragraph
 (2) for any penalty imposed under such paragraph.
 `(C)(i) The assessment of any penalty under subparagraph (A) with respect
 to any violation shall not preclude the appropriate Federal banking
 agency from--
 `(I) issuing any order under subsection (e), (f), or (g) with respect to
 such violation; or
 `(II) taking any other action authorized by any such subsection with
 respect to such violation.
 `(ii) No civil penalty may be imposed under subparagraph (A) for any
 violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under paragraph (2) or
 other provision of law.
 `(4) The jurisdiction and authority of the Board to proceed under this
 section against any institution-related party shall not be affected by
 the resignation, termination of employment, or other separation of such
 person from an insured credit union.';
 (12) in the first sentence of paragraph (3)(A) of subsection (k), by
 inserting after `this section' the following: `or any condition imposed in
 writing by the Board in connection with the granting of any application
 or other request by the credit union', and by striking `subsection (e),
 (f), or (g)' and inserting `subsection (e), (f), or (q)';
 (13) by amending subsection (l) to read as follows:
 `(l) Any person against whom there is outstanding and effective any order
 served upon such person under paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (g)
 or under subsection (i) who, directly or indirectly, without the prior
 written approval of the Board participates in any manner in the conduct
 of the affairs of--
 `(A) any insured institution,
 `(B) any bank holding company or subsidiary of a bank holding company
 (as those terms are defined in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956),
 `(C) any organization organized and operated under section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act or operating under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act,
 `(D) any savings and loan holding company or subsidiary of a savings and
 loan holding company, or
 `(E)(1) any institution chartered under the Farm Credit Act of 1971, from
 which such person has been suspended, removed, or prohibited, or solicits
 or procures, or transfers or attempts to transfer, or votes or attempts
 to vote any proxies, consents, or authorization in respect to any voting
 rights in such institution; or
 `(2) votes for a director, or serves or acts as a director, officer,
 committee member, employee, or agent, or otherwise participates in any
 manner in the conduct of the affairs of any insured institution, any
 bank holding company or subsidiary thereof, or any other institution
 described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be fined not more
 than $1,000,000 or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both. Any
 order issued under subsection (g) of this section may prohibit any act
 that would violate this subsection.';
 (14) by striking subsection (m) and redesignating subsections (n), (o),
 (p), and (q) of this section as subsections (m), (n), (o), and (p),
 respectively; and
 (15) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs, (q), (r),
 (s), and (t):
 `(q)(A) The Board, within its discretion, after notification of the Attorney
 General may pay a reward to a person who provides original information
 which directly leads to recovery of a criminal fine or restitution or civil
 penalty under this title, or under section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007,
 1014, 1344 or 3663 or of a forfeiture under section 983 or 984 of title 18,
 United States Code, or penalty under this section, which exceeds $50,000.
 `(B) The Board may not pay more than 25 per centum of the amount of the
 fine, penalty or forfeiture or $100,000, whichever is less.
 `(C) An officer or employee of the United States, State, or local
 government who provides information described in paragraph (A), obtained
 in the performance of official duties, is not eligible for a reward under
 this section.
 `(D) A reward decision or decision not to make a reward made pursuant to
 this section by the Board is final and not reviewable by any court.
 `(r)(1) No federally insured credit union may discharge or otherwise
 discriminate against any employee with respect to compensation, terms,
 conditions or privileges of employment because the employee (or any person
 acting pursuant to the request of the employee) provided information to
 any financial institution regulatory authority or to the Department of
 Justice regarding a possible violation of any law or regulation by the
 financial institution or its officers, directors or employees.
 `(2) Any employee or former employee who believes he has been discharged
 or discriminated against in violation of paragraph (1) may file a complaint
 in federal district court within two years from the date of such discharge
 or discrimination.
 `(3) If the district court determines that a violation of paragraph (1)
 has occurred, it shall order the financial institution who committed the
 violation to reinstate the employee to his former position together with
 compensatory damages and otherwise remedy any past discrimination.
 `(4) The protections of this subsection do not apply to an employee who
 deliberately caused the alleged violation of law or regulation.
 `(s) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 `(1) the term `appropriate Federal regulatory agency' has the same meaning
 as in section 8(k) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 `(2) the terms `cease-and-desist order which has become final' and
 `order which has become final' mean a cease-and-desist order or other
 order issued by the Board (A) with the consent of the credit union or the
 institution-related party concerned; (B) with respect to which no petition
 for review of the action of the agency has been filed and perfected in a
 court of appeals as specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (j) of this
 section; (C) with respect to which the action of the court in which such
 a petition is so filed is not subject to further review by the Supreme
 Court of the United States in proceedings provided for in that paragraph;
 or (D) under paragraphs (1) or (3) of subsection (i) of this section;
 `(3) the term `institution-related party' means a director, officer,
 committee member, employee, agent, independent contractor, or other person
 participating in the conduct of the affairs of an insured credit union;
 `(4) the term `insured institution' means an insured credit union, as
 defined in section 101, or a depository institution whose accounts are
 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and
 `(5) the term `violation' includes without limitation any action (alone or
 with another or others) for or toward causing, bringing about, participating
 in, counseling, or aiding or abetting a violation.
 `(t) The authority granted to the Board under this section shall be in
 addition to, and not restricted by, any other authority provided by Federal
 or State law.'.
 SEC. 912. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 205- Section 205 of the Federal Credit
 Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1785) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence of subsection (d), by inserting after the phrase
 `insured credit union', the phrase `or shall participate in the conduct
 of the affairs of such insured credit union';
 (2) by striking the second sentence of subsection (d) and inserting `For
 each violation of this subsection, the credit union or the individual
 involved shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day
 such violation continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for violations made
 with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness of the institution, the
 Board, in its discretion may assess a penalty of not more than $1,000,000
 per day for each day such violation continues. The Board may recover the
 costs of penalty assessment and collection for its use.'; and
 (3) in the first sentence of paragraph (2) of subsection (e), by inserting
 a period after the word `standards' and striking the phrase `and shall
 require the submission of periodic reports with respect to the installation,
 maintenance, and operation of security devices and procedures'.
 SEC. 913. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 202- Section 202(a)(3) of the Federal
 Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1782(a)(3)) is amended by striking out the
 second sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following new sentences:
 `Any insured credit union which--
 `(A) fails to submit or publish any report required under this subsection
 or section 106 within the period of time specified by the Board; or
 `(B) submits or publishes any false, misleading, or incomplete report or
 information shall be subject to a penalty for such failure, submission, or
 publication or false, misleading, or incomplete submission of not more than
 $25,000 for each day during which such failure continues or for each day
 from the time of submission or publication until such false, misleading, or
 incomplete report or information is corrected. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
 for violations made with reckless disregard for the safety and soundness of
 a credit union, the Board, in its discretion, may assess a penalty of not
 more than $1,000,000 for each day during which such failure continues or
 for each day from the time of submission or publication until such false,
 misleading, or incomplete report or information is corrected. Any penalty
 imposed by the preceding sentence shall be assessed and collected by the
 Board in the manner provided in section 206(k)(2) (for penalties imposed
 under such section), and any such assessment (including the determination
 of the amount of the penalty) shall be subject to the provisions of such
 section.'.
Subtitle D--Right to Financial Privacy Act
 SEC. 914. AMENDMENTS TO RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT- (a) Section 1101 of
 the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (title XI of Public Law 95-630,
 12 U.S.C. 3401) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7) and (8),
 respectively; and
 (2) by deleting in paragraph (7), as redesignated, all before subparagraph
 (A) and inserting in lieu thereof:
 `(7) `supervisory agency' means with respect to any particular financial
 institution, holding company or any subsidiary of a financial institution
 or holding company, any of the following which has statutory authority
 to examine the financial condition, business operations or records or
 transactions of that institution, holding company or subsidiary--'; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph (6)
 to read as follows:
 `(6) `Holding company' means any `bank holding company' as defined in section
 2 and any company described in section 3(f)(1) of the Bank Holding Company
 Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841), or any `savings and loan holding company'
 as defined in the National Home Owners' Loan Act.'.
 (b) Section 1113 of the Right of Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (title XI
 of Public Law 95-630, 12 U.S.C. 3413(b)) is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 `(b) Nothing in this chapter applies to the examination by or disclosure
 to any supervisory agency of financial records or information in the
 exercise of its supervisory regulatory or monetary functions, including
 conservatorship or receivership functions, with respect to any financial
 institution, holding company or any subsidiary of a financial institution
 or holding company or any officer, director, employee, agent or other
 person participating in the affairs thereof.'; and
 (2) by adding new paragraphs (m) and (n) as follows:
 `(m) Nothing in this title shall apply to the examination by or disclosure
 to employees or agents of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System or any Federal Reserve Bank of financial records or information in
 the exercise of the Federal Reserve System's authority to extend credit
 to depository institutions or others.
 `(n) Nothing in this title shall apply to the examination by or disclosure
 to the Resolution Trust Corporation or its employees or agents of financial
 records or information in the exercise of its conservatorship, receivership
 or liquidation functions with respect to a financial institution.'.
 (c) Section 3420 of the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3420) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `A financial institution on which a grand jury subpoena has been served,
 relating to a possible violation of section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006,
 1007, 1008, 1014, or 1344 of title 18, United States Code, shall not
 notify the customer whose records are sought or any other party about
 the existence or contents of the subpoena or information that has been
 furnished to the grand jury in response to that subpoena. Any person who
 violates the requirement of the preceding sentence shall be punished as
 provided in section 1510(b) of title 18, United States Code.'.
Subtitle E--Criminal Enhancements
 SEC. 915. INCREASED CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND CIVIL PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN
 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION OFFENSES- (a) Section 215, title 18, United States
 Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$5,000' with `$1,000,000' and the word `five' with
 the word `twenty' in subsection 215(a) and removing the period at the
 end thereof and inserting: `and shall be subject to a civil penalty of
 $1,000,000 or the amount of the thing given, offered, promised, solicited,
 demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, whichever is greater. Civil
 and criminal penalties under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (2) in subsection 215(b)--
 (A) by replacing the words `a bank' in subsection (b)(1) with the words
 `an institution'; and
 (B) by removing subsections (b)(2) and (b)(8) and by redesignating
 subsections (b) (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) subsections (b) (2), (3), (4),
 (5), and (6); and
 (3) by adding new subsections (e) and (f) as follows:
 `(e) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(f)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. Any failure to obey such order of the court
 may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in any
 such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (b) Section 656, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$5,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater,' and
 the word `five' with the word `twenty';
 (2) by removing the period at the end of the first paragraph and adding
 the following:`and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000 for
 each day the violation continues or the amount embezzled, abstracted,
 purloined or willfully misapplied and any pecuniary gain attributable
 to that amount, or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and criminal
 penalties and restitution under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (3) by redesignating current section 656 as 656(a) and by adding new
 subsections (b) and (c) as follows:
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. Any failure to obey such order of the court
 may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in any
 such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (c) Section 657, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$5,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater, and any
 pecuniary gain attributable to that amount,' and the word `five' with the
 word `twenty';
 (2) by removing the period at the end of the section and adding the
 following: `and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000 for
 each day the violation continues or the amount embezzled, abstracted,
 purloined or willfully misapplied and any pecuniary gain attributable
 to that amount, or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and criminal
 penalties and restitution under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (3) by redesignating current section 657 as 657(a) and by adding new
 subsections (b) and (c) as follows:
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district whereof such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (d) Section 1005, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by adding the words `bank or savings and loan holding company,' after
 the words `member bank,' in the third clause thereof;
 (2) by replacing the `--' at the end of the third clause following the
 words `Federal Reserve System' with a semicolon and adding a fourth clause
 immediately thereafter as follows:
 `Whoever with intent to defraud the United States or any agency thereof,
 or any financial institution referred to in this section, participates or
 shares in or receives directly or indirectly any money, profit, property,
 or benefits through any transaction, loan, commission, contract, or any
 other act of any such financial institution--';
 (3) by replacing `$5,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater' and
 the word `five' with the word `twenty';
 (4) by removing the period at the end of the first paragraph and by adding
 the following: `and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000
 for each day the violation continues or the amount of any pecuniary
 gain attributable to the proscribed actions, or $5,000,000, whichever is
 greater. Civil and criminal penalties and restitution under this section
 are cumulative.'; and
 (5) by redesignating current section 1005 as 1005(a) and by adding new
 subsections (b) and (c) as follows:
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued, to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (e) Section 1006, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$5,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater' and
 the word `five' with the word `twenty';
 (2) by removing the period at the end of the section and adding the
 following: `and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000 for each
 day the violation continues or the amount of pecuniary gain attributable
 to the proscribed actions, or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and
 criminal penalties and restitution under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (3) by redesignating current section 1006 as 1006(a) and by adding new
 subsections (b) and (c) as follows:
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (f) Section 1007, title 18, United States Code, is amended to read:
 `(a) Whoever, for the purpose of inducing the insurance of the accounts
 of any institution by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, for
 the purpose of obtaining any loan from the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation, for the purpose of obtaining any extension or renewal of such
 insurance or such loan, or for the purpose of obtaining the acceptance,
 release, or substitution of security for such loan, or for the purpose of
 inducing the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to purchase any assets,
 or for the purpose of obtaining the payment of any insured deposit or
 transferred deposit or the allowance, approval, or payment of any claim,
 or for the purpose of influencing in any way the action of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, makes, passes, utters, or publishes any
 statement, knowing it to be false; utters, forges, or counterfeits any
 instrument, paper, or document, or utters, publishes, or passes as true
 any instrument, paper or document, knowing it to have been uttered, forged,
 or counterfeited; or willfully overvalues any security, asset, or income,
 of any institution insured or applying for insurance by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or twice the
 amount authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater,
 or imprisoned for not more than twenty years, or both, and shall be subject
 to a civil penalty of $1,000,000 for each day the violation continues,
 or the amount of pecuniary gain attributable to the proscribed actions,
 or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and criminal penalties and
 restitution under this section are cumulative.
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (g) Section 1008, title 18, United States Code, is repealed.
 (h) Section 1014, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$5,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater' and
 the word `two' with the word `twenty';
 (2) by removing the period at the end of the first paragraph and by adding
 the following: `and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000
 for each day the violation continues, or the amount of any pecuniary
 gain attributable to the false statement or report or overvaluation,
 or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and criminal penalties and
 restitution under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (3) by redesignating current section 1014 as 1014(a) and by adding new
 subsections (b) and (c) as follows:
 `(b) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(c)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena of the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (i) Section 1344(a), title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by replacing `$10,000' with the words `$1,000,000 or twice the amount
 authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever is greater' and
 the word `five' with the word `twenty';
 (2) by removing the period at the end and adding the following: `and shall
 be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000,000 for each day the violation
 continues or the amount of pecuniary gain attributable to the fraud,
 or $5,000,000, whichever is greater. Civil and criminal penalties and
 restitution under this section are cumulative.'; and
 (3) by adding new subsections (c) and (d) as follows:
 `(c) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who
 violates the provisions of the preceding section. The suit may be brought in
 any district court of the United States or the United States courts of any
 territory in which the defendant or, in the case of multiple defendants,
 any one defendant resides, is doing business, may be found, or in which
 any proscribed act was committed. A subpoena requiring the attendance
 of a witness at trial or hearing conducted under this provision may be
 served at any place in the United States. The court in which such action is
 brought shall determine the existence of a violation upon a preponderance
 of the evidence, shall assess the civil penalty, and shall have power to
 grant such other relief, including injunctions, as may be appropriate. Such
 remedies shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory
 or common law.
 `(d)(1) For the purpose of any civil investigation or proceeding under
 this chapter, the Attorney General or any officer designated by him is
 empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel
 their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any books,
 papers, correspondence, memoranda, or other records which the Attorney
 General deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such attendance of
 witnesses and the production of any such records may be required from any
 place in the United States or any State at any designated place of hearing.
 `(2) In case of contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any
 person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United
 States within the jurisdiction of which such investigation or proceeding
 is carried on, or where such person resides or carries on business, in
 requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
 books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records. And such court
 may issue an order requiring such person to appear before the Attorney
 General or officer designated by the Attorney General to produce records,
 if so ordered, or to give testimony touching upon the matter under civil
 investigation or in question. And any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof. All process in
 any such case may be served in the judicial district where such person is
 an inhabitant or wherever he may be found. Any person who shall, without
 just cause, fail or refuse to attend and testify or to answer any lawful
 inquiry or to produce books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other
 records, if in his power so to do, in obedience to the subpoena or the
 Attorney General shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
 a term of not more than one year, or both.'.
 (j) Chapter 213 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new section:
`Sec. 3293. Financial Institution Offenses
 `No person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for violation of
 any provision of sections 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014
 and 1344 of this title, or for conspiracy to commit violations of any
 of the aforementioned sections, unless the indictment is returned or
 the information is filed within ten years after the commission of the
 offense. This section shall apply to any of the aforementioned offenses
 committed before the effective date of this section, if the statute of
 limitations applicable to that offense under this chapter had not run as
 of the effective date of this section.'.
 (k) Pursuant to its authority under section 994(p) of title 28, United
 States Code, and section 21 of the Sentencing Act of 1987, the United States
 Sentencing Commission shall promulgate guidelines, or shall amend existing
 guidelines, to provide that a defendant convicted of violating section 215,
 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014, or 1344 of title 18, United States
 Code, under circumstances which substantially jeopardize the safety and
 soundness of a financial institution shall be assigned an offense level
 under chapter 2 of the sentencing guidelines that is not less than level
 24. If the sentencing guidelines are amended after the effective date of
 this section, the Sentencing Commission shall implement the instruction
 set forth in this provision so as to achieve a comparable result.
 SEC. 916. MISCELLANEOUS REVISIONS TO TITLE 18- (a) The term `Federal Home
 Loan Bank Board' is replaced by the term `Federal Home Loan Bank System'
 wherever it appears.
 (b) Section 212 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by replacing
 the word `bank' or `banks' wherever they appear with the words `financial
 institution' or `financial institutions', respectively (except in the phrases
 `land bank' and `member banks') and by adding in the second sentence the
 words `Federal Home Loan Bank System' after the words `Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation'.
 (c) Section 213 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by replacing the
 words `banks the deposits of which' with the words `financial institutions
 the deposits of which'.
 (d) Section 1009, title 18, United States Code, is repealed.
 (e) Section 1030, title 18, United States Code, is amended by removing the
 words `a bank' from subsection (e)(4)(A) and replacing it with the words
 `an institution,' by removing subsection (e)(4)(C), and by redesignating
 subsections (e)(4)(D), (E), (F), (G), and (H), as subsections (e)(4)(C),
 (D), (E), (F), and (G), respectively.
 (f) Section 1114, title 18, United States Code, is amended by removing
 the words `the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation,'.
 (g) Section 1306, title 18, is amended by removing the words `section 20 of
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, or section 410 of the National Housing
 Act' and replacing it with the words `or section 20 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act'.
 (h) Section 1510, title 18, United States Code, is amended (1) by
 redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c), and (2) by adding a new
 subsection (b) as follows:
 `(b) Whoever, being an officer, director, partner, or employee of a financial
 institution (as that term is defined in section 3401 of title 12, United
 States Code), directly or indirectly notifies a customer of that financial
 institution whose financial records are sought by a grand jury subpoena
 served on that financial institution, relating to a possible violation of
 section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014, or 1344 of title 18,
 United States Code, or any other party about the existence or contents
 of the subpoena or information that has been furnished to the grand jury
 in response to that subpoena shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or
 twice the amount authorized by section 3571(d) of this title, whichever
 is greater, or be imprisoned not more than twenty years, or both.'.
 (i) Section 2113, title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by removing from subsection (f) the words `any bank the deposits of
 which' and replacing it with `any institution the deposits of which';
 (2) by adding before the period at the end of subsection (h) the words
 `, and any `Federal credit union' as defined in section 2 of the Federal
 Credit Union Act'; and
 (3) by removing subsection (g) and redesignating subsection (h) as subsection
 (g).
 (j) Section 1961(1), title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding
 the words `sections 656 and 657 (relating to financial institution
 embezzlement),' after the words `(relating to counterfeiting),' and the
 words `section 1344 (relating to financial institution fraud),' following
 the words `(relating to wire fraud),'.
 SEC. 917. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL FORFEITURE- (a) Title 18, United States Code
 is amended by adding the following new sections 983 and 984 as follows:
`Sec. 983. Civil forfeiture relating to certain financial institution
violations
 `(a) Any property, real or personal, which constitutes or is derived from
 proceeds traceable to a violation of section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006,
 1007, 1014, or 1344 of this title affecting a federally insured financial
 institution, shall be subject to forfeiture to the United States, except
 that no property shall be forfeited under this section, to the extent of
 the interest of an owner or lienholder by reason of any act or omission
 established by that owner or lienholder to have been committed or omitted
 without the knowledge or consent of that owner or lienholder.
 `(b) Any property subject to civil forfeiture to the United States under
 this section may be seized by the Attorney General upon process issued
 pursuant to the Supplemental Rules for Certain Admiralty and Maritime
 Claims by any district court of the United States having jurisdiction over
 the property, except that seizure without such process may be made when
 the seizure is incident to a lawful arrest or search or if the Attorney
 General has probable cause to believe that the property is subject to
 civil forfeiture under this section. In the event of seizure pursuant to
 paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection, proceedings under subsection (d)
 of this section shall be instituted promptly. The Government may request
 the issuance of a warrant authorizing the seizure of property subject to
 forfeiture under this section in the same manner as provided for a search
 warrant under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.
 `(c) Property taken or detained under this section shall not be
 repleviable, but shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Attorney
 General, subject only to the orders and decrees of the court or the official
 having jurisdiction thereof. Whenever property is seized under any of the
 provisions of this subchapter, the Attorney General may--
 `(1) place the property under seal;
 `(2) remove the property to a place designated by him; or
 `(3) require that the General Services Administration take custody of the
 property and remove it, if practicable, to an appropriate location for
 disposition in accordance with law.
 `(d) The provisions of law relating to the seizure, summary and judicial
 forfeiture, and condemnation of property for violation of customs laws;
 the disposition of such property or the proceeds from the sale thereof; the
 remission or mitigation of such forfeitures; and the compromise of claims
 shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred, or alleged to have been
 incurred, under this section, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent
 with the provisions hereof; except that such duties as are imposed upon
 the customs officer or any other person with respect to the seizure and
 forfeiture of property under the customs laws shall be performed with
 respect to seizures of property under this section by the Federal Bureau
 of Investigation, and with respect to custody and forfeitures under this
 section by such officers, agents, or other persons as may be authorized
 or designated for that purpose by the Attorney General.
 `(e)(1) Whenever property is forfeited under this section, the Attorney
 General may sell any forfeited property which is not required to be
 destroyed by law and which is not harmful to the public.
 `(2)(A) The Attorney General shall transfer the property or proceeds from
 the sale of such property to any federal financial institution regulatory
 agency to the extent of such agency's contribution of resources to, or
 expenses involved in, the seizures and forfeiture, and the investigation
 leading directly to the seizure and forfeiture, of such property; and
 `(B) The Attorney General may retain property and proceeds from the sale
 of such property to the extent of the Attorney General's contribution
 of resources to, or expenses involved in, the seizure and forfeiture,
 and the investigation leading directly to the seizure and forfeiture,
 of such property. Such expenses include, but are not limited to, expenses
 for maintenance of custody, advertising, and court cost.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the affected financial
 institution is in receivership, property forfeited pursuant to this section,
 or proceeds from the sale of such property, less any amount transferred
 pursuant to subsection (e)(2) of this section, shall be deposited to the
 General Fund of the Treasury.
 `(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the affected financial
 institution is not in receivership, property forfeited pursuant to this
 section, or proceeds from the sale of such property, less any amount
 transferred pursuant to subsection (e)(2) of this section, shall be deposited
 to the General Fund of the Treasury or may be made available upon the
 order of the appropriate Federal financial institution as restitution to
 that financial institution. Amounts received by the financial institution
 shall be set off against any amounts later recovered by the institution
 as compensatory damages in any State or Federal proceeding.
 `(5) The United States shall not be liable in any action arising out of
 a transfer made pursuant to subsection (e) (2), (3), or (4).
 `(f) All right, title, and interest in property described in subsection
 (a) of this section shall vest in the United States upon commission of
 the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section.
 `(g) The filing of an indictment or information alleging a violation of
 law which is also related to a civil forfeiture proceeding under this
 section shall, upon motion of the United States and for good cause shown,
 stay the civil forfeiture proceeding.
 `(h) In addition to the venue provided for in section 1395 of title 28 or
 other provision of law, in the case of property of a defendant charged with
 a violation that is the basis for forfeiture of the property under this
 section, a proceeding for forfeiture under this section may be brought in
 the judicial district in which the defendant owning such property is found
 or in the judicial district in which the criminal prosecution is brought.
`Sec. 984. Criminal forfeiture relating to certain financial institution
violations
 `(a) Any person convicted of an offense under section 215, 656, 657,
 1005, 1007, 1014, or 1344 of this title affecting a federally insured
 financial institution, shall forfeit to the United States, irrespective
 of any provision of State law, any property constituting, or derived from,
 proceeds the person obtained directly or indirectly, as the result of such
 violation. The court, in imposing sentence on such person shall order,
 in addition to any other sentence imposed, that the person forfeit to the
 United States all property described in this section.
 `(b) Property subject to criminal forfeiture under this section includes--
 `(1) real property including things growing on, affixed to, and found in
 land; and
 `(2) tangible and intangible personal property, including rights, privileges,
 interest, claims and securities.
 `(c) All right, title and interest in property described in subsection
 (a) vests in the United States upon the commission of the act giving rise
 to forfeiture under this section. Any such property that is subsequently
 transferred to a person other than the defendant may be the subject of a
 special verdict of forfeiture and thereafter shall be ordered forfeited
 to the United States, unless the transferee establishes in a hearing
 pursuant to subsection (m) that he is a bona fide purchaser for value of
 such property who at the time of purchase was reasonably without cause to
 believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under this section.
 `(d)(1) Upon application of the United States, the court may enter a
 restraining order or injunction, require the execution of a satisfactory
 performance bond, or take any other action to preserve the availability
 of property described in subsection (a) for forfeiture under this section--
 `(A) upon the filing of an indictment or information charging a violation
 of section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, or 1344 of this title and
 alleging that the property with respect to which the order is sought would,
 in the event of conviction, be subject to forfeiture under this section; or
 `(B) prior to the filing of such an indictment or information, if, after
 notice to persons appearing to have an interest in the property and
 opportunity for a hearing, the court determines that--
 `(i) there is a substantial probability that the United States will prevail
 on the issue of forfeiture and that failure to enter the order will result
 in the property being destroyed, removed from the jurisdiction of the court,
 or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture; and
 `(ii) the need to preserve the availability of the property through the
 entry of the requested order outweighs the hardship on any party against
 whom the order is to be entered: Provided, however, That an order entered
 pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall be effective for not more than ninety
 days, unless extended by the court for good cause shown or unless an
 indictment or information described in subparagraph (A) has been filed.
 `(2) A temporary restraining order under this subsection may be entered
 upon application of the United States without notice or opportunity for
 a hearing when an information or indictment has not yet been filed with
 respect to the property, if the United States demonstrates that there is
 probable cause to believe that the property with respect to which the order
 is sought would, in the event of conviction, be subject to forfeiture under
 this section and that provision of notice will jeopardize the availability
 of the property for forfeiture. Such a temporary order shall expire not more
 than ten days after the date on which it is entered, unless extended for
 good cause shown or unless the party against whom it is entered consents to
 an extension for a longer period. A hearing requested concerning an order
 entered under this paragraph shall be held at the earliest possible time,
 and prior to the expiration of the temporary order.
 `(3) The court may receive and consider, at a hearing held pursuant to this
 subsection, evidence and information that would be inadmissible under the
 Federal Rules of Evidence.
 `(e) Upon conviction of a person under section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006,
 1007, 1014, or 1344 of this title, the court shall enter a judgment of
 forfeiture of the property to the United States and shall also authorize
 the Attorney General to seize all property ordered forfeited upon such
 terms and conditions as the court shall deem proper. Following the
 entry of an order declaring the property forfeited, the court may, upon
 application of the United States, enter such appropriate restraining orders
 or injunctions, require the execution of satisfactory performance bonds,
 appoint receivers, conservators, appraisers, accountants, or trustees,
 or take any other action to protect the interest of the United States in
 the property ordered forfeited. Any income accruing to, or derived from, an
 enterprise or an interest in an enterprise which has been ordered forfeited
 under this section may be used to offset ordinary and necessary expenses
 to the enterprise which are required by law, or which are necessary to
 protect the interests of the United States or third parties.
 `(f) Following the seizure of property ordered forfeited under this section,
 the Attorney General shall direct the disposition of the property by sale or
 any other commercially feasible means, making due provision for the rights
 of any innocent persons. Any property right or interest not exercisable
 by, or transferable for value to, the United States shall expire and shall
 not revert to the defendant, nor shall the defendant or any person acting
 in concert with or on behalf of the defendant be eligible to purchase
 forfeited property at any sale held by the United States. Upon application
 of a person, other than the defendant or a person acting in concert with
 or on behalf of the defendant, the court may restrain or stay the sale or
 disposition of the property pending the conclusion of any appeal of the
 criminal case giving rise to the forfeiture, if the applicant demonstrates
 that proceeding with the sale or disposition of the property will result
 in irreparable injury, harm or loss to him.
 `(g) With respect to property ordered forfeited under this section, the
 Attorney General is authorized to--
 `(1) grant petitions for mitigation or remission of forfeiture, restore
 forfeited property to victims of the violation, or take any other action
 to protect the rights of innocent persons which is in the interest of
 justice and which is not inconsistent with the provisions of this section;
 `(2) compromise claims arising under this section;
 `(3) award compensation to persons providing information resulting in a
 forfeiture under this section;
 `(4) direct the disposition by the United States of all property ordered
 forfeited under this section, making due provision for the rights of
 innocent persons; and
 `(5) take appropriate measures necessary to safeguard and maintain property
 ordered forfeited under this section pending its disposition.
 `(h) Except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions
 of this section, the provisions of sections 983(d) and 983(e) of this
 title shall apply to a criminal forfeiture under this section.
 `(i) Except as provided in subsection (m) of this section, no party claiming
 an interest in property subject to forfeiture under this section may--
 `(1) intervene in a trial or appeal of a criminal case involving the
 forfeiture of such property under this section; or
 `(2) commence an action at law or equity against the United States concerning
 the validity of his alleged interest in the property subsequent to the
 filing of an indictment or information alleging that the property is
 subject to forfeiture under this section.
 `(j) The district court of the United States shall have jurisdiction to
 enter orders as provided in this section without regard to the location
 of any property which may be subject to forfeiture under this section or
 which has been ordered forfeited under this section.
 `(k) In order to facilitate the identification and location of property
 declared forfeited and to facilitate the disposition of petitions for
 remission or mitigation of forfeiture, after the entry of an order declaring
 property forfeited to the United States, the court may, upon application of
 the United States, order that the testimony of any witness relating to the
 property forfeited be taken by deposition and that any designated book,
 paper, document, record, recording, or other material not privileged be
 produced at the same time and place, in the same manner as provided for
 the taking of depositions under Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Criminal
 Procedure.
 `(l)(1) Following the entry of an order of forfeiture under this section,
 the United States shall publish notice of the order and of its intent
 to dispose of the property in such manner as the Attorney General may
 direct. The Government may also, to the extent practicable, provide direct
 written notice to any person known to have alleged an interest in the
 property that is the subject of the order of forfeiture as a substitute
 for published notice as to those persons so notified.
 `(2) Any person, other than the defendant, asserting a legal interest in
 property which has been ordered forfeited to the United States pursuant to
 this section may, within thirty days of the final publication of notice or
 his receipt of notice under paragraph (1), whichever is earlier, petition the
 court for a hearing to adjudicate the validity of his alleged interest in the
 property. The hearing shall be held before the court alone, without a jury.
 `(3) The petition shall be signed by the petitioner under penalty of perjury
 and shall set forth the nature and extent of the petitioner's right, title,
 or interest in the property, the time and circumstances of the petitioner's
 acquisition of the right, title, or interest in the property, any additional
 facts supporting the petitioner's claim, and the relief sought.
 `(4) The hearing on the petition shall, to the extent practicable and
 consistent with the interests of justice, be held within thirty days of
 the filing of the petition. The court may consolidate the hearing on the
 petition with a hearing on any other petition filed by a person other than
 the defendant under this subsection.
 `(5) At the hearing, the petitioner may testify and present evidence and
 witnesses on his own behalf, and cross-examine witnesses who appear at the
 hearing. The United States may present evidence and witnesses in rebuttal
 and in defense of its claim to the property and cross-examine witnesses who
 appear at the hearing. In addition to testimony and evidence presented at
 the hearing, the court shall consider the relevant portions of the record
 of the criminal case which resulted in the order of forfeiture.
 `(6) If, after the hearing, the court determines that the petitioner has
 established by a preponderance of the evidence that--
 `(A) the petitioner has a legal right, title, or interest in the property,
 and such right, title, or interest renders the order of forfeiture invalid
 in whole or in part because the right, title, or interest was vested in the
 petitioner rather than the defendant or was superior to any right, title,
 or interest of the defendant at the time of the commission of the acts
 which gave right to the forfeiture of the property under this section; or
 `(B) the petitioner is a bona fide purchaser for value of the right, title,
 or interest in the property and was at the time of the purchase reasonably
 without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under
 this section, the court shall amend the order of forfeiture in accordance
 with its determination.
 `(7) Following the court's disposition of all petitions filed under this
 subsection, or if no such petitions are filed following the expiration
 of the period provided in paragraph (2) for the filing of such petitions,
 the United States shall have clear title to property that is the subject
 of the order of forfeiture and may warrant good title to any subsequent
 purchaser or transferee.
 `(m) If any of the property described in subsection (a) of this section,
 as a result of any act or omission of the defendant--
 `(1) cannot be located upon the exercise of due diligence;
 `(2) has been transferred or sold to, or deposited with, a third party;
 `(3) has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the court;
 `(4) has been substantially diminished in value; or
 `(5) has been commingled with other property which cannot be divided
 without difficulty;
the court shall order the forfeiture of any of the property of the defendant
up to the value of any property described in paragraph (1) through (5).'.
 SEC. 918. GRAND JURY AMENDMENTS- (a) Paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) of rule
 6(e)(3) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure are amended to read
 as follows:
 `(A) Disclosure otherwise prohibited by this rule of matters occurring
 before the grand jury, other than its deliberations and the vote of any
 grand juror, may be made to--
 `(i) any attorney for the government for use in the performance by an
 attorney of the government's duty to enforce Federal criminal or civil
 law; and
 `(ii) such government personnel (including personnel of a State or
 subdivision of a State) as are deemed necessary by an attorney for the
 government to assist an attorney for the government in the performance of
 such attorney's duty to enforce Federal criminal law.
 `(B) Any person to whom matters are disclosed under subparagraph (A)(ii) of
 this paragraph shall not utilize that grand jury material for any purpose
 other than assisting an attorney for the government in the performance of
 such attorney's duty to enforce Federal criminal or civil law. An attorney
 for the government shall promptly provide the district court, before which
 was impaneled the grand jury whose material has been so disclosed, with
 the names of the persons to whom such disclosure has been made, and shall
 certify that the attorney has advised such persons of their obligation of
 secrecy under this rule.
 `(C) Disclosure otherwise prohibited by this rule of matters occurring
 before the grand jury may also be made--
 `(i) when so directed by a court, upon a showing of particularized need,
 preliminarily to or in connection with a judicial proceeding;
 `(ii) when permitted by a court at the request of the defendant, upon
 a showing that grounds may exist for a motion to dismiss the indictment
 because of matters occurring before the grand jury;
 `(iii) when the disclosure is made by an attorney for the government to
 another Federal grand jury;
 `(iv) when permitted by a court at the request of an attorney for the
 government, upon a showing that such matters may disclose a violation of
 State criminal law, to an appropriate official of a State or subdivision
 of a State for the purpose of enforcing such law; or
 `(v) at the request of an attorney for the government, and when so
 permitted by a court upon a showing of substantial need, to personnel of
 any department or agency of the United States (a) when such personnel are
 deemed necessary to provide assistance to an attorney for the government
 in the performance of such attorney's duty to enforce Federal civil law,
 or (b) for use in relation to any matter within the jurisdiction of such
 department or agency.'.
 (b) The first sentence of paragraph (D) of rule 6(e)(3) of the Federal
 Rules of Criminal Procedure is amended to read as follows:
 `(D) A petition for disclosure pursuant to subdivision (e)(3)(C)(i) or
 (v) shall be filed in the district where the grand jury convened.'.
 (c) Paragraph (1) of section 1681b of title 15, United States Code, is
 amended by inserting after `an order' the following: `, or a subpoena
 issued in connection with proceedings before a grand jury'.
 SEC. 919. LITIGATION AUTHORITY- Nothing in this Act may be construed
 as impairing or diminishing the authority of the Attorney General under
 section 516 of title 28, United States Code, to conduct and coordinate
 litigation on behalf of the United States Government.
 SEC. 920. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE APPROPRIATION- There is hereby authorized
 to be appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, from the General Fund
 of the Treasury, $50,000,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1989
 and for each of the two fiscal years thereafter, to the Attorney General,
 for purposes of investigations and prosecutions involving financial
 institution crimes.
TITLE X--STUDY OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND BANKING REGULATION
 SEC. 1001. STUDY- The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System, the Chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Director
 of the Office of Management and the Budget, shall conduct a study of the
 Federal deposit insurance system, including an appropriate structure for
 the offering of competitive products and services to consumers consistent
 with standards of safety and soundness.
 SEC. 1002. TOPICS- As part of such study, the Secretary shall investigate,
 review and evaluate the following:
 (a) risk and rate structure for deposit insurance;
 (b) incentives for market discipline;
 (c) the scope of deposit insurance coverage and its impact on the liability
 of the insurance fund;
 (d) the feasibility of market value accounting, assessments on foreign
 deposits, limitations on brokered deposits, the addition of collateralized
 borrowings to the deposit insurance base, and multiple insured accounts;
 (e) policies to be followed with respect to the recapitalization or closure
 of insured depositories whose capital is depleted to or near the point of,
 insolvency; and
 (f) the efficiency of housing subsidies through the Federal Home Loan
 Bank System.
 SEC. 1003. FINAL REPORT- The Secretary shall submit to Congress within
 eighteen months from the date of enactment of this Act, a final report which
 shall contain a detailed statement of findings and conclusions, including
 recommendations for advisable administrative and legislative action.
TITLE XI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 SEC. 1101. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 202 OF THE FEDERAL CREDIT UNION ACT- Section
 202 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1782), is amended as follows:
 (1) in paragraph (1) of subsection (b), by deleting `both the amount of its
 deposit or adjustment thereof and' and `both as computed under subsection
 (c) of this section';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking paragraph (1), redesignating paragraph
 (2) as paragraph (1), and by adding a new paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) In the event the operating level of the Fund at the end of a
 given insurance year is below a minimum level specified by the Board or
 extraordinary circumstances exist that in the opinion of the Board raise a
 risk of serious future insurance losses, the Board shall have authority to
 assess a premium in excess of that specified in (c)(1). In no event shall
 any increase in the premium rate exceed 50 per centum over the previous
 year, and in no event shall the premium in a given year exceed 0.35 per
 centum of total member accounts. In no event shall the premiums or fees
 assessed under this chapter be considered appropriated moneys.'
 (3) in paragraph (1) of subsection (d), by striking `deposit or any';
 (4) in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (d), by striking `its deposit
 or' and `deposit or the' each time they appear therein;
 (5) in subsections (e) and (f), by striking `deposit or' `deposit or any',
 and `its deposit or' each time they appear therein;
 (6) in subsection (g), by striking `deposits' in the first sentence, and
 by striking in the second sentence `any deposit or adjustment thereof or'
 each time it appears therein;
 (7) in paragraph (2) of subsection (h), by striking `1.30' and inserting
 `1.25'.
 (8) adding a new paragraph (i) to read as follows:
 `(i)(1) Over an eight-year transition beginning one year after the date of
 enactment of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement
 Act of 1989, insured credit unions shall expense the 1 per centum deposit
 maintained with the Board pursuant to Public Law 98-369. The method of
 expensing the deposit shall be established pursuant to rules and regulations
 of the Board.
 `(2) Credit unions that obtain insurance from the Fund during the transition
 period in (i)(1) above shall not be required to maintain a deposit with
 the Board, but the Board shall have authority to assess such additional
 premiums on those credit unions as are necessary and appropriate to
 ensure that the economic cost of maintaining the Fund is comparable for
 all insured credit unions.'.
 SEC. 1102. AMENDMENT TO SECTION 203 OF THE FEDERAL CREDIT UNION ACT-
 Section 203 of the Federal Credit Union Act, 12 U.S.C. 1783, is amended
 by striking `deposits and' in paragraph (b).
 SEC. 1103. AMENDMENT TO SECTION 5240 OF THE REVISED STATUTES- Section 5240
 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 482) is amended--
 (1) by deleting the first sentence; and
 (2) by inserting in lieu thereof the following: `Subject to the approval
 of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Comptroller of the Currency shall
 fix the compensation of employees of the Office of the Comptroller of the
 Currency and shall make a report thereof to the Congress. Such compensation
 shall be determined by the Comptroller without regard to the provisions
 of any law or regulation (including, but not limited to, provisions in
 title 5 of the United States Code) relating to Federal employee and officer
 compensation. In setting and adjusting such compensation, the Comptroller
 shall seek to maintain comparability with the compensation at the other
 Federal bank regulatory agencies.'.
 SEC. 1104. SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS- If any provision of this Act or
 the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
 the remainder of the Act and the application of the provision to other
 persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be
 affected thereby.