HR 5208 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5208
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to make that Act applicable to
tobacco products.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 28, 1990
Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN (for himself, Mr. WHITTAKER, Mr. DURBIN, Mr. MRAZEK,
Mr. ATKINS, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. WYDEN, Mr. WAXMAN, and Mrs. COLLINS) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to make that Act applicable to
tobacco products.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Equal Treatment for Cigarettes Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) in 1976 Congress declared when it passed the Toxic Substances Control
 Act that it is the policy of the United States that the Environmental
 Protection Agency should have adequate authority to regulate chemical
 substances and mixtures which present an unreasonable risk of injury to
 health or the environment and to take actions with respect to chemical
 substances and mixtures which are imminent hazards,
 (2) in enacting the Toxic Substances Control Act the Congress excluded
 tobacco products from the covered chemical substances,
 (3) in 1976 there was little scientific evidence that cigarette smoke
 caused death and illness to non-smokers but in 1986 the Surgeon General
 concluded that a large number of lung cancer deaths that occur among
 non-smokers are caused by cigarette smoke,
 (4) in 1987 Congress banned for 2 years smoking on all scheduled domestic
 airline flights of 2 hours or less and in 1989 Congress approved a permanent
 ban on smoking on almost all scheduled domestic flights, and
 (5) the authority of the Toxic Substances Control Act is needed to deal
 with the threat to public health caused by cigarette smoke.
SEC. 3. REPEAL OF TOBACCO EXEMPTION.
 Section 3(2)(B) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2602(2)(B))
 is amended by striking out clause (iii) and redesignating clauses (iv),
 (v), and (vi) as clauses (iii), (iv), and (v), respectively.