S 2513 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2513
To provide universal access for all Americans to basic health care services
and long-term care services.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 2 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. DASCHLE (for himself, Mr. WOFFORD, and Mr. SIMON) introduced the following
bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide universal access for all Americans to basic health care services
and long-term care services.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `American Health Security
 Plan'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Statement of principles.
Sec. 3. General definitions.
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
Sec. 101. Eligibility and entitlement.
Sec. 102. Enrollment.
Sec. 103. Portability.
TITLE II--BENEFITS
Subtitle A--Health Care Services
Sec. 201. Covered health care services.
Sec. 202. Limitations and exclusions.
Sec. 203. Patient cost-sharing.
Subtitle B--Long-Term Care Services
Sec. 211. Covered long-term care services.
Sec. 212. Long-Term Care Services Assessment Commission.
Subtitle C--Modification of Services
Sec. 221. Modification of services covered under this Act.
TITLE III--FEDERAL AND STATE ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--Federal Administration
Sec. 301. Federal Health Board.
Sec. 302. Federal Health Advisory Council.
Sec. 303. Federal Health Priorities Council.
Sec. 304. Authorization of appropriations.
Subtitle B--State Administration
Sec. 311. State programs.
Sec. 312. Use of fiscal intermediaries.
Sec. 313. State waivers; managed care.
Sec. 314. State regional consortia.
Sec. 315. Technical assistance to States.
TITLE IV--FINANCING
Subtitle A--Health Budgets
Sec. 401. National health budget.
Sec. 402. Payments to States.
Sec. 403. State program budgets.
Subtitle B--Payments to Providers
Sec. 411. Payments to hospitals and other health care and long-term care
institutions.
Sec. 412. Payments for practitioners services.
Sec. 413. Special nonphysician practitioner provisions.
Sec. 414. Mandatory assignment.
Subtitle C--Revenues
Sec. 421. Federal sources of revenues.
Sec. 422. Tax treatment of American Health Security Plan and private health
and long-term care insurance.
Sec. 423. Federal Health Trust Fund.
Sec. 424. State sources of revenues.
TITLE V--CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION
Sec. 501. Rules governing congressional consideration.
TITLE VI--PRIVATE OPTIONS
Sec. 601. Private supplemental insurance.
Sec. 602. Option to purchase duplicative private insurance.
Sec. 603. Limits on private insurance.
TITLE VII--EXPANSION OF OUTCOMES RESEARCH AND DELIVERY OF SERVICES IN
UNDERSERVED AREAS
Sec. 701. Expansion of outcomes research.
Sec. 702. National health service corps.
Sec. 703. Community and migrant health centers.
TITLE VIII--MALPRACTICE REFORM
Sec. 801. Grants to States.
Sec. 802. Criteria for State malpractice reforms.
Sec. 803. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE IX--EFFECTIVE DATES; TERMINATIONS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA.
Sec. 901. Effective dates.
Sec. 902. Termination of other programs.
Sec. 903. Transition.
Sec. 904. Relation to ERISA.
SEC. 2. STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES.
 The principles of this Act are--
 (1) to provide universal access to basic health care services for all
 Americans regardless of their financial and medical conditions;
 (2) to establish the institutional and political capacity to control the
 Nation's escalating health care costs and eliminate administrative waste;
 (3) to ensure the portability of health care coverage to all regions of
 the country;
 (4) to build on the strengths of American federalism, with the Federal
 Government contributing progressive financing and specifying minimum
 national standards while State governments supply additional funding and
 administer the program with the flexibility needed to address the specific
 concerns of each region;
 (5) to maintain the proven advantages of the American health care
 delivery system, including private practice, the freedom to choose among
 practitioners, and superiority in biomedical technology;
 (6) to encourage the effective use of preventive and primary care;
 (7) to enhance the autonomy of practitioners by limiting the intrusiveness
 of government intervention in the actual delivery of care;
 (8) to promote the role of competition among practitioners and to encourage
 innovation that results in higher quality and more efficient care;
 (9) to reduce the incentives providers face to perform medically unnecessary
 or inappropriate services;
 (10) to reinforce the public accountability of the health care system,
 permitting explicit and open deliberation about the allocation of society's
 resources to health care; and
 (11) to provide that all Americans share in the responsibility of maintaining
 an efficient health care system.
SEC. 3. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `Board' means the Federal Health Board established in
 section 301.
 (2) The term `Advisory Council' means the Federal Health Care Advisory
 Council established in section 302.
 (3) The term `Priorities Council' means the Federal Health Priorities
 Council established in section 303.
 (4) The term `State program' means a State health care program approved
 under section 311.
 (5) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
 of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa,
 and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (6) The term `Trust Fund' means the Federal Health Trust Fund established
 in section 423.
 (b) OTHER DEFINITIONS- Except as otherwise provided, the definitions
 contained in section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 shall apply in this Act.
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Every individual who is a resident of the United States
 and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (d)) is entitled to health care services and
 long-term care services covered under this Act in the State in which the
 individual maintains a primary residence.
 (b) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN NONIMMIGRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board may make eligible for health care services and
 long-term care services covered under this Act such classes of aliens
 admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants as the Board may provide.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1), the
 Board shall consider reciprocity in health care and long-term care services
 offered to United States citizens who are nonimmigrants in other foreign
 states, and such other factors as the Board determines to be appropriate.
 (c) TREATMENT OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS- The Board may make eligible for
 health care services and long-term care services covered under this Act
 other individuals not described in subsection (a) or (b), and regulate
 the nature of the eligibility of such individuals for the purposes of
 fulfilling the following criteria:
 (1) Preserving the public health of communities.
 (2) Compensating States for the additional health care financing burdens
 created by such individuals.
 (3) Preventing adverse financial and medical consequences of uncompensated
 care.
 (4) Inhibiting travel and immigration to the United States for the sole
 purpose of obtaining health care services or long-term care services
 covered under this Act.
 (d) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `lawful resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
 residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United
 States under color of law, including an alien with lawful temporary resident
 status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).
SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide a mechanism for enrollment
 of individuals entitled to benefits under this Act and, in conjunction
 with such enrollment, the issuance of a State health insurance card which
 may be used for purposes of identification and processing of claims for
 benefits under this Act.
 (b) ENROLLMENT AT BIRTH OR IMMIGRATION- The mechanism under subsection (a)
 shall include a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the
 time of birth in the State or at the establishment of permanent residence
 in the State, including at the time of immigration into the United States,
 other acquisition of lawful resident status in the United States, or
 eligibility for other individuals established under section 101(c).
SEC. 103. PORTABILITY.
 To ensure continuous access to health care services and long-term care
 services covered under this Act, each State program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the State, or
 waiting period, in excess of 3 months before residents of the State are
 entitled to such services;
 (2) shall provide continuation of payment for such services to individuals
 who have terminated their residence in the State and established their
 residence in another State, for the duration of any waiting period imposed in
 the State of new residency for establishing entitlement to such services; and
 (3) shall provide for the payment for health care services covered under
 this Act provided to individuals while temporarily absent from the State
 based on the following principles:
 (A) Payment for such health care services is at the rate that is approved
 by the State program in the State in which the services are provided,
 unless the States concerned agree to apportion the cost between them in
 a different manner.
 (B)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), payment for such health care
 services provided outside the United States is made on the basis of the
 amount that would have been paid by the State program for similar services
 rendered in the State, with due regard, in the case of hospital services, to
 the size of the hospital, standards of service, and other relevant factors.
 (ii) Payment for services described under clause (i) which are elective
 services may be subject to prior consent of the agency that administers
 and operates the State program if such elective services are available on
 a substantially similar basis in the State.
 (iii) For the purposes of this subparagraph, the term `elective services'
 means health care services covered under this Act other than services that
 are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance in which medical
 care is required without delay.
TITLE II--BENEFITS
Subtitle A--Health Care Services
SEC. 201. COVERED HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Every eligible individual is entitled to have payment made
 for the health care services covered under this Act by a participating
 provider if the service is necessary or appropriate for the maintenance of
 health or for the diagnosis or treatment of, or rehabilitation following,
 injury, disability, or disease.
 (b) SPECIFIC SERVICES- Subject to limitations described in section 202,
 health care services covered under this Act are as follows:
 (1) Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, including 24-hour per day
 emergency services.
 (2) Diagnostic and screening tests.
 (3) Medical and other health services furnished by health care professionals
 who are authorized to provide such services under State law.
 (4) Preventive health care, including care for well-defined causes
 of illness and injury (such as breast, cervical, and colon cancer),
 immunizations, prenatal and postnatal care, and well-baby and well-child
 care (including physical examinations and vision, dental, hearing, and
 developmental examinations).
 (5) Prescription drugs, biologicals, and devices.
 (6) Substance abuse treatment services, including comprehensive residential
 treatment services for pregnant women and women with children seeking
 treatment for substance abuse.
 (7) Outpatient mental health services to provide an active preventive,
 diagnostic, therapeutic, or rehabilitative service with respect to emotional
 or mental disorders.
 (8) Hospice care for patients certified to be terminally ill, provided
 under a State approved program.
 (9) Habilitation and rehabilitation services, including physical, speech,
 and occupational therapies.
 (10) Home medical equipment and prosthetic devices prescribed by a licensed
 practitioner.
 (11) Experimental treatment as deemed necessary by the review of the Board
 and the State Advisory Boards.
SEC. 202. LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
 (a) NO LIMITS IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, section
 203, and section 221, a State program may not limit the amount, duration,
 or scope of health care services covered under this Act.
 (b) SPECIFIC EXCLUSIONS- Health care services excluded from coverage under
 this Act include the following:
 (1) Cosmetic surgery, except medically necessary reconstruction.
 (2) Certain amenities in inpatient facilities, such as private rooms and
 other amenities determined by the Board, unless medically necessary.
SEC. 203. PATIENT COST-SHARING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, a State program may
 not impose cost-sharing for services under this Act.
 (b) ESTABLISHMENT OF COST-SHARING SCHEDULE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Copayments and out-of-pocket limits shall be established
 by the Board. The Board shall base its determinations on the following
 principles:
 (A) Assurance of administrative simplicity and efficiency.
 (B) Maintenance of the fiscal integrity of the public health insurance
 program.
 (C) Deterrence of unnecessary use of services.
 (D) Encouragement of healthy behaviors.
 (E) Encouragement of the use of preventive services.
 (F) Maximization of economic fairness.
 (G) Minimization of financial barriers to appropriate medical care.
 (2) STUDY OF MODIFICATIONS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Priorities Council shall study whether the out-of-pocket
 limits should be modified to take into account family size, and whether
 cost sharing requirements should be different for individuals that engage
 in certain practices deemed to increase the likelihood such individuals
 will utilize more health care resources than individuals who do not engage
 in such practices.
 (B) SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS- The Priorities Council within 2 years of the
 date described in section 901(b)(1) shall issue recommendations regarding
 the study described in subparagraph (A). The recommendations must balance
 the following goals:
 (i) Preserve the fiscal integrity of the public health insurance program.
 (ii) Minimize the shifting between individuals and families of the burden
 of financing the public program.
 (iii) Encourage behaviors by governments, intermediaries, providers,
 and individuals that lead to reduced costs to the health care system.
 (3) REGULATIONS BASED ON RECOMMENDATIONS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board is authorized to promulgate regulations, as it
 deems appropriate, for implementing the recommendations of the Priorities
 Council.
 (B) MODIFICATIONS- The Board is also authorized to promulgate regulations
 to make periodic adjustments for inflation to income categories, copayments,
 and deductibles.
 (C) EFFECT OF REGULATIONS- The regulations incorporating these modifications
 to the cost sharing and out-of-pocket limits described in this section
 shall have the force of law, unless within 60 days of the promulgation of
 the regulations, the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution under the
 procedures described in section 501.
Subtitle B--Long-Term Care Services
SEC. 211. COVERED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board, by regulation, shall set standards for
 eligibility, long-term care services covered, cost-sharing, income
 protection, and case management, subject to the criteria described in the
 following subsections.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall determine the standards for eligibility
 for institutional and for home and community-based long-term care services
 based on an individual's ability to perform activities of daily living
 (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), and comparable
 cognitive or behavioral impairments.
 (2) DETERMINATION- Eligibility for long-term care services shall be based on
 a determination by a case manager of the individual's ability to perform the
 minimum level of ADLs and IADLs, according to the standard set by the Board.
 (3) STANDARD- The Board shall, pursuant to recommendations by the Advisory
 Council and the Long-Term Care Services Assessment Commission, periodically
 make recommendations about the efficacy of using deficits in ADLs and IADLs,
 or measures of comparable cognitive or behavioral impairment, or both,
 to determine eligibility for long-term care services.
 (c) SERVICES COVERED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall determine the long-term care services to
 be covered under this Act to meet the long-term care needs of the eligible
 population.
 (2) MINIMUM SERVICES- At a minimum, long-term care services to be covered
 under this Act, subject to standards set by the Board, shall include:
 (A) Home and community-based services, such as nursing care and
 rehabilitative and restorative care.
 (B) Nursing home care.
 (C) Hospice care.
 (D) Home medical equipment.
 (E) Services for individuals with developmental disabilities and mental
 illness.
 (d) COST SHARING- The Board shall establish an income-related cost-sharing
 schedule for individuals eligible for long-term care services covered
 under this Act, taking into account such factors as what out-of-nursing
 home expenses would have been.
 (e) INCOME PROTECTION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall reduce the cost sharing to ensure that
 the income and assets of the individual using long-term care services
 covered under this Act are sufficient to enable such individual to retain
 a personal needs allowance sufficient--
 (A) to cover all items needed in addition to those provided by the long-term
 care facility,
 (B) to maintain such individual's primary residence, and
 (C) to maintain such individual's independence once the individual no
 longer needs long-term care services.
 (2) SPOUSAL PROTECTION, ETC- The Board shall reduce the cost sharing to
 ensure that the income of the spouse or dependent of the individual using
 long-term care services covered under this Act is not reduced below levels
 determined appropriate by the Board, but in no case less than the spousal
 protection levels under title XIX of the Social Security Act, as in effect
 on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (f) CASE MANAGEMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall set standards for case management of
 long-term care services covered under this Act.
 (2) CASE MANAGER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Under the case management system, services shall be made
 available to individuals through a case manager who will be responsible
 for matching services to each individual's needs, and coordinating the
 delivery of services.
 (B) SPECIFIC RESPONSIBILITIES- The specific responsibilities of the case
 manager include:
 (i) The assessment and periodic reassessment of an individual's need for
 services, and the availability and efficacy of informal services.
 (ii) the development of plan of care for the individual.
 (iii) The authorization and coordination of services designed to meet an
 individual's unmet needs.
 (g) EFFECT OF REGULATIONS- The regulations incorporating the standards
 described in subsection (a) shall have the force of law, unless within
 60 days of the promulgation of the regulations, the Congress enacts a
 disapproval resolution under the procedures described in section 501.
SEC. 212. LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES ASSESSMENT COMMISSION.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Director')
 shall provide for the appointment of a Long-Term Care Services Assessment
 Commission (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Commission').
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Commission shall consist of 10 individuals appointed
 for a seven-year term, beginning on October 1, 1993. The membership of the
 Commission shall include long-term care service providers, other health
 and social service professionals, individuals skilled in the conduct and
 interpretation of biomedical, health services, and health economics research,
 and representatives of consumers, the elderly, and the disabled. The
 Director shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the Commission in the
 same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the
 power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (c) COMPENSATION- All members of the Commission shall be reimbursed by
 the Board for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses during
 the performance of duties of the Commission in accordance with subchapter
 I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (d) ORGANIZATION- The Commission shall cease to exist at the end of the
 7-year term described in subsection (b).
 (e) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act shall not apply to the Commission.
 (f) DUTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall make recommendations to the Board
 not later than January 31 of 1994 (and of each subsequent year) regarding--
 (A) the adequacy and appropriateness of the long-term care services covered
 under this Act,
 (B) the criteria for eligibility for long-term care services,
 (C) the effect of the cost sharing requirements for long-term care services,
 (D) the financial protections provided individuals in the use of such
 services and the ability of the patient and any spouse or dependent of
 the patient in the community to remain financially independent once the
 patient no longer needs long-term care services,
 (E) the effect of the long-term care services covered under this Act on
 the availability and use of informal long-term care services and private
 long-term care insurance, and
 (F) the overall functioning of the provision of long-term care services
 covered under this Act, once fully implemented.
 (2) REVIEW- The Commission shall review and analyze any long-term care
 services regulations or proposed regulations of the Board and report to
 the Congress its assessment of the appropriateness of the regulations in
 meeting the statutory criteria established under this Act.
 (g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as are necessary for the establishment and operation of the
 Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Subtitle C--Modification of Services
SEC. 221. MODIFICATION OF SERVICES COVERED UNDER THIS ACT.
 (a) RECOMMENDATIONS BY PRIORITIES COUNCIL- Not later than January 31 of
 1997 (and of each subsequent year), the Priorities Council shall issue
 a report to the Board describing any changes, additions, deletions,
 or clarifications the Priority Council recommends for the health care
 services and long-term care services covered under this Act.
 (b) BOARD REGULATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board is authorized to promulgate regulations, as
 the Board deems appropriate, for implementing the recommendations of the
 Priorities Council. Such regulations are to be promulgated within 1 year
 of the submission of the Priorities Council's report.
 (2) EFFECT- The regulations incorporating modifications in the health care
 services and long-term care services covered under this Act shall have the
 force of law, unless within 60 days of the promulgation of the regulations,
 the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution under the procedures described
 in section 501.
TITLE III--FEDERAL AND STATE ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--Federal Administration
SEC. 301. FEDERAL HEALTH BOARD.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established a Federal Health Board.
 (b) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The Board shall be composed of 9 individuals appointed by
 the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, not later than
 October 1, 1993, and shall be chosen on the basis of backgrounds in health
 policy, health economics, the healing professions, and the administration
 of health care institutions. At least 1 member of the Board shall represent
 consumer interests, and due regard must be given to geographic, urban,
 and rural representation. No more than 5 members may be affiliated with
 a single political party.
 (2) TERMS OF MEMBERS- The individuals appointed shall serve for a term
 of 9 years (or until a successor is appointed), except that the terms of
 individuals initially appointed shall be (as specified by the President)
 for such fewer number of years as will provide for the expiration of terms
 on a staggered basis.
 (3) REMOVAL FOR CAUSE ONLY- Upon confirmation, members of the Board may
 not be removed except for cause upon notice and hearing.
 (c) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The President shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the
 Board in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall not
 affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The President may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Board for a second term in the same manner as the original appointment.
 (d) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Board shall select a Chairperson
 and a Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Board.
 (e) COMPENSATION- Members of the Board shall be compensated at a level
 comparable to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance with
 section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) STAFF- The Board shall employ such staff as the Board may determine
 necessary.
 (g) APPLICABILITY OF CIVIL SERVICE PROVISIONS- The staff of the Board may be
 appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 governing appointments in the competitive service and be compensated without
 regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53 of
 title 5 relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except
 that no individual may receive pay less than 120 percent of the minimum
 rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule or more than
 the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 (h) DUTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board is responsible for the overall administration
 of this Act, including such duties specifically designated by this Act.
 (2) ADDITIONAL DUTIES- The duties of the Board also include--
 (A) facilitating the exchange of information among States,
 (B) establishing, evaluating, and updating national minimum quality
 standards,
 (C) establishing uniform reporting requirements,
 (D) reviewing and approving interstate consortia, and
 (E) assisting States in developing systems to minimize fragmented care.
 (i) REPORTS-
 (1) INITIAL REPORT- Not later than January 1, 1995, the Board shall report
 to the Congress regarding the implementation of the program established under
 this Act, including any recommendations for further implementing legislation.
 (2) ANNUAL REPORTS- Beginning January 1, 1996, the Board shall annually
 report to Congress on the status of expenditures under this Act and the
 long-range plans and goals of the Board for the organization and delivery
 of health care services and long-term care services under this Act.
SEC. 302. FEDERAL HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL.
 (a) APPOINTMENT- Not later than January 1, 1994, the Board shall provide
 for appointment of a Federal Health Advisory Council to advise the Board
 on its activities.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- Such Advisory Council shall consist of 15 members who
 are representatives of consumers, providers, unions, health care experts,
 senior citizen groups, public health officials, rural health experts, and
 other individuals with an interest in the health care system. Such members
 shall serve for terms of 3 years, except that, in the initial appointment,
 5 members shall be each appointed for terms of 1-year, 2-years, and 3-years.
 (c) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall fill any vacancy in the membership of
 the Advisory Council in the same manner as the original appointment. The
 vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute
 the duties of the Advisory Council.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The Board may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Advisory Council for a second term in the same manner as the original
 appointment.
 (d) CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON- The Advisory Council shall select a
 Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Advisory
 Council.
 (e) COMPENSATION- All members of the Advisory Council shall be reimbursed
 by the Board for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses
 during the performance of duties of the Advisory Council in accordance
 with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) FACA NOT APPLICABLE- The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act shall not apply to the Advisory Council.
 (g) DUTIES- The Advisory Council shall conduct studies and make
 recommendations to the Board on the overall functioning of the program
 established under this Act and consumer and provider satisfaction with
 such program.
SEC. 303. FEDERAL HEALTH PRIORITIES COUNCIL.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established a Federal Health Priorities
 Council.
 (b) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The Priorities Council shall be composed of 15 individuals
 appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate,
 not later than October 1, 1993. Such individuals shall be representatives
 from the fields of medicine, dentistry, mental health care, nursing,
 social services, ethics, economics, business, and consumer groups.
 (2) TERMS OF MEMBERS- The individuals appointed shall serve for a term of
 5 years, except that the terms of individuals initially appointed shall be
 (as specified by the President) for such fewer number of years as will
 provide for the expiration of terms on a staggered basis.
 (c) VACANCIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The President shall fill any vacancy in the membership of
 the Priorities Council in the same manner as the original appointment. The
 vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute
 the duties of the Priorities Council.
 (2) VACANCY APPOINTMENTS- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall
 serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member
 was appointed.
 (3) REAPPOINTMENT- The President may reappoint an appointed member of the
 Priorities Council for a second term in the same manner as the original
 appointment.
 (d) PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT- The Priorities Council shall select a
 President and a Vice President from among the members of the Priorities
 Council.
 (e) COMPENSATION- Members of the Priorities Council shall be compensated
 at a level comparable to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance
 with section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) STAFF- The Priorities Council shall employ such staff as the Priorities
 Council may determine necessary.
 (g) APPLICABILITY OF CIVIL SERVICE PROVISIONS- The staff of the Priorities
 Council may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service
 and be compensated without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5 relating to classification and
 General Schedule pay rates, except that no individual may receive pay less
 than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the
 General Schedule or more than the rate of basic pay payable for level IV
 of the Executive Schedule.
 (h) COMMITTEES- The Priorities Council may establish such committees of
 its members and other medical, economic, or health services advisers as
 it determines to be necessary to assist the Priorities Council in the
 performance of its duties.
 (i) FUNCTIONS- In order to build a consensus on the values to be used to
 guide health resource decisions, the Priorities Council shall have the
 following functions:
 (1) Conduct public hearings and solicit testimony and information from
 advocates for children, senior citizens, the disabled, consumers of mental
 health services, low-income people, providers of health care, business
 leaders, and others.
 (2) Building on outcomes research and the development of practice guidelines,
 conduct studies and make recommendations for how health care dollars
 should be allocated in the context of a publicly funded national health
 insurance plan.
 (j) REPORTS- The Priorities Council shall report to the Board a list
 of health services ranked by priority, from the most important to the
 least important, representing the comparative benefits of each service
 to the Nation's population. The recommendation shall be accompanied by a
 report of an independent actuary retained for the Board to determine rates
 necessary to cover the costs of the included services in order to establish
 an appropriate annual global budget. The recommendation is to be used in
 evaluating and modifying the health care services and the long-term care
 services covered under this Act. The reports from the Priorities Council to
 the Board are to be submitted by January 31 of 1995 (and of each subsequent
 year), to be acted on by the Board by the following January 31.
SEC. 304. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for the
 establishment and operation of the Board, Advisory Council, and Priorities
 Council to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Subtitle B--State Administration
SEC. 311. STATE PROGRAMS.
 (a) Submission of Programs-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1, 1995, each State shall submit
 to the Board the State program in the State.
 (2) REGIONAL PROGRAMS- Any State may join with neighboring States to submit
 to the Board a regional program in lieu of a State program, as described
 in section 314.
 (b) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PROGRAMS- The Board shall review programs
 submitted under subsection (a) and determine whether such programs meet
 the requirements for approval, not later than October 1, 1996. The Board
 shall not approve such a program unless it finds that the program provides,
 consistent with the provisions of this Act, for--
 (1) adequate financing of health care services and long-term care services
 covered under this Act through a designated fund, including the annual
 submission of the State program budget to the Board,
 (2) adequate administration, including the designation of a single nonprofit
 State agency responsible for administration of the program, and sufficient
 provisions to ensure against fraud and abuse,
 (3) the establishment of--
 (A) an institution reimbursement negotiation board to negotiate global
 operating, capital, and health training budgets with hospitals and other
 health care and long-term care institutions,
 (B) a practitioner reimbursement negotiation board (with membership including
 State government representatives, consumers, general practice physicians,
 specialists, and nonphysician practitioners) to negotiate reimbursement
 rates for participating providers, and
 (C) at the State's option, a State advisory board (with broad representation
 of health policy experts, institutional providers, practitioners, and
 consumers) to generally oversee and review the performance of the State
 program,
 (4) assurances that individuals have the freedom to choose practitioners
 and other health care providers for services covered under this Act, and
 (5) an organized grievance procedure available to consumers through which
 complaints about the organization and administration of the State program
 may be filed, heard, and resolved.
 (c) OPERATIONAL STATUS- A State program in a State shall not be considered
 operational unless it is approved and remains approved under subsection (b).
 (d) FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS ACT- Whenever the Board, after reasonable
 notice and opportunity for hearing to the designated State agency finds
 that in the administration of the State program there is a failure to
 comply with any provision of this Act, the Board may--
 (1) withhold further payments to the State under section 402 and may
 limit such withholding to specific portions of such program affected by
 the failure, or
 (2) place the State program, or specific portions of such program, in
 receivership under the jurisdiction of the Board,
until such failure has been corrected.
 (e) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If any State is dissatisfied with the Board's action
 in denying approval of such State's program or finding a failure under
 subsection (d) with respect to such program, such State may, within 60 days
 after notice of such action, file with the United States court of appeals
 for the circuit in which such State is located a petition for review of that
 action. A copy of the petition shall be forthwith transmitted by the clerk
 of the court to the Board. The Board thereupon shall file in the court
 the record of the proceedings upon which the Board's action was based,
 as provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code.
 (2) FINDINGS OF FACT- The findings of fact by the Board, if supported by
 substantial evidence, shall be conclusive; but the court, for good cause
 shown, may remand the case to the Board to take further evidence, and the
 Board may thereupon make new or modified findings of fact and may modify
 the Board's previous action, and shall file in the court the record of the
 further proceedings. Such new or modified findings of fact shall likewise
 be conclusive if supported by substantial evidence.
 (3) JURISDICTION OF COURT- Upon the filing of such petition, the court
 shall have jurisdiction to affirm the action of the Board or to set it
 aside, in whole or in part. The judgment of the court shall be subject
 to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari or
 certification as provided in section 1254 of title 28, United States Code.
SEC. 312. USE OF FISCAL INTERMEDIARIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program may contract with fiscal intermediaries
 in a process of competitive bidding.
 (b) ROLE OF FISCAL INTERMEDIARY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2) and under continuous State
 oversight, the fiscal intermediary shall process claims and reimbursements,
 distribute the allocation of funds as specified in agreements on global
 operating budgets, and assume general responsibility for the administration
 of the State program.
 (2) LIMITATION- The fiscal intermediary may not participate in, nor
 administer, the negotiating processes used to establish global operating
 budgets or practitioner reimbursement rates.
 (c) TYPE OF ORGANIZATION- The fiscal intermediary may be any type of entity
 designated by the State, including nonprofit associations and private
 companies, as long as the State or regional program provides for public
 accountability. Such accountability may include review of the operations
 of the fiscal intermediary by the State advisory board.
SEC. 313. STATE WAIVERS; MANAGED CARE.
 (a) STATE WAIVERS- A State program shall be allowed to obtain waivers from
 the Board--
 (1) to implement alternative and innovative--
 (A) methods of reimbursing health care providers,
 (B) patient cost sharing arrangements, and
 (C) administrative structures, and
 (2) to provide the services covered under this Act through the use of health
 plans paid through a capitation method in order to allow the freedom of
 choice of all eligible individuals in the selection of a health plan.
In approving any waiver the Board shall assure itself that the State program
otherwise complies with the requirements of this Act that are not inconsistent
with the granting of such waiver.
 (b) MANAGED CARE OPTION- No provision of this Act shall be construed to
 prohibit or discourage any State from developing, or contracting with,
 managed care networks for the purpose of delivering services covered
 under this Act of a higher quality and in a more cost-effective manner,
 as long as such networks otherwise meet the requirements of this Act.
 (c) ORGANIZED APPROACHES TO DELIVERY OF SERVICES- The Board shall sponsor
 efforts to encourage States and providers of services to develop and expand
 organized approaches to the delivery of health care services covered under
 this Act, including health maintenance organizations, hospital-based and
 community-oriented team health services, and neighborhood-hospital-home
 health care plans.
SEC. 314. STATE REGIONAL CONSORTIA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any group of States may enter into an agreement to establish
 a regional consortium for the purposes of implementing a program to be
 approved by the Board under section 311. Such regional consortium shall
 have jurisdiction over all States that are parties to such agreement and
 that shall be subject to the provisions of section 311 as if such consortium
 were established by a single State.
 (b) CONSORTIUM AGREEMENT- Any agreement to establish a State regional
 consortium shall, in addition to providing for the requirements specified
 in section 311(b), provide for--
 (1) a mechanism to resolve any disputes between or among the States that
 are parties to the agreement, and
 (2) the collection of data and information concerning the operations of
 the consortium and the submission of such data and information to the
 Board on an annual basis.
 (c) CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW- Any consortium agreement described in this
 section which has been approved by the Board, shall be submitted to the
 Congress and shall be considered in effect, unless within 60 days of the
 submission of the agreement, the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution
 under the procedures described in section 501.
SEC. 315. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES.
 (a) GRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than October 1, 1994, the Board shall award
 a grant to each State or group of States to assist in paying the costs
 associated with the establishment and initial operation of the State plan
 or the State regional consortium agreement.
 (2) AMOUNTS- Not less than $500,000 shall be provided to each State or
 group of States under a grant awarded under paragraph (1), and any State
 or group of States shall remit to the Trust Fund any unspent amount of
 such grant at the end of the 2-year period beginning with the date of the
 awarding of such grant.
 (3) PLANNING FUNCTIONS- Amounts provided under grants awarded under paragraph
 (1) shall be utilized for planning functions only.
 (4) STUDY- Not later than October 1, 1997, the Board shall prepare and
 submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report that shall
 contain the results of a study conducted by the Board concerning the
 use of the grants awarded under paragraph (1), and whether such use was
 effective preparing State plans and State regional consortia agreements
 and simplifying administrative procedures.
 (b) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Board shall provide technical assistance to
 States in developing State plans and State regional consortia agreements.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
TITLE IV--FINANCING
Subtitle A--Health Budgets
SEC. 401. NATIONAL HEALTH BUDGET.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ANNUAL BUDGETS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Board shall
 establish an annual fiscal year budget of expenditures that estimates the
 total expenditures to be made in such fiscal year by the Federal Government
 and States for health care services and long-term care services covered under
 this Act, including the administrative costs associated with such services.
 (2) BIENNIAL BUDGETS- The Board may establish biennial fiscal year budgets
 in lieu of annual budgets.
 (b) NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- At least 6 months before the beginning of the first fiscal
 year of the program under this Act, the Board shall compute the national
 average per capita cost for each of the services described in subsection
 (a) using data the Board deems to be appropriate.
 (2) ADJUSTMENTS FOR RISK GROUPS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board shall develop an adjustment factor to the national
 average per capita costs computed under paragraph (1) for each risk group
 (as designated under subparagraph (B)) to reflect the national average
 per capita costs for that risk group.
 (B) RISK GROUPS- The Board shall designate a series of risk groups,
 determined by age, sex, and other factors that represent distinct patterns
 of health care services and long-term care services utilization and costs.
 (3) STATE ADJUSTMENTS TO NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS- The Board shall
 develop for each State a factor to adjust the national average per capita
 costs for each risk group to reflect--
 (A) average labor and nonlabor costs that are necessary to produce the
 services described in subsection (a),
 (B) any special social, environmental, epidemiological, or other condition
 affecting health status or the need for health care services and long-term
 care services,
 (C) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly
 the proportion of the population residing in rural or medically underserved
 areas,
 (D) the quality and availability of the State's existing health care
 resources needed for delivering health care services and long-term care
 services, and
 (E) any other economic, geographic, and sociologic factors.
 (c) STATE TOTAL EXPENDITURES- The Board shall compute for each State total
 projected expenditures in the next fiscal year for each of the services
 described in subsection (a), by multiplying--
 (1) the national average per capita costs of each risk group designated
 in subsection (b)(2)(B), by
 (2) the product of the State adjustment factors described in subsection
 (b)(3) and the number of persons in the State estimated by the Bureau of
 the Census to be resident members of each risk group at the beginning of
 the next fiscal year.
 (d) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall determine the appropriate Federal
 contribution for each State, constituting the Federal percentage share of
 each State's total projected expenditures for the services described in
 section (a). The Federal share shall be determined by subtracting the State
 share from 100 percent of the total projected expenditures for such State
 (as described under subsection (c)), but in no event shall such Federal
 contribution be less than 75 percent nor more than 85 percent of such
 expenditures. The Federal share for all States shall equal 80 percent of
 the aggregate of such expenditures for all States.
 (2) ADJUSTMENTS IN STATE SHARE- In determining each State share, the Board
 shall develop a formula that considers a State's--
 (A) per capita income,
 (B) total taxable resources,
 (C) economic performance relative to the national economy as it affects
 the availability of taxable resources, and
 (D) other relevant economic and demographic indicators.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT CALCULATIONS- For each subsequent fiscal year, the Board
 shall recompute under subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) at least 6 months
 before the beginning of such fiscal year. In making such a recomputation,
 the Board shall take into account--
 (1) changes in medical technology, outcomes research evidence concerning
 the efficacy and safety of health care services and long-term care services,
 needs for health personnel, professional practice guidelines, and changing
 health care priorities, after reviewing recommendations of the Advisory
 Council and the Priorities Council, and
 (2) changes in the services described in subsection (a) under regulations
 promulgated by the Board and accepted by the Congress under section 204.
 (f) EFFECT OF BOARD ACTIONS- Any determination made by the Board under
 this section with respect to any fiscal year shall be submitted to the
 Congress at least 6 months before the beginning of such fiscal year, and
 shall have the force of law, unless within 60 days of the submission of
 such determination, the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution under
 the procedures described in section 501.
SEC. 402. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For each fiscal year, each State with a State program
 approved under section 311, is entitled to receive (subject to section
 311(d)), from amounts in the Trust Fund, a Federal contribution in an
 amount equal to the product of--
 (1) the Federal share for such State (computed under section 401(d), and
 (2) such State's total projected expenditures (computed under section
 401(c)).
 (b) USE OF DEDICATED FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All revenues, including the Federal contribution and
 State revenues provided to finance a State program under this Act shall be
 allocated to a dedicated fund specified by the State. Payments for health
 care services and long-term care services covered under this Act shall be
 made from such fund.
 (2) SPECIAL ACCOUNTS- Each State shall establish within its designated fund
 special accounts, the amount of revenues deposited in each to be determined
 by the State. The various special accounts shall include the following:
 (A) An Institutional Global Operating Budget Account shall be used to fund
 total expenditures for the operating costs of hospitals and other health
 care and long-term care institutions, allocated according to the method
 specified in section 411(b).
 (B) An Institutional Capital Account shall be used to fund total expenditures
 for capital-related items in hospitals and other health care and long-term
 care institutions, allocated according to the method specified in section
 411(c).
 (C) A Health Training Account shall be used to fund direct and indirect
 graduate medical education in hospitals and other health care and long-term
 care institutions to cover excess operating and capital costs associated
 with teaching and related research activities, allocated according to the
 method specified in section 411(d).
 (D) A Practitioner Reimbursement Account shall be used to fund the
 reimbursement of services provided by physicians and other health care
 practitioners, allocated according to the method specified in section 412.
SEC. 403. STATE PROGRAM BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall establish an annual fiscal year
 State program budget which provides for--
 (1) the total expenditures to be made under the State program in such
 fiscal year for health care services and long-term care services covered
 under this Act (including administrative and associated costs), and
 (2) the revenues to meet such expenditures.
 (b) COORDINATION- Each State program budget shall be coordinated, in a
 manner specified by the Board, with the national health budget established
 under section 401(a).
 (c) STATE SHARE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall cover the State share of program
 costs through the use of tax revenues and other financing methods allowed
 under section 424.
 (2) ADDITIONS TO STATE SHARE- Each State shall raise the revenues necessary
 to cover at least the State share specified in the national health budget
 established by the Board (computed under section 401(d)). Each State
 is permitted to raise additional revenues and to increase such State's
 health program expenditures beyond the amount specified in the State share
 specified for the national health budget--
 (A) to cover the costs of benefits for health care services or long-term
 care services the State program authorizes in addition to the services
 covered in this Act or as amended by the Board and the Congress,
 (B) to provide for increased global operating, capital, or health training
 budgets for hospitals and other health care and long-term care institutions,
 (C) to provide for any unexpected increase in health care costs identified
 by the State program, and
 (D) for other purposes that may be identified by the Board.
 (d) BARRIERS TO ACCESS PROHIBITED- No State, either by intention or as
 an unstated consequence of budget allocations, may restrict or cause to
 be restricted timely access to the medically necessary and appropriate
 health care services and long-term care services covered under this Act,
 or permit queues for services to form that have the potential of being
 life threatening.
 (e) ANNUAL PUBLICATION- The State program shall provide for the publication
 annually of the most recent State program budget established under this
 section.
Subtitle B--Payments to Providers
SEC. 411. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE AND LONG-TERM CARE
INSTITUTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall be responsible for--
 (1) allocating from the State program budget the aggregate amount of
 money to be directed to hospitals and other health care and long-term
 care institutions for the global operating, capital, and health training
 budgets of such institutions, and
 (2) devising mechanisms for the allocation from such budget of capital
 expenditures in non-institutional settings.
 (b) GLOBAL BUDGETS FOR OPERATING EXPENSES FOR HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH
 CARE AND LONG-TERM CARE INSTITUTIONS- The following principles shall
 guide a State institution reimbursement negotiation board in negotiating
 institutional global operating budgets:
 (1) Each State program budget shall include a separate account for global
 operating expenses to provide for total State expenditures for the operating
 expenses of hospitals and other health care and long-term care institutions.
 (2) Payment shall be based on an annual prospective global budget for
 operating expenses submitted by an institution, in a manner specified by
 the State program, to the agency designated by the State program.
 (3) The budgets shall take into account amounts that are reasonable and
 necessary in the efficient provision of necessary hospital and other
 institutional services covered under this Act.
 (4) The operating budgets shall not include capital-related and health
 training expenses.
 (5) Adjustments may later be made in the budget to reflect significant
 changes in the volume or types of services assumed in the approval of
 the budget.
 (6) A State should encourage innovation by permitting any institution
 to include in its budget for the immediate year any programs designed
 to increase efficiency in later years, if those improvements can be
 demonstrated to the satisfaction of the designated State agency.
 (c) CAPITAL BUDGETS FOR HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE AND LONG-TERM CARE
 INSTITUTIONS- The following principles shall guide a State institution
 reimbursement negotiation board in negotiating institutional capital budgets:
 (1) Each State program budget shall include a separate account for capital
 expenses to provide for total State expenditures for the capital-related
 items in hospitals and other health care and long-term care institutions.
 (2) Each State program budget shall specify the general manner in which
 such expenditures for capital-related items are to be distributed among
 different types of institutions and the different areas of the State to
 take into account the need for capital expenditures throughout the State.
 (3) Capital expenditures are those authorized by the State for the provision
 of insured health services, regardless of whether the source of funds for
 the capital expenditure is derived from accumulated depreciation charges,
 operating surpluses or retained earnings, expenditure of accumulated
 fund balances, issuance of bonds, notes, debentures or other evidence
 of indebtedness, borrowed funds, or any other source including equity
 capitalization.
 (4) Unless otherwise provided in this Act regarding underserved areas,
 or waived by the designated State agency if necessary to provide equitable
 resource allocation and access to quality care, hospitals and other health
 care and long-term care institutions shall furnish a 15 percent match for
 funds allocated from the Institutional Capital Account of the budget.
 (d) HEALTH TRAINING FOR HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE AND LONG-TERM CARE
 INSTITUTIONS- The following principles shall guide a State institution
 reimbursement negotiation board in negotiating institutional health
 training budgets:
 (1) Each State program budget shall include a separate account for direct
 and indirect graduate medical education-related expenses in hospitals and
 other health care and long-term care institutions.
 (2) Each state program budget shall specify the general manner in which
 such expenditures for direct and indirect graduate medical education are
 to be distributed among different types of institutions and the different
 areas of the State.
 (3) The distribution of funds to hospitals and other health care and
 long-term care institutions from the Health Training Account must conform
 to the following principles:
 (A) At least 50 percent of the funding from the Health Training Account
 is to be directed to primary care training programs.
 (B) For each 5-year period beginning after the date which is 5 years after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Advisory Board will evaluate the
 required minimum percentage of funds that States must direct to primary care
 and recommend whether the percentage should be changed to ensure consistency
 with the goal of encouraging primary care residency training programs.
 (C) The State is to develop a methodology for funding nonhospital-based
 residency programs and to establish opportunities for residencies in
 community-based health care facilities.
 (D) The distribution of funds from the Health Training Account must take
 into account the potentially higher costs of placing medical students in
 rural residency programs.
 (E) The distribution of funds from the Health Training Account must
 accommodate the education and training needs of nonphysician practitioners.
SEC. 412. PAYMENTS FOR PRACTITIONERS SERVICES.
 The State practitioner reimbursement negotiation board shall negotiate with
 the State organizations representing each of the practitioner disciplines
 in order to derive a relative value scale fee schedule that fulfills each
 of the following principles:
 (1) Appropriate levels of payment are provided primary care services,
 including general, family, and preventive procedures.
 (2) The same compensation is given for the same procedures even when
 performed by different types of practitioners licensed to offer those
 procedures.
 (3) Reimbursement rates for different procedures performed by practitioners
 in different disciplines reflect the relative value of those procedures.
 (4) Urban and rural practitioners receive the same reimbursement rates
 for the same services, unless the State determines that a differential
 rate is required to increase the access to health care practitioners in
 underserved areas.
 (5) A process is established that keeps overall reimbursements in line
 with the amount of funding budgeted for practitioner reimbursements.
SEC. 413. SPECIAL NONPHYSICIAN PRACTITIONER PROVISIONS.
 The following principles shall guide the State practitioner reimbursement
 negotiation board in negotiating reimbursement rates for nonphysician
 practitioners:
 (1) When the same services covered under this Act are provided by
 practitioners licensed by the State, reimbursement rates for those same
 services shall be the same regardless of the type of practitioner providing
 such services.
 (2) For procedures covered under this Act, services provided by all
 practitioners licensed in the State for those services are to be included
 in the reimbursement fee schedule.
SEC. 414. MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except with respect to patient cost-sharing provisions
 under section 203 of this Act, no individual shall be liable for payment
 of any amount for health care services or long-term care services covered
 under this Act, and payment by a State program shall constitute payment
 in full for such services.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT- The State program shall apply appropriate sanctions
 against the entity if such entity knowingly and willfully charges for an
 item or service or accepts payment in violation of subsection (a).
Subtitle C--Revenues
SEC. 421. FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY PLAN PREMIUMS- The Board, in consultation with
 the Secretary of the Treasury, shall develop a mechanism for determining
 and collecting a premium from individuals and employers for health care
 services and long-term care services covered under this Act, to be known
 as the American Health Security Plan premium.
 (b) DETERMINATION OF PREMIUM AMOUNT- The Board shall determine the American
 Health Security Plan premium for each taxable year beginning after December
 31, 1995, by estimating the total amount necessary to equal the excess of--
 (1) expenditures described in section 423(c) for the fiscal year beginning
 in such taxable year, over
 (2) receipts described in section 423(b) (other than paragraph (1)) for
 such fiscal year.
 (c) COLLECTION OF PREMIUM-
 (1) INDIVIDUALS- The Board shall collect the American Health Security
 Plan premium from individuals using a mechanism with the following
 characteristics:
 (A) Income-based (including earned and unearned income).
 (B) Progressive.
 (C) Payable in increments during the course of the year.
 (D) Payable by individuals or by employers on behalf of employees (at the
 option of the employer), as described in paragraph (2)(C).
 (E) Subject to the provisions of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986.
 (2) EMPLOYERS- The Board shall collect the American Health Security Plan
 premium from employers using a mechanism with the following characteristics:
 (A) Aggregate employer contributions would equal an amount necessary to
 prevent an increase in the percentage of 1992 aggregate household health
 care expenditures.
 (B) Contribution rate based on each employer's ability to pay as indicated
 by factors such as the size of the employer's workforce and profitability.
 (C) Any employer would have the option of paying all or part of the American
 Health Security Plan premium otherwise payable by such employer's employees.
 (D) Subject to the provisions of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986.
 (d) EFFECT OF BOARD ACTIONS- Any premium determination made by the Board
 under this subsection with respect to any taxable year shall be submitted to
 the Congress at least 6 months before the beginning of such taxable year,
 and shall have the force of law, unless within 60 days of the submission
 of such determination, the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution under
 the procedures described in section 501.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The provisions of this section shall apply with respect
 to remuneration paid after December 31, 1995, and with respect to earnings
 from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning after such date.
SEC. 422. TAX TREATMENT OF AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY PLAN AND PRIVATE HEALTH
AND LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE.
 (a) TAX EXCLUSIONS FOR AMOUNTS RECEIVED FROM, AND EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
 TO, THE PLAN-
 (1) AMOUNTS RECEIVED- Subsection (e) of section 105 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to amounts received under accident and health plans)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(e) ACCIDENT OR HEALTH INSURANCE- For purposes of this section, section 104,
 and section 106, the term `accident or health insurance' means an approved
 State program under section 311 of the American Health Security Plan.'.
 (2) EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS- Section 106 of such Code (relating to
 contributions by employer to accident and health plans) is amended by
 striking `an accident or health plan' and inserting `accident or health
 insurance'.
 (3) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 105 of such Code is amended by striking
 subsection (h).
 (b) BUSINESS EXPENSE DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE- Section 162 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trade or business expenses) is
 amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting
 after subsection (l) the following new subsection:
 `(m) GROUP HEALTH PLANS- The expenses paid or incurred by an employer
 for a group health plan shall not be allowed as a deduction under this
 section unless the plan is an approved State program under section 311 of
 the American Health Security Plan.'.
 (c) RULES RELATING TO DEDUCTIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) SAME TREATMENT FOR SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS AND BUSINESSES- Section
 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules
 for health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended--
 (A) by striking `25 percent of' in paragraph (1), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6).
 (2) SIMILAR TREATMENT FOR OTHER INDIVIDUALS- Subsection (d) of section
 213 of such Code (relating to medical, dental, etc., expenses) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(1) MEDICAL CARE- The term `medical care' means American Health Security
 Plan premiums and cost-sharing amounts paid for coverage under an approved
 State program under section 311 of the American Health Security Plan.',
 (B) by striking paragraphs (2), (6), (7), and (9), and by redesignating
 paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (8) as paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5),
 respectively.
 (d) TERMINATION OF CHILD HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT- Clause (i) of section
 32(b)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by inserting `(0 percent for taxable
 years beginning after December 31, 1998)' after `6 percent'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1998.
SEC. 423. FEDERAL HEALTH TRUST FUND.
 (a) TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED- There is hereby created on the books of the
 Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Federal Health
 Care Trust Fund'. The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests
 as may be made and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to,
 such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (b) RECEIPTS-
 (1) TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS EQUIVALENT TO CERTAIN TAXES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to 100 percent of the American Health Security Plan premiums
 received in the Treasury as the result of the mechanism described in
 section 421 of this Act.
 (B) ADDITIONAL REVENUES- There are appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to the additional revenues received in the Treasury as the
 result of the amendments made by section 422 of this Act.
 (C) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by subparagraphs
 (A) and (B) shall be transferred from time to time (not less frequently
 than monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such
 amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the
 Treasury of the taxes and premiums, specified in such subparagraphs, paid
 to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be made in
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess
 of or were less than the taxes and premiums specified in such subparagraphs.
 (2) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- All amounts, not otherwise obligated, that remain
 in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplemental
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund on the first day of the fiscal year 1999
 shall be transferred to the Trust Fund.
 (3) APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL SUMS- For fiscal years beginning after
 September 30, 1998, there are hereby authorized to be appropriated, and are
 appropriated, to the Trust Fund such additional sums as equal the amounts
 appropriated with respect to title XIX of the Social Security Act, section
 1079 of title 10, United States Code (CHAMPUS), and chapter 89 of title 5,
 United States Code, as in effect for fiscal year 1988. Such amount shall
 be adjusted each fiscal year by the increase in the Consumer Price Index
 (as determined by the Department of Labor) for the previous fiscal year.
 (4) APPROPRIATION OF SUMS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS- For fiscal years 1994,
 1995, and 1996, there are hereby authorized to be appropriated, and are
 appropriated, to the Trust Fund such additional sums as may be required
 to make expenditures referred to in subsection (c)(2).
 (5) RETURNED GRANT FUNDS- Any returned grant funds as described in section
 315(a)(2) of this Act shall be transferred to the Trust Fund.
 (c) Expenditures-
 (1) TO STATES- Payments in each fiscal year to each State from the Trust
 Fund as determined under section 402 are hereby authorized and appropriated.
 (2) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES AND GRANTS- There are hereby authorized and
 appropriated such sums as are necessary for the administrative expenses
 and grants described in sections 212(g), 304, 315(c) and 803 of this Act
 for each fiscal year.
 (3) CONTINGENCY ACCOUNT- There are hereby authorized and appropriated such
 sums as determined necessary by the Board to cover unanticipated events that
 affect the health care needs of individuals described in section 101(a),
 to be available without fiscal year limitation.
 (d) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (b)
 through (e) of section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any
 reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Administrator
 of the Health Care Financing Administration shall be deemed a reference
 to the Board.
 (e) TRUST FUND OFF-BUDGET- The receipts and disbursements of the Trust
 Fund and the taxes described in subsection (b)(1) shall not be included
 in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted
 by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be exempt from
 any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net
 lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.
SEC. 424. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for establishing a financing
 program for the implementation of the State program in the State. Such
 financing program may include--
 (1) funds used to finance the State share of medicaid under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act as in effect on the day before the date described
 in section 902(f) of this Act,
 (2) State and local funding for public hospitals and other indigent care
 programs, and
 (3) State funding from general revenues, earmarked taxes, payroll taxes,
 sales taxes, and such other measures consistent with this Act as the State
 may provide.
 (b) ON-GOING ENTITLEMENT- Each State with a State program approved by
 the Commission is entitled to funding from the Commission in the amounts
 provided under section 402.
TITLE V--CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION
SEC. 501. RULES GOVERNING CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.
 (a) RULES OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATE- This section is enacted
 by the Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives
 and the Senate, respectively, and as such is deemed a part of the rules of
 each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure
 to be followed in that House in the case of disapproval resolutions described
 in subsection (b), and supersedes other rules only to the extent that such
 rules are inconsistent therewith; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House
 to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House)
 at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of
 any other rule of that House.
 (b) TERMS OF THE RESOLUTION- For purposes of this Act, the term `disapproval
 resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of the Congress,
 providing in--
 (1) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That the
 Congress disapproves the action of the Federal Health Board as submitted
 by the Board on XXXXXXXXXXXXXX', the blank space being filled in with the
 appropriate date; and
 (2) the title of which is as follows: `Joint Resolution disapproving the
 action of the Federal Health Board'.
 (c) INTRODUCTION AND REFERRAL- On the day on which the action of the Board
 is transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate, a disapproval
 resolution with respect to such action shall be introduced (by request)
 in the House of Representatives by the Majority Leader of the House,
 for himself and the Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the
 House designated by the Majority Leader of the House, for himself and the
 Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the House designated by the
 Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House; and shall be introduced
 (by request) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself
 and the Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated
 by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate. If either House
 is not in session on the day on which such an action is transmitted, the
 disapproval resolution with respect to such action shall be introduced
 in the House, as provided in the preceding sentence, on the first day
 thereafter on which the House is in session. The disapproval resolution
 introduced in the House of Representatives and the Senate shall be referred
 to the appropriate committees of each House.
 (d) AMENDMENTS PROHIBITED- No amendment to a disapproval resolution
 shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate;
 and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in
 order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the
 Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of
 this subsection by unanimous consent.
 (e) PERIOD FOR COMMITTEE AND FLOOR CONSIDERATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), if the committee
 or committees of either House to which a disapproval resolution has
 been referred have not reported it at the close of the 45th day after
 its introduction, such committee or committees shall be automatically
 discharged from further consideration of the disapproval resolution and
 it shall be placed on the appropriation calendar. A vote on final passage
 of the disapproval resolution shall be taken in each House on or before
 the close of the 45th day after the disapproval resolution is reported
 by the committees or committee of that House to which it was referred,
 or after such committee or committees have been discharged from further
 consideration of the disapproval resolution. If prior to the passage by
 one House of a disapproval resolution of that House, that House receives
 the same disapproval resolution from the other House then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no disapproval
 resolution had been received from the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the disapproval resolution of
 the other House.
 (2) COMPUTATION OF DAYS- For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a
 number of days in either House, there shall be excluded any day on which
 the House is not in session.
 (f) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed
 to the consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be highly privileged
 and not debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor
 shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion
 is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) DEBATE- Debate in the House of Representatives on a disapproval
 resolution shall be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be
 divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the disapproval
 resolution. A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable. It
 shall not be in order to move to recommit a disapproval resolution or to
 move to reconsider the vote by which a disapproval resolution is agreed
 to or disagreed to.
 (3) MOTION TO POSTPONE- Motions to postpone, made in the House of
 Representatives with respect to the consideration of a disapproval
 resolution, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business,
 shall be decided without debate.
 (4) APPEALS- All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
 application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure
 relating to a disapproval resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (5) GENERAL RULES APPLY- Except to the extent specifically provided in the
 preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a disapproval
 resolution shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives
 applicable to other bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
 (g) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration
 of a disapproval resolution shall be privileged and not debatable. An
 amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to
 move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) GENERAL DEBATE- Debate in the Senate on a disapproval resolution,
 and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall
 be limited to not more than 20 hours. The time shall be equally divided
 between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader
 or their designees.
 (3) DEBATE OF MOTIONS AND APPEALS- Debate in the Senate on any debatable
 motion or appeal in connection with a disapproval resolution shall be
 limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and
 controlled by, the mover and the manager of the disapproval resolution,
 except that in the event the manager of the disapproval resolution is
 in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto,
 shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee. Such leaders,
 or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of
 a disapproval resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the
 consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
 (4) OTHER MOTIONS- A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not
 debatable. A motion to recommit a disapproval resolution is not in order.
 (h) POINT OF ORDER REQUIRING SUPERMAJORITY FOR MODIFICATIONS TO ACTIONS
 ONCE APPROVED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or
 the Senate to consider any amendment to the actions of the Federal Health
 Board except as provided in paragraph (2).
 (2) WAIVER- The point of order described in paragraph (1) may be waived
 or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only, by the
 affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn.
TITLE VI--PRIVATE OPTIONS
SEC. 601. PRIVATE SUPPLEMENTAL INSURANCE.
 Except as provided in section 603, nothing in this Act shall be construed
 to prohibit the purchase of private insurance that provides coverage of
 health care and long-term care services supplementing the services covered
 under this Act.
SEC. 602. OPTION TO PURCHASE DUPLICATIVE PRIVATE INSURANCE.
 Except as provided in section 603, nothing in this Act shall be construed
 to prohibit the purchase of private insurance that provides coverage of
 health care and long-term care services covered under this Act.
SEC. 603. LIMITS ON PRIVATE INSURANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No insurer may issue a private insurance policy if such
 policy provides coverage for the cost-sharing requirements for health care
 services and other non-long-term care services covered under this Act.
 (b) CERTIFICATION OF NOTIFICATION- At the time of sale, the issuer of
 any private insurance policy shall secure in writing a certification by
 the purchaser that the purchaser has been informed of any duplication in
 coverage of the services covered under this Act.
 (c) REVIEW OF PRACTICES- No later than 2 years after the full implementation
 of the provisions of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States
 shall review the practices of the private insurance industry and make such
 recommendations as necessary to the Congress in order to prevent fraud and
 abuse in the sale of duplicative or supplemental private health insurance
 and to protect the integrity of the American Health Security Plan.
 (d) OBLIGATION TO PAY PREMIUM REMAINS- The purchase of any type of private
 health insurance policy shall not relieve the purchaser of the payment of
 the American Health Security Plan premium imposed under section 421.
TITLE VII--EXPANSION OF OUTCOMES RESEARCH AND DELIVERY OF SERVICES IN
UNDERSERVED AREAS
SEC. 701. EXPANSION OF OUTCOMES RESEARCH.
 Paragraph (1) of section 1142(i) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320b-12(i)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (D) and (E)
 and inserting the following:
 `(D) $225,000,000 for fiscal year 1993;
 `(E) $275,000,000 for fiscal year 1994; and
 `(F) $325,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.'.
SEC. 702. NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.
 (a) INCREASE IN AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized
 to be appropriated to carry out subpart II of part D of title III of the
 Public Health Services Act (42 U.S.C. 254d et seq.) for fiscal year 1993,
 an amount equal to--
 (1) the amount appropriated under such subpart for fiscal year 1992; and
 (2) an additional amount equal to 40 percent of the amount described in
 paragraph (1).
When making loans under such subpart, priority should be given to students from
schools that have primary care programs and that stress underserved practices.
 (b) COMMUNITY FINANCING PROGRAM- Subpart II of part D of title III of the
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254d et seq.) is amended by inserting
 after section 336, the following new section:
`SEC. 336A. COMMUNITY FINANCING PROGRAMS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary may award grants under this section
 to local communities to enable such communities to establish programs to
 finance the health-related education of residents of such communities.
 `(b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a),
 a community shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application, at
 such time, in such manner and containing such information as the Secretary
 may require.
 `(c) USE- A community that receives a grant under subsection (a),
 shall use amounts received under such grant to provide assistance to
 local residents with respect to the health-related educational expenses
 of such residents. Such community shall not provide assistance under a
 grant under this section to a local resident unless such resident agrees
 to practice in a health-related field in such community for not less than
 4 years after graduation. In providing assistance to such residents, the
 community should give priority to residents attending schools that have
 primary care programs and that stress underserved practices.
 `(d) AMOUNTS- The amount of a grant awarded to a community under this section
 shall not exceed 75 percent of the cost to such community in administering
 and implementing a community financing program under this section.
 `(e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to carry out
 this section, $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal year 1993 through 1995.'.
SEC. 703. COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS.
 Subpart II of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 254d et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330, the
 following new section:
`SEC. 330A. NEW COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS.
 `(a) NEW COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities
 to expand the availability of comprehensive primary health services (as
 defined in section 330(b)(1)) in medically underserved areas.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an
 entity shall--
 `(A) be an entity that--
 `(i) meets the requirements of section 329(a) or 330(a) for being a
 migrant or community health center, though not a recipient of a grant
 under either section;
 `(ii) does not meet the requirements of section 329(a) or 330(a) for
 being a migrant or community health center, but that provides assurances
 satisfactory to the Secretary, including subsequent demonstrable evidence,
 that such entity will meet the requirements of either section not later
 than 2 years after receiving a grant under this section;
 `(iii) is eligible for a planning grant under sections 329(c) or 330(c); or
 `(iv) is able to provide a subset of the required services, be able to
 prove that it cannot meet the requirements of section 329(a) or 330(a),
 and demonstrate that it is the most qualified entity in the service area; and
 `(B) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time,
 in such manner and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 `(b) EXPANSION OF CURRENT COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Community and migrant health centers in existence on
 the date of enactment of this section may utilize any increase in revenue
 experienced as a result of the increase in the number of insured patients
 treated for the expansion of the amounts and types of services furnished,
 to serve additional patients or areas, or to promote the recruitment,
 training or retention of personnel.
 `(2) RECOMMENDATIONS- Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate
 committees of Congress recommendations concerning the provision of paragraph
 (1).
 `(c) REPORT- Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of
 this section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate
 committees of Congress a report concerning the need for further migrant
 and community health center primary care service capacity development and
 recommendations concerning the appropriate level of support needed for
 activities to address such capacity development.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this
 section, $300,000,000 for fiscal years 1993 through 1995.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL AMOUNTS- Amounts provided under this section shall be in
 addition to any amounts appropriated under sections 329 and 330.'.
TITLE VIII--MALPRACTICE REFORM
SEC. 801. GRANTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall make grants to States for the development
 and implementation of medical malpractice reforms, as described in section
 802. A State shall use a grant made under this section to develop, implement,
 and evaluate the effectiveness of such reforms.
 (b) COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL STANDARDS- Beginning 2 years after the
 implementation of the reforms, each State shall annually submit a report to
 the Board containing such information as the Board may require to determine
 whether the State is in compliance with the terms of the grant made under
 this section.
SEC. 802. CRITERIA FOR STATE MALPRACTICE REFORMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State must demonstrate to the Board that the reforms to
 the State medical malpractice system that the State develops or has already
 adopted or intends to adopt meet the criteria described in subsection (b).
 (b) CRITERIA- The criteria for medical malpractice reforms are as follows:
 (1) COSTS- Decrease administrative costs and reduce incentives for filing
 non-meritorious claims.
 (2) EFFICIENCY- Reduce the time between the filing of medical malpractice
 claims and case resolutions using procedures which may include the
 establishment of voluntary alternative dispute resolution mechanisms,
 such as mediation, arbitration, minitrials, and summary judgments, to
 facilitate earlier case resolutions.
 (3) ACCESS- Develop mechanisms to ensure that victims of malpractice or
 medically injured patients have the meaningful ability to seek compensation,
 including voluntary alternative dispute resolution mechanisms designed
 for small claims.
 (4) QUALITY- Improve the quality of health care by strengthening mechanisms
 that reduce the occurrence of medical injury, and detect and sanction
 health care professionals who commit health care malpractice.
 (5) EQUITY- Enhance the fairness of compensation provided to injured
 individuals for both medically and non-medically-related damages, and
 increase incentives for experience rating of insurance premiums.
 (c) BOARD STUDY OF CRITERIA-
 (1) STUDY- The Board shall collect data from the States awarded grants
 under section 801 on the effects of the reforms established to meet the
 criteria described in subsection (b) on the medical malpractice systems
 of such States. The data shall be used to evaluate the effectiveness and
 appropriateness of the criteria described in subsection (b) in addressing
 the problems of the medical malpractice systems of such States. The Board
 may modify such criteria based on such study.
 (2) REPORT- The Board shall report the results of the study described in
 paragraph (1) to the Congress on a periodic basis.
SEC. 803. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this title such
 sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1993 through 1996.
TITLE IX--EFFECTIVE DATES; TERMINATIONS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA.
SEC. 901. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION- Not later than October 1, 1994, the Board shall
 promulgate regulations regarding the health care and long-term care services
 covered under this Act and the related patient cost-sharing schedules under
 title II, develop the means for computing the National Health Budget and
 Federal contributions to the States under subtitle A of Title IV, and
 establish the procedures for reviewing and approving State plans under
 section 311.
 (b) PROVISION OF SERVICES-
 (1) PREVENTIVE AND PRIMARY CARE SERVICES- The provision of preventive and
 primary care services under approved State plans, as established under
 section 201, shall take effect with respect to services furnished on or
 after October 1, 1996.
 (2) ACUTE CARE SERVICES- The provision of acute care services under
 approved State plans, as established under section 201, shall take effect
 with respect to services furnished on or after October 1, 1997.
 (3) LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- The provision of long-term care services under
 approved State plans, as established under section 202, shall take effect
 with respect to services furnished on or after October 1, 1998.
 (c) MODIFICATION OF TRANSITION PERIOD-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act and to the
 extent the Board determines it is appropriate and fiscally responsible, the
 Board may promulgate regulations to reduce the period between the date of the
 enactment of this Act and the effective dates otherwise provided in this Act.
 (2) EFFECT OF BOARD ACTIONS- Any determination made by the Board under this
 subsection to change an effective date under this Act shall be submitted
 to the Congress at least 6 months before the new effective date, and shall
 have the force of law, unless within 60 days of the submission of such
 determination, the Congress enacts a disapproval resolution under the
 procedures described in section 501.
SEC. 902. TERMINATION OF OTHER PROGRAMS.
 (a) MEDICARE AND MEDICAID-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act are repealed.
 (2) REPEAL OF HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAXES UPON FULL IMPLEMENTATION OF
 PLAN- Sections 1401(b), 1402(k)(2), 3101(b), 3111(b), 3121(x)(2),
 3231(e)(2)(B)(i)(II), and 6413(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 are repealed.
 (b) REPEAL OF CHAMPUS PROVISIONS-
 (1) AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER 55 OF TITLE 10- Sections 1079 through 1083,
 1086, and 1097 through 1100 of title 10, United States Code, are repealed.
 (2) TABLE OF SECTIONS- The table of sections at the beginning of chapter
 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out the items
 relating to the sections referred to in paragraph (1).
 (3) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code,
 is amended as follows:
 (A) DEFINITION- Section 1072 is amended by striking out paragraph (4).
 (B) REIMBURSEMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS- Section 1104(b)
 is amended--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking out `from CHAMPUS funds'; and
 (ii) by striking out `from funds' and all that follows and inserting in
 lieu thereof `for medical care provided by the Department of Veterans
 Affairs pursuant to such agreement.'.
 (c) REPEAL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM- Chapter 89 of
 title 5, United States Code, is repealed.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The repeals and amendments made by this section shall
 take effect on October 1, 1998.
SEC. 903. TRANSITION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall issue such regulations as are necessary to
 provide for a transition to the American Health Security Plan established
 under this Act from the programs repealed under section 902.
 (b) RELATION TO OTHER PROGRAMS- The Board shall recommend to the Congress
 appropriate legislative proposals for the amendment or repeal of any other
 Federal program inconsistent with, or duplicative of, the principles of
 the American Health Security Plan established under this Act.
SEC. 904. RELATION TO ERISA.
 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act are superseded
 to the extent inconsistent with the requirements of this Act.