S 445 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 445
To amend the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
relating to criminal penalties, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 20 (legislative day, FEBRUARY 6), 1991
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. JEFFORDS, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. SIMON, Ms. MIKULSKI,
Mr. HARKIN, Mr. KENNEDY, and Mr. DODD) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
relating to criminal penalties, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `OSHA Criminal Penalty Reform Act'.
SEC. 2. OSHA CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 17 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
 (29 U.S.C. 666) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking `fine of not more than $10,000' and inserting `fine in
 accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,';
 (B) by striking `six months' and inserting `10 years';
 (C) by striking `fine of not more than $20,000' and inserting `fine in
 accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,'; and
 (D) by striking `one year' and inserting `20 years';
 (2) in subsection (f), by striking `fine of not more than $1,000 or by
 imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting `fine in accordance
 with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for
 not more than 2 years,';
 (3) in subsection (g), by striking `fine of not more than $10,000,
 or by imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting `fine
 in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by
 imprisonment for not more than 1 year,';
 (4) by redesignating subsections (h) through (l) as subsections (i) through
 (m), respectively;
 (5) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection:
 `(h) Any employer who willfully violates any standard, rule, or order
 promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to
 this Act, and that violation causes serious bodily injury to any employee but
 does not cause death to any employee, shall, upon conviction, be punished
 by a fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,
 or by imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or by both, except that if
 the conviction is for a violation committed after a first conviction of
 such person, punishment shall be by a fine in accordance with section 3571
 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 10
 years, or by both.'; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(n) If a penalty or fine is imposed on a director, officer, or agent of an
 employer under subsection (e), (f), (g), or (h), such penalty or fine shall
 not be paid out of the assets of the employer on behalf of that individual.'.
 (b) DEFINITION- Section 3 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 652) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(15) The term `serious bodily injury' means bodily injury that involves--
 `(A) a substantial risk of death;
 `(B) protracted unconsciousness;
 `(C) protracted and obvious physical disfigurement; or
 `(D) protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member,
 organ, or mental faculty.'.
 (c) JURISDICTION FOR PROSECUTION UNDER STATE AND LOCAL CRIMINAL LAWS- Section
 17 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 666) (as amended by subsection (a) of this section)
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(o) Nothing in this Act shall preclude State and local law enforcement
 agencies from conducting criminal prosecutions in accordance with the laws
 of such State or locality.'.