[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 753 Introduced in House (IH)]

104th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 753

 To establish rules governing product liability actions against raw 
materials and bulk component suppliers to medical device manufacturers, 
 and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 31, 1995

Mr. Gekas (for himself, Mr. Pastor, Mr. Coburn, Mr. Ramstad, Mr. Cox of 
 California, and Mr. Bilbray) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on the Judiciary and, in addition, to the 
 Committee on Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by 
the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish rules governing product liability actions against raw 
materials and bulk component suppliers to medical device manufacturers, 
 and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Biomaterials Access Assurance Act of 
1995''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) each year millions of citizens of the United States 
 depend on the availability of lifesaving or life-enhancing 
 medical devices, many of which are permanently implantable 
 within the human body;
 (2) a continued supply of raw materials and component parts 
 is necessary for the invention, development, improvement, and 
 maintenance of the supply of the devices;
 (3) most of the medical devices are made with raw materials 
 and component parts that--
 (A) are not designed or manufactured specifically 
 for use in medical devices; and
 (B) come in contact with internal human tissue;
 (4) the raw materials and component parts also are used in 
 a variety of nonmedical products;
 (5) because small quantities of the raw materials and 
 component parts are used for medical devices, sales of raw 
 materials and component parts for medical devices constitute an 
 extremely small portion of the overall market for the raw 
 materials and medical devices;
 (6) under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), manufacturers of medical devices are 
 required to demonstrate that the medical devices are safe and 
 effective, including demonstrating that the products are 
 properly designed and have adequate warnings or instructions;
 (7) notwithstanding the fact that raw materials and 
 component parts suppliers do not design, produce, or test a 
 final medical device, the suppliers have been the subject of 
 actions alleging inadequate--
 (A) design and testing of medical devices 
 manufactured with materials or parts supplied by the 
 suppliers; or
 (B) warnings related to the use of such medical 
 devices;
 (8) even though suppliers of raw materials and component 
 parts have very rarely been held liable in such actions, such 
 suppliers have ceased supplying certain raw materials and 
 component parts for use in medical devices because the costs 
 associated with litigation in order to ensure a favorable 
 judgment for the suppliers far exceeds the total potential 
 sales revenues from sales by such suppliers to the medical 
 device industry;
 (9) unless alternate sources of supply can be found, the 
 unavailability of raw materials and component parts for medical 
 devices will lead to unavailability of lifesaving and life-
 enhancing medical devices;
 (10) because other suppliers of the raw materials and 
 component parts in foreign nations are refusing to sell raw 
 materials or component parts for use in manufacturing certain 
 medical devices in the United States, the prospects for 
 development of new sources of supply for the full range of 
 threatened raw materials and component parts for medical 
 devices are remote;
 (11) it is unlikely that the small market for such raw 
 materials and component parts in the United States could 
 support the large investment needed to develop new suppliers of 
 such raw materials and component parts;
 (12) attempts to develop such new suppliers would raise the 
 cost of medical devices;
 (13) courts that have considered the duties of the 
 suppliers of the raw materials and component parts have 
 generally found that the suppliers do not have a duty--
 (A) to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the use 
 of a raw material or component part in a medical 
 device; and
 (B) to warn consumers concerning the safety and 
 effectiveness of a medical device;
 (14) attempts to impose the duties referred to in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (13) on suppliers of the 
 raw materials and component parts would cause more harm than 
 good by driving the suppliers to cease supplying manufacturers 
 of medical devices; and
 (15) in order to safeguard the availability of a wide 
 variety of lifesaving and life-enhancing medical devices, 
 immediate action is needed--
 (A) to clarify the permissible bases of liability 
 for suppliers of raw materials and component parts for 
 medical devices; and
 (B) to provide expeditious procedures to dispose of 
 unwarranted suits against the suppliers in such manner 
 as to minimize litigation costs.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Biomaterials supplier.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``biomaterials supplier'' 
 means an entity that directly or indirectly supplies a 
 component part or raw material for use in the 
 manufacture of an implant.
 (B) Persons included.--Such term includes any 
 person who--
 (i) has submitted master files to the 
 Secretary for purposes of premarket approval of 
 a medical device; or
 (ii) licenses a biomaterials supplier to 
 produce component parts or raw materials.
 (2) Claimant.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``claimant'' means any 
 person who brings a civil action, or on whose behalf a 
 civil action is brought, arising from harm allegedly 
 caused directly or indirectly by an implant, including 
 a person other than the individual into whose body, or 
 in contact with whose blood or tissue, the implant is 
 placed, who claims to have suffered harm as a result of 
 the implant.
 (B) Action brought on behalf of an estate.--With 
 respect to an action brought on behalf or through the 
 estate of an individual into whose body, or in contact 
 with whose blood or tissue the implant is placed, such 
 term includes the decedent that is the subject of the 
 action.
 (C) Action brought on behalf of a minor.--With 
 respect to an action brought on behalf or through a 
 minor, such term includes the parent or guardian of the 
 minor.
 (D) Exclusions.--Such term does not include--
 (i) a provider of professional services, in 
 any case in which--
 (I) the sale or use of an implant 
 is incidental to the transaction; and
 (II) the essence of the transaction 
 is the furnishing of judgment, skill, 
 or services; or
 (ii) a manufacturer, seller, or 
 biomaterials supplier.
 (3) Component part.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``component part'' means 
 a manufactured piece of an implant.
 (B) Certain components.--Such term includes a 
 manufactured piece of an implant that--
 (i) has significant nonimplant applications; and
 (ii) alone, has no implant value or purpose, but 
 when combined with other component parts and materials, 
 constitutes an implant.
 (4) Harm.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``harm'' means--
 (i) any injury to or damage suffered by an 
 individual;
 (ii) any illness, disease, or death of that 
 individual resulting from that injury or 
 damage; and
 (iii) any loss to that individual or any 
 other individual resulting from that injury or 
 damage.
 (B) Exclusion.--The term does not include any 
 commercial loss or loss of or damage to an implant.
 (5) Implant.--The term ``implant'' means--
 (A) a medical device that is intended by the 
 manufacturer of the device--
 (i) to be placed into a surgically or 
 naturally formed or existing cavity of the body 
 for a period of at least 30 days; or
 (ii) to remain in contact with bodily 
 fluids or internal human tissue through 
a surgically produced opening for a period of less than 30 days; and
 (B) suture materials used in implant procedures.
 (6) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means any 
 person who, with respect to an implant--
 (A) is engaged in the manufacture, preparation, 
 propagation, compounding, or processing (as defined in 
 section 510(a)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360(a)(1)) of the implant; and
 (B) is required--
 (i) to register with the Secretary pursuant 
 to section 510 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360) and the 
 regulations issued under such section; and
 (ii) to include the implant on a list of 
 devices filed with the Secretary pursuant to 
 section 510(j) of such Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)) 
 and the regulations issued under such section.
 (7) Medical device.--The term ``medical device'' means a 
 device, as defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(h)).
 (8) Qualified specialist.--With respect to an action, the 
 term ``qualified specialist'' means a person who is qualified 
 by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education in the 
 specialty area that is the subject of the action.
 (9) Raw material.--The term ``raw material'' means a 
 substance or product that--
 (A) has a generic use; and
 (B) may be used in an application other than an 
 implant.
 (10) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (11) Seller.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``seller'' means a person 
 who, in the course of a business conducted for that 
 purpose, sells, distributes, leases, packages, labels, 
 or otherwise places an implant in the stream of 
 commerce.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term does not include--
 (i) a seller or lessor of real property;
 (ii) a provider of professional services, 
 in any case in which the sale or use of an 
 implant is incidental to the transaction and 
 the essence of the transaction is the 
 furnishing of judgment, skill, or services; or
 (iii) any person who acts in only a 
 financial capacity with respect to the sale of 
 an implant.

SEC. 4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; APPLICABILITY; PREEMPTION.

 (a) General Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--In any civil action covered by this Act, a 
 biomaterials supplier may raise any defense set forth in 
 section 5.
 (2) Procedures.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, the Federal or State court in which a civil action covered 
 by this Act is pending shall, in connection with a motion for 
 dismissal or judgment based on a defense described in paragraph 
 (1), use the procedures set forth in section 6.
 (b) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 notwithstanding any other provision of law, this Act applies to 
 any civil action brought by a claimant, whether in a Federal or 
 State court, against a manufacturer, seller, or biomaterials 
 supplier, on the basis of any legal theory, for harm allegedly 
 caused by an implant.
 (2) Exclusion.--A civil action brought by a purchaser of a 
 medical device for use in providing professional services 
 against a manufacturer, seller, or biomaterials supplier for 
 loss or damage to an implant or for commercial loss to the 
 purchaser--
 (A) shall not be considered an action that is 
 subject to this Act; and
 (B) shall be governed by applicable commercial or 
 contract law.
 (c) Scope of Preemption.--
 (1) In general.--This Act supersedes any State law 
 regarding recovery for harm caused by an implant and any rule 
 of procedure applicable to a civil action to recover damages 
 for such harm only to the extent that this Act establishes a 
 rule of law applicable to the recovery of such damages.
 (2) Applicability of other laws.--Any issue that arises 
 under this Act and that is not governed by a rule of law 
 applicable to the recovery of damages described in paragraph 
 (1) shall be governed by applicable Federal or State law.
 (d) Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this Act may be construed--
 (1) to affect any defense available to a defendant under 
 any other provisions of Federal or State law in an action 
 alleging harm caused by an implant; or
 (2) to create a cause of action or Federal court 
 jurisdiction pursuant to section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, 
 United States Code, that otherwise would not exist under 
 applicable Federal or State law.

SEC. 5. LIABILITY OF BIOMATERIALS SUPPLIERS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Exclusion from liability.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (2), a biomaterials supplier shall not be liable for 
 harm to a claimant caused by an implant.
 (2) Liability.--A biomaterials supplier that--
 (A) is a manufacturer may be liable for harm to a 
 claimant described in subsection (b);
 (B) is a seller may be liable for harm to a 
 claimant described in subsection (c); and
 (C) furnishes raw materials or component parts that 
 fail to meet applicable contractual requirements or 
 specifications may be liable for a harm to a claimant 
 described in subsection (d).
 (b) Liability as Manufacturer.--
 (1) In general.--A biomaterials supplier may, to the extent 
 required and permitted by any other applicable law, be liable 
 for harm to a claimant caused by an implant if the biomaterials 
 supplier is the manufacturer of the implant.
 (2) Grounds for liability.--The biomaterials supplier may 
 be considered the manufacturer of the implant that allegedly 
 caused harm to a claimant only if the biomaterials supplier--
 (A)(i) has registered with the Secretary pursuant 
 to section 510 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 360) and the regulations issued under 
 such section; and
 (ii) included the implant on a list of devices 
 filed with the Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of 
 such Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)) and the regulations issued 
 under such section; or
 (B) is the subject of a declaration issued by the 
 Secretary pursuant to paragraph (3) that states that 
 the supplier, with respect to the implant that 
 allegedly caused harm to the claimant, was required 
 to--
 (i) register with the Secretary under section 510 
 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 360), and the regulations issued 
 under such section, but failed to do so; or
 (ii) include the implant on a list of devices filed 
 with the Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of such 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)) and the regulations issued under 
 such section, but failed to do so.
 (3) Administrative procedures.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may issue a 
 declaration described in paragraph (2)(B) on the motion 
 of the Secretary or on petition by any person, after 
 providing--
 (i) notice to the affected persons; and
 (ii) an opportunity for an informal 
 hearing.
 (B) Docketing and final decision.--Immediately upon 
 receipt of a petition filed pursuant to this paragraph, 
 the Secretary shall docket the petition. Not later than 
 180 days after the petition is filed, the Secretary 
 shall issue a final decision on the petition.
 (C) Applicability of statute of limitations.--Any 
 applicable statute of limitations shall toll during the 
 period during which a claimant has filed a petition 
 with the Secretary under this paragraph.
 (c) Liability as Seller.--A biomaterials supplier may, to the 
extent required and permitted by any other applicable law, be liable as 
a seller for harm to a claimant caused by an implant if the 
biomaterials supplier--
 (1) held title to the implant that allegedly caused harm to 
 the claimant as a result of purchasing the implant after--
 (A) the manufacture of the implant; and
 (B) the entrance of the implant in the stream of 
 commerce; and
 (2) subsequently resold the implant.
 (d) Liability for Violating Contractual Requirements or 
Specifications.--A biomaterials supplier may, to the extent required 
and permitted by any other applicable law, be liable for harm to a 
claimant caused by an implant, if the claimant in an action shows, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that--
 (1) the raw materials or component parts delivered by the 
 biomaterials supplier either--
 (A) did not constitute the product described in the 
 contract between the biomaterials supplier and the 
 person who contracted for delivery of the product; or
 (B) failed to meet any specifications that were--
 (i) provided to the biomaterials supplier 
 and not expressly repudiated by the 
 biomaterials supplier prior to acceptance of 
 delivery of the raw materials or component 
 parts;
 (ii)(I) published by the biomaterials 
 supplier;
 (II) provided to the manufacturer by the 
 biomaterials supplier; or
 (III) contained in a master file that was 
 submitted by the biomaterials supplier to the 
 Secretary and that is currently maintained by 
 the biomaterials supplier for purposes of 
 premarket approval of medical devices; or
 (iii)(I) included in the submissions for 
 purposes of premarket approval or review by the 
 Secretary under section 510, 513, 515, or 520 
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 360, 360c, 360e, or 360j); and
 (II) have received clearance from the 
 Secretary,
 if such specifications were provided by the 
 manufacturer to the biomaterials supplier and were not 
 expressly repudiated by the biomaterials supplier prior 
 to the acceptance by the manufacturer of delivery of 
 the raw materials or component parts; and
 (2) such conduct was an actual and proximate cause of the 
 harm to the claimant.

SEC. 6. PROCEDURES FOR DISMISSAL OF CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST BIOMATERIALS 
 SUPPLIERS.

 (a) Motion To Dismiss.--In any action that is subject to this Act, 
a biomaterials supplier who is a defendant in such action may, at any 
time during which a motion to dismiss may be filed under an applicable 
law, move to dismiss the action on the grounds that--
 (1) the defendant is a biomaterials supplier; and
 (2)(A) the defendant should not, for the purposes of--
 (i) section 5(b), be considered to be a 
 manufacturer of the implant that is subject to such 
 section; or
 (ii) section 5(c), be considered to be a seller of 
 the implant that allegedly caused harm to the claimant; 
 or
 (B)(i) the claimant has failed to establish, pursuant to 
 section 5(d), that the supplier furnished raw materials or 
 component parts in violation of contractual requirements or 
 specifications; or
 (ii) the claimant has failed to comply with the procedural 
 requirements of subsection (b).
 (b) Procedural Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The procedural requirements described in 
 paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply to any action by a claimant 
 against a biomaterials supplier that is subject to this Act.
 (2) Manufacturer of implant shall be named a party.--The 
 claimant shall be required to name the manufacturer of the 
 implant as a party to the action, unless--
 (A) the manufacturer is subject to service of 
 process solely in a jurisdiction in which the 
 biomaterials supplier is not domiciled or subject to a 
 service of process; or
 (B) an action against the manufacturer is barred by 
 applicable law.
 (3) Affidavit.--At the time the claimant brings an action 
 against a biomaterials supplier the claimant shall be required 
 to submit an affidavit that--
 (A) declares that the claimant has consulted and 
 reviewed the facts of the action with a qualified 
 specialist, whose qualifications the claimant shall 
 disclose;
 (B) includes a written determination by a qualified 
 specialist that the raw materials or component parts 
 actually used in the manufacture of the implant of the 
 claimant were raw materials or component parts 
 described in section 5(d)(1), together with a statement 
 of the basis for such a determination;
 (C) includes a written determination by a qualified 
 specialist that, after a review of the medical record 
 and other relevant material, the raw material or 
 component part supplied by the biomaterials supplier 
 and actually used in the manufacture of the implant was 
 a cause of the harm alleged by claimant, together with 
 a statement of the basis for the determination; and
 (D) states that, on the basis of review and 
 consultation of the qualified specialist, the claimant 
 (or the attorney of the claimant) has concluded that 
 there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for the 
 filing of the action against the biomaterials supplier.
 (c) Proceeding on Motion To Dismiss.--The following rules shall 
apply to any proceeding on a motion to dismiss filed under this 
section:
 (1) Affidavits relating to listing and declarations.--
 (A) In general.--The defendant in the action may 
 submit an affidavit demonstrating that defendant has 
 not included the implant on a list, if any, filed with 
 the Secretary pursuant to section 510(j) of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360(j)).
 (B) Response to motion to dismiss.--In response to 
 the motion to dismiss, the claimant may submit an 
 affidavit demonstrating that--
 (i) the Secretary has, with respect to the 
 defendant and the implant that allegedly caused 
 harm to the claimant, issued a declaration 
 pursuant to section 5(b)(2)(B); or
 (ii) the defendant who filed the motion to 
 dismiss is a seller of the implant who is 
 liable under section 5(c).
 (2) Effect of motion to dismiss on discovery.--
 (A) In general.--If a defendant files a motion to 
 dismiss under paragraph (1) or (3) of subsection (a), 
 no discovery shall be permitted in connection to the 
 action that is the subject of the motion, other than 
 discovery necessary to determine a motion to dismiss 
 for lack of jurisdiction, until such time as the court 
 rules on the motion to dismiss in accordance with the 
 affidavits submitted by the parties in accordance with 
 this section.
 (B) Discovery.--If a defendant files a motion to 
 dismiss under subsection (a)(2) on the grounds that the 
 biomaterials supplier did not furnish raw materials or 
 component parts in violation of contractual 
 requirements or specifications, the court may permit 
 discovery, as ordered by the court. The discovery 
 conducted pursuant to this subparagraph shall be 
 limited to issues that are directly relevant to--
 (i) the pending motion to dismiss; or
 (ii) the jurisdiction of the court.
 (3) Affidavits relating status of defendant.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in clauses (i) 
 and (ii) of subparagraph (B), the court shall consider 
 a defendant to be a biomaterials supplier who is not 
 subject to an action for harm to a claimant caused by 
 an implant, other than an action relating to liability 
 for a violation of contractual requirements or 
 specifications described in subsection (d).
 (B) Responses to motion to dismiss.--The court 
 shall grant a motion to dismiss any action that asserts 
 liability of the defendant under subsection (b) or (c) 
 of section 5 on the grounds that the defendant is not a 
 manufacturer subject to such subsection 5(b) or seller 
 subject to subsection 5(c), unless the claimant submits 
 a valid affidavit that demonstrates that--
 (i) with respect to a motion to dismiss contending 
 the defendant is not a manufacturer, the defendant 
 meets the applicable requirements for liability as a 
 manufacturer under section 5(b); or
 (ii) with respect to a motion to dismiss contending 
 that the defendant is not a seller, the defendant meets 
 the applicable requirements for liability as a seller 
 under section 5(c).
 (4) Basis of ruling on motion to dismiss.--
 (A) In general.--The court shall rule on a motion 
 to dismiss filed under subsection (a) solely on the 
 basis of the pleadings of the parties made pursuant to 
 this section and any affidavits submitted by the 
 parties pursuant to this section.
 (B) Motion for summary judgment.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, if the court determines 
 that the pleadings and affidavits made by parties 
 pursuant to this section raise genuine issues as 
 concerning material facts with respect to a motion 
 concerning contractual requirements and specifications, 
 the court may deem the motion to dismiss to be a motion 
 for summary judgment made pursuant to subsection (d).
 (d) Summary Judgment.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Basis for entry of judgment.--A biomaterials 
 supplier shall be entitled to entry of judgment without 
 trial if the court finds there is no genuine issue as 
 concerning any material fact for each applicable 
 element set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 
 5(d).
 (B) Issues of material fact.--With respect to a 
 finding made under subparagraph (A), the court shall 
 consider a genuine issue of material fact to exist only 
 if the evidence submitted by claimant would be 
 sufficient to allow a reasonable jury to reach a 
 verdict for the claimant if the jury found the evidence 
 to be credible.
 (2) Discovery made prior to a ruling on a motion for 
 summary judgment.--If, under applicable rules, the court 
 permits discovery prior to a ruling on a motion for summary 
 judgment made pursuant to this subsection, such discovery shall 
 be limited solely to establishing whether a genuine issue of 
 material fact exists.
 (3) Discovery with respect to a biomaterials supplier.--A 
 biomaterials supplier shall be subject to discovery in 
 connection with a motion seeking dismissal or summary judgment 
 on the basis of the inapplicability of section 5(d) or the 
 failure to establish the applicable elements of section 5(d) 
 solely to the extent permitted by the applicable Federal or 
 State rules for discovery against nonparties.
 (e) Stay Pending Petition for Declaration.--If a claimant has filed 
a petition for a declaration pursuant to section 5(b) with respect to a 
defendant, and the Secretary has not issued a final decision on the 
petition, the court shall stay all proceedings with respect to that 
defendant until such time as the Secretary has issued a final decision 
on the petition.
 (f) Manufacturer Conduct of Proceeding.--The manufacturer of an 
implant that is the subject of an action covered under this Act shall 
be permitted to file and conduct a proceeding on any motion for summary 
judgment or dismissal filed by a biomaterials supplier who is a 
defendant under this section if the manufacturer and any other 
defendant in such action enter into a valid and applicable contractual 
agreement under which the manufacturer agrees to bear the cost of such 
proceeding or to conduct such proceeding.
 (g) Attorney Fees.--The court shall require the claimant to 
compensate the biomaterials supplier (or a manufacturer appearing in 
lieu of a supplier pursuant to subsection (f)) for attorney fees and 
costs, if--
 (1) the claimant named or joined the biomaterials supplier; 
 and
 (2) the court found the claim against the biomaterials 
 supplier to be without merit and frivolous.

SEC. 7. APPLICABILITY.

 This Act shall apply to all civil actions covered under this Act 
that are commenced on or after the date of enactment of this Act, 
including any such action with respect to which the harm asserted in 
the action or the conduct that caused the harm occurred before the date 
of enactment of this Act.
 <all>
HR 753 IH----2
HR 753 IH----3