S 411 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 411
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to restore a capital gains tax
differential, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 9 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BOSCHWITZ (for himself, Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. KASTEN, Mr. SYMMS, Mr. GARN,
and Mr. LUGAR) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to restore a capital gains tax
differential, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. RESTORATION OF CAPITAL GAINS TAX DIFFERENTIAL.
 (a) TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended
 by inserting after section 1201 the following new section:
`SEC. 1202. DEDUCTION FOR CAPITAL GAINS.
 `(a) DEDUCTION ALLOWED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If for any taxable year a taxpayer other than a corporation
 has a net capital gain, there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross
 income an amount equal to the sum of--
 `(A) 60 percent of the lesser of--
 `(i) the net capital gain, or
 `(ii) the qualified net capital gain, plus
 `(B) 40 percent of the excess (if any) of--
 `(i) the net capital gain, over
 `(ii) the amount of the qualified net capital gain taken into account
 under subparagraph (A).
 `(b) QUALIFIED NET CAPITAL GAIN- For purposes of subsection (a), the term
 `qualified net capital gain' means the amount of net capital gain which would
 be computed for any taxable year if, in determining net long-term capital
 gain for such taxable year, only capital assets held by the taxpayer for
 at least 3 years at the time of the sale or exchange were taken into account.
 `(c) ESTATES AND TRUSTS- In the case of an estate or trust, the deduction
 under subsection (a) shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any)
 of the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets
 which, under section 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in
 gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income
 beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.'.
 (b) CORPORATIONS- Subsection (a) of section 1201 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to the alternative tax for corporations) is amended
 to read as follows:
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- If for any taxable year a corporation has a net capital
 gain, then, in lieu of the tax imposed by sections 11, 511, and 831 (a)
 or (b), there is hereby imposed a tax (if such tax is less than the tax
 imposed by such sections) which shall consist of the sum of--
 `(1) a tax computed on the taxable income reduced by the amount of the
 net capital gain, at the rates and in the manner as if this subsection
 had not been enacted, plus
 `(2) a tax of 28 percent of the net capital gain.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 out subsection (j).
 (2) Section 57(a) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(8) CAPITAL GAINS-
 `(A) INDIVIDUALS- In the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation,
 an amount equal to the net capital gain deduction for the taxable year
 determined under section 1202.
 `(B) PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE- For purposes of subparagraph (A), gain from the
 sale or exchange of a principal residence (within the meaning of section
 1034) shall not be taken into account.
 `(C) Special rule for certain insolvent taxpayers-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The amount of the tax preference under subparagraph (A)
 shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the excess (if any) of--
 `(I) the applicable percentage of gain from any farm insolvency transaction,
 over
 `(II) the applicable percentage of any loss from any farm insolvency
 transaction which offsets such gain.
 `(ii) REDUCTION LIMITED TO AMOUNT OF INSOLVENCY- The amount of the reduction
 determined under clause (i) shall not exceed the amount by which the
 taxpayer is insolvent immediately before the transaction (reduced by any
 portion of such amount previously taken into account under this clause).
 `(iii) FARM INSOLVENCY TRANSACTION- For purposes of this subparagraph,
 the term `farm insolvency transaction' means--
 `(I) the transfer by a farmer of farmland to a creditor in cancellation
 of indebtedness, or
 `(II) the sale or exchange by the farmer of property described in subclause
 (I) under the threat of foreclosure,
but only if the farmer is insolvent immediately before such transaction.
 `(iv) INSOLVENT- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `insolvent'
 means the excess of liabilities over the fair market value of assets.
 `(v) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term
 `applicable percentage' means that percentage of net capital gain with
 respect to which a deduction is allowed under section 1202(a).
 `(vi) FARMLAND- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `farmland'
 means any land used or held for use in the trade or business of farming
 (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)(5)).
 `(vii) FARMER- For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `farmer' means
 any taxpayer if 50 percent or more of the average annual gross income
 of the taxpayer for the 3 preceding taxable years is attributable to the
 trade or business of farming (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)(5)).'
 (3) Section 62(a) of such Code is amended by adding after paragraph (12)
 the following new paragraph:
 `(13) LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAINS- The deduction allowed by section 1202.'
 (4) Subparagraph (B) of section 170(e)(1) of such Code is amended by
 inserting `100 percent minus the percentage described in subparagraph
 (A) or (B) of section 1202(a)(1), whichever is applicable, of' before
 `the amount of gain'.
 (5) Section 172(d)(2) of such Code (relating to modifications with respect
 to net operating loss deduction) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAINS AND LOSSES OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS- In
 the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation--
 `(A) the amount deductible on account of losses from sales or exchanges
 of capital assets shall not exceed the amount includible on account of
 gains from sales or exchanges of capital assets; and
 `(B) the deduction for long-term capital gains provided by section 1202
 shall not be allowed.'.
 (6) Subparagraph (B) of section 172(d)(4) of such Code is amended by
 inserting `, (2)(B),' after `paragraphs (1)'.
 (7)(A) Section 220 of such Code (relating to cross reference) is amended
 to read as follows:
`SEC. 220. CROSS REFERENCES.
 `(1) For deduction for long-term capital gains in the case of a taxpayer
 other than a corporation, see section 1202.
 `(2) For deductions in respect of a decedent, see section 691.'.
 (B) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of
 such Code is amended by striking out `reference' in the item relating to
 section 220 and inserting `references'.
 (8) Subparagraph (D)(v) of section 593(b)(2) is amended to read as follows:
 `(v) by excluding from gross income an amount equal to the lesser of 6/34
 of the net long-term capital gain for the taxable year or 6/34 of the
 net long-term capital gain for the taxable year from the sale or exchange
 of property other than property described in clause (iii).'.
 (9) Paragraph (4) of section 642(c) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(4) ADJUSTMENTS- To the extent that the amount otherwise allowable as a
 deduction under this subsection consists of gain from the sale or exchange
 of capital assets held for more than 1 year, proper adjustment shall be
 made for any deduction allowable to the estate or trust under section 1202
 (relating to deduction for excess of capital gains over capital losses). In
 the case of a trust, the deduction allowed by this subsection shall be
 subject to section 681 (relating to unrelated business income).'.
 (10) Paragraph (3) of section 643(a) of such Code is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new sentence: `The deduction under section
 1202 (relating to deduction for excess capital gains over capital losses)
 shall not be taken into account.'
 (11) Paragraph (4) of section 691(c) of such Code is amended by striking out
 `1(j), 1201, and 1211' and inserting in lieu thereof `1201, 1202, and 1211,
 and for purposes of section 57(a)(8)'.
 (12) Clause (iii) of section 852(b)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by
 striking out `66 percent' and inserting in lieu thereof `72 percent'.
 (13) The second sentence of paragraph (2) of section 871(a) of such Code
 is amended by inserting `such gains and losses shall be determined without
 regard to section 1202 (relating to deduction for capital gains) and'
 after `except that'.
 (14) Paragraph (2) of section 904(b) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAINS- For purposes of this section--
 `(A) CORPORATIONS- In the case of a corporation--
 `(i) the taxable income of such corporation from sources without the United
 States shall include gain from the sale or exchange of capital assets only
 in an amount equal to foreign source capital gain net income reduced by
 the rate differential portion of foreign source net capital gain,
 `(ii) the entire taxable income of such corporation shall include gain
 from the sale or exchange of capital assets only in an amount equal to
 capital gain net income reduced by the rate differential portion of net
 capital gain, and
 `(iii) for purposes of determining taxable income from sources without the
 United States, any net capital loss (and any amount which is a short-term
 capital loss under section 1212(a)) from sources without the United
 States to the extent taken into account in determining capital gain net
 income for the taxable year shall be reduced by an amount equal to the
 rate differential portion of the excess of net capital gain from sources
 within the United States over net capital gain.
 `(B) OTHER TAXPAYERS- In the case of a taxpayer other than a taxpayer
 described in subparagraph (A), taxable income from sources without the
 United States shall include gain from the sale or exchange of capital
 assets only to the extent of foreign source capital gain net income.'.
 (15) Paragraph (3) of section 904(b) of such Code is amended by striking
 out subparagraphs (D) and (E) and inserting in lieu thereof the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(D) RATE DIFFERENTIAL PORTION- The `rate differential portion' of foreign
 source net capital gain, net capital gain, or the excess of net capital
 gain from sources within the United States over net capital gain, as the
 case may be, is the same proportion of such amount as the excess of the
 highest rate of tax specified in section 11(b) over the alternative rate
 of tax under section 1201(a) bears to the highest rate of tax specified
 in section 11(b).'.
 (16) Section 1402(i)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In determining the net earnings from self-employment of
 any options dealer or commodities dealer--
 `(A) notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(A), there shall not be excluded any
 gain or loss (in the normal course of the taxpayer's activity of dealing in
 or trading section 1256 contracts) from section 1256 contracts or property
 related to such contracts, and
 `(B) the deduction provided by section 1202 shall not apply.'.
 (17) Section 1445(e) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by striking out `34 percent (or, to the extent provided in regulations,
 28 percent)' in paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof `28 percent', and
 (B) by striking out `34 percent' in paragraph (2) and inserting in lieu
 thereof `28 percent'.
 (18) The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of such
 Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1201 the
 following new item:
`Sec. 1202. Deduction for capital gains.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after Decem- ber 31, 1989.