[Congressional Bills 112th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 3846 Introduced in House (IH)]

112th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3846

 To establish a National Commission for Independent Redistricting to 
prepare Congressional redistricting plans for all States and to require 
 Congressional redistricting in a State to be conducted in accordance 
 with the Commission plan for the State.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 31, 2012

Mr. Blumenauer introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on Rules, 
for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case 
for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of 
 the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish a National Commission for Independent Redistricting to 
prepare Congressional redistricting plans for all States and to require 
 Congressional redistricting in a State to be conducted in accordance 
 with the Commission plan for the State.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, FINDING OF CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National 
Commission for Independent Redistricting Act of 2012''.
 (b) Finding.--Congress finds that it has the authority to establish 
the terms and conditions in carrying out Congressional redistricting 
after an apportionment of Members of the House of Representatives 
because--
 (1) the authority granted to Congress under article I, 
 section 4 of the Constitution of the United States gives 
 Congress the power to enact laws governing the time, place, and 
 manner of elections for Members of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the authority granted to Congress under section 5 of 
 the 14th Amendment to the Constitution gives Congress the power 
 to enact laws to enforce section 2 of such amendment, which 
 requires Representatives to be apportioned among the several 
 States according to their number.

 TITLE I--NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDEPENDENT REDISTRICTING

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.

 There is established in the legislative branch with respect to each 
regular decennial census (beginning with the regular decennial census 
conducted during 2020) a commission to be known as the ``National 
Commission for Independent Redistricting'' (hereafter in this Act 
referred to as the ``Commission'').

SEC. 102. PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF STATE REDISTRICTING PLANS.

 (a) Preparation of Congressional Redistricting Plan for Each 
State.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after receiving the 
 statement of the number of Representatives to which each State 
 is entitled, as transmitted to the Commission by the President 
 under section 22(a) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for 
 the fifteenth and subsequent decennial censuses and to provide 
 for an apportionment of Representatives in Congress'', approved 
 June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a(a)), as amended by subsection (d), 
 the Commission shall establish and approve a Congressional 
 redistricting plan for each State that contains--
 (A) a map showing each Congressional district 
 established under the plan for the State, consistent 
 with the criteria described in paragraph (2);
 (B) a detailed statement of the findings and 
 conclusions of the Commission and the reasons why the 
 adoption of the plan will best serve the public 
 interest; and
 (C) the assumptions, scenarios, and alternatives 
 considered in reaching such findings and conclusions.
 (2) Criteria considered.--The Commission shall develop the 
 redistricting plan for a State in accordance with the following 
 criteria:
 (A) Adherence to the ``one person, one vote'' 
 standard and other requirements imposed under the 
 Constitution of the United States.
 (B) To the greatest extent mathematically possible, 
 ensuring that the population of each Congressional 
 district in the State does not vary from the population 
 of any other Congressional district in the State (as 
 determined on the basis of the total count of persons 
 of the most recent decennial census conducted by the 
 Bureau of the Census).
 (C) Consistency with any applicable requirements of 
 the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and other Federal laws.
 (D) To the greatest extent practicable, the 
 maintenance of the geographic continuity of the 
 political subdivisions of the State which are included 
 in the same Congressional district, in the following 
 order of priority:
 (i) The continuity of counties or parishes.
 (ii) The continuity of municipalities.
 (iii) The continuity of neighborhoods (as 
 determined on the basis of census tracts or 
 other relevant information).
 (E) To the greatest extent practicable and 
 consistent with the criteria set forth above, 
 encouraging the geographical compactness of districts 
 so that nearby population areas are not bypassed for 
 more distant population areas (in accordance with such 
 standards as the Commission may establish).
 (F) Ensuring that districts are contiguous (except 
 to the extent necessary to include any area which is 
 surrounded by a body of water).
 (3) Factors prohibited from consideration.--In developing 
 the redistricting plan for a State, the Commission may not take 
 into consideration any of the following factors, except to the 
 extent necessary to comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965:
 (A) The voting history of the population of a 
 Congressional district, except that the commission may 
 take such history into consideration to the extent 
 necessary to comply with any law of the State which 
 requires the establishment of competitive Congressional 
 districts.
 (B) The political party affiliation of the 
 population of a district.
 (C) The residence of incumbent Members of the House 
 of Representatives, or of potential candidates for the 
 House of Representatives, in the State.
 (b) Development and Approval of Plans Through Transparent 
Process.--In accordance with section 104, the Commission shall develop 
interim redistricting plans for a State, and shall develop and approve 
a final redistricting plan for a State, through a transparent process 
that takes into account public comments.
 (c) Approval of Plan.--The Commission may not approve a 
redistricting plan for a State under this section unless the plan is 
approved by not fewer than 8 of its members.
 (d) Requiring President To Transmit Statement of Number of 
Representatives for States.--Section 22(a) of the Act entitled ``An Act 
to provide for the fifteenth and subsequent decennial censuses and to 
provide for an apportionment of Representatives in Congress'', approved 
June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a(a)), is amended by striking ``to the 
Congress'' and inserting ``to the Congress and to the National 
Commission for Independent Redistricting established with respect to 
the decennial census involved''.

SEC. 103. MEMBERSHIP.

 (a) Appointment.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 14 
 members, of whom no more than 7 may be members of or affiliated 
 with the same political party, who are appointed as follows:
 (A) The Speaker of the House of Representatives 
 shall appoint 4 members.
 (B) The minority leader of the House of 
 Representatives shall appoint 4 members.
 (C) The majority leader of the Senate shall appoint 
 3 members.
 (D) The minority leader of the Senate shall appoint 
 3 members.
 (2) Qualifications.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed on the basis of relevant experience, integrity, 
 impartiality, and good judgment and members, subject to the 
 following:
 (A) An individual may not be appointed as a Member 
 if, at the time of appointment, the individual is 
 elected or appointed officer or employee of the Federal 
 Government.
 (B) An individual who is appointed as a Member 
 shall certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, to 
 each of the officers referred to in paragraph (1) that 
 the individual shall not seek election or appointment 
 to any public office until the expiration of the 3-year 
 period which begins on the date the Commission 
 terminates.
 (3) Deadline.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed 
 by not later than October 1 of the year in which the regular 
 decennial census is conducted.
 (b) Co-Chairs.--The Co-Chairs of the Commission shall be elected 
from among the members of the Commission. The Co-Chairs may not be 
members or affiliated with the same political party.
 (c) Term of Service; Vacancies.--Each Member shall be appointed for 
the life of the Commission. A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled 
in the manner in which the original appointment was made, but shall be 
filled not later than 14 days after the vacancy occurs.
 (d) Compensation: Travel Expenses.--Members shall each be paid at a 
rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive 
Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are 
engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission. 
Each Member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu 
of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under 
subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) Administration.--
 (1) Authority to establish rules and regulations.--The Co-
 Chairs, in consultation with the other members of the 
 Commission, shall establish rules and regulations for the 
 conduct of Commission business, if such rules and regulations 
 are not inconsistent with this section or other applicable law.
 (2) Quorum.--Not fewer than 9 members of the Commission 
 shall constitute a quorum for purposes of voting, meeting, and 
 holding hearings.
 (3) Meetings.--
 (A) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after 
 all of the Commission's members have been appointed, 
 the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
 (B) Subsequent meetings.--After the first meeting, 
 the Commission shall meet upon the call of the Co-
 Chairs.

SEC. 104. TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) Open Meetings and Hearings.--Each meeting and hearing held by 
the Commission shall be open to the public, and a notice of the date, 
time, and location of the meeting and hearing shall be posted on the 
Internet site established and operated under subsection (c).
 (b) Development and Approval of Plans Through Participation of 
Public.--
 (1) Outreach to public.--The Commission shall establish a 
 public outreach program to notify members of the public of the 
 work about the Commission and to encourage to the greatest 
 extent practicable the participation of the public in the 
 development and review of redistricting plans. Under such 
 program, the Commission shall solicit comments from the public 
 for each proposed redistricting plan for a State it develops, 
 and shall take such comments into consideration prior to 
 developing any subsequent plan.
 (2) Final plan.--The Commission may not vote on a final 
 redistricting plan for a State until the expiration of the 14-
 day period which begins on the date the Commission first makes 
 the plan available for public comment.
 (c) Internet.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 30 days after all of the 
 Commission's members have been appointed, the Commission shall 
 establish and operate an Internet site through which members of 
 the public may obtain the information described in paragraph 
 (2) and may submit comments to the Commission regarding any of 
 the information posted on the site.
 (2) Contents.--On the Internet site established under 
 paragraph (1), the Commission shall post and continuously 
 updated the following information:
 (A) A complete and current schedule of Commission 
 events (including all meetings, hearings, and forums) 
 and dates relevant to the development and adoption of 
 redistricting plans (including periods for members of 
 the public to submit comments on plans).
 (B) Each redistricting plan proposed by the 
 Commission, including a map of each Congressional 
 district under the plan and a Statewide map showing 
 each Congressional district in a State under the plan.
 (C) The most recent available information from the 
 Bureau of the Census on voting-age population, voter 
 registration, and voting results in the State, 
 including precinct-level and census tract-level data 
 with respect to such information, as well as detailed 
 maps reflecting such information.
 (D) The records of the Commission which pertain to 
 the development and adoption of redistricting plans, 
 including recorded votes taken on the approval of a 
 plan and any minority or dissenting opinions written 
 with respect to the approval or rejection of a plan.
 (E) Not later than 14 days prior to the date of any 
 meeting or hearing of the Commission, a notice of the 
 date, time, and location of the meeting or hearing.
 (F) Not later than 7 days prior to the date of any 
 meeting of the Commission, the agenda for the meeting.
 (G) Not later than 7 days after the conclusion of 
 any hearing conducted by the Commission, a 
 transcription and video recording of the hearing.
 (H) Such other information as the Commission is 
 required to make publicly available under applicable 
 law, and any other information the Commission may 
 choose to make publicly available subject to applicable 
 law.

SEC. 105. STAFF OF COMMISSION.

 (a) Appointment of Staff.--
 (1) Shared staff.--The Co-Chairs shall jointly appoint an 
 individual to serve as staff director of the Commission, and 
 may also jointly appoint such other personnel as may be 
 necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its functions.
 (2) Additional staff for commission members.--Each member 
 of the Commission may appoint up to 5 additional staff for the 
 Commission.
 (3) Coverage under congressional accountability act of 
 1995.--Any individual appointed to the staff of the Commission 
 under this subsection shall be considered a covered employee, 
 and the Commission shall be considered an employing office, for 
 purposes of the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 (2 
 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.).
 (b) Inapplicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff 
director and other personnel of the Commission may be appointed without 
regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing 
appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard 
to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of 
that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, 
except that no individual appointed under the authority of this section 
may receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay for GS-15 of 
the General Schedule.
 (c) Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Co-Chairs 
of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may 
detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of that department 
or agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out its duties under 
this title.

SEC. 106. POWERS OF COMMISSION.

 (a) Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of 
carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, 
take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers 
appropriate.
 (b) Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the 
Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which 
the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
 (c) Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly 
from any agency of the United States information necessary to enable it 
to carry out this Act. Upon the request of the Chair of the Commission, 
the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to 
the Commission.
 (d) Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the 
same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and 
agencies of the United States.
 (e) Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the 
Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the 
Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support 
services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities 
under this Act.

SEC. 107. COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICS GUIDELINES.

 (a) Compliance With Code of Conduct of House of Representatives.--
Each member and staff of the Commission shall certify in writing to 
each of the individuals referred to in section 103(a)(1), under penalty 
of perjury, that the member or staff agrees to follow rule XXIII of the 
Rules of the House of Representatives (known as the ``Code of 
Conduct'').
 (b) Reports Under Ethics in Government Act of 1978.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for purposes of title I of 
the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), each member and 
staff of the Commission--
 (1) shall be deemed to be an officer or employee of the 
 Congress (as defined in section 109(13) of such title); and
 (2) shall file any report required to be filed by such 
 member or such staff (including by virtue of the application of 
 paragraph (1)) under title I of the Ethics in Government Act of 
 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) with the Clerk of the House of 
 Representatives.

SEC. 108. TERMINATION.

 The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date of enactment 
of the Commission plan.

SEC. 109. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary to carry out this title.

 TITLE II--REQUIREMENTS FOR CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING

SEC. 201. REQUIRING REDISTRICTING TO BE CONDUCTED THROUGH APPROVED 
 STATE PLANS OF COMMISSION.

 (a) Enactment of Legislation by Congress.--After the Commission has 
approved a redistricting plan under title I for all States, the 
Commission shall prepare and submit to Congress and the President a 
bill (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Commission bill''), 
the matter following the enacting clause of which consists of only the 
following: ``That notwithstanding any other provision of law, each 
State shall carry out any congressional redistricting required after 
the regular decennial census conducted in ___ only in accordance with 
the redistricting plan which was approved for the State with respect to 
that census by the National Commission for Independent 
Redistricting.'', with the blank filled in with the year in which the 
decennial census was conducted.
 (b) Existing Districts Unchanged Until Enactment of Commission 
Bill.--Until the Commission bill is enacted, the congressional 
districts in each State shall remain in effect.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 22(c) of the Act entitled ``An 
Act to provide for the fifteenth and subsequent decennial censuses and 
to provide for an apportionment of Representatives in Congress'', 
approved June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a(c)), is amended by striking ``in 
the manner provided by the law thereof'' and inserting: ``in the manner 
provided by the National Commission for Independent Redistricting Act 
of 2011''.

SEC. 202. EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION BILL BY CONGRESS.

 (a) Introduction of Commission Bill.--Upon receipt by Congress, the 
Commission bill shall be introduced within 30 days in the Senate and in 
the House of Representatives by the majority leader of each House of 
Congress, for himself, the minority leader of each House of Congress, 
for himself, or any member of the House designated by the majority 
leader or minority leader. If the Commission bill is not introduced in 
accordance with the preceding sentence in either House of Congress, 
then any Member of that House may introduce the Commission bill on any 
day thereafter. Upon introduction, the Commission bill shall be 
referred to the appropriate committees under subsection (b).
 (b) Committee Consideration.--A Commission bill introduced in 
either House of Congress shall be jointly referred to the committee or 
committees of jurisdiction, which shall report the bill without any 
revision and with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable 
recommendation, or without recommendation, not later than 7 calendar 
days after the date of introduction of the bill in that House, or the 
first day thereafter on which that House is in session. If any 
committee fails to report the bill within that period, that committee 
shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill, and 
the bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
 (c) Fast Track Consideration in House of Representatives.--
 (1) Proceeding to consideration.--It shall be in order, not 
 later than 2 days of session after the date on which a 
 Commission bill is reported or discharged from all committees 
 to which it was referred, for the majority leader of the House 
 of Representatives or the majority leader's designee, to move 
 to proceed to the consideration of the Commission bill. It 
 shall also be in order for any Member of the House of 
 Representatives to move to proceed to the consideration of the 
 Commission bill at any time after the conclusion of such 2-day 
 period. All points of order against the motion are waived. Such 
 a motion shall not be in order after the House has disposed of 
 a motion to proceed on the Commission bill. The previous 
 question shall be considered as ordered on the motion to its 
 adoption without intervening motion. The motion shall not be 
 debatable. A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion 
 is disposed of shall not be in order.
 (2) Consideration.--The Commission bill shall be considered 
 as read. All points of order against the Commission bill and 
 against its consideration are waived. The previous question 
 shall be considered as ordered on the Commission bill to its 
 passage without intervening motion except 2 hours of debate 
 equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an 
 opponent, and any motion to limit debate. A motion to 
 reconsider the vote on passage of the Commission bill shall not 
 be in order.
 (3) Appeals.--Appeals from decisions of the chair relating 
 to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives 
 to the procedure relating to a Commission bill shall be decided 
 without debate.
 (4) Application of house rules.--Except to the extent 
 specifically provided in paragraph (1), consideration of a 
 Commission bill shall be governed by the Rules of the House of 
 Representatives. It shall not be in order in the House of 
 Representatives to consider any Commission bill introduced 
 pursuant to the provisions of this subsection under a 
 suspension of the rules pursuant to Clause 1 of House Rule XV, 
 or under a special rule reported by the Committee on Rules.
 (5) No amendments.--No amendment to the Commission bill 
 shall be in order in the House of Representatives.
 (6) Vote on passage.--Immediately following the conclusion 
 of consideration of the Commission bill, the vote on passage of 
 the Commission bill shall occur without any intervening action 
 or motion. If the Commission bill is passed, the Clerk of the 
 House of Representatives shall cause the bill to be transmitted 
 to the Senate before the close of the next day of session of 
 the House.
 (d) Fast Track Consideration in Senate.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding Rule XXII of the Standing 
 Rules of the Senate, it is in order, not later than 2 days of 
 session after the date on which a Commission bill is reported 
 or discharged from all committees to which it was referred, for 
 the majority leader of the Senate or the majority leader's 
 designee to move to proceed to the consideration of the 
 Commission bill. It shall also be in order for any Member of 
 the Senate to move to proceed to the consideration of the 
 Commission bill at any time after the conclusion of such 2-day 
 period. A motion to proceed is in order even though a previous 
 motion to the same effect has been disagreed to. All points of 
 order against the motion to proceed to the Commission bill are 
 waived. The motion to proceed is not debatable. The motion is 
 not subject to a motion to postpone. A motion to reconsider the 
 vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not 
 be in order. If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the 
 Commission bill is agreed to, the Commission bill shall remain 
 the unfinished business until disposed of.
 (2) Debate.--All points of order against the Commission 
 bill and against consideration of the Commission bill are 
 waived. Consideration of the Commission bill and of all 
 debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith shall not 
 exceed a total of 100 hours. Debate shall be divided equally 
 between the majority and minority leaders or their designees. A 
 motion further to limit debate on the Commission bill is in 
 order and is not debatable. Any debatable motion or appeal is 
 debatable for not to exceed 1 hour, to be divided equally 
 between those favoring and those opposing the motion or appeal. 
 All time used for consideration of the Commission bill, 
 including time used for quorum calls and voting, shall be 
 counted against the total 100 hours of consideration.
 (3) No amendments.--An amendment to the Commission bill, or 
 a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the 
 consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the 
 Commission bill, is not in order.
 (4) Vote on passage.--The vote on passage shall occur 
 immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a 
 Commission bill, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of 
 the debate if requested.
 (5) Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the 
 decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules 
 of the Senate, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to 
 a Commission bill shall be decided without debate.
 (e) Rules to Coordinate Action With Other House.--
 (1) Referral.--If, before the passage by one House of a 
 Commission bill of that House, that House receives from the 
 other House a Commission bill, then the Commission bill of the 
 other House shall not be referred to a committee and shall 
 immediately be placed on the calendar.
 (2) Procedure.--If the Senate receives the Commission bill 
 passed by the House of Representatives before the Senate has 
 voted on passage of the Commission bill--
 (A) the procedure in the Senate shall be the same 
 as if no Commission bill had been received from the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (B) the vote on passage in the Senate shall be on 
 the Commission bill of the House of Representatives.
 (3) Treatment of commission bill of other house.--If one 
 House fails to introduce or consider a Commission bill under 
 this section, the Commission bill of the other House shall be 
 entitled to expedited floor procedures under this section.
 (4) Treatment of companion measures in the senate.--If 
 following passage of the Commission bill in the Senate, the 
 Senate then receives the Commission bill from the House of 
 Representatives, the House-passed Commission bill shall not be 
 debatable. The vote on passage of the Commission bill in the 
 Senate shall be considered to be the vote on passage of the 
 Commission bill received from the House of Representatives.
 (5) Vetoes.--If the President vetoes the Commission bill, 
 debate on a veto message in the Senate under this section shall 
 be 1 hour equally divided between the majority and minority 
 leaders or their designees.
 (f) Suspension.--No motion to suspend the application of this 
section shall be in order in the Senate or in the House of 
Representatives.

SEC. 203. LIMIT ON CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AFTER AN APPORTIONMENT.

 (a) Limit.--The Act entitled ``An Act for the relief of Doctor 
Ricardo Vallejo Samala and to provide for congressional 
redistricting'', approved December 14, 1967 (2 U.S.C. 2c), is amended 
by adding at the end the following: ``A State which has been 
redistricted in the manner provided by law after an apportionment under 
section 22(a) of the Act entitled `An Act to provide for the fifteenth 
and subsequent decennial censuses and to provide for an apportionment 
of Representatives in Congress,' approved June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a), 
may not be redistricted again until after the next apportionment of 
Representatives under such section, unless a court requires the State 
to conduct such subsequent redistricting to comply with the 
Constitution or to enforce the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 
1973 et seq.)''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 204. NO EFFECT ON REDISTRICTING FOR STATE OR LOCAL ELECTIONS.

 Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act may be 
construed to affect any procedures a State or a unit of local 
government in a State may use to conduct redistricting with respect to 
elections for State or local offices.

 TITLE III--EFFECTIVE DATE

SEC. 301. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as provided in section 203, this Act and the amendments made 
by this Act shall apply with respect to any Congressional redistricting 
which occurs after the regular decennial census conducted during 2020.
 <all>