S 491 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 491
To reduce atmospheric pollution to protect the stratosphere from ozone
depletion, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 2 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. CHAFEE (for himself and Mr. BAUCUS) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To reduce atmospheric pollution to protect the stratosphere from ozone
depletion, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Stratospheric Ozone and Climate Protection
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the best available scientific evidence shows that manufactured
 substances, including chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by
 this Act, are destroying stratospheric ozone, and significantly contributing
 to global climate change, and other atmospheric modifications;
 (2) no level of stratospheric ozone depletion or global climate change
 caused by human activities can be deemed safe;
 (3) stratospheric ozone depletion will lead to increased incidence of solar
 ultraviolet radiation in the troposphere and at the surface of the Earth;
 (4) increased incidence of solar ultraviolet radiation will cause increased
 rates of disease in humans (including increased rates of skin cancer,
 cataracts, and, potentially, suppression of the immune system), threaten food
 crops and marine resources, and otherwise damage the natural environment;
 (5) the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer provides
 a framework for all nations of the world to protect the earth's ozone shield;
 (6) the Ozone Trends Report completed in March 1988 through the effort of
 over one-hundred international scientists found undisputed observational
 evidence that the atmospheric concentrations of source gases important
 in controlling stratospheric ozone levels (chlorofluorocarbons, halons,
 methane, nitrous oxide, and carbon dioxide) are increasing on a global
 scale as a result of human activities and that observed losses of ozone
 since 1970 are significantly greater than computer models had predicted,
 especially over the northern hemisphere during the winter months where
 losses ranging from 2.3 per centum to 6.2 per centum were observed;
 (7) the computer models used in the formulation of the Montreal Protocol
 predicted that global ozone depletion would reach 0.8 per centum by 1986,
 the Ozone Trends Report measured global ozone depletion of 2.5 per centum.
 (8) there has been a large, sudden, and unexpected decrease in springtime
 Antarctic ozone with decreases greater than 50 per centum in the total
 column, and greater than 95 per centum between an altitude of fifteen to
 twenty kilometers;
 (9) scientific expeditions and analyses have established that chlorine
 compounds derived from emissions of chlorofluorocarbons are responsible
 for destruction of the stratospheric ozone layer over the Antarctic and
 the surrounding oceans;
 (10) recent scientific reports indicate that a similar destruction of the
 ozone layer may occur over the Arctic region and that the same chlorine
 compounds found in the Antarctic region are present in areas of the Arctic
 ozone layer;
 (11) experimental laboratory studies and measurements of ozone depletion
 suggest that the chemical reactions responsible for destruction of ozone
 over Antarctica could operate in the aerosal layer of the stratosphere
 and would not be limited to the polar regions;
 (12) the Ozone Trends Report found that, since 1979, ozone appears to have
 decreased by 5 per centum or more at all latitudes south of 60 degrees
 south throughout the entire year;
 (13) the control measures that are set forth in the Montreal Protocol (a
 freeze on the consumption of certain chlorofluorocarbons at 1986 levels
 in 1989 followed by a 20 per centum reduction in 1993 and an additional 30
 per centum reduction in 1998, coupled with a freeze on the consumption of
 certain halons at 1986 levels in 1992) will allow atmospheric concentrations
 of chlorine to increase by more than a factor of two;
 (14) the Ozone Trends Report and other recent scientific studies have
 raised serious questions about the adequacy of the control measures that
 are set forth in the Montreal Protocol;
 (15) ozone depletion chlorofluorocarbons are powerful greenhouse gases
 projected to be responsible for 15-25 per centum of global warming and,
 under the existing Montreal Protocol, 10 per centum of future warming;
 (16) stratospheric ozone depletion and global climate change from continued
 emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated chlorocarbons with
 ozone depleting potential, and emissions of other gases, imperil human
 health and the environment worldwide;
 (17) in order to stabilize and eventually reduce concentrations of chlorine
 and bromine in the stratosphere, to conserve the stratospheric ozone layer
 (an exhaustible natural resource), and to reduce the extent of global
 climate change--
 (A) emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by this
 Act, including halogenated carbons with ozone depleting potential, should
 be terminated rapidly,
 (B) it is necessary to control international trade in substances covered
 by this Act and products containing or made with processes that use such
 substances; and
 (C) trade with countries that are not parties to the Montreal Protocol
 should be controlled;
 (18) the highest priority must be given to developing and deploying safe
 and energy efficient substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances as
 rapidly as possible; and
 (19) the United States needs to develop and deploy safe, energy efficient
 substitutes to replace ozone depleting substances in order to demonstrate
 to the world its commitment to protect the stratosphere and to limit
 climate change.
SEC. 3. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL.
 (a) The objectives of this Act are to restore and maintain the chemical
 and physical integrity of the Earth's atmosphere and to protect human
 health and the global environment from all known and potential dangers
 due to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone
 depletion, that is or may be related to the chlorofluorocarbons or other
 substances covered by this Act by--
 (1) reducing significantly the production and emission into the atmosphere
 of pollutants caused by human activities,
 (2) promoting the rapid development and deployment of energy efficient
 alternatives to the use of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered
 by this Act,
 (3) assuring that such alternatives reduce ozone depleting potential to
 the maximum extent possible and, at the same time, do not exacerbate the
 problem of human-induced global climate change either directly as radiatively
 important trace gases or indirectly as substances that reduce the energy
 efficiency of products which incorporate or use such substances, and
 (4) promoting additional scientific research on atmospheric or climatic
 modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion, and on the known
 and potential adverse effects therefrom on human health and the global
 environment.
 (b) In order to achieve the objectives of this Act, it is the national
 goal to eliminate atmospheric emissions of manufactured substances with
 ozone-depleting potential as well as direct and indirect global warming
 potential, including chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated carbons with
 ozone depleting and global warming potential, and to reduce to the maximum
 extent possible emissions of other gases caused by human activities that
 are likely to affect adversely the global climate.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.
 (2) The term `household appliances' means noncommercial personal effects,
 including air-conditioners, refrigerators, and motor vehicles.
 (3) The term `import' means to land on, bring into, or introduce into,
 or attempt to land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States, whether or not such landing,
 bringing, or introduction constitutes an importation within the meaning
 of the customs laws of the United States.
 (4) The term `manufactured substances' means any organic or inorganic
 chemical substances of a particular molecular identity, or any mixture,
 that has been manufactured for commercial purposes.
 (5) The term `medical purposes' means medical devices and diagnostic products
 (A) for which no safe substitute has been developed and (B) which, after
 notice and opportunity for public comment, has been approved and determined
 to be essential by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
 in consultation with the Administrator.
 (6) The term `person' means an individual, corporation (including a
 government corporation), partnership, firm, joint stock company, trust,
 association, or any other entity, or any officer, employee, agent,
 department, or instrumentality of the Federal Government, of any State or
 political subdivision thereof (including any interstate body), or of any
 foreign government (including any international instrumentality).
 (7) The term `substances covered by this Act' means those substances
 which are known or may reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute
 to atmospheric or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone
 depletion, and are listed under subsection (a) or (b) of section 5.
SEC. 5. LISTING OF REGULATED SUBSTANCES.
 (a) PRIORITY LIST AND INITIAL LISTS OF SUBSTANCES TO BE PHASED OUT-
 Within sixty days after enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall
 publish a priority list of manufactured substances which are known or
 may reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute to atmospheric
 or climatic modification, including stratospheric ozone depletion. The
 initial list shall include chlorofluorocarbon-11, chlorofluorocarbon-12,
 chlorofluorocarbon-113, chlorofluorocarbon-114, chlorofluorocarbon-115,
 methyl chloroform, halon-1211, halon-1301, and halon-2402.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Simultaneously with publication of the
 priority list, the Administrator shall create a list of other manufactured
 substances which, in the judgment of the Administrator, meet the criteria
 set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). The list of other
 substances shall be subject to the limitations of ozone depletion potential
 under section 10 of this Act and shall include chlorofluorocarbon-22,
 chlorofluorocarbon-123, chlorofluorocarbon-124, chlorofluorocarbon-125,
 chlorofluorocarbon-141(b), chlorofluorocarbon-142(b), carbon tetrachloride,
 and methylene chloride. At least annually thereafter, the Administrator shall
 publish a proposal to add to such list each other manufactured substance
 which, in the judgment of the Administrator, meets the criteria set forth
 in the first sentence of subsection (a). Within one hundred and eighty days
 of any such proposal, after allowing an opportunity for public comment,
 the Administrator shall promulgate a regulation adding each such substance
 to the list, unless the Administrator determines that such substance clearly
 does not meet the criteria set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a).
 (c) OZONE DEPLETION FACTOR- Simultaneously with publication of the lists
 or additions thereto under this section, and at least annually thereafter,
 the Administrator shall assign to each listed substance a numerical value
 representing the ozone depletion potential of such substance, on a mass (per
 kilogram) basis, as compared with chlorofluorocarbon-11. The numerical value
 shall, for the purposes of section 10, constitute the ozone-depletion factor
 of each such substance. Unless the Administrator promulgates regulations
 under this subsection setting forth a different value, the following ozone
 depletion factors shall apply for each listed substance:
--Ozone depleting
Substance
--factor
chlorofluorocarbon-11
--1.0
chlorofluorocarbon-12
--1.0
chlorofluorocarbon-22
--0.05
chlorofluorocarbon-113
--0.8
chlorofluorocarbon-114
--1.0
chlorofluorocarbon-115
--0.6
chlorofluorocarbon-123
--0.02
chlorofluorocarbon-124
--0.02
chlorofluorocarbon-141 (b)
--0.1
chlorofluorocarbon-142 (b)
--0.06
carbon tetrachloride
--1.06
Methyl chloroform
--0.10
halon-1211
--3.0
halon-1301
--10.0
halon-2402
--6.0
SEC. 6. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) PRIORITY LIST- Within ninety days after enactment of this Act,
 each person producing a substance listed pursuant to subsection (a) of
 section 5 shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 amount of the substance that was produced by such person during calendar
 year 1986. Not less than annually thereafter, each producer shall file
 a report with the Administrator setting forth the production levels of
 such substance in each successive twelve-month period until such producer
 ceases production of the substance. Each such report shall be signed by
 a responsible corporate officer.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Within ninety days of the date on which
 a substance is placed on the list under subsection (b) of section 5,
 each person shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 amount of the substance that was produced by such person during the twelve
 months preceding the date of listing. Not less than annually thereafter,
 each producer shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth
 the production levels of such substance in each successive twelve-month
 period until such producer ceases production of the substance. Each such
 report shall be signed by a responsible corporate officer.
SEC. 7. PRODUCTION PHASE-OUT OF SUBSTANCES ON THE PRIORITY LIST.
 (a) PRODUCTION FREEZE- Effective July 1, 1989, it shall be unlawful for
 any person to produce a substance listed under subsection (a) of section
 5 in annual quantities greater than that produced by such person during
 calendar year 1986.
 (b) PHASE ONE REDUCTION- Effective July 1, 1992, it shall be unlawful for
 any person to produce a substance listed under subsection (a) in section
 5 in annual quantities greater than 80 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
 (c) PHASE TWO REDUCTION- Effective July 1, 1995, it shall be unlawful for
 any person to produce a substance listed under subsection (a) in section
 5 in annual quantities greater than 50 per centum of that produced by such
 person during calendar year 1986.
 (d) PHASE THREE REDUCTION- Effective July 1, 1997, it shall be unlawful for
 any person to produce any quantity of a substance listed under subsection
 (a) of section 5 unless such person has, in accordance with subsection
 (e), received prior authorization to produce such substance.
 (e) EXCEPTION FOR MEDICAL PURPOSES- Notwithstanding the prohibition set
 forth in subsection (d), the Administrator, in consultation with the
 Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and after notice and
 opportunity for public comment, may authorize the production of limited
 quantities of a substance listed under subsection (a) of section 5 solely
 for medical purposes if such authorization is determined to be necessary
 for medical purposes.
SEC. 8. PRODUCTION PHASE-OUT EXCEPTION FOR NATIONAL SECURITY.
 The President may issue such orders regarding production and use of
 halon-1211, halon-1301 and halon-2402, at any specified site or facility as
 may be necessary to protect the national security interests of the United
 States if the President finds that adequate substitutes are not available
 and that the production and use of such substance is necessary to protect
 such national security interests. Such orders may include, where necessary
 to protect such interests, an exemption from any requirement contained
 in this Act. The President shall notify the Congress within thirty days
 of the issuance of an order under this paragraph providing for any such
 exemption. Such notification shall include a statement of the reasons for
 the granting of the exemption. An exemption under this paragraph shall be
 for a specified period which may not exceed one year. Additional exemptions
 may be granted, each upon the President's issuance of a new order under
 this paragraph. Each such additional exemption shall be for a specified
 period which may not exceed one year. No exemption shall be granted under
 this paragraph due to lack of appropriation unless the President shall
 have specifically requested such appropriation as a part of the budgetary
 process and the Congress shall have failed to make available such requested
 appropriation.
SEC. 9. LIMITATIONS ON USE AND DISPOSAL.
 (a) The Administrator shall, not later than July 1, 1991, promulgate
 regulations establishing standards and requirements regarding the use of
 substances covered by this Act. Such regulations shall include requirements
 that reduce the use and emission of such substances to the lowest achievable
 level and may include requirements to use alternative substances (including
 substances which are not covered by this Act), minimize use of substances
 covered by this Act, or maximize the recapture and recycling of substances
 covered by this Act.
 (b) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations establishing standards
 and requirements regarding the use of any manufactured substance that may,
 either directly as a radiatively important trace gas or indirectly as a
 substance that reduces the energy efficiency of products which incorporate
 or use such substance, exacerbate the problem of human induced global
 climate change.
 (c) The Administrator shall, before January 1, 1994, promulgate regulations
 establishing standards and requirements for the recapture, recycling,
 and safe disposal of substances covered by this Act. Such regulations
 shall include requirements that--
 (1) substances covered by this Act that are contained in bulk in appliances,
 machines or other goods (including but not limited to refrigerators and
 air-conditioners) shall be removed from each such appliance, machine or
 other good prior to the disposal of such item;
 (2) any appliance, machine or other good containing a substance covered
 by this Act in bulk shall not be manufactured or distributed in commerce
 unless it is equipped with a servicing aperture which will allow the
 recapture of such substance during service and repair of such item; and
 (3) any product in which a substance covered by this Act is incorporated
 so as to constitute an inherent element of such product, including but
 not limited to rigid and soft foams, shall be disposed of in a manner that
 prevents the release of such substance into the environment.
 (d) Effective January 1, 1993, it shall be unlawful for any person to
 knowingly vent into the atmosphere or otherwise knowingly use, release,
 or dispose of any substance covered by this Act (other than halon-1211,
 halon-1301, and halon-2402) in a fashion which permits such substance
 to enter the environment. Releases associated with the approved use of
 medical devices and diagnostic products for medical purposes and de minimus
 releases associated with good-faith attempts to recapture and recycle or
 safely dispose of any substance covered by this Act shall not be covered
 by the preceding sentence. The first sentence of this subsection shall not
 apply to releases associated with the servicing or repair of equipment
 which contains substances covered by this Act but does not include a
 servicing aperture which allows the recapture of such substances if,
 during the first servicing or repair after the effective date of this Act,
 such servicing aperture or other similar features are installed.
 (e) Effective July 1, 1997, it shall be unlawful to introduce into
 interstate commerce or to use a substance listed under subsection (a)
 of section 5 except for medical purposes approved by the Commissioner of
 the Food and Drug Administration, in consultation with the Administrator,
 and, for a period not to exceed ten years after July 1, 1997, to maintain
 and service household appliances.
SEC. 10. LIMITATION ON OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL.
 (a) Effective July 1, 1989, it shall be unlawful for any person to produce
 substances covered by this Act in annual quantities that, based upon the
 ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under subsection
 (c) of section 5, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater than
 that produced by such person during calendar year 1986. The prohibition
 set forth in the preceding sentence shall remain in effect until the
 effective date of regulations promulgated in accordance with subsection
 (b) or July 1, 1993, whichever is earlier.
 (b) Prior to July 1, 1992, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations
 establishing production limitations for substances covered by this Act that,
 based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under
 subsection (c) of section 5 and calendar year 1986 production levels, yield
 not less than a 95 per centum reduction in total ozone depletion potential
 in 1997. If the Administrator fails to promulgate regulations in accordance
 with this subsection, effective July 1, 1997, it shall be unlawful for any
 person to produce substances covered by this Act in annual quantities that,
 based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each such substance under
 subsection (c) of section 5, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater
 than 5 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
SEC. 11. ACCELERATED SCHEDULE.
 The Administrator shall promulgate regulations, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, which require each producer to reduce its production of--
 (1) a substance listed under subsection (a) of section 5 more rapidly than
 the schedule provided under this Act; or
 (2) a substance listed under subsection (b) of section 5 on a specific
 schedule not otherwise provided for in this Act
if the Administrator determines that such revised or specific schedule (A)
based on new information regarding the harmful effects on the stratosphere or
climate which may be associated with a listed substance, may be necessary to
protect human health and the environment or (B) based on the availability of
substitutes for a listed substance, is attainable. Any person may petition
the Administrator to issue such regulations. The Administrator shall issue
such regulations within one hundred and eighty days after receipt of any such
petition, unless the Administrator determines that such regulations are not
necessary and denies the petition. No less often than every eighteen months,
the Adminstrator shall, in response to a petition or otherwise, either publish
such regulations or a determination that such regulations are not necessary.
SEC. 12. CERTIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT PROGRAMS.
 (a) IMPORTS- Effective twelve months after the date on which a substance is
 placed on the priority list under subsection (a) of section 5, it shall be
 unlawful for any person to import such substance, any product containing
 such substance, or any product manufactured with a process that uses such
 substance unless the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of
 State (the Secretary), has published a decision, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, certifying that the nations in which such substance
 or product was manufactured and from which such substance or product
 is imported have established and are fully implementing programs that
 require reduced production of such listed substance, and limit production
 of other substances covered by this Act, on a schedule and in a manner that
 is at least as stringent as the reduction schedule for, and limitations on,
 domestic production which apply under this Act. The prohibition on the import
 of any product manufactured with a process that uses a substance listed under
 subsection (a) of section 5 shall include, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, any product which the Administrator has reason to believe
 may have been manufactured with a process that uses such substance. The
 Administrator's decision that a product may have been manufactured with
 a process that uses such substance shall constitute a rebuttable presumption.
 (b) CERTIFICATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAM- The Administrator shall not certify
 any national program under subsection (a) unless it is determined that--
 (1) the Nation has adopted legislation or regulations which give the
 reduction schedule for each listed substance the force of law; and
 (2) the legislation or regulations include reporting requirements and
 enforcement provisions no less stringent than those specified in sections
 6 and 14 of this Act, and that the information contained in such reports
 is available to the Administrator and the Secretary.
 (c) REVOCATION- At least annually, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Secretary, shall review each certification made under this section and
 shall revoke such certification, after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, unless it is determined that the conditions of subsections (a)
 and (b) remain satisfied and that the reduction schedule for each listed
 substance is in fact being carried out in such nations. Any such revocation
 shall take effect one hundred and eighty days after notice of the revocation
 has been published.
 (d) ALLOCATION- Any person who imports a substance covered by this Act or
 a product containing such substance shall, for the purposes of section 7
 (production phase-out for priority list) and section 10 (limitation on
 ozone depletion potential), shall be deemed to have produced an equivalent
 amount of such substance on the date of such importation.
SEC. 13. LABELING.
 (a) Effective eighteen months after the date on which a substance is
 placed on a list maintained under subsection (a) or (b) of section 5,
 no container in which such substance is stored or transported, no product
 containing such substance, and no product manufactured with a process that
 uses a listed substance shall be introduced into interstate commerce unless
 it bears a label stating either of the following, as appropriate:
 (1) `Contains (insert name of listed substance) a substance which harms
 public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper atmosphere
 and by disrupting the climate'.
 (2) `Manufactured with (insert name of listed substance) a substance
 which harms public health and environment by destroying ozone in the upper
 atmosphere and by disrupting the climate'.
The Administrator shall issue regulations to implement the labeling
requirements of this section within one year after enactment of this section,
after notice and opportunity for public comment. Such regulations shall require
all containers and products which are subject to this section and introduced
or reintroduced into commerce later than ninety days after promulgation of
such regulations to bear the appropriate label.
SEC. 14. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- (1) Whenever on the basis of any information the
 Administrator determines that any person has violated or is in violation
 of any requirement of this Act, the Administrator may issue an order
 assessing a civil penalty for any past or current violation, requiring
 compliance immediately or within a specified time period, or both, or the
 Administrator may commence a civil action in the United States district
 court in the district in which the violation occurred for appropriate
 relief, including a temporary or permanent injunction.
 (2) Any order issued pursuant to this subsection may include a suspension or
 revocation of any permit issued by the Administrator under this Act and shall
 state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation. Any penalty
 assessed in the order shall not exceed $25,000 per day of noncompliance for
 each violation of a requirement of this Act. In assessing such a penalty,
 the Administrator shall take into account the seriousness of the violation
 and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements.
 (b) PUBLIC HEARING- Any order issued under this section shall become final
 unless, no later than thirty days after the order is served, the person
 or persons named therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the
 Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any
 proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpenas for the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers,
 books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 (c) VIOLATION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS- If a violator fails to take corrective
 action within the time specified in a compliance order, the Administrator may
 assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued
 noncompliance with the order and the Administrator may suspend or revoke
 any permit issued to the violator.
 (d) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who--
 (1) knowingly exceeds the production limits under section 7 (production
 phase-out for initial list) or section 10 (limitation on ozone depletion
 potential);
 (2) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance that was
 produced in violation of section 7 or section 10;
 (3) knowingly imports a substance listed under subsection (a) of section
 5, a product containing such substance, or a product manufactured with a
 process that uses such substance, in violation of section 12 (certification
 of equivalent programs);
 (4) knowingly vents or releases a substance into the environment in
 violation of section 9 (limitations on use and disposal);
 (5) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance or product
 in violation of section 9 (limitation on use and disposal) or section 13
 (labeling);
 (6) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any application, record, report, permit,
 or other document filed, maintained, or used for purposes of compliance
 with this Act; or
 (7) knowingly produces, transports, distributes, or uses any substance
 listed under section 5, a product containing such substance, or a product
 manufactured with a process that uses such substance, and who knowingly
 destroys, alters, conceals, or fails to file any record, application,
 report, or other document required to be maintained or filed for purposes
 of compliance with this Act
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with title 18
of the United States Code for each day of a violation, or imprisonment not
to exceed two years, or both. If conviction is for a violation committed
after a first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum
punishment under the respective paragraph shall be doubled with respect to
both fine and imprisonment.
 (e) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who violates any requirement of this Act
 shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount not
 to exceed $25,000 for each such violation.
 (f) VIOLATIONS- Each day of violation of any requirement of this Act shall,
 for purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation. In addition,
 for purposes of section 7 (production phase-out for initial list), section 9
 (limitation on use and disposal), section 10 (limitation on ozone depletion
 potential), and paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (5) of subsection (d) of
 this section, the production, introduction into commerce, or importation
 of each one hundred pounds of a substance listed under subsection (a)
 of section 5 that is in excess of the production limits under section 7
 or section 10 shall constitute a separate violation.
SEC. 15. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL REGULATIONS AND CERTAIN PETITIONS.
 Any judicial review of any final action of the Administrator pursuant to
 this Act shall be in accordance with sections 701 through 706 of title 5
 of the United States Code, except that--
 (1) a petition for review of any final action of the Administrator may be
 filed by any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals of the United
 States for the Federal judicial district in which such person resides or
 transacts business, and such petition shall be filed within ninety days from
 the date of such promulgation or denial or after such date if such petition
 is for review based solely on grounds arising after such ninetieth day;
 action of the Administrator with respect to which review could have been
 obtained under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review in
 civil or criminal proceedings for enforcement; and
 (2) if a party seeking review under this Act applies to the court for
 leave to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of
 the court that the information is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before
 the Administrator, the court may order such additional evidence (and
 evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the Administrator, and
 to be adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms and
 conditions as the court may deem proper; the Administrator may modify
 administrative findings as to the facts, or make new findings, by reason
 of the additional evidence so taken, and shall file with the court such
 modified or new findings and the Administrator's recommendation, if any,
 for the modification or setting aside of the original administrative order,
 with the return of such additional evidence.
SEC. 16. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section,
 any person may commence a civil action on his own behalf--
 (1) against any person (including (a) the United States, and (b) any
 other governmental instrumentality or agency, to the extent permitted
 by the eleventh amendment to the Constitution) who is alleged to be in
 violation of any permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition,
 or order which has become effective pursuant to this Act; or
 (2) against the Administrator where there is alleged a failure of the
 Administrator to perform any act or duty under this Act which is not
 discretionary with the Administrator.
Any action under paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection shall be brought in the
district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred. Any
action brought under paragraph (a)(2) of this subsection may be brought in
the district court for the district in which the alleged violation occurred or
the District Court of the District of Columbia. The district court shall have
jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship
of the parties, to enforce the permit, regulation, condition, requirement,
prohibition, or order, referred to in paragraph (1), to order such person
to take such other action as may be necessary, or both, or to order the
Administrator to perform the act or duty referred to in paragraph (2), as
the case may be, and to apply any appropriate civil penalties under section 14.
 (b) ACTIONS PROHIBITED- No action may be commenced under subsection (a)(1)
 of this section--
 (1) prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice of the
 violation to--
 (A) the Administrator; and
 (B) to any alleged violator of such permit, regulation, condition,
 requirement, prohibition, or order; or
 (2) if the Administrator has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a civil
 or criminal action in a court of the United States to require compliance
 with such permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order.
In any action under subsection (a)(1), any person may intervene as a matter
of right. Any action respecting a violation under this Act may be brought
under this section only in the judicial district in which such alleged
violation occurs.
 (c) NOTICE- No action may be commenced under paragraph (a)(2) of this section
 prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice to the Administrator
 that he will commence such action. Notice under this subsection shall be
 given in such manner as the Administrator shall prescribe by regulation.
 (d) INTERVENTION- In any action under this section the Administrator,
 if not a party, may intervene as a matter of right.
 (e) COSTS- The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought
 pursuant to this section or section 15, may award costs of litigation
 (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to the prevailing
 or substantially prevailing party, whenever the court determines such an
 award is appropriate. The court may, if a temporary restraining order or
 preliminary injunction is sought, require the filing of a bond or equivalent
 security in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (f) OTHER RIGHTS PRESERVED- Nothing in this section shall restrict any
 right which any person (or class of persons) may have under any statute
 or common law to seek enforcement of any standard or requirement or to
 seek any other relief (including relief against the Administrator).
SEC. 17. SEPARABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or the application of any provision of this
 Act to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application of such
 provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of this Act,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 18. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to alter or affect the authority
 of the Administrator under the Clean Air Act or the Toxic Substances
 Control Act or to affect the authority of any other department or agency,
 or instrumentality of the United States under any provision of law to
 promulgate or enforce any requirement respecting the control of any
 substance, practice, process, or activity for purposes of protecting the
 stratosphere or ozone in the stratosphere.
 (b) Nothing in this Act shall preclude or deny any State or political
 subdivision thereof from adopting or enforcing any requirement respecting
 the control of any substances, practice, process, or activity for purposes
 of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the stratosphere.
SEC. 19. AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATION.
 The Administrator is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are
 necessary to carry out this Act.