B37 5-3-89 (Update)
HR 2171 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2171
To revitalize the United States steel industry.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 2, 1989
Mr. CARDIN (for himself, Mrs. BENTLEY, Mr. CAMPBELL of Colorado, Mr. DEFAZIO,
Mr. DYSON, Mr. EVANS, Mr. HAYES of Illinois, Mr. HOYER, Ms. KAPTUR,
Mr. MFUME, Mr. TOWNS, and Mr. TRAFICANT) introduced the following bill;
which was referred jointly to the Committees on Ways and Means and Banking,
Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To revitalize the United States steel industry.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Steel Revitalization Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) steel manufacturing has been, and will continue to be, a fundamental
 building block of this Nation's strength;
 (2) steel manufacturing in this Nation is an industry in crisis and
 must be modernized, but the costs of modernization (estimated at over
 $14,000,000,000 over the next 5 years) are constraining to an industry
 that is already $8,000,000,000 in debt;
 (3) steel imports have hampered the United States industry's ability to
 restructure as illustrated by the fact that in September 1984 imports
 captured 28.9 percent of the domestic steel market and since that time
 the Executive Branch's Voluntary Restraint Agreements (VRA) Program has
 limited imports but has never achieved its established goals;
 (4) a limitation on steel imports to a level of 20.2 percent of the domestic
 market has been the traditional goal of both Executive and Legislative
 Branch Programs and proposals;
 (5) employment in the United States steel industry has fallen from an
 average of 544,300 hourly workers in 1953 to 125,700 in 1988; and
 (6) numerous domestic steel producers have sought bankruptcy protection
 thereby creating hardships for large numbers of steelworkers, straining
 Federal pension guarantee programs, and placing increased financial pressure
 on those companies trying to avoid bankruptcy proceedings.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) The term `domestic consumption' means, with respect to any steel
 category or to all steel categories, as the case may be, the quantity of
 articles within that category or all such categories that are produced in
 the United States, plus imports and less exports.
 (2) The term `entered' means entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for
 consumption, in the customs territory of the United States.
 (3) The term `quota year' means any period occurring after September 30,
 1989, that begins on October 1 of any year and ends on September 30 of the
 following year. A quota year is identified by the year in which October
 1 occurs.
 (4) The term `steel category' means each of the 37 categories set forth in
 the publication entitled `The American Iron and Steel Institute Steel Mill
 Product Categories 1-37'; dated January 1978. The Secretary of Commerce
 shall from time to time make such additions, deletions, or other revisions
 to such categories as the Secretary considers are necessary or appropriate
 to carry out the purposes of this Act.
SEC. 4. QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS ON THE IMPORTATION OF ARTICLES IN STEEL
CATEGORIES.
 (a) FOR ALL STEEL CATEGORIES-
 (1) During each of quota years 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993, the
 aggregate quantity of articles that may be entered within all steel
 categories may not exceed 20.2 percent of the domestic consumption for
 such year of articles described in all steel categories.
 (2) During quota year 1994, the aggregate quantity of articles that may be
 entered within all steel categories may not exceed 25 percent of the domestic
 consumption for such year of articles described in all steel categories.
 (3) During each of quota years 1995, 1996, and 1997, the aggregate quantity
 of articles that may be entered within all steel categories may not exceed
 the aggregate quantity percentage in effect under this subsection for the
 preceding quota year plus 5 percent.
 (b) FOR EACH STEEL CATEGORY- During each quota year, the aggregate quantity
 of articles that may be entered within each steel category may not exceed the
 percentage of the domestic consumption that is determined by the Secretary
 of Commerce to be the percentage of the domestic consumption of articles in
 that category that has been accounted for historically by imported articles.
 (c) FOREIGN COUNTRY LIMITATION- During each quota year, the aggregate
 quantity of articles that are the product of any one foreign country
 that may be entered within all steel categories may not exceed 5 percent
 of the domestic consumption for such year of articles described in all
 steel categories.
 (d) COMPUTATION OF QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS- The Secretary of Commerce
 shall determine the domestic consumption for each quota year of articles
 described in each steel category and in all steel categories and compute the
 quantitative restrictions under subsections (a), (b), and (c) that apply
 during that quota year. The Secretary of Commerce shall make preliminary
 determinations and computations before the beginning of each quota year and
 shall periodically revise such determinations and computations as domestic
 consumption data for a quota year becomes available. The Secretary of
 Commerce shall--
 (1) carry out such monitoring of the domestic production in, and the
 exportation from and the importation into, the United States of articles
 described in all steel categories may be necessary to carry out this
 subsection; and
 (2) shall promptly notify the Secretary of the Treasury of all determinations
 and computations made under this subsection.
SEC. 5. AUCTIONING SYSTEM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury, subject to the quantitative
 limitations imposed under section 4 for the quota year concerned, shall,
 under such procedures as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe,
 auction rights to enter during each quota year quantities of articles
 within steel categories.
 (b) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS- The auction of entry rights under this section
 shall be by sealed bid. Entry rights shall be auctioned biannually and
 shall be effective for the 6-month period beginning on the 180th day after
 the date of auction.
 (c) DOCUMENTATION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall by regulation
 establish the form of the documentation that will be issued to persons
 who are awarded rights by auction under this section to enter articles.
 (d) DISPOSITION OF AUCTION MONEYS- The Secretary of the Treasury shall
 deposit into the Steel Revitalization Fund established under section 10
 all moneys received from the auctioning of entry rights under this section.
SEC. 6. ADMINISTRATION.
 The Secretary of the Treasury shall take such action as may be necessary
 or appropriate to ensure that--
 (1) the quantities of articles within each steel category and all steel
 categories that are entered during any quota year do not exceed the
 applicable quantitative restrictions computed under section 4(d); and
 (2) all entries of articles subject to this Act are accompanied by the
 appropriate documentation required under section 5.
SEC. 7. NEGOTIATIONS.
 Before the beginning of quota year 1989, the President shall initiate such
 negotiations with the appropriate foreign countries as may be necessary to
 ensure an orderly transition from voluntary restraint agreements regarding
 steel and steel products to the quantitative restrictions imposed under
 this Act.
SEC. 8. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section:
 (1) The term `domestic steel product manufacturer' means a person that
 engages, within the United States, in one or more manufacturing operations
 described in Standard Industry Classification 3312 of the Department
 of Commerce.
 (2) The term `restructuring plan' means a plan that sets forth those
 corporate actions that are proposed to be undertaken by a domestic steel
 product manufacturer over a period of 5 years for the purpose of--
 (A) enabling the manufacturer, through plant or equipment modernization
 or other appropriate means, to compete on an internationally competitive
 basis in the manufacture of one or more steel products;
 (B) permanently reducing or eliminating the over-capacity, if any, of the
 manufacturer for producing products in any steel category; and
 (C) providing for the full funding of the programs of the manufacturer for--
 (i) worker health care, disability insurance, and retraining programs, and
 (ii) pensions, health care, and other benefits for retired workers.
For purposes of applying subparagraph (B), the capacity of a manufacturer to
produce products in any steel category is the average production level of the
manufacturer with respect to those products during the second quarter of 1987.
 (3) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Commerce.
 (b) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may provide financial assistance under
 subsection (e) to assist a domestic steel product manufacturer to carry
 out a restructuring plan approved under subsection (d).
 (c) PLAN CONTENTS- The Secretary shall by regulation establish the form
 and content requirements for restructuring plans that are submitted for
 approval under subsection (d).
 (d) APPROVAL OF PLANS- Any domestic steel product manufacturer may submit a
 restructuring plan to the Secretary for approval. If the Secretary finds that
 the elements of a restructuring plan submitted under this subsection will
 likely result in the achievement of the purposes set forth in subparagraphs
 (A), (B), and (C) of subsection (a)(2) with respect to the domestic steel
 product manufacturer, the Secretary shall approve the plan.
 (e) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE-
 (1) Subject to the limitations in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), the
 Secretary may provide to a domestic steel product manufacturer that has
 a restructuring plan approved under subsection (d) one or more of the
 following forms of financial assistance:
 (A) Direct loans or grants, or both, by the Secretary to the manufacturer
 for purposes that are, in the opinion of the Secretary, consistent with
 the approved restructuring plan.
 (B) Payment by the Secretary--
 (i) to subsidize the interest on one or more loans obtained by the
 manufacturer in the private market; or
 (ii) of the premiums necessary to insure the performance of one or more
 loans obtained by the manufacturer in the private market; or
 (iii) of both interest and premiums described in clauses (i) and (ii);
if the uses to be made of the loan proceeds are, in the opinion of the
Secretary, consistent with the approved restructuring plan.
 (2) Any financial assistance provided under paragraph (1) shall be subject
 to such terms and conditions as the Secretary considers necessary or
 appropriate to protect the interests of the United States.
 (3) No grant may be made by the Secretary under paragraph (1)(A) for any
 purpose described in subsection (a)(2)(C).
 (4) No financial assistance may be provided by the Secretary under this
 section for purposes of assisting a domestic steel product manufacturer to
 reduce its capacity to manufacture products in any steel category below
 the average production level of the manufacturer with respect to that
 category during the second quarter of 1987.
 (f) Plan Review and Amendment-
 (1) The Secretary shall annually review the implementation of each
 restructuring plan approved under subsection (d) for purposes of assessing
 the effectiveness of the plan.
 (2) The Secretary may suspend the provision of financial assistance under
 this Act to any domestic steel product manufacturer if the Secretary decides,
 on the basis of a review under paragraph (1), that the manufacturer is
 either not implementing, or not implementing in a satisfactory manner,
 the corporate actions set forth in the approved restructuring plan.
 (3) After consultation with the domestic steel product manufacturer, the
 Secretary may approve such amendments to an approved restructuring plan
 as may be proposed by either the manufacturer or the Secretary, if the
 Secretary considers that the incorporation of the amendments will enhance
 the achievement of the purposes of the plan.
SEC. 9. PLAN REVIEW ADVISORY COUNCIL.
 (a) AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH- The Secretary may establish a plan review
 advisory council. The membership of the advisory council shall consist of
 individuals, selected by the Secretary, who are representatives of labor
 and management in the domestic steel industry and of such other sectors
 that the Secretary considers appropriate. Members of the advisory council
 are entitled to travel and per diem expenses for each day on which they
 transact advisory council business.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The plan review advisory council shall--
 (1) review and provide advice to the Secretary regarding the restructuring
 plans submitted for approval under section 8(d);
 (2) assist the Secretary in undertaking annual reviews of approved
 restructuring plans under section 8(f); and
 (3) evaluate, and report thereon to the Secretary regarding, the
 effectiveness of the financial assistance provided under this Act.
 (c) STATUS- The Federal Advisory Committee Act does not apply to the plan
 review advisory council.
SEC. 10. STEEL REVITALIZATION FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established in the Treasury of the United States
 the Steel Revitalization Fund (hereinafter in this section referred to as
 the `Fund'). The Fund shall consist of--
 (1) all moneys deposited under section 5(d); and
 (2) all amounts credited to the Fund under subsection (c).
 (b) PURPOSE OF FUND- The moneys in the Fund shall be available, to the
 extent provided for in advance in appropriation Acts, to the Secretary of
 Commerce for--
 (1) the provision of financial assistance under section 8 (including
 administrative costs), except that not to exceed 10 percent of the moneys
 accruing to the Fund during any year may be used to provide grants under
 section 8(e)(1)(A); and
 (2) the operation of the plan review advisory council established under
 section 9.
 (c) INVESTMENT OF FUND MONEYS-
 (1) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund as is
 not, in judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals. Such
 investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United
 States. For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired--
 (A) on original issue at the issue price, or
 (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
 (2) Any obligation acquired by the Fund may be sold by the Secretary of
 the Treasury at the market price.
 (3) The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of,
 any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of
 the Fund.
 (d) LIQUIDATION- After September 30, 1998, the Secretary of Commerce shall
 from time-to-time deposit such moneys in the Fund as are not needed for
 current operations into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. At such
 time as the Secretary of Commerce determines that there is no longer any
 need for the Fund, any obligation acquired under subsection (c) shall be
 sold or redeemed and all monies in the Fund shall be deposited into the
 Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
SEC. 11. TERMINATION.
 No quantitative restriction may be imposed under this Act on articles in
 any steel category that are entered after September 30, 1998.