S 3159 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3159
To amend the Endangered Species Act of 1973 to reauthorize such Act and to
provide a means whereby endangered species and threatened species may be
preserved and the habitat needs of the endangered and threatened species
may be balanced and harmonized with the needs of man, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 10 (legislative day, AUGUST 5), 1992
Mr. SYMMS (for himself, Mr. CRAIG, Mr. GARN, Mr. HATCH, Mr. LOTT, Mr. THURMOND,
and Mr. HELMS) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Endangered Species Act of 1973 to reauthorize such Act and to
provide a means whereby endangered species and threatened species may be
preserved and the habitat needs of the endangered and threatened species
may be balanced and harmonized with the needs of man, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Progressive Endangered Species Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. PROGRESSIVE ENDANGERED SPECIES PROTECTION.
 The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) is amended to
 read as follows:
`SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 `(a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Endangered Species Act
 of 1973'.
 `(b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
`Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
`Sec. 2. Findings, purposes, and policy.
`Sec. 3. Definitions.
`Sec. 4. Determination of endangered species and threatened species.
`Sec. 5. Land acquisition.
`Sec. 6. Cooperation with States.
`Sec. 7. Interagency cooperation.
`Sec. 8. International cooperation.
`Sec. 9. Convention implementation.
`Sec. 10. Prohibited acts.
`Sec. 11. Exceptions.
`Sec. 12. Penalties and enforcement.
`Sec. 13. Relationship to Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.
`Sec. 14. Annual cost analysis by the Fish and Wildlife Service.
`Sec. 15. Development of subspecies definition.
`Sec. 16. Protection of private property.
`Sec. 17. Incentives for conservation.
`Sec. 18. United States Biodiversity Foundation.
`Sec. 19. Authorization of appropriations.
`SEC. 2. FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND POLICY.
 `(a) FINDINGS- Congress finds and declares that--
 `(1) various species of fish, wildlife, and plants in the United States
 have been rendered extinct by natural processes and as an unintended
 consequence of public and private actions;
 `(2) other species of fish, wildlife, and plants have been so depleted in
 numbers that they are in danger of or threatened with extinction;
 `(3) among these fish, wildlife, and plants are species of economic,
 esthetic, ecological, educational, historical, recreational, and scientific
 value to the United States and the people of the United States;
 `(4) the United States has pledged itself as a sovereign state in the
 international community to conserve to the extent practicable, and to the
 extent the Constitution authorizes Federal action, the various species of
 fish or wildlife and plants facing extinction, pursuant to--
 `(A) migratory bird treaties with Canada and Mexico;
 `(B) the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds and Birds in
 Danger of Extinction, and their Environment, with Annex, signed at Tokyo,
 March 4, 1972 (TIAS 7990);
 `(C) the Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife Preservation in the
 Western Hemisphere, with Annex, done at the Pan American Union, Washington,
 October 12, 1940 (TS 981);
 `(D) the International Convention for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries;
 `(E) the International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the
 North Pacific Ocean, with Annex and Protocol, signed at Tokyo, May 9, 1952
 (TIAS 2786); and
 `(F) the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
 Fauna and Flora, with Appendices, done at Washington, March 3, 1973 (TIAS
 8249); and
 `(5) encouraging the States and other interested parties, through Federal
 financial assistance and a system of incentives (including free market
 incentives and the extension of private property rights), to develop
 and maintain conservation programs that meet national and international
 standards is a key to meeting the international commitments of the United
 States and to better safeguarding, for the benefit of all citizens, the
 heritage of the United States in fish, wildlife, and plants.
 `(b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are--
 `(1) to provide a means whereby endangered species and threatened species
 may be conserved or stabilized and the habitat needs of the endangered
 and threatened species may be balanced and harmonized with the needs of man;
 `(2) to provide a program for the conservation or stabilization of the
 endangered and threatened species; and
 `(3) to take steps that use scientific, technological, economic, and social
 advances to achieve the purposes of the treaties and conventions set forth
 in subsection (a).
 `(c) POLICY- It is the policy of Congress that--
 `(1) all Federal departments and agencies shall on Federal lands, in a manner
 consistent with the mission of the managing departments and agencies, and
 may on State and private lands, seek to conserve or stabilize endangered
 species and threatened species and shall utilize the authorities of the
 departments and agencies in furtherance of the purposes of this Act;
 `(2)(A) Federal agencies shall cooperate with State and local agencies to
 resolve water resource issues in concert with conservation or stabilization
 of endangered species in ways that are consistent with State water law;
 `(B) water rights protected under State law should not be injured or
 adversely affected in carrying out any section of this Act without just
 compensation; and
 `(C) no provision of this Act shall be interpreted so as to alter, change,
 modify, or abrogate in any way whatsoever the allocations of water among
 or between States pursuant to either interstate compacts or decisions of
 the United States Supreme Court;
 `(3) the least socio-economically damaging alternatives for conserving or
 stabilizing endangered species or threatened species should be implemented
 to minimize adverse effects on employment, private property, and human
 communities;
 `(4) the protection of threatened or endangered species should be conducted
 so as not to result in the taking of property, or property rights, in land,
 water, or other resources, without just compensation; and
 `(5) the public should be fully informed of--
 `(A) the costs and socio-economic impacts and benefits of conserving or
 stabilizing endangered and threatened species prior to the actions being
 taken; and
 `(B) the scientific reasons for listing and delisting species as endangered
 or threatened, and of progress towards recovery.
`SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 `For the purposes of this Act:
 `(1) ALTERNATIVE COURSES OF ACTION- The term `alternative courses of action'
 means all alternatives and is not limited to original project objectives
 and agency jurisdiction.
 `(2) COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY- The term `commercial activity' means all
 activities of industry and trade, including the buying or selling of
 commodities and activities conducted for the purpose of facilitating the
 buying and selling, except that the term does not include exhibitions of
 commodities by museums or similar cultural or historical organizations.
 `(3) CONSERVE, CONSERVING, AND CONSERVATION- The terms `conserve',
 `conserving', and `conservation' when used to describe Federal activity
 mean to use, and the use of, the least costly alternative that is necessary
 to bring endangered species or threatened species to the point at which
 the measures taken pursuant to this Act are no longer necessary. The
 methods and procedures include all activities associated with beneficial
 scientific, commercial, or avocational resources management, such as
 research, census, law enforcement, habitat acquisition, maintenance and
 enhancement, propagation and captive breeding, live trapping, transportation
 and transplantation, and, in the extraordinary case in which population
 pressures within an ecosystem cannot be otherwise relieved, may include
 regulated taking.
 `(4) CONVENTION- The term `Convention' means the Convention on International
 Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, signed on March 3,
 1973, and the appendices to the Convention.
 `(5) CRITICAL HABITAT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `critical habitat' for a threatened or endangered
 species means--
 `(i) the specific minimum areas within the geographical area normally and
 naturally occupied by the species, at the time it is listed in accordance
 with section 4, on which are found those physical or biological features
 (I) essential to the conservation of the species, and (II) that may require
 special management considerations or protection; and
 `(ii) specific areas outside the geographical area occupied by the species at
 the time it is listed in accordance with section 4, on a determination by the
 Secretary, based on an analysis of adequate and verifiable scientific data
 sufficient to reach conclusions meeting reasonable scientific standards,
 that the areas are the minimum habitat essential for the conservation
 of the species and that failure to designate the areas will result in
 extinction of the species.
 `(B) LISTED SPECIES- Critical habitat may be established for those species
 currently listed as threatened or endangered species for which no critical
 habitat has been previously established as set forth in subparagraph (A).
 `(C) GEOGRAPHICAL AREA- Except in those circumstances determined by the
 Secretary, critical habitat shall not include the entire geographical area
 that can be occupied by the threatened or endangered species.
 `(6) ENDANGERED SPECIES- The term `endangered species' means any species
 that is in danger of extinction, or any mammal, bird (except the Northern
 Spotted Owl), reptile, amphibian, or true species of fish, invertebrate,
 or plant that was listed as an endangered species or a threatened species
 prior to the date of enactment of the Progressive Endangered Species
 Act of 1992, other than a species of the Class Insecta determined by
 the Secretary to constitute a pest whose protection under this Act would
 present an overwhelming and overriding risk to man.
 `(7) FEDERAL AGENCY- The term `Federal agency' means any department,
 agency, or instrumentality of the United States.
 `(8) FISH OR WILDLIFE- The term `fish or wildlife' means any member of
 the animal kingdom, including without limitation any mammal, fish, bird
 (including any migratory, nonmigratory, or endangered bird for which
 protection is also afforded by treaty or other international agreement),
 amphibian, reptile, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod, or other invertebrate,
 and includes any part, product, egg, or offspring thereof, or the dead
 body or parts thereof.
 `(9) FOREIGN COMMERCE- The term `foreign commerce' includes, among other
 things, any transaction--
 `(A) between persons within one foreign country;
 `(B) between persons in two or more foreign countries;
 `(C) between a person within the United States and a person in a foreign
 country; or
 `(D) between persons within the United States, where the fish and wildlife
 in question are moving in any country or countries outside the United States.
 `(10) IMPORT- The term `import' means to land on, bring into, or introduce
 into or attempt to land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States, whether or not the landing,
 bringing, or introduction constitutes an importation within the meaning
 of the customs laws of the United States.
 `(11) INTRODUCED POPULATION- The term `introduced population' means a
 member of an endangered or threatened species that inhabits, ranges, or
 is otherwise found in an area outside of the designated critical habitat
 of the species where efforts to conserve or stabilize it have been employed.
 `(12) PERMIT OR LICENSE APPLICANT- The term `permit or license applicant'
 means, when used with respect to an action of a Federal agency for which
 an exemption is sought under section 7, any person whose application to
 the agency for a permit or license has been denied primarily because of
 the application of section 7(a) to the agency action.
 `(13) PERSON- The term `person' means--
 `(A) an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, association, or any
 other private entity;
 `(B) any officer, employee, agent, department, or instrumentality of the
 Federal Government, of any State, municipality, or political subdivision
 of a State, or of any foreign government;
 `(C) any State, municipality, or political subdivision of a State; or
 `(D) any other entity subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
 `(14) PLANT- The term `plant' means any member of the plant kingdom,
 including seeds, roots, and other parts thereof.
 `(15) PRIVATE CONSERVATION- The term `private conservation' means, with
 respect to conservation or stabilization of endangered, threatened, or
 candidate species, an action undertaken to enhance the survival of the
 species and that is carried out in accordance with section 11(k)(2).
 `(16) RELEASE HABITAT- The term `release habitat' means an area designated
 by the Secretary in accordance with section 11(j)(2)(D) for the purposes
 of introducing an experimental population.
 `(17) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means, except as otherwise provided
 in this Act, the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce as
 program responsibilities are vested pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 4
 (1970), except that with respect to the enforcement of the provisions of
 this Act and the Convention that pertain to the importation or exportation
 of terrestrial plants, the term also means the Secretary of Agriculture.
 `(18) SPECIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `species' means a group of fish or wildlife or
 plants that has the potential to interbreed with no loss of reproductive
 potential.
 `(B) INTERBREEDING POTENTIAL- If empirical evidence or testing on
 interbreeding potential does not exist, the classification used to designate
 a species, for the purposes of this Act, shall use indirect evidence to
 infer that the species has the potential to interbreed with no loss of
 reproductive potential.
 `(19) STABILIZE, STABILIZING, AND STABILIZATION- The terms `stabilize',
 `stabilizing', and `stabilization' mean, with respect to a Federal action,
 to use, and the use of, all methods and procedures that are necessary
 to bring any endangered or threatened species to the point at which the
 numbers and health of the species are not declining, except in the case
 of cyclical norms.
 `(20) STATE- The term `State' means any of the several States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, the Virgin
 Islands, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the
 Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
 `(21) STATE AGENCY- The term `State agency' means any State agency,
 department, board, commission, or other governmental entity that is
 responsible for the management and conservation of fish, plant, or wildlife
 resources within a State.
 `(22) TAKE- The term `take' means knowingly or with deliberate ignorance
 to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or
 collect living specimens of a listed species, or to attempt to engage in
 any such conduct, and modification to a habitat or critical habitat when
 the modification is scientifically verified to be adverse to conservation
 or stabilization of the species. The term shall not include modification
 to the habitat of an introduced population.
 `(23) THREATENED SPECIES- The term `threatened species' means any species
 that is likely to become an endangered species based on an analysis of
 adequate and verifiable scientific data sufficient to reach conclusions
 meeting reasonable scientific standards.
 `(24) UNITED STATES- The term `United States', when used in a geographical
 context, includes all States.
`SEC. 4. DETERMINATION OF ENDANGERED SPECIES AND THREATENED SPECIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) DETERMINATIONS- Except as provided in paragraphs (7) and (8) of
 subsection (e), the Secretary shall by regulation promulgated in accordance
 with subsection (b) determine whether any species is an endangered species
 or a threatened species because of--
 `(A) the present or imminent destruction, adverse modification, or
 curtailment of the habitat or range of the species;
 `(B) present or imminent overutilization for commercial, recreational,
 scientific, or educational purposes;
 `(C) disease or predation; or
 `(D) other adequate and verifiable scientifically valid data indicating
 natural or manmade factors adversely affecting the continued existence of
 the species.
 `(2) SPECIES UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE- With respect to any species
 over which program responsibilities have been vested in the Secretary of
 Commerce pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 4 (1970):
 `(A) LISTING OR CHANGED STATUS- In any case in which the Secretary of
 Commerce determines that the species should--
 `(i) be listed as an endangered species or a threatened species; or
 `(ii) be changed in status from a threatened species to an endangered
 species,
the Secretary shall so inform the Secretary of the Interior, who shall list
the species in accordance with this section.
 `(B) REMOVAL OR CHANGED STATUS- In any case in which the Secretary of
 Commerce determines that the species should--
 `(i) be removed from any list published pursuant to subsection (c); or
 `(ii) be changed in status from an endangered species to a threatened
 species,
the Secretary shall recommend the action to the Secretary of the Interior, and
the Secretary of the Interior, if the Secretary concurs in the recommendation,
shall implement the action.
 `(C) FAVORABLE DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY OF COMMERCE- The Secretary of
 the Interior may not list or remove from any list any such species, and
 may not change the status of any such species that are listed, without
 a prior favorable determination made pursuant to this section by the
 Secretary of Commerce.
 `(3) HABITAT DESIGNATION- The Secretary, by regulation promulgated in
 accordance with subsection (b) and to the maximum extent determinable--
 `(A) shall, concurrently with making a determination under paragraph (1)
 that a species is an endangered species or a threatened species, designate
 any habitat of the species that is then considered to be critical habitat;
 `(B) may, from time-to-time thereafter as appropriate, revise the
 designation; and
 `(C) may withhold from publication, other than notification of the affected
 parties referred to in subsection (b)(2)(C), delineation of critical
 habitat if the Secretary determines that release of the information would
 jeopardize the survival of the endangered or threatened species.
 `(b) BASIS FOR DETERMINATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) BASIS- The Secretary shall make determinations required by subsection
 (a)(1) solely on the basis of analysis of adequate and verifiable
 scientifically valid data sufficient to reach conclusions meeting reasonable
 scientific standards, after conducting a review of the status of the
 species and after taking into account private conservation measures and
 those efforts, if any, being made by any State or foreign nation, or any
 political subdivision of a State or foreign nation, to protect the species,
 whether by predator control, protection of habitat and food supply, or
 other conservation practices, within any area under its jurisdiction,
 or on the high seas.
 `(B) PROTECTION BY FOREIGN NATIONS- In carrying out this section, the
 Secretary shall give consideration to species that have been--
 `(i) designated as requiring protection from unrestricted commerce by any
 foreign nation, or pursuant to any international agreement; or
 `(ii) identified as in danger of extinction, or likely to become so within
 the foreseeable future, by any State agency or by any agency of a foreign
 nation that is responsible for the conservation of fish or wildlife
 or plants.
 `(2) CRITICAL HABITATS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall designate critical habitat, and make
 revisions of the designations, under subsection (a)(3) on the basis of
 the best scientific data available and after taking into consideration
 the economic impact, and any other relevant impact, of specifying any
 particular area as critical habitat.
 `(B) EXCLUSIONS- The Secretary may exclude any area from critical habitat
 if the Secretary determines that the benefits of the exclusion outweigh
 the benefits of specifying the area as part of the critical habitat, unless
 the Secretary determines, based on the best scientific and commercial data
 available, that the failure to designate the area as critical habitat will
 result in the extinction of the species concerned.
 `(C) NOTICE- The Secretary shall provide notice of not less than 90 days by
 certified mail to all owners of record of non-Federal property and persons
 who have a lease, permit, or other substantial interest on Federal land
 prior to designating critical habitat or making revisions to designations.
 `(3) Petitions to add or remove species from lists-
 `(A) IN GENERAL-
 `(i) FINDING- To the maximum extent practicable, within 90 days after
 receiving the petition of an interested person under section 553(e) of
 title 5, United States Code, to add a species to, or to remove a species
 from either of the lists published under subsection (c), the Secretary
 shall make a finding as to whether the petition presents substantial
 scientific or commercial information indicating that the petitioned action
 may be warranted.
 `(ii) NOTICE- Within 30 days after receiving a valid petition, the Secretary
 shall notify the governor of affected States and publish notice in the
 Federal Register that describes the action requested, the petitioners,
 the States in which the species is known or likely to occur, and procedures
 for requesting a local or public hearing.
 `(iii) REVIEW- If the information or data is found to substantiate the
 petition, the Secretary shall promptly commence a review of the status
 of the species concerned, unless the Secretary finds that such a review
 would interfere with the success of higher priority reviews.
 `(iv) PUBLICATION- The Secretary shall promptly publish each finding made
 under this subparagraph in the Federal Register.
 `(B) FINDINGS- Within 12 months after receiving a petition that is found
 under subparagraph (A) to present substantial information indicating that
 the petitioned action may be warranted, the Secretary shall make one of
 the following findings:
 `(i) NOT WARRANTED- The petitioned action is not warranted, in which case
 the Secretary shall promptly publish the finding in the Federal Register.
 `(ii) WARRANTED- The petitioned action is warranted, in which case the
 Secretary shall promptly publish in the Federal Register a general notice
 and the complete text of a proposed regulation to implement the action in
 accordance with paragraph (5), and a request for proposals for the drafting
 or drafting and implementing of a recovery plan. The proposals shall
 be accepted until the 30th day following the date of the general notice.
 The Secretary shall select the lowest cost bid from among the United States
 Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Marine and Fisheries Service,
 and any person who submitted a valid proposal and is capable of performing
 the actions indicated in the proposal.
 `(iii) PENDING PROPOSALS- The petitioned action is warranted, but that no
 action shall be taken in relation to the petition because--
 `(I) the immediate proposal and timely promulgation of a final regulation
 implementing the petitioned action in accordance with paragraphs (5) and
 (6) is precluded by pending proposals to determine whether any species is
 an endangered species or a threatened species; and
 `(II) expeditious progress is being made to add qualified species to either
 of the lists published under subsection (c) and to remove from the lists
 species for which the protections of this Act are no longer necessary,
in which case the Secretary shall promptly publish the finding in the Federal
Register, together with a description and evaluation of the reasons and data
on which the finding is based.
 `(iv) CONSERVATION EFFORTS- The petitioned action is warranted but
 precluded because sufficient conservation efforts are currently underway
 and additional protections of this Act are not necessary, or the invoking
 of this Act may interfere with the success of the efforts, in which case
 the Secretary shall promptly publish the finding in the Federal Register.
 `(v) OTHER LAWS OR REGULATIONS- The petitioned action is warranted but
 precluded because other laws or regulations provide adequate protection,
 in which case the Secretary shall promptly publish the finding in the
 Federal Register.
 `(C) REVIEW-
 `(i) PENDING PROPOSALS- A petition with respect to which a finding is
 made under subparagraph (B)(iii) shall be treated as a petition that is
 resubmitted to the Secretary under subparagraph (A) on the date of the
 finding and that presents substantial scientific or commercial information
 that the petitioned action may be warranted.
 `(ii) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any finding or determination described in subsection
 (a) or (b) shall be subject to judicial review if sought by an affected
 party.
 `(iii) PROTECTION OF SPECIES- The Secretary shall implement a system to
 monitor effectively the status of all species with respect to which a
 finding is made under subparagraph (B)(iii) and shall make prompt use of
 the authority under paragraph (7) to prevent a significant risk to the
 well being of any such species.
 `(iv) ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS- The Secretary shall provide for an
 administrative appeal by any individual whose property or operations are
 adversely affected by a determination made pursuant to this section.
 `(D) REVISION OF CRITICAL HABITAT DESIGNATION-
 `(i) FINDING- To the maximum extent practicable, within 90 days after
 receiving the petition of an interested person under section 553(e) of
 title 5, United States Code, to revise a critical habitat designation,
 the Secretary shall make a finding as to whether the petition presents
 substantial scientific information indicating that the revision may
 be warranted. The Secretary shall promptly publish the finding in the
 Federal Register.
 `(ii) INTENTION TO PROCEED- Within 12 months after receiving a petition that
 is found under clause (i) to present substantial information indicating that
 the requested revision may be warranted, the Secretary shall determine how
 the Secretary intends to proceed with the requested revision, and shall
 promptly publish notice of the intention in the Federal Register.
 `(4) RULEMAKING PROCEDURES- Except as provided in paragraphs (5) and (6),
 the provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code (relating to
 rulemaking procedures) shall apply to any regulation promulgated to carry
 out this Act.
 `(5) PROPOSED REGULATIONS- With respect to any regulation proposed by the
 Secretary to implement a determination, designation, or revision referred
 to in paragraph (1) or (3) of subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 `(A) not less than 90 days before the effective date of the regulation--
 `(i) publish in the Federal Register a general notice, the complete text
 of the proposed regulation, and a statement of--
 `(I) feasible, objective, measurable criteria that, when met, would result
 in a determination, in accordance with this section, that the species be
 removed from the list;
 `(II) population goals to be achieved for recovery;
 `(III) estimates of present population distribution;
 `(IV) projected economic impact by economic sector;
 `(V) critical habitat of the species if critical habitat is to be designated;
 `(VI) actions that may constitute taking under section 16; and
 `(VII) a summary of any other aspects of the recovery plan in the Federal
 Register; and
 `(ii)(I) give actual notice of the proposed regulation (including the
 complete text of the regulation) to the governor and the State agency in
 each State in which the species is believed to occur, and to each county,
 or equivalent jurisdiction in which the species is believed to occur; and
 `(II) invite the comments of the agency, and each such jurisdiction,
 on the proposed regulation;
 `(B) insofar as practical, and in cooperation with the Secretary of State,
 give notice of the proposed regulation to each foreign nation in which the
 species is believed to occur or whose citizens harvest the species on the
 high seas, and invite the comment of the nation on the regulation;
 `(C) give notice of the proposed regulation to such professional scientific
 organizations as the Secretary considers appropriate, except that no
 professional scientific organization or person that has received funding
 appropriated to carry out this Act within the previous 24 months shall be
 eligible to submit comments on the proposed regulation;
 `(D) publish a summary of the proposed regulation in a newspaper of general
 circulation in each area of the United States in which the species is
 believed to occur; and
 `(E) hold, on request, one or more public hearings on the action being
 considered at a location reasonably convenient to the affected public,
 if any person files a request for such a hearing within 90 days after the
 date of publication of a positive finding described in paragraph (3)(A).
 `(6) ACTION ON PROPOSED REGULATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Within the 1-year period beginning on the date on which
 general notice is published in accordance with paragraph (5)(A)(i) regarding
 a proposed regulation, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register--
 `(i) if a determination as to whether a species is an endangered species
 or a threatened species, or a revision of critical habitat is involved--
 `(I) a final regulation to implement the determination;
 `(II) a final regulation to implement the revision or a finding that the
 revision should not be made;
 `(III) notice that the 1-year period is being extended under subparagraph
 (B)(i); or
 `(IV) notice that the proposed regulation is being withdrawn under
 subparagraph (B)(ii), together with the finding on which the withdrawal
 is based;
 `(ii) subject to subparagraph (C), if a designation of critical habitat
 is involved--
 `(I) a final regulation to implement the designation; or
 `(II) notice that the 1-year period is being extended under such
 subparagraph; or
 `(iii) in any case in which subsection (e)(7) applies, notice that a
 species shall be conditionally listed as a threatened species or an
 endangered species.
 `(B) INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE-
 `(i) EXTENSION OF PERIOD- If the Secretary finds with respect to a proposed
 regulation referred to in subparagraph (A)(i) that there is substantial
 disagreement regarding the sufficiency or accuracy of the available data
 relevant to the determination or revision concerned, the Secretary may
 extend the 1-year period specified in subparagraph (A) for not more than
 1 year for purposes of soliciting additional data.
 `(ii) WITHDRAWAL OF REGULATION- If a proposed regulation referred to in
 subparagraph (A)(i) is not promulgated as a final regulation within the
 1-year period (or longer period if extension under clause (i) applies)
 because the Secretary finds that there is not sufficient evidence to justify
 the action proposed by the regulation, the Secretary shall immediately
 withdraw the regulation. The finding on which a withdrawal is based shall
 be subject to judicial review. The Secretary may not propose a regulation
 that has previously been withdrawn under this clause unless the Secretary
 determines that sufficient new information is available to warrant the
 proposal.
 `(iii) ACTION DURING EXTENDED PERIOD- If the 1-year period specified in
 subparagraph (A) is extended under clause (i) with respect to a proposed
 regulation, before the close of the extended period, the Secretary shall
 publish in the Federal Register--
 `(I) a final regulation to implement the determination or revision concerned;
 `(II) a finding that the revision should not be made; or
 `(III) a notice of withdrawal of the regulation under clause (ii), together
 with the finding on which the withdrawal is based.
 `(C) DESIGNATION OF CRITICAL HABITAT- A final regulation designating
 critical habitat of an endangered species or a threatened species shall
 be published concurrently with the final regulation implementing the
 determination that the species is endangered or threatened, unless the
 Secretary determines that--
 `(i) it is essential to the conservation of the species that the regulation
 implementing the determination be promptly published; or
 `(ii) critical habitat of the species is not then determinable, in which
 case the Secretary, with respect to the proposed regulation to designate
 the critical habitat, may extend the 1-year period specified in subparagraph
 (A) by not more than 1 additional year, but not later than the close of the
 additional year the Secretary shall publish a final regulation, based on
 such data as may be available at that time, designating the critical habitat.
 `(7) EMERGENCY REGULATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Neither paragraph (4), (5), or (6) nor section 553 of
 title 5, United States Code, shall apply to any regulation issued by the
 Secretary in regard to any emergency posing a significant risk to the
 well-being of any species of fish or wildlife or plants, if--
 `(i) at the time of publication of the regulation in the Federal Register,
 the Secretary publishes in the Federal Register detailed reasons why the
 regulation is necessary; and
 `(ii) in any case in which the regulation applies to resident species of fish
 or wildlife or plants, the Secretary gives actual notice of the regulation
 to the State agency in each State in which the species is believed to occur.
 `(B) COMMENCEMENT- The regulation shall, at the discretion of the Secretary,
 take effect immediately on the publication of the regulation in the
 Federal Register.
 `(C) TERMINATION- Any regulation promulgated under this paragraph shall
 cease to have force and effect at the close of the 240-day period following
 the date of publication unless, during the 240-day period, the rulemaking
 procedures that would apply to the regulation without regard to this
 paragraph are complied with.
 `(D) WITHDRAWAL- If at any time after issuing an emergency regulation the
 Secretary determines, on the basis of the best appropriate data available
 to the Secretary, that substantial evidence does not exist to warrant the
 regulation, the Secretary shall withdraw it.
 `(8) SUMMARY- The publication in the Federal Register of any proposed or
 final regulation that is necessary or appropriate to carry out this Act
 shall include a summary by the Secretary of--
 `(A) the data on which the regulation is based;
 `(B) the relationship of the data to the regulation; and
 `(C) if the regulation designates or revises critical habitat, to the maximum
 extent practicable, a brief description and evaluation of the activities
 (whether public or private) that, in the opinion of the Secretary, if
 undertaken may adversely modify the habitat, or may be affected by the
 designation.
 `(9) INTERIM DETERMINATIONS- If the Secretary determines that the data
 referred to in paragraph (1)(A) are not currently available, the Secretary
 may make an interim determination based on the best available scientific and
 commercial data. A species listed on the basis of an interim determination
 shall be so listed for no longer than 2 years and may not be listed
 consecutively unless substantial new information is presented.
 `(c) LISTS-
 `(1) PUBLICATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Interior shall publish in the Federal
 Register a list of all species determined by the Secretary of the Interior
 or the Secretary of Commerce to be endangered species and a list of all
 species determined by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of
 Commerce to be threatened species.
 `(B) CONTENTS- Each list shall--
 `(i) refer to the species contained on the list by scientific and common
 name or names, if any;
 `(ii) specify with respect to the species over what portion of its range
 the species is endangered or threatened; and
 `(iii) specify any critical habitat within the range.
 `(C) REVISIONS- The Secretary shall, no less than once each year, revise
 each list published under this subsection to reflect recent determinations,
 designations, and revisions made in accordance with subsections (a) and
 (b). The Secretary shall include in a separate section a description of
 those species that have been removed from the list and the grounds (such
 as recovery, data error, or extinction) for each removal.
 `(2) REVIEW- The Secretary shall--
 `(A) conduct, at least once every 5 years, a review of all species included
 in a list that is published pursuant to paragraph (1) and that is in effect
 at the time of the review; and
 `(B) determine, in accordance with subsections (a) and (b), on the basis
 of the review whether any such species should--
 `(i) be removed from the list;
 `(ii) be changed in status from an endangered species to a threatened
 species; or
 `(iii) be changed in status from a threatened species to an endangered
 species.
 `(d) PROTECTIVE REGULATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Whenever any species is listed as a threatened species
 pursuant to subsection (c), the Secretary shall issue such regulations
 as the Secretary considers necessary and advisable to provide for the
 conservation or stabilization of the specific threatened species.
 `(2) PROHIBITIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), on a determination
 that application of a prohibition to a specific species is necessary
 and advisable and in consultation with a State that has entered into
 a cooperative agreement pursuant to section 6(c) and that contains the
 specific species, the Secretary may by specific regulation prohibit with
 respect to any specific threatened species any act prohibited under section
 10(a)(1), in the case of fish or wildlife, or section 10(a)(2) in the case
 of plants, with respect to endangered species.
 `(B) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS- In the case of the taking of resident species
 of fish or wildlife, the regulations shall apply in any State that has
 entered into a cooperative agreement pursuant to section 6(c) only to the
 extent that the regulations have also been adopted by the State.
 `(e) RECOVERY PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Concurrently with the listing process for any species for
 which there is a positive finding as described in subsection (b)(3)(A)
 and except as provided in paragraph (2), (7), (8), or (9) the Secretary
 shall develop and carry out plans (referred to in this subsection as
 `recovery plans') for the conservation of domestic endangered species
 and threatened species listed pursuant to this section. In developing and
 carrying out recovery plans, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) give priority to those endangered species or threatened species that are
 most likely to benefit from the plans, particularly those species for which a
 recovery plan would facilitate both the survival of the species and socially,
 economically, or scientifically beneficial use of natural resources;
 `(B) incorporate in each plan a description of--
 `(i) such site-specific management actions as may be necessary to achieve
 the goal of the plan which shall be recovery of the species;
 `(ii) feasible, objective, measurable criteria that, when met, would result
 in a determination, in accordance with this section, that the species be
 removed from the list;
 `(iii) estimates of the time required and the cost to carry out those
 measures needed to achieve the goal of the plan and to achieve intermediate
 steps toward the goal;
 `(iv) the actions and costs essential to recover and delist the species;
 `(v) costs to the Federal Government, and State and local governments,
 of carrying out the recovery plan;
 `(vi) population goals to be achieved for recovery;
 `(vii) estimates of present population distribution;
 `(viii) activities subject to section 7 as a result of listing;
 `(ix) the least costly alternatives that must be carried out to avoid
 jeopardy;
 `(x) the least costly alternatives for conservation;
 `(xi) the projected economic impact by economic sector;
 `(xii) identifiable economic and social benefits of conserving the species;
 `(xiii) the critical habitat of the species if critical habitat is to
 be designated;
 `(xiv) the identification of private property expected to be adversely
 impacted by conservation of the species, private property rights to be
 taken as a result of carrying out the recovery plan, and the cost of
 compensation for the property and property rights;
 `(xv) actions that may constitute taking under section 16; and
 `(xvi) list of conflicts and potential conflicts with State laws.
 `(2) RECOVERY STATEMENT- If the Secretary finds that a recovery plan is
 not necessary to promote the conservation of a species, the Secretary shall
 develop, in lieu of a recovery plan, a recovery statement that shall include
 an estimate of the time required to recover the species and a description
 of the items described in clause (ii), and clauses (iv) through (xvi),
 of paragraph (1)(B).
 `(3) USE OF OTHER PERSONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In developing and implementing recovery plans, the
 Secretary may procure the services of appropriate public and private
 agencies and institutions and other qualified persons.
 `(B) FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT- Recovery teams appointed pursuant
 to this subsection shall be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act
 (5 U.S.C. App.).
 `(C) INELIGIBILITY OF PETITIONERS- No professional scientific organization or
 person who has been directly or indirectly involved in the petition process
 for the listing of a species or the designation of critical habitat shall be
 eligible to participate in the preparation of a recovery or stabilization
 plan for the species or receive compensation for the participation under
 this Act.
 `(4) REPORTS- The Secretary shall report not later than October 7, 1990,
 and each 2 years thereafter, to the Committee on Environment and Public
 Works of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries
 of the House of Representatives on the status of efforts to develop and
 implement recovery plans for all species listed pursuant to this section
 and on the status of all listed species.
 `(5) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC COMMENTS- Prior to final approval of
 a new or revised recovery plan, the Secretary shall provide public notice
 and an opportunity for public review and comment on the plan. The Secretary
 shall consider all information presented during the public comment period
 prior to approval of the plan.
 `(6) CONSIDERATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS- Prior to the implementation of
 a new or revised recovery plan, each Federal agency shall consider all
 information presented during the public comment period under paragraph (5).
 `(7) STABILIZATION PLANS- If the Secretary determines that the total cost
 of developing and implementing a recovery plan (including the economic
 impact of the plan) exceeds $10,000,000, and makes a positive finding
 described in subsection (a)(1), or determines that the cumulative total of
 governmental expenditures, costs imposed as the result of implementation of
 a recovery plan and all other costs attributable to implementation of this
 Act pursuant to the listing of a specific species exceeds $10,000,000,
 not later than 540 days after the date of the determination, except as
 provided in paragraph (9), the Secretary shall--
 `(A) develop a plan (referred to in this section as a `stabilization plan')
 that incorporates a description of--
 `(i) such site-specific management actions as may be necessary to achieve
 the goal of the plan for the stabilization of the species;
 `(ii) feasible, objective, measurable criteria that, when met, would result
 in a determination that the species is stable;
 `(iii) estimates of the time required and the cost to carry out those
 measures needed to achieve the stabilization and to achieve intermediate
 steps toward the goal;
 `(iv) the actions and costs essential to stabilize the species;
 `(v) costs to the Federal Government, and State and local governments,
 of carrying out the stabilization plan;
 `(vi) population goals to be achieved for stabilization;
 `(vii) estimates of present population distribution;
 `(viii) activities subject to section 7 as a result of listing;
 `(ix) the least costly alternatives that must be implemented to avoid
 jeopardy;
 `(x) the least costly alternatives for stabilization;
 `(xi) projected economic impact by economic sector;
 `(xii) identifiable economic and social benefits of stabilizing the species;
 `(xiii) critical habitat of the species if critical habitat is to be
 designated;
 `(xiv) identification of private property expected to be adversely impacted
 by stabilization of the species, private property rights to be taken as
 a result of implementing the recovery plan, and the cost of compensation
 for the property and property rights;
 `(xv) actions that may constitute taking under section 16; and
 `(xvi) list of conflicts and potential conflicts with State laws;
 `(B) submit to Congress--
 `(i) a copy of the recovery plan or statement and legislation to extend
 the listing; and
 `(ii) a stabilization plan or statement and legislation designed to carry
 out the stabilization plan or statement; and
 `(C) exempt from this paragraph any mammal, bird (except the Northern Spotted
 Owl), reptile, amphibian, or true species of fish, invertebrate, or plant
 that was listed as an endangered species or threatened species prior to
 the date of enactment of the Progressive Endangered Species Act of 1992.
 `(8) LISTING OF SPECIES- The listing of any species subject to paragraph (7)
 shall cease to be in effect at the close of a session of Congress following
 a session of Congress during which a stabilization plan or statement for
 the species is received from the Secretary, unless the listing is extended
 by law.
 `(9) STABILIZATION STATEMENTS- If the Secretary finds that a stabilization
 plan will not promote the stabilization of the species, in lieu of a
 stabilization plan, the Secretary shall develop a stabilization statement
 that shall include an estimate of the time required to stabilize the species
 and a description of the items described in clause (ii), and clauses (iv)
 through (xiv), of paragraph (7)(A).
 `(10) DEVELOPMENT OF RECOVERY PLANS- Not later than 3 years after the date
 of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall develop recovery plans
 in accordance with paragraph (1) for all species and subspecies listed in
 accordance with section 3(6).
 `(f) MONITORING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall carry out a system in cooperation with
 the States to monitor effectively for not less than 5 years the status of
 all species that have recovered to the point at which the measures provided
 pursuant to this Act are no longer necessary and which, in accordance with
 this section, have been removed from either of the lists published under
 subsection (c).
 `(2) PROTECTION OF SPECIES- The Secretary shall make prompt use of the
 authority under subsection (b)(7) to prevent a significant risk to the
 well being of any such recovered species.
 `(g) AGENCY GUIDELINES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish, and publish in the Federal
 Register, agency guidelines to ensure that the purposes of this section
 are achieved efficiently and effectively. The guidelines shall include--
 `(A) procedures for recording the receipt and the disposition of petitions
 submitted under subsection (b)(3);
 `(B) criteria for making the findings required under such subsection with
 respect to the petitions;
 `(C) a ranking system to assist in the identification of species that
 should receive priority review under subsection (a)(1);
 `(D) a system for developing and implementing, on a priority basis,
 recovery plans under subsection (e); and
 `(E) the establishment of an administrative review and appeals procedure
 of actions taken to carry out this Act on the petition of persons injured
 by the actions.
 `(2) NOTICE AND COMMENT- The Secretary shall provide to the public notice of,
 and opportunity to submit written comments on, any guideline (including any
 amendment to a guideline) proposed to be established under this subsection.
 `(h) INCONSISTENCY WITH STATE AGENCY POSITIONS- In the case of any
 regulation proposed by the Secretary under this section, if a State agency
 to which notice of the regulation was given in accordance with subsection
 (b)(5)(A)(ii) files comments disagreeing with all or part of the proposed
 regulation, and the Secretary issues a final regulation that is in conflict
 with the comments, or if the Secretary fails to adopt a regulation pursuant
 to an action petitioned by a State agency under subsection (b)(3), the
 Secretary shall submit to the State agency a written justification for the
 failure of the Secretary to adopt regulations consistent with the comments
 or petition of the State agency.
`SEC. 5. LAND ACQUISITION.
 `(a) PROGRAM- The Secretary, and the Secretary of Agriculture with respect
 to the National Forest System, shall establish and carry out a program to
 conserve fish, wildlife, and plants, including those that are listed as
 endangered species or threatened species pursuant to section 4. To carry
 out such a program, the appropriate Secretary--
 `(1) shall utilize the land acquisition and other authority under the
 Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956 (16 U.S.C. 742a et seq.), the Fish and
 Wildlife Coordination Act (16 U.S.C. 661 et seq.), and the Migratory Bird
 Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 715 et seq.); and
 `(2) is authorized to acquire by purchase or donation lands, waters,
 or interest therein, and the authority shall be in addition to any other
 land acquisition authority that is vested in the Secretary.
 `(b) ACQUISITIONS- Funds made available pursuant to the Land and Water
 Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 U.S.C. 4601-4 et seq.) may be used for the
 purpose of acquiring lands, waters, or interests therein under subsection
 (a).
`SEC. 6. COOPERATION WITH STATES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In carrying out the program authorized by this Act,
 the Secretary shall cooperate to the maximum extent practicable with
 the States. In order to acquire any land or water, or interest therein,
 for the purpose of conserving or stabilizing any endangered species or
 threatened species, the Secretary must obtain the agreement of the governor
 and relevant State agencies of the affected State.
 `(b) MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS- The Secretary may enter into an agreement with
 any State for the administration and management of any area established for
 the conservation or stabilization of endangered species or threatened species
 and that establishes a system for the protection of private property rights
 equivalent to section 16. Any revenues derived from the administration of
 the areas under the agreement shall be subject to section 401 of the Act
 of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 383; 16 U.S.C. 715s).
 `(c) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS-
 `(1) FISH OR WILDLIFE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the Secretary
 is authorized to enter into a cooperative agreement in accordance with this
 section with any State that establishes and maintains an adequate and active
 program for the conservation of endangered species and threatened species.
 `(B) PERIOD FOR DETERMINATION- Within 120 days after the Secretary receives
 a certified copy of such a proposed State program, the Secretary shall
 determine whether the program is established in accordance with this Act.
 `(C) ENTRY INTO AGREEMENTS- Unless the Secretary determines, pursuant to this
 paragraph, that the State program is not established in accordance with this
 Act, the Secretary shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the State
 for the purpose of assisting in the implementation of the State program.
 `(D) REQUIREMENTS FOR ADEQUATE PROGRAM- In order for a State program
 to be considered an adequate and active program for the conservation of
 endangered species and threatened species, the Secretary must find, and
 annually thereafter reconfirm the finding, that under the State program--
 `(i) authority resides in the State agency to conserve resident species
 of fish or wildlife determined by the State agency or the Secretary to be
 endangered or threatened;
 `(ii) the State agency has established acceptable conservation programs,
 consistent with the purposes and policies of this Act, for all resident
 species of fish or wildlife in the State that are considered by the
 Secretary to be endangered or threatened, and has furnished a copy of
 the plan and program (together with all pertinent details, information,
 and data requested) to the Secretary;
 `(iii) the State agency is authorized to conduct investigations to
 determine the status and requirements for survival of resident species of
 fish and wildlife;
 `(iv) the State agency is authorized to establish programs, including the
 acquisition by purchase or donation of land or aquatic habitat or interests
 therein, for the conservation of resident endangered or threatened species
 of fish or wildlife;
 `(v) provision is made for public participation in designating resident
 species of fish or wildlife as endangered or threatened, or that under
 the State program--
 `(I) the requirements set forth in paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) are complied
 with; and
 `(II) plans are included under which immediate attention will be given to
 those resident species of fish and wildlife that are determined by the
 Secretary or the State agency to be endangered or threatened and that
 the Secretary and the State agency agree are most urgently in need of
 conservation or stabilization programs; and
 `(vi) the State has established a system for a protection of private
 property rights equivalent to section 16.
 `(E) TAKING- A cooperative agreement entered into with a State whose program
 is considered adequate and active pursuant to subparagraph (D) shall
 not affect the applicability of prohibitions set forth in or authorized
 pursuant to section 4(d) or 10(a)(1) with respect to the taking of any
 resident endangered or threatened species.
 `(2) PLANTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the Secretary
 is authorized to enter into a cooperative agreement in accordance with
 this section with any State that establishes and maintains an adequate
 and active program for the conservation or stabilization of endangered
 species and threatened species of plants.
 `(B) PERIOD FOR DETERMINATION- Within 120 days after the Secretary receives
 a certified copy of such a proposed State program, the Secretary shall
 determine whether the program is established in accordance with this Act.
 `(C) ENTRY INTO AGREEMENTS- Unless the Secretary determines, pursuant to
 this paragraph, that the State program is not established in accordance with
 this Act, the Secretary shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the
 State for the purpose of assisting in implementation of the State program.
 `(D) REQUIREMENTS FOR ADEQUATE PROGRAM- In order for a State program
 to be considered an adequate and active program for the conservation or
 stabilization of endangered species of plants and threatened species of
 plants, the Secretary must find, and annually thereafter reconfirm the
 finding, that under the State program--
 `(i) authority resides in the State agency to conserve or stabilize resident
 species of plants determined by the State agency or the Secretary to be
 endangered or threatened;
 `(ii) the State agency has established acceptable conservation or
 stabilization programs, consistent with the purposes and policies of this
 Act, for all resident species of plants in the State that are considered
 by the Secretary to be endangered or threatened, and has furnished a copy
 of the plan and program (together with all pertinent details, information,
 and data requested) to the Secretary;
 `(iii) the State agency is authorized to conduct investigations to determine
 the status and requirements for survival of resident species of plants; and
 `(iv) provision is made for public participation in designating resident
 species of plants as endangered or threatened, or that under the State
 program--
 `(I) the requirements set forth in subparagraphs (C) and (D) are complied
 with; and
 `(II) plans are included under which immediate attention will be given to
 those resident species of plants that are determined by the Secretary or
 the State agency to be endangered or threatened and that the Secretary
 and the State agency agree are most urgently in need of conservation or
 stabilization programs.
 `(E) TAKING- A cooperative agreement entered into with a State whose program
 is considered adequate and active pursuant to subparagraph (D) shall
 not affect the applicability of prohibitions set forth in or authorized
 pursuant to section 4(d) or 10(a)(1) with respect to the taking of any
 resident endangered or threatened species.
 `(d) ALLOCATION OF FUNDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to provide financial
 assistance to any State, through its respective State agency, that has
 entered into a cooperative agreement pursuant to subsection (c) to assist
 in the development of programs for the conservation or stabilization of
 endangered and threatened species or to assist in monitoring the status
 of candidate species pursuant to section 4(b)(3)(C) and recovered species
 pursuant to section 4(e).
 `(2) BASIS- Subject to paragraph (3), the Secretary shall allocate each
 annual appropriation made in accordance with the subsection (i) to the
 States based on consideration of--
 `(A) the international commitments of the United States to protect endangered
 species or threatened species;
 `(B) the readiness of a State to proceed with a conservation or stabilization
 program consistent with the objectives and purposes of this Act;
 `(C) the number of endangered species and threatened species within a State;
 `(D) the potential for restoring endangered species and threatened species
 within a State;
 `(E) the relative urgency to initiate a program to restore and protect an
 endangered species or threatened species in terms of survival of the species;
 `(F) the importance of monitoring the status of candidate species within a
 State to prevent a significant risk to the well being of any such species;
 and
 `(G) the importance of monitoring the status of recovered species within
 a State to ensure that the species do not return to the point at which
 the measures provided pursuant to this Act are again necessary.
 `(3) SPECIES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall ensure that no less than 30 percent
 of total annual expenditures of grants made under this section, and no
 less than one third of the total projects in no less than one third of the
 States that receive funds pursuant to this section, shall be expended on
 voluntary, cooperative efforts to enhance the habitat, habitat availability,
 or population of endangered, threatened, or candidate species on private
 property.
 `(B) CONSERVATION EASEMENTS- The voluntary and cooperative efforts may
 include the purchase of conservation easements of up to 20 years in duration,
 except that no easements may be considered as part of any mitigation plan
 or as required for the rendering of other services normally offered by
 the State.
 `(4) CARRYOVER- As much of the annual appropriation made in accordance with
 subsection (i) allocated for obligation to any State for any fiscal year
 as remains unobligated at the close of the fiscal year is authorized to
 be made available to that State until the close of the succeeding fiscal
 year. Any amount allocated to any State that is unobligated at the end of
 the period during which it is available for expenditure is authorized to
 be made available for expenditure by the Secretary in conducting programs
 under this section.
 `(5) CONTENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the cooperative
 agreements shall provide for--
 `(i) the actions to be taken by the Secretary and the States;
 `(ii) the benefits that are expected to be derived in connection with the
 conservation or stabilization of endangered or threatened species;
 `(iii) the estimated cost of the actions; and
 `(iv) the share of the costs to be borne by the Federal Government and by
 the States.
 `(B) FEDERAL SHARE- For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) the Federal share of the program costs shall not exceed 75 percent
 of the estimated program cost stated in the agreement; and
 `(ii) the Federal share may be increased to 90 percent whenever two or more
 States having a common interest in one or more endangered or threatened
 species, the conservation or stabilization of which may be enhanced by
 cooperation of the States, enter jointly into agreement with the Secretary.
 `(6) ADVANCE FUNDS- At the discretion of the Secretary and under such rules
 and regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may advance
 funds to the State for financing the United States pro rata share agreed
 on in the cooperative agreement.
 `(7) FORM OF NON-FEDERAL SHARE- For the purposes of this section, the
 non-Federal share may, in the discretion of the Secretary, be in the form
 of money or real property, the value of which shall be determined by the
 Secretary whose decision shall be final.
 `(e) REVIEW OF STATE PROGRAMS- Any action taken by the Secretary under
 this section shall be subject to the periodic review of the Secretary at
 no greater than annual intervals.
 `(f) CONFLICTS BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any State law or regulation that applies with respect to
 the importation or exportation of, or interstate or foreign commerce in,
 endangered species or threatened species is void to the extent that it
 may effectively--
 `(A) permit what is prohibited by this Act of by any regulation that
 implements this Act; or
 `(B) prohibit what is authorized pursuant to an exemption or permit provided
 for in this Act or in any regulation that implements this Act.
 `(2) CONSERVATION OR SALE- This Act shall not otherwise be construed to
 void any State law or regulation that is intended to conserve migratory,
 resident, or introduced fish or wildlife, or to permit or prohibit the
 sale of the fish or wildlife.
 `(3) TAKING- Any State law or regulation respecting the taking of an
 endangered species or threatened species may be more restrictive than
 the exemptions or permits provided for in this Act or in any regulation
 that implements this Act but not less restrictive than the prohibitions
 prescribed in this Act.
 `(g) TRANSITION-
 `(1) DEFINITION OF ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `establishment period' means, with respect to any State, the
 period beginning on December 28, 1973, and ending on whichever of the
 following dates first occurs:
 `(A) The date of the close of the 120-day period following the adjournment
 of the first regular session of the legislative of the State that commences
 after December 28, 1973.
 `(B) The date of the close of the 15-month period following December
 28, 1973.
 `(2) COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS- The prohibitions set forth in or authorized
 pursuant to sections 4(d) and 10(a)(1)(B) shall not apply with respect
 to the taking of any resident endangered species or threatened species
 (other than species listed in Appendix I to the Convention or otherwise
 specifically covered by any other treaty or Federal law) within any State--
 `(A) that is then a party to a cooperative agreement with the Secretary
 pursuant to subsection (c) (except to the extent that the taking of any
 such species is contrary to the law of the State); or
 `(B) except for any time within the establishment period when--
 `(i) the Secretary applies the prohibition to the species at the request
 of the State; or
 `(ii) the Secretary applies the prohibition after the Secretary finds,
 and publishes a finding of the Secretary, that an emergency exists posing a
 significant risk to the well-being of the species and that the prohibition
 must be applied to protect the species.
 `(3) NOTICE AND COMMENT- The finding and publication of the Secretary
 may be made without regard to the public hearing or comment provisions
 of section 553 of title 5, United States Code, or any other provision of
 this Act, except that the prohibition shall expire 90 days after the date
 of the imposition of the prohibition unless the Secretary further extends
 the prohibition by publishing notice and a statement of justification of
 the extension.
 `(h) REGULATIONS- The Secretary is authorized to promulgate such regulations
 as may be appropriate to carry out the provisions of this section relating
 to financial assistance to States.
 `(i) APPROPRIATIONS-
 `(1) DEPOSITS INTO FUND- To carry out this section for fiscal years after
 September 30, 1988, there shall be deposited into a special fund known as
 the `Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund', to be administered
 by the Secretary, an amount equal to 5 percent of the combined amounts
 covered each fiscal year into the Federal aid to wildlife restoration fund
 under section 3 of the Act of September 2, 1937 (16 U.S.C. 669b), and paid,
 transferred, or otherwise credited each fiscal year to the Sport Fishing
 Restoration Account established under section 9504(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(2) APPROPRIATIONS AND ALLOCATIONS FROM FUND- Amounts deposited into the
 special fund are authorized to be appropriated annually and allocated in
 accordance with subsection (d).
`SEC. 7. INTERAGENCY COOPERATION.
 `(a) FEDERAL AGENCY ACTIONS AND CONSULTATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall review other programs administered by
 the Secretary and utilize the programs in furtherance of the purposes of
 this Act. All other Federal agencies shall, in consultation with and with
 the assistance of the Secretary, utilize the authorities of the agencies in
 furtherance of the purposes of this Act by carrying out programs for the
 conservation of endangered species and threatened species listed pursuant
 to section 4.
 `(2) AGENCY ACTIONS JEOPARDIZING SPECIES- Each Federal agency shall, in
 consultation with and with the assistance of the Secretary, ensure that
 any action authorized, funded, or carried out by the agency (referred to
 in this section as an `agency action') is not likely to jeopardize the
 continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species. In
 fulfilling the requirements of this paragraph, each agency shall use
 adequate and verifiable scientifically valid data and shall hold public
 hearings on the consultation process, if so requested by the agency or
 prospective permit or license applicant.
 `(3) AGENCY ACTIONS INVOLVING PERMITS OR LICENSE APPLICANTS- Subject to such
 guidelines as the Secretary may establish, a Federal agency shall consult
 with the Secretary on any prospective agency action at the request of,
 and in cooperation with, the prospective permit or license applicant if the
 applicant has reason to believe that an endangered species or a threatened
 species may be present in the area affected by the project of the applicant
 and that implementation of the action will likely affect the species.
 `(4) AGENCY ACTIONS JEOPARDIZING PROPOSED LISTINGS- Each Federal agency
 shall confer with the Secretary on any agency action that is likely to
 jeopardize the continued existence of any species proposed to be listed
 under section 4. This paragraph shall not require a limitation on the
 commitment of resources as described in subsection (d).
 `(b) OPINION OF SECRETARY-
 `(1) AGENCY ACTIONS JEOPARDIZING SPECIES-
 `(A) PERIOD FOR CONSULTATION- Consultation under subsection (a)(2) with
 respect to any agency action shall be concluded within the 90-day period
 beginning on the date on which the action is initiated or, subject to
 subparagraph (B), within such other period of time as is mutually agreeable
 to the Secretary and the Federal agency.
 `(B) AGENCY ACTIONS INVOLVING PERMITS OR LICENSE APPLICANTS- In the case
 of an agency action involving a permit or license applicant, the Secretary
 and the Federal agency may not mutually agree to conclude consultation
 within a period exceeding 90 days unless the Secretary, before the close
 of the 90th day referred to in subparagraph (A)--
 `(i) if the consultation period proposed to be agreed to will end before
 the 150th day after the date on which consultation was initiated, submits
 to the applicant a written statement setting forth--
 `(I) the reasons why a longer period is required;
 `(II) the information that is required to complete the consultation; and
 `(III) the estimated date on which consultation will be completed; or
 `(ii) if the consultation period proposed to be agreed to will end 150 or
 more days after the date on which consultation was initiated, obtains the
 consent of the applicant to the period.
 `(C) EXTENSION OF CONSULTATION PERIODS- The Secretary and the Federal
 agency may mutually agree to extend a consultation period established
 under subparagraph (B) if the Secretary, before the close of the period,
 obtains the consent of the applicant to the extension.
 `(2) AGENCY ACTIONS INVOLVING PERMITS OR LICENSE APPLICANTS- Consultation
 under subsection (a)(3) shall be concluded within such period as is
 agreeable to the Secretary, the Federal agency, and the applicant concerned.
 `(3) BASIS FOR OPINION-
 `(A) WRITTEN STATEMENT AND SUMMARY- Promptly after conclusion of consultation
 under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide to
 the Federal agency and the applicant, if any, a written statement setting
 forth the opinion of the Secretary, and a summary of the information on
 which the opinion is based, detailing how the agency action affects the
 species. If jeopardy is found, the Secretary shall suggest those reasonable
 and prudent alternatives that the Secretary believes would not violate
 subsection (a)(2) and can be taken by the Federal agency or applicant in
 implementing the agency action.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF CONSULTATION- Consultation under subsection (a)(3), and
 an opinion based by the Secretary incident to the consultation, regarding
 an agency action shall be treated respectively as a consultation under
 subsection (a)(2), and as an opinion issued after consultation under such
 subsection, regarding that action if the Secretary reviews the action before
 it is commenced by the Federal agency and finds, and notifies the agency,
 that no significant changes have been made with respect to the action and
 that no significant change has occurred regarding the information used
 during the initial consultation.
 `(4) NO VIOLATION- If after consultation under subsection (a)(2), the
 Secretary concludes that--
 `(A) the agency action will not violate such subsection, or offers reasonable
 and prudent alternatives the Secretary believes would not violate subsection
 (a)(2);
 `(B) the taking of an endangered species or a threatened species incidental
 to the agency action will not violate such subsection; and
 `(C) if an endangered species or threatened species of a marine mammal is
 involved, the taking is authorized pursuant to section 101(a)(5) of the
 Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1371(a)(5)),
the Secretary shall provide the Federal agency and the applicant concerned
or any requesting party, if any, with a written statement that--
 `(i) specifies the impact of the incidental taking on the species;
 `(ii) specifies the least costly reasonable and prudent measures that the
 Secretary considers necessary or appropriate to minimize the impact;
 `(iii) in the case of marine mammals, specifies those measures that are
 necessary to comply with section 101(a)(5) of the Marine Mammal Protection
 Act of 1972 with regard to the taking; and
 `(iv) sets forth the terms and conditions (including reporting requirements)
 that must be complied with by the Federal agency or applicant (if any),
 or both, to implement the measures specified under clauses (ii) and (iii).
 `(c) BIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT-
 `(1) INFORMATION REQUESTS BY AGENCIES- To facilitate compliance with the
 requirements of subsection (a)(2), each Federal agency shall, with respect
 to any agency action of the agency for which no contract for construction
 has been entered into and for which no construction has begun on November 10,
 1978, request of the Secretary information whether any species that is listed
 or proposed to be listed may be present in the area of the proposed action.
 `(2) ASSESSMENT IF SPECIES PRESENT- If the Secretary advises, on the basis
 of the analysis of adequate and verifiable scientifically valid data,
 that the species may be present, the agency shall conduct a biological
 assessment for the purpose of identifying any endangered species or
 threatened species that is likely to be affected by the action.
 `(3) PERIOD FOR ASSESSMENT- The assessment shall be completed within 180
 days after the date on which the assessment is initiated (or within such
 other period as in mutually agreed to by the Secretary and the agency,
 except that if a permit or license applicant is involved, the 180-day
 period may not be extended unless the agency provides the applicant,
 before the close of the period, with a written statement setting forth
 the estimated length of the proposed extension and the reasons for the
 extension) and, before any contract for construction is entered into and
 before construction is begun with respect to the action.
 `(4) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS- The assessment may be undertaken as
 part of the compliance of a Federal agency with the requirements of section
 102 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332).
 `(d) LIMITATION ON COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES- After initiation of consultation
 required under subsection (a)(2), the Federal agency and the permit or
 license applicant shall not make any irreversible or irretrievable commitment
 of resources with respect to the agency action that has the demonstrable
 effect of foreclosing the formulation or implementation of reasonable and
 prudent alternative measures that would not violate subsection (a)(2).
 `(e) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any affected person may obtain judicial review of
 any opinion or conclusion made by the Secretary pursuant to this section.
 `(f) PRESIDENTIAL DETERMINATION OF EMERGENCY- The President is authorized
 to exempt any area that has been declared by the President to be a major
 disaster area under The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.) if the President determines that
 such an exemption is necessary for the repair or replacement of a public
 facility to the condition of the facility substantially as the facility
 existed prior to the disaster under section 405 or 406 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 5171 or 5172).
`SEC. 8. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION.
 `(a) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- As a demonstration of the commitment of the United States
 to the worldwide protection of endangered species and threatened species,
 the President may, subject to section 1306 of title 31, United States Code,
 use foreign currencies accruing to the United States Government under the
 Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (7 U.S.C. 1691 et
 seq.) or any other law to provide to any foreign county (with its consent)
 assistance in the development and management of programs in that country
 that the Secretary determines to be necessary or useful for the conservation
 of any endangered species or threatened species listed by the Secretary
 pursuant to section 4.
 `(2) TERMS AND CONDITIONS- The President shall provide assistance (which
 includes the acquisition, by lease or otherwise, of lands, waters, or
 interests therein) to foreign countries under this section under such
 terms and conditions as the President considers appropriate.
 `(3) FOREIGN CURRENCIES- Whenever foreign currencies are available for
 the provision of assistance under this section, the currencies shall be
 used in preference to funds appropriated under section 19.
 `(b) ENCOURAGEMENT OF FOREIGN PROGRAMS- To carry out this Act, the Secretary,
 acting through the Secretary of State, shall encourage--
 `(1) foreign countries to provide for the conservation of fish or wildlife
 and plants including endangered species and threatened species listed
 pursuant to section 4;
 `(2) the entering into of bilateral or multilateral agreements with foreign
 countries to provide for the conservation; and
 `(3) foreign persons who directly or indirectly take fish or wildlife or
 plants in foreign countries or on the high seas for importation into the
 United States for commercial or other purposes to develop and carry out
 with such assistance as the Secretary may provide, conservation practices
 designed to enhance the fish or wildlife or plants and their habitat.
 `(c) PERSONNEL- After consultation with the Secretary of State, the
 Secretary may--
 `(1) assign or otherwise make available any officer or employee of the
 Department of the Interior for the purpose of cooperating with foreign
 countries and international organizations in developing personnel resources
 and programs that promote the conservation of fish or wildlife or plants; and
 `(2) conduct or provide financial assistance for the educational training
 of foreign personnel, in the United States or abroad, in fish, wildlife, or
 plant management, research, and law enforcement and to render professional
 assistance abroad in such matters.
 `(d) INVESTIGATIONS- After consultation with the Secretary of State and
 the Secretary of the Treasury, as appropriate, the Secretary may conduct
 or cause to be conducted such law enforcement investigations and research
 abroad as the Secretary considers necessary to carry out this Act.
`SEC. 9. CONVENTION IMPLEMENTATION.
 `(a) MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY AND SCIENTIFIC AUTHORITY- The Secretary of the
 Interior (referred to in this section as the `Secretary') is designated
 as the Management Authority and the Scientific Authority for purposes of
 the Convention and the respective functions of each such Authority shall
 be carried out through the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
 `(b) MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY FUNCTIONS- The Secretary shall do all things
 necessary and appropriate to carry out the functions of the Management
 Authority under the Convention.
 `(c) SCIENTIFIC AUTHORITY FUNCTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall do all things necessary and appropriate
 to carry out the functions of the Scientific Authority under the Convention.
 `(2) BASIS FOR DETERMINATIONS AND ADVICE- The Secretary shall base the
 determinations and advice given by the Secretary under Article IV of the
 Convention with respect to wildlife on the best available biological
 information derived from professionally accepted wildlife management
 practices, except that the Secretary is not required to make, or require
 any State to make, estimates of population size in making the determinations
 or giving the advice.
 `(d) RESERVATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES UNDER THE CONVENTION- If the United
 States votes against including any species in Appendix I or II of the
 Convention and does not enter a reservation pursuant to paragraph (3) of
 Article XV of the Convention with respect to the species, the Secretary of
 State, before the 90th day after the last day on which such a reservation
 could be entered, shall submit to the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on the
 Environment and Public Works of the Senate, a written report setting forth
 the reasons why such a reservation was not entered.
 `(e) WILDLIFE PRESERVATION IN WESTERN HEMISPHERE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Interior (referred to in this
 subsection as the `Secretary'), in cooperation with the Secretary of
 State, shall act on behalf of, and represent, the United States in all
 regards as required by the Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife
 Preservation in the Western Hemisphere (56 Stat. 1354, T.S. 982, referred
 to in this subsection as the `Western Convention'). In the discharge of
 these responsibilities, the Secretary and the Secretary of State shall
 consult with the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce,
 and the heads of other agencies with respect to matters relating to or
 affecting their areas of responsibility.
 `(2) IMPLEMENTATION- The Secretary and the Secretary of State shall,
 in cooperation with the contracting parties to the Western Convention
 and, to the extent feasible and appropriate, with the participation of
 State agencies, take such steps as are necessary to implement the Western
 Convention. The steps shall include--
 `(A) cooperation with contracting parties and international organizations
 for the purpose of developing personnel resources and programs that will
 facilitate implementation of the Western Convention;
 `(B) identification of those species of birds that migrate between the
 United States and other contracting parties, and the habitats on which
 those species depend, and the implementation of cooperative measures to
 ensure that the species will not become endangered or threatened; and
 `(C) identification of measures that are necessary and appropriate to
 implement those provisions of the Western Convention that address the
 protection of wild plants.
 `(3) STATE REGULATION- This subsection shall not be construed as affecting
 the authority, jurisdiction, or responsibility of the several States to
 manage, control, or regulate resident fish or wildlife under State law
 or regulations.
`SEC. 10. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) FISH OR WILDLIFE- Except as provided in sections 6(g)(2) and 11, with
 respect to any endangered species of fish or wildlife listed pursuant to
 section 4, it is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of
 the United States to--
 `(A) import any such species into, or export any such species from the
 United States;
 `(B) take any such species within the United States or the territorial sea of
 the United States, except as is necessary for the protection of human health;
 `(C) take any such species on the high seas;
 `(D) possess, sell, deliver, carry, transport, or ship, by any means
 whatsoever, any such species taken in violation of subparagraphs (B) and (C);
 `(E) deliver, receive, carry, transport, or ship in interstate or foreign
 commerce, by any means whatsoever and in the course of a commercial activity,
 any such species;
 `(F) sell or offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce any such
 species unless such actions serve to better the chances of survival of
 the species; or
 `(G) violate any regulation pertaining to the species or to any threatened
 species of fish or wildlife listed pursuant to section 4 and promulgated
 by the Secretary pursuant to authority provided by this Act.
 `(2) PLANTS- Except as provided in sections 6(g)(2) and 11, with respect
 to any endangered species of plants listed pursuant to section 4, it is
 unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to--
 `(A) import any such species into, or export any such species from, the
 United States;
 `(B) remove and reduce to possession any such species from areas under
 Federal jurisdiction, maliciously damage or destroy any such species on any
 such area, or remove cut, dig up, or damage or destroy any such species
 on any other area in knowing violation of any law or regulation of any
 State or in the course of any violation of a State criminal trespass law;
 `(C) deliver, receive, carry, transport, or ship in interstate or foreign
 commerce, by any means whatsoever and in the course of a commercial activity,
 any such species;
 `(D) sell or offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce unless the
 actions serve to further the chances of survival of the species; or
 `(E) violate any regulation pertaining to the species or to any threatened
 species of plants listed pursuant to section 4 and promulgated by the
 Secretary pursuant to authority provided by this Act.
 `(3) ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS- The Secretary shall provide for an
 administrative appeal of any determination made under this section.
 `(b) SPECIES HELD IN CAPTIVITY OR CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) SPECIES HELD ON CERTAIN DATE- Subparagraphs (A) and (G) of subsection
 (a)(1) shall not apply to any fish or wildlife that was held in captivity
 or in a controlled environment on (i) December 28, 1973, or (ii) the date
 of the publication in the Federal Register of a final regulation adding the
 fish or wildlife species to any list published pursuant to section 4(c), if
 the holding and any subsequent holding or use of the fish or wildlife was
 not in the course of a commercial activity unless the commercial activity
 is beneficial to the survival of the species.
 `(B) ACTS COMMITTED AFTER CERTAIN DATE- With respect to any act that is
 prohibited by subparagraph (A) or (G) of subsection (a)(1) that occurs
 after a period of 180 days from (i) December 28, 1973, or (ii) the date
 of publication in the Federal Register of a final regulation adding the
 fish or wildlife species to any list published pursuant to section 4(c),
 there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the fish or wildlife involved
 in such act is not entitled to the exemption contained in this subsection.
 `(2) RAPTORS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), subsection (a)(1) shall not
 apply to--
 `(i) any raptor legally held in captivity or in a controlled environment
 on November 10, 1978; or
 `(ii) any progeny of any raptor described in clause (i), until such time
 as any such raptor or progeny is intentionally returned to a wild state.
 `(B) REQUIREMENTS- In order for subparagraph (A) to apply, any person
 holding any raptor or progeny described in subparagraph (A) must be able
 to demonstrate that the raptor or progeny does, in fact, qualify under this
 paragraph, and shall maintain and submit to the Secretary, on request, such
 inventories, documentation, and records as the Secretary may by regulation
 require as being reasonably appropriate to carry out this paragraph. The
 requirements shall not unnecessarily duplicate the requirements of other
 rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 `(c) VIOLATION OF CONVENTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- It is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States to engage in any trade in any specimens contrary
 to the provisions of the Convention, or to possess any specimens traded
 contrary to the provisions of the Convention, including the definitions
 of terms in article I of the Convention.
 `(2) IMPORTATION OF CERTAIN FISH OR WILDLIFE- Any importation into the
 United States of fish or wildlife shall, if--
 `(A) the fish or wildlife is not an endangered species listed pursuant to
 section 4 but is listed in Appendix II of the Convention;
 `(B) the taking and exportation of the fish or wildlife is not contrary
 to the provisions of the Convention and all other applicable requirements
 of the Convention have been satisfied;
 `(C) the applicable requirements of subsections (d), (e), and (f) have
 been satisfied; and
 `(D) the importation is not made in the course of a commercial activity,
be presumed to be an importation not in violation of any provision of this
Act or any regulation issued pursuant to this Act.
 `(d) IMPORTS AND EXPORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- It is unlawful for any person, without first having
 obtained permission from the Secretary, to engage in business--
 `(A) as an importer or exporter of fish or wildlife (other than shellfish and
 fishery products that (i) are not listed pursuant to section 4 as endangered
 species or threatened species, and (ii) are imported for purposes of human
 or animal consumption or taken in waters under the jurisdiction of the
 United States or on the high seas for recreational purposes) or plants; or
 `(B) as an importer or exporter of any quantity of raw or worked African
 elephant ivory.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS- Any person required to obtain permission under paragraph
 (1) shall--
 `(A) keep such records as will fully and correctly disclose each importation
 or exportation of fish, wildlife, plants, or African elephant ivory made
 by the person and the subsequent disposition, made by the person with
 respect to the fish, wildlife, plants, or ivory;
 `(B) at all reasonable times on notice by a duly authorized representative
 of the Secretary, afford the representative access to the place of business
 of the person, an opportunity to examine the inventory of the person of
 imported fish, wildlife, plants, or African elephant ivory and the records
 required to be kept under subparagraph (A), and to copy the records; and
 `(C) file such reports as the Secretary may require.
 `(3) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are
 necessary and appropriate to carry out this subsection.
 `(4) RESTRICTION ON CONSIDERATION OF VALUE OF QUANTITY OF AFRICAN ELEPHANT
 IVORY IMPORTED OR EXPORTED- In granting permission under this subsection
 for importation or exportation of African elephant ivory, the Secretary
 shall not vary the requirements for obtaining the permission on the basis
 of the value or quantity of ivory imported or exported under the permission.
 `(e) REPORTS- It is unlawful for any person importing or exporting fish
 or wildlife (other than shellfish and fishery products that (1) are not
 listed pursuant to section 4 as endangered or threatened species, and
 (2) are imported for purposes of human or animal consumption or taken in
 waters under the jurisdiction of the United States or on the high seas
 for recreational purposes) or plants to fail to file any declaration or
 report as the Secretary considers necessary to facilitate enforcement of
 this Act or to meet the obligations of the Convention.
 `(f) DESIGNATION OF PORTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) USE OF DESIGNATED PORTS- It is unlawful for any person subject to the
 jurisdiction of the United States to import into or export from the United
 States any fish or wildlife (other than shellfish and fishery products that
 (i) are not listed pursuant to section 4 as endangered species or threatened
 species, and (ii) are imported for purposes of human or animal consumption
 or taken in waters under the jurisdiction of the United States or on the
 high seas for recreational purposes) or plants, except at a port or ports
 designated by the Secretary of the Interior.
 `(B) DESIGNATION OF PORTS- For the purposes of facilitating enforcement
 of this Act and reducing the costs of enforcement, the Secretary of the
 Interior, with approval of the Secretary of the Treasury and after notice
 and opportunity for public hearing, may, by regulation, designate ports
 and change the designations.
 `(C) USE OF NONDESIGNATED PORTS- The Secretary of the Interior, under
 such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, may permit the
 importation or exportation at nondesignated ports in the interest of the
 health or safety of the fish or wildlife or plants, or for other reasons if,
 at the discretion of the Secretary, the Secretary considers it appropriate
 and consistent with the purpose of this subsection.
 `(2) STATUS OF PREVIOUSLY DESIGNATED PORTS- Any port designated by the
 Secretary of the Interior under the authority of section 4(d) of the Act
 of December 5, 1969 (16 U.S.C. 666cc-4(d)), shall, if the designation is
 in effect on December 27, 1973, be considered to be a port designated
 by the Secretary under paragraph (1) until such time as the Secretary
 otherwise provides.
 `(g) VIOLATIONS- It is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States to attempt to commit, solicit another to commit,
 or cause to be committed, any offense described in this section.
`SEC. 11. EXCEPTIONS.
 `(a) PERMITS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may permit, under such terms and conditions
 as the Secretary shall prescribe--
 `(A) any act otherwise prohibited by section 10 for scientific purposes or
 to enhance the propagation or survival of the affected species, including
 acts necessary for the establishment and maintenance of experimental
 populations pursuant to subsection (j); or
 `(B) any taking otherwise prohibited by section 10(a)(1)(B) if the taking
 is incidental to, and not the purpose of, the carrying out of an otherwise
 lawful activity.
 `(2) CONSERVATION PLAN-
 `(A) CONTENTS- No permit may be issued by the Secretary authorizing any
 taking referred to in paragraph (1)(B) unless the applicant for the permit
 submits to the Secretary a conservation plan that specifies--
 `(i) the impact that will likely result from the taking;
 `(ii) what steps the applicant will take to minimize and mitigate the
 impacts, and the funding that will be available to implement the steps;
 `(iii) what alternative actions to the taking the applicant considered
 and the reasons why the alternatives are not being utilized; and
 `(iv) such other measures that the Secretary may require as being necessary
 or appropriate for purposes of the plan.
 `(B) ISSUANCE- If the Secretary finds, after opportunity for public comment,
 with respect to a permit application and the related conservation plan that--
 `(i) the taking will be incidental;
 `(ii) the applicant will, to the maximum extent practicable, minimize and
 mitigate the impacts of the taking;
 `(iii) the applicant will ensure that adequate funding for the plan will
 be provided;
 `(iv) the taking will not appreciably reduce the likelihood of the survival
 and recovery of the species in the wild; and
 `(v) the measures, if any, required under subparagraph (A)(iv) will be met,
and the Secretary has received such other assurances as the Secretary may
require that the plan will be implemented, the Secretary shall issue the
permit.
 `(C) REPORTING REQUIREMENTS- The permit shall contain such terms and
 conditions as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate to carry
 out this paragraph, including such reporting requirements as the Secretary
 considers necessary for determining whether the terms and conditions are
 being complied with.
 `(D) REVOCATION- The Secretary shall revoke a permit issued under this
 paragraph if the Secretary finds that the permittee is not complying with
 the terms and conditions of the permit.
 `(b) HARDSHIP EXEMPTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), if any person enters
 into a contract with respect to a species of fish or wildlife or plant
 before the date of the publication in the Federal Register of notice of
 consideration of that species as an endangered species and the subsequent
 listing of that species as an endangered species pursuant to section 4 will
 cause undue hardship to the person under the contract, the Secretary, in
 order to minimize the hardship, may exempt the person from the application of
 section 10(a) to the extent the Secretary considers appropriate if the person
 applies to the Secretary for the exemption and includes with the application
 such information as the Secretary may require to prove the hardship.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) TIME AND QUANTITY- No exemption under paragraph (1) shall be for a
 duration of more than 1 year from the date of publication in the Federal
 Register of notice of consideration of the species concerned, or shall apply
 to a quantity of fish or wildlife or plants in excess of that specified
 by the Secretary.
 `(B) PRIOR LISTING- The 1-year period for those species of fish or wildlife
 listed by the Secretary as endangered prior to December 28, 1973, shall
 expire in accordance with the terms of section 3 of the Act of December 5,
 1969 (16 U.S.C. 668c-3).
 `(C) IMPORTS AND EXPORTS- No exemption under paragraph (1) may be granted
 for the importation or exportation of a specimen listed in Appendix I of
 the Convention except in accordance with the Convention.
 `(3) UNDUE ECONOMIC HARDSHIP- As used in this subsection, the term `undue
 economic hardship' shall include--
 `(A) substantial economic loss resulting from inability caused by this Act
 to perform contracts with respect to species of fish and wildlife entered
 into prior to the date of publication in the Federal Register of a notice
 of consideration of the species as an endangered species;
 `(B) substantial economic loss to persons who, for the year prior to the
 notice of consideration of the species as an endangered species, derived
 a substantial portion of the income of the persons from the lawful taking
 of any listed species, which taking would be made unlawful under this Act; or
 `(C) curtailment of subsistence taking made unlawful under this Act by
 persons--
 `(i) not reasonably able to secure other sources of subsistence;
 `(ii) dependent to a substantial extent on hunting and fishing for
 subsistence; and
 `(iii) who must engage in the curtailed taking for subsistence purposes.
 `(4) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary may make further requirements
 for a showing of undue economic hardship as the Secretary considers
 necessary. Exceptions granted under this section may be limited by the
 Secretary in the discretion of the Secretary as to time, area, or other
 factor of applicability.
 `(c) NOTICE AND REVIEW-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall publish notice in the Federal Register
 of each application for an exemption or permit that is made under this
 section, except for an action taken pursuant to subsection (k).
 `(2) COMMENT PERIOD- Each notice shall invite the submission from interested
 parties, within 30 days after the date of the notice, of written data,
 views, or arguments with respect to the application, except that the
 30-day period may be waived by the Secretary in an emergency situation
 in which the health or life of an endangered animal is threatened and no
 reasonable alternative is available to the applicant, but notice of any
 such waiver shall be published by the Secretary in the Federal Register
 within 10 days following the issuance of the exemption or permit.
 `(3) PUBLIC INFORMATION- Information received by the Secretary as part
 of any application shall be available to the public as a matter of public
 record at every stage of the proceeding.
 `(d) PERMIT AND EXEMPTION POLICY- The Secretary may grant exceptions under
 subsections (a)(1)(A) and (b) only if the Secretary finds and publishes
 a finding of the Secretary in the Federal Register that--
 `(1) the exceptions were applied for in good faith;
 `(2) if granted and exercised will not operate to the disadvantage of the
 endangered species; and
 `(3) will be consistent with the purposes and policy set forth in section 2.
 `(e) ALASKA NATIVES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (4), this Act shall not
 apply with respect to the taking of any endangered species or threatened
 species, or the importation of any such species taken pursuant to this
 section, by--
 `(A) any Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo who is an Alaskan Native who resides in
 Alaska; or
 `(B) any nonnative permanent resident of an Alaska native village,
if the taking is primarily for subsistence purposes.
 `(2) NATIVE HANDICRAFTS AND CLOTHING- Nonedible by-products of species
 taken pursuant to this section may be sold in interstate commerce when made
 into authentic native articles of handicrafts and clothing, except that
 this subsection shall not apply to any non-native resident of an Alaskan
 native village found by the Secretary to be not primarily dependent on
 the taking of fish and wildlife for consumption or for the creation and
 sale of authentic native articles of handicrafts and clothing.
 `(3) WASTE- Any taking under this subsection may not be accomplished in
 a wasteful manner.
 `(4) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subsection:
 `(A) AUTHENTIC NATIVE ARTICLES OF HANDICRAFTS AND CLOTHING- The term
 `authentic native articles of handicrafts and clothing' means items composed
 wholly or in some significant respect to natural materials, and that are
 produced, decorated or fashioned in the exercise of traditional native
 handicrafts without the use of pantographs, multiple carvers, or other mass
 copying devices. Traditional native handicrafts include weaving, carving,
 stitching, sewing, lacing, beading, drawing, and painting.
 `(B) SUBSISTENCE- The term `subsistence' includes selling any edible
 portion of fish or wildlife in native villages and towns in Alaska for
 native consumption within native villages or towns.
 `(5) TAKING OF ENDANGERED SPECIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding paragraph (l), whenever the Secretary
 determines that any species of fish or wildlife that is subject to taking
 under this subsection is an endangered species or threatened species,
 and that the taking materially and negatively affects the threatened or
 endangered species, the Secretary may prescribe regulations on the taking
 of the species by any such Indian, Aleut, Eskimo, or nonnative Alaskan
 resident of an Alaskan native village.
 `(B) FACTORS- The regulations may be established with reference to species,
 geographical description of the area included, the season for taking, or
 any other factors related to the reason for establishing the regulations
 and consistent with the policy of this Act.
 `(C) NOTICE, HEARINGS, AND REMOVAL- The regulations shall be prescribed
 after a notice and hearings in the affected judicial districts of Alaska
 and as otherwise required by section 103 of the Marine Mammal Protection
 Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1373), and shall be removed as soon as the Secretary
 determines that the need for the regulations has disappeared.
 `(f) PRE-ACT ENDANGERED SPECIES PARTS-
 `(1) DEFINITIONS- As used in this subsection:
 `(A) PRE-ACT ENDANGERED SPECIES PART- The term `pre-Act endangered species
 part' means--
 `(i) any sperm whale oil, including derivatives of the oil, that was
 lawfully held within the United States on December 28, 1973, in the course
 of a commercial activity; or
 `(ii) any finished scrimshaw product, if the product or the raw material
 for the product was lawfully held within the United States on December 28,
 1973, in the course of a commercial activity.
 `(B) SCRIMSHAW PRODUCT- The term `scrimshaw product' means any art form
 that involves the substantial etching or engraving of designs on, or the
 substantial carving of figures, patterns, or designs from, any bone or tooth
 of any marine mammal of the order Cetacea. For purposes of this subsection,
 polishing or the adding of minor superficial markings does not constitute
 substantial etching, engraving, or carving.
 `(2) EXEMPTIONS- The Secretary, pursuant to this subsection, may exempt, if
 the exemption is not in violation of the Convention, any pre-Act endangered
 species part from one or more of the following prohibitions:
 `(A) The prohibition on exportation from the United States set forth in
 section 10(a)(1)(A).
 `(B) Any prohibition set forth in subparagraph (E) or (F) of section
 10(a)(1).
 `(3) APPLICATION- Any person seeking an exemption described in paragraph
 (2) shall make application for the exemption to the Secretary in such form
 and manner as the Secretary shall prescribe, but no such application may
 be considered by the Secretary unless the application--
 `(A) is received by the Secretary before the close of the 1-year period
 beginning on the date on which regulations promulgated by the Secretary
 to carry out this subsection first take effect;
 `(B) contains a complete and detailed inventory of all pre-Act endangered
 species parts for which the applicant seeks exemption;
 `(C) is accompanied by such documentation as the Secretary may require to
 prove that any endangered species part or product claimed by the applicant
 to be a pre-Act endangered species part is in fact such a part; and
 `(D) contains such other information as the Secretary considers necessary
 and appropriate to carry out this subsection.
 `(4) ISSUANCE- If the Secretary approves any application for exemption
 made under this subsection, the Secretary shall issue to the applicant a
 certificate of exemption that shall specify--
 `(A) any prohibition in section 10(a) that is exempted;
 `(B) the pre-Act endangered species parts to which the exemption applies;
 `(C) the period of time during which the exemption is in effect, but no
 exemption made under this subsection shall have force and effect after
 the close of the 3-year period beginning on the date of issuance of the
 certificate unless the exemption is renewed under paragraph (8); and
 `(D) any term or condition prescribed pursuant to subparagraph (A) or
 (B), or both, of paragraph (5), that the Secretary considers necessary
 or appropriate.
 `(5) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as
 the Secretary considers necessary and appropriate to carry out this
 subsection. The regulations may set forth--
 `(A) terms and conditions that may be imposed on applicants for exemptions
 under this subsection (including requirements that applicants register
 inventories, keep complete sales records, permit duly authorized agents
 of the Secretary to inspect the inventories and records, and periodically
 file appropriate reports with the Secretary); and
 `(B) terms and conditions that may be imposed on any subsequent purchaser
 of any pre-Act endangered species part covered by an exemption granted
 under this subsection,
to ensure that any such part so exempted is adequately accounted for and not
disposed of contrary to this Act. No regulation prescribed by the Secretary
to carry out this subsection shall be subject to section 4(e)(3).
 `(6) APPLICATION OF SUBSECTION-
 `(A) VALIDITY OF SALES CONTRACTS- A contract for the sale of pre-Act
 endangered species parts that is entered into by the Administrator of
 General Services prior to the effective date of this subsection and
 pursuant to the notice published in the Federal Register on January 9,
 1973, shall not be rendered invalid by virtue of the fact that fulfillment
 of the contract may be prohibited under section 10(a)(1)(F).
 `(B) SEPARABILITY- In the event that this paragraph is held invalid,
 the validity of the remainder of the Act, including the remainder of this
 subsection, shall not be affected.
 `(7) PRIOR ACTS- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to--
 `(A) exonerate any person from any act committed in violation of subparagraph
 (A), (E), or (F) of section 10(a)(1) prior to July 12, 1976; or
 `(B) immunize any person from prosecution for any such act.
 `(8) RENEWAL OF EXEMPTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any valid certificate of exemption that was renewed after
 October 13, 1982, and was in effect on March 31, 1988, shall be considered
 to be renewed for a 6-month period beginning on October 7, 1988. Any person
 holding such a certificate may apply to the Secretary for one additional
 renewal of the certificate for a period not to exceed 5 years beginning
 on October 7, 1988.
 `(B) CONTINUATION OF PROVISIONS- If the Secretary approves any application
 for renewal of an exemption under this paragraph, the Secretary shall issue
 to the applicant a certificate of renewal of the exemption that shall
 provide that all terms, conditions, prohibitions, and other regulations
 made applicable by the previous certificate shall remain in effect during
 the period of the renewal.
 `(C) EXEMPTION- No exemption or renewal of the exemption made under this
 subsection shall have force and effect after the expiration date of the
 certificate of renewal of the exemption issued under this paragraph.
 `(D) SCRIMSHAW PRODUCTS- No person may, after January 31, 1984, sell or
 offer for sale in interstate or foreign commerce, and pre-Act finished
 scrimshaw product unless the person holds a valid certificate of exemption
 issued by the Secretary under this subsection, and unless the product or
 the raw material for the product was held by the person on October 13, 1982.
 `(g) CERTAIN ANTIQUE ARTICLES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Sections 4(d), 10(a), and 10(c) do not apply to any
 article that--
 `(A) is not less than 100 years of age;
 `(B) is composed in whole or in part of any endangered species or threatened
 species listed under section 4;
 `(C) has not been repaired or modified with any part of any such species
 on or after December 28, 1973; and
 `(D) is entered at a port designated under paragraph (3).
 `(2) IMPORTATION- Any person who wishes to import an article under the
 exception provided by this subsection shall submit to the customs officer
 concerned at the time of entry of the article such documentation as the
 Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of the
 Interior, shall by regulation require as being necessary to establish
 that the article meets the requirements set forth in subparagraphs (A),
 (B), and (C) of paragraph (1).
 `(3) PORT DESIGNATION- The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation
 with the Secretary of the Interior, shall designate one port within each
 customs region at which articles described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and
 (C) of paragraph (1) must be entered into the customs territory of the
 United States.
 `(4) APPLICATION FOR RETURN OF ARTICLES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any person who imported, after December 27, 1973, and on
 or before November 10, 1978, any article described in paragraph (1) that--
 `(i) was not repaired or modified after the date of importation with any
 part of any endangered species or threatened species listed under section 4;
 `(ii) was forfeited to the United States before November 10, 1978, or is
 subject to forfeiture to the United States on November 10, 1978, pursuant
 to the assessment of a civil penalty under section 12; and
 `(iii) is in the custody of the United States on November 10, 1978,
may, before the close of the 1-year period beginning on November 10, 1978
make application to the Secretary for return of the article.
 `(B) INFORMATION- Application shall be made in such form and manner,
 and contain such documentation, as the Secretary prescribes.
 `(C) RETURN OF ARTICLES- If on the basis of any such application that is
 timely filed, the Secretary is satisfied that the requirements of this
 paragraph are met with respect to the article concerned, the Secretary
 shall return the article to the applicant and the importation of the
 article shall, on and after the date of return, be considered to be a
 lawful importation under this Act.
 `(h) NONCOMMERCIAL TRANSSHIPMENTS- Any importation into the United States
 of fish or wildlife shall, if--
 `(1) the fish or wildlife was lawfully taken and exported from the country
 of origin and country of reexport, if any;
 `(2) the fish or wildlife is in transit or transshipment through any place
 subject to the jurisdiction of the United States en route to a country
 where the fish or wildlife may be lawfully imported and received;
 `(3) the exporter or owner of the fish or wildlife gave explicit
 instructions not to ship the fish or wildlife through any place subject to
 the jurisdiction of the United States, or did all that could have reasonably
 been done to prevent transshipment, and the circumstances leading to the
 transshipment were beyond the control of the exporter or owner; and
 `(4) the applicable requirements of the Convention have been satisfied,
be an importation not in violation of this Act or any regulation issued
pursuant to this Act while the fish or wildlife remains in the control of
the United States Customs Service.
 `(j) EXPERIMENTAL POPULATIONS-
 `(1) DEFINITION OF EXPERIMENTAL POPULATION- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `experimental population' means any population (including any
 offspring arising solely from a population) authorized by the Secretary
 for release under paragraph (2), but only when, and at such times as,
 the population is wholly separate geographically from nonexperimental
 populations of the same species.
 `(2) RELEASE OF POPULATIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may authorize the release into designated
 release habitat (and the related transportation) of any population
 (including eggs, propagules, or individuals) of an endangered species
 or a threatened species outside the current range of the species if the
 Secretary determines that the release will further the conservation or
 stabilization of the species.
 `(B) CONTINUED EXISTENCE OF SPECIES- Before authorizing the release of
 any population under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall by regulation
 identify the population and determine, on the basis of the best available
 information, whether or not the population is essential to the continued
 existence of an endangered species or a threatened species.
 `(C) TREATMENT AS THREATENED SPECIES- For the purposes of this Act, each
 member of an experimental population shall be treated as a threatened
 species, except that--
 `(i) solely for purposes of section 7 (other than section 7(a)(1)),
 an experimental population determined under subparagraph (B) to be not
 essential to the continued existence of a species shall be treated, except
 when it occurs in an area within the National Wildlife Refuge System or the
 National Park System, as a species proposed to be listed under section 4; and
 `(ii) critical habitat shall not be designated under this Act for any
 experimental population determined under subparagraph (B) to be not
 essential to the continued existence of a species.
 `(D) PROCEDURE-
 `(i) NOTICE AND HEARING- Not less than 1 year prior to designating any
 release habitat, the Secretary shall--
 `(I) publish notice of areas being considered for designation as release
 habitat;
 `(II) notify by certified mail all owners of record of non-Federal property
 and those who have a lease, permit, or other substantial interest in
 Federal land that may be designated as release habitat; and
 `(III) on request of any affected party, hold a public hearing in a location
 reasonably convenient to the affected parties.
 `(ii) PERMISSION OF LANDOWNER- No area may be designated as release habitat
 without prior, written permission of the landowner.
 `(iii) STATE LAWS- An experimental population or its progeny shall be
 regulated by applicable State laws except when limited to its designated
 release habitat.
 `(iv) PROGENY- Any population of unknown origin that is of the same species
 as an experimental or introduced population and that occurs in any county
 or lesser political subdivision in or adjacent to the county or counties
 into which the experimental population was introduced shall be treated as
 the progeny of the experimental or introduced population.
 `(3) DETERMINATION OF POPULATIONS- The Secretary, with respect to population
 of endangered species or threatened species that the Secretary authorized,
 before October 13, 1982, for release in geographical areas separate from
 the other populations of the species, shall determine by regulation which
 of the populations are an experimental population for the purposes of this
 subsection and whether or not each is essential to the continued existence
 of an endangered species or a threatened species.
 `(k) EXEMPTIONS TO ENCOURAGE PRIVATE CONSERVATION-
 `(1) UNITED STATES BIODIVERSITY FOUNDATION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any action done pursuant to and in accordance with a grant,
 contract, or other agreement between any individual or their authorized
 agent and the United States Biodiversity Foundation established by section
 18 shall be considered to be in compliance with this Act.
 `(B) TAKING- In the case of an incidental taking described in subsection
 (a)(1)(B) of an animal or plant occurring outside critical habitat as a
 result of a contract, grant, or other agreement with the United States
 Biodiversity Foundation, no taking may be determined to have occurred
 unless the taking is a violation by a recipient of a grant, contract, or
 other agreement or the authorized agent of the recipient or as the result
 of an otherwise illegal act that occurs on property voluntarily covered
 by the contract or agreement.
 `(2) BENEFICIAL MODIFICATIONS OR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If property (other than property designated as critical
 habitat, or reserved as part of a mitigation plan, on the date of enactment
 of the Progressive Endangered Species Act of 1992) has been modified or
 managed for not less than 3 years in a manner that is designed to benefit
 a listed species and the owner or the authorized agent of the owner has
 informed the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine
 Fisheries Service, whichever is appropriate, through written notification
 of the conservation actions, it shall be a defense against any charge of
 harm or harass that the owner or agent--
 `(i) gives written notice to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or
 the National Marine Fisheries Service of a proposed habitat modification
 that may have an adverse effect on the species in question 90 days before
 commencing the habitat modification; and
 `(ii) affords the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the National
 Marine Fisheries Service reasonable access to the property for the sole
 purpose of capturing or collecting the species.
 `(B) DURATION- The beneficial modifications or management practices may be
 for less than 3 years with the consent of the Fish and Wildlife Service or
 the National Marine Fisheries Service or be extended by the property owner.
 `(C) NO NET BENEFIT TO SPECIES- The Secretary may on receiving the notice
 of conservation actions as described in this paragraph and based on the
 analysis of adequate and verifiable scientific data sufficient to reach
 conclusions meeting reasonable scientific standards determine that the
 proposed actions do not constitute a net benefit to the species, in which
 case the Secretary shall notify the party giving notification of the
 determination and the analysis leading to such a determination.
 `(D) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A decision by the Secretary under this paragraph
 shall be subject to judicial review on request of the notifying party.
`SEC. 12. PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) CIVIL PENALTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PROHIBITED ACTS- Any person who intentionally violates, and any person
 engaged in business as an importer or exporter of fish, wildlife, or plants
 who violates, any provision of this Act, or any provision of any permit or
 certificate issued under this Act, or of any regulation issued in order to
 implement subparagraph (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), or (F) of subsection (a)(1),
 subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of subsection (a)(2), or subsection (c),
 (d) (other than a regulation relating to recordkeeping or filing or reports),
 (f), or (g) of section 10, may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary
 of not more than $25,000 for each violation.
 `(B) OTHER REGULATIONS- Any person who intentionally violates, and any
 person engaged in business as an importer or exporter of fish, wildlife,
 or plants who violates, any provision of any other regulation issued under
 this Act may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than
 $12,000 for each such violation.
 `(C) REGULATIONS, PERMITS, OR CERTIFICATES- Any person who otherwise violates
 any provision of this Act, or any regulation, permit, or certificate issued
 under this Act, may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not
 more than $500 for each such violation.
 `(D) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING- No penalty may be assessed under
 this subsection unless the person is given notice and opportunity for a
 hearing with respect to the violation.
 `(E) SEPARATE OFFENSES- Each violation shall be considered a separate
 offense.
 `(F) MITIGATION BY SECRETARY- Any such civil penalty may be remitted or
 mitigated by the Secretary.
 `(G) FAILURE TO PAY PENALTY- On any failure to pay a penalty assessed under
 this subsection, the Secretary may request the Attorney General to institute
 a civil action in a district court of the United States for any district
 in which the person is found, resides, or transacts business to collect
 the penalty and the court shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide any
 such action. The court shall hear the action on the record made before the
 Secretary and shall sustain the action of the Secretary if the action is
 supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole.
 `(2) HEARINGS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Hearings held during proceedings for the assessment of
 civil penalties under paragraph (1) shall be conducted in accordance with
 section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(B) SUBPOENAS- The Secretary may issue subpoenas for the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books,
 and documents, and administer oaths.
 `(C) WITNESSES- Witnesses summoned shall be paid the same fees and mileage
 that are paid to witnesses in the courts of the United States.
 `(D) REFUSAL TO OBEY SUBPOENAS- In case of contumacy or refusal to obey
 a subpoena served on any person pursuant to this paragraph, the district
 court of the United States for any district in which the person is found,
 resides, or transacts business, on application by the United States and after
 notice to the person, shall have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring
 the person to appear and give testimony before the Secretary or to appear
 and produce documents before the Secretary, or both. Any failure to obey the
 order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of the court.
 `(3) GOOD FAITH DEFENSE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
 no civil penalty shall be imposed if it can be shown by a preponderance
 of the evidence that the defendant committed an act based on a good faith
 belief that the defendant was acting to protect himself or herself, a
 member of his or her family, or any other individual from bodily harm,
 from any endangered or threatened species.
 `(b) CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL-
 `(A) PROHIBITED ACTS- Any person who knowingly violates any provision of
 this Act, of any permit or certificate issued under this Act, or of any
 regulation issued in order to implement subparagraph (A), (B), (C), (D),
 (E), or (F) of subsection (a)(1), subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of
 subsection (a)(2), or subsection (c), (d) (other than a regulation relating
 to recordkeeping, or filing of reports), (f), or (g) of section 10 shall,
 on conviction, be fined not more than $50,000 or imprisoned for not more
 than 1 year, or both.
 `(B) OTHER REGULATIONS- Any person who knowingly violates any provision of
 any other regulation issued under this Act shall, on conviction, be fined
 not more than $25,000 or imprisoned for not more than 6 months, or both.
 `(2) MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF AGREEMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The head of any Federal agency that has issued a lease,
 license, permit, or other agreement authorizing a person to import or export
 fish, wildlife, or plants, or to operate a quarantine station for imported
 wildlife, or authorizing the use of Federal lands, including grazing of
 domestic livestock, to any person who is convicted of a criminal violation
 of this Act or any regulation, permit, or certificate issued under this
 Act may immediately modify, suspend, or revoke each lease, license, permit,
 or other agreement.
 `(B) SUSPENSION OF PERMITS OR STAMPS- The Secretary shall also suspend for
 a period of up to 1 year, or cancel, any Federal hunting or fishing permit
 or stamp issued to any person who is convicted of a criminal violation of
 any provision of this Act or any regulation, permit, or certificate issued
 under this Act.
 `(C) NO LIABILITY- The United States shall not be liable for the payment
 of any compensation, reimbursement, or damages in connection with the
 modification, suspension, or revocation of any leases, licenses, permits
 stamps, or other agreements pursuant to this section.
 `(3) GOOD FAITH DEFENSE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
 it shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the defendant
 committed the offense based on a good faith belief that the defendant was
 acting to protect himself or herself, a member of his or her family, or any
 other individual, from bodily harm from any endangered or threatened species.
 `(c) DISTRICT COURT JURISDICTION- The several district courts of the United
 States (including the courts enumerated in section 460 of title 28, United
 States Code) shall have jurisdiction over any actions arising under this
 Act. For the purpose of this Act, American Samoa shall be included within
 the judicial district of the District Court of the United States for the
 District of Hawaii.
 `(d) REWARDS AND CERTAIN INCIDENTAL EXPENSES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary or the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay,
 from sums received as penalties, fines, or forfeitures of property for
 any violations of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act--
 `(A) a reward to any person who furnishes information that leads to an
 arrest, a criminal conviction, civil penalty assessment, or forfeiture of
 property for any violation of this Act or any regulation issued under this
 Act; and
 `(B) the reasonable and necessary costs incurred by any person in providing
 temporary care for any fish, wildlife, or plant pending the disposition
 of any civil or criminal proceeding alleging a violation of this Act with
 respect to that fish, wildlife, or plant.
 `(2) AMOUNT- The amount of the reward, if any, shall be designated by the
 Secretary or the Secretary of the Treasury, as appropriate.
 `(3) INELIGIBILITY OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES- Any officer or employee of the
 United States or any State or local government who furnishes information
 or renders service in the performance of the official duties of the officer
 or employee is ineligible for payment under this subsection.
 `(4) EXCESS FUNDS TO COOPERATIVE ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSERVATION FUND-
 Whenever the balance of sums received under this section and section 6(d)
 of the Act of November 16, 1981 (16 U.S.C. 3375(d)) as penalties or fines, or
 from forfeitures of property, exceed $500,000, the Secretary of the Treasury
 shall deposit an amount equal to the excess balance in the Cooperative
 Endangered Species Conservation Fund established under section 6(i).
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The provisions of this Act and any regulations or
 permits issued pursuant to this Act shall be enforced by the Secretary,
 the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary of the Department in which
 the Coast Guard is operating, or all such Secretaries. Each such Secretary
 may utilize by agreement, with or without reimbursement, the personnel,
 services, and facilities of any other Federal agency or any State agency
 for purposes of enforcing this Act.
 `(2) WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESS- The judges of the district courts of the
 United States and the United States magistrates may within their respective
 jurisdictions, on proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause,
 issue such warrants or other process as may be required for enforcement
 of this Act and any regulation issued under this Act.
 `(3) ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS-
 `(A) INSPECTIONS- Any person authorized by the Secretary, the Secretary
 of the Treasury, or the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating, to enforce this Act may detain for inspection and
 inspect any package, crate, or other container, including its contents,
 and all accompanying documents, on importation or exportation.
 `(B) ARRESTS- A person referred to in subparagraph (A) may make arrests,
 without a warrant, for any violation of this Act if the person has reasonable
 grounds to believe that the person to be arrested is committing the violation
 in the presence or view of the person and may execute and serve any arrest
 warrant, search warrant, or other warrant or civil or criminal process
 issued by any officer or court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement
 of this Act.
 `(C) SEARCH AND SEIZURES- A person so authorized may search and seize,
 with or without a warrant, as authorized by law. Any fish, wildlife,
 property, or item so seized shall be held by any person authorized by
 the Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary of the
 Department in which the Coast Guard is operating pending disposition of
 civil or criminal proceedings, or the institution of an action in rem for
 forfeiture of the fish, wildlife, property, or item pursuant to paragraph
 (4), except that the Secretary may, in lieu of holding the fish, wildlife,
 property, or item, permit the owner or consignee to post a bond or other
 surety satisfactory to the Secretary, but on forfeiture of any such property
 to the United States, or the abandonment or waiver of any claim to any such
 property, it shall be disposed of (other than by sale to the general public)
 by the Secretary in such a manner, consistent with the purposes of this Act,
 as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
 `(4) FORFEITURE-
 `(A) FISH OR WILDLIFE OR PLANTS- All fish or wildlife or plants taken,
 possessed, sold, purchased, offered for sale or purchase, transported,
 delivered, received, carried, shipped, exported, or imported contrary to this
 Act, any regulation made pursuant to this Act, or any permit or certificate
 issued under this Act shall be subject to forfeiture to the United States.
 `(B) EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORTATION- All guns, traps, nets, and other
 equipment, vessels, vehicles, aircraft, and other means of transportation
 used to aid the taking, possessing, selling, purchasing, offering for sale or
 purchase, transporting, delivering, receiving, carrying, shipping, exporting,
 or importing of any fish or wildlife or plants in violation of this Act,
 any regulation made pursuant to this Act, or any permit or certificate
 issued under this Act shall be subject to forfeiture to the United States
 on conviction of a criminal violation pursuant to section 12(b)(1).
 `(5) APPLICATION OF CUSTOMS LAWS- All provisions of law relating to the
 seizure, forfeiture, and condemnation of a vessel for violation of the
 customs laws, the disposition of the vessel or the proceeds from the sale
 of the vessel, and the remission or mitigation of the forfeiture, shall
 apply to the seizures and forfeitures incurred, or alleged to have been
 incurred, under this Act, insofar as the provisions of law are applicable
 and not inconsistent with this Act, except that all powers, rights, and
 duties conferred or imposed by the customs laws on any officer or employee
 of the Department of the Treasury shall, for the purposes of this Act, be
 exercised or performed by the Secretary or by the persons as the Secretary
 may designate.
 `(6) INJUNCTIONS- The Attorney General of the United States may seek to
 enjoin any person who is alleged to be in violation of any provision of
 this Act or regulation issued under authority thereof.
 `(f) REGULATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the
 Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, are
 authorized to--
 `(A) promulgate such regulations as may be appropriate to enforce this
 Act; and
 `(B) charge reasonable fees for expenses to the Government connected with
 permits or certificates authorized by this Act, including processing
 applications and reasonable inspections, and with the transfer, board,
 handling, or storage of fish or wildlife or plants and evidentiary items
 seized and forfeited under this Act.
 `(2) DISPOSITION OF FEES- All such fees collected pursuant to this subsection
 shall be deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the appropriation that is
 current and chargeable for the cost of furnishing the services. Appropriated
 funds may be expended pending reimbursement from parties in interest.
 `(g) CITIZEN SUITS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), any affected person
 may commence a civil suit on behalf of the person--
 `(A) to enjoin any person, including the United States and any other
 governmental instrumentality or agency (to the extent permitted by the 11th
 amendment to the Constitution), who is alleged to be in violation of any
 provision of this Act or regulation issued under the authority of this Act;
 `(B) to compel the Secretary to apply, pursuant to section 6(g)(2)(B)(ii),
 the prohibitions set forth in or authorized pursuant to section 4(d) or
 10(a)(1)(B) with respect to the taking of any resident endangered species
 or threatened species within any State; or
 `(C) against the Secretary where there is alleged a failure of the Secretary
 to perform any act or duty under section 4 that is not discretionary with
 the Secretary.
 `(2) ENFORCEMENT- The district courts shall have jurisdiction, without
 regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship of the parties,
 to enforce any such provision or regulation or to order the Secretary to
 perform the act or duty, as the case may be. In any civil suit commenced
 under paragraph (1)(B), the district court shall compel the Secretary to
 apply the prohibition sought if the court finds that the allegation that
 an emergency exists is supported by substantial evidence.
 `(3) LIMITATIONS-
 `(A) INJUNCTIONS- No action may be commenced under paragraph (1)(A)--
 `(i) prior to 60 days after written notice of the violation has been
 given to the Secretary, and to any alleged violator of any such provision
 or regulation;
 `(ii) if the Secretary has commenced action to impose a penalty pursuant
 to subsection (a); or
 `(iii) if the United States has commenced and is diligently prosecuting
 a criminal action in a court of the United States or a State to redress
 a violation of any such provision or regulation.
 `(B) TAKING OF SPECIES- No action may be commenced under paragraph (1)(B)--
 `(i) prior to 60 days after written notice has been given to the Secretary
 setting forth the reasons why an emergency is thought to exist with respect
 to an endangered species or a threatened species in the State concerned; or
 `(ii) if the Secretary has commenced and is diligently prosecuting action
 under section 6(g)(2)(B)(ii) to determine whether any such emergency exists.
 `(C) DETERMINATION OF ENDANGERED OR THREATENED SPECIES- No action may be
 commenced under subparagraph (1)(C) prior to 60 days after written notice
 has been given to the Secretary, except that the action may be brought
 immediately after the notification in the case of an action under this
 section respecting an emergency posing a significant risk to the well-being
 of any species of fish or wildlife or plants.
 `(4) SUITS-
 `(A) VENUE- Any suit under this subsection may be brought in the judicial
 district in which the violation occurs.
 `(B) INTERVENTION- In any such suit under this subsection in which the
 United States is not a party, the Attorney General, at the request of the
 Secretary, may intervene on behalf of the United States as a matter of right.
 `(5) COSTS- The court, in issuing any final order in any suit brought
 pursuant to paragraph (1), may award costs of litigation (including
 reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to any party, whenever the
 court determines the award is appropriate.
 `(6) OTHER RIGHTS- The injunctive relief provided by this subsection
 shall not restrict any right that any person (or class of persons) may
 have under any statute or common law to seek enforcement of any standard
 or limitation or to seek any other relief (including relief against the
 Secretary or a State agency).
 `(h) COORDINATION WITH OTHER LAWS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary shall
 provide for appropriate coordination of the administration of this Act
 with the administration of the animal quarantine laws and section 306 of
 the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1306).
 `(2) SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE- Nothing in this Act or any amendment made
 by this Act (as it existed before the amendment made by section 2 of the
 Progressive Endangered Species Act of 1992) shall be construed as superseding
 or limiting in any manner the functions of the Secretary of Agriculture
 under any other law relating to prohibited or restricted importations or
 possession of animals and other articles and no proceeding or determination
 under this Act shall preclude any proceeding or be considered determinative
 of any issue of fact or law in any proceeding under any Act administered
 by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 `(3) SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY- Nothing in this Act shall be construed as
 superseding or limiting in any manner the functions and responsibilities of
 the Secretary of the Treasury under the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1202
 et seq.), including, without limitation, section 527 of such Act (19
 U.S.C. 1527), relating to the importation of wildlife taken, killed,
 possessed, or exported to the United States in violation of the laws or
 regulations of a foreign country.
 `(4) DEFINITION OF ANIMAL QUARANTINE LAWS- As used in this subsection,
 the term `animal quarantine laws' means--
 `(A) sections 6 through 10 of the Act of August 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 416;
 21 U.S.C. 101 through 105);
 `(B) section 2 of the Act of February 2, 1903 (32 Stat. 792, chapter 349;
 21 U.S.C. 111);
 `(C) the Act of May 29, 1884 (23 Stat. 32, chapter 60; 21 U.S.C. 112 to
 114a-1, 115, 117-119, and 130) (commonly known as the `Animal Industry Act');
 `(D) the Act of February 28, 1947 (61 Stat. 7, chapter 8; 21 U.S.C. 114b,
 114c, and 114d-1);
 `(E) the Act of June 16, 1948 (62 Stat. 458, chapter 477; 21 U.S.C. 114e
 and 114f);
 `(F) Public Law 87-209 (21 U.S.C. 114g and 114h);
 `(G) the Act of May 31, 1920 (41 Stat. 699, chapter 217; 21 U.S.C. 116);
 `(H) the Act of February 2, 1903 (32 Stat. 791, chapter 349; 21 U.S.C. 112
 and 120-122) (commonly known as the `Cattle Contagious Diseases Act
 of 1903');
 `(I) the Act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. 1264, chapter 1496; 21
 U.S.C. 123-127) (commonly known as the `Cattle Contagious Diseases Act
 of 1905');
 `(J) the matter under the heading `Bureau of Animal Industry' of the Act
 of June 30, 1914 (38 Stat. 419, chapter 131; 21 U.S.C. 128);
 `(K) section 101 of Public Law 92-73 (21 U.S.C. 129);
 `(L) the matter under the heading `Miscellaneous' of the Act of May 26,
 1910 (36 Stat. 440, chapter 256; 21 U.S.C. 131);
 `(M) sections 1 through 6 and 11 through 13 of Public Law 87-518 (21
 U.S.C. 134-134h); or
 `(N) sections 12 through 14 of the Act of March 4, 1907 (21 U.S.C. 612
 through 614).
`SEC. 13. RELATIONSHIP TO MARINE MAMMAL PROTECTION ACT OF 1972.
 `Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no provision of this Act shall
 take precedence over any more restrictive conflicting provision of the
 Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1361 et seq.).
`SEC. 14. ANNUAL COST ANALYSIS BY THE FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE.
 `On or before January 15, 1990, and each January 15 thereafter, the
 Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Fish and Wildlife Service,
 shall submit to the Congress an annual report covering the preceding fiscal
 year that shall contain--
 `(1) an accounting on a species-by-species basis of all reasonably
 unidentifiable Federal expenditures by year and as a running total made
 primarily for the conservation or stabilization of endangered or threatened
 species by year and as a running total pursuant to this Act; and
 `(2) an accounting on a species-by-species basis, by year and as a running
 total, for all reasonably identifiable expenditures made primarily for the
 conservation or stabilization of endangered or threatened species pursuant
 to this Act by States receiving grants under section 6.
`SEC. 15. DEVELOPMENT OF SUBSPECIES DEFINITION.
 `The Secretary shall request the National Academy of Science to--
 `(1) determine an objective and measurable definition of subspecies; and
 `(2) not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Progressive
 Endangered Species Act of 1992, report its findings to the Committee on
 Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant
 Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives.
`SEC. 16. PROTECTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
 `(a) TAKING- No regulation promulgated pursuant to this Act by any
 agency shall become effective until the issuing agency is certified by
 the Attorney General to be in compliance with Executive Order 12630 or
 similar procedures established to assess the potential for the taking of
 private property in the course of Federal regulatory activity, with the
 goal of minimizing the taking if possible.
 `(b) REIMBURSEMENT OF APPROPRIATED FUND-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Executive department or agency that is authorized by
 this Act to make the final decision or to undertake an action that--
 `(A) is litigated in a claim arising (in whole or in part) under the
 Taking Clause of the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution and under the
 jurisdiction afforded by section 1491, 1505, or 1346(a)(2) of title 28,
 United States Code; and
 `(B) results in a judgment paid under section 2517 of such title 28,
shall reimburse the appropriated fund established under section 1304 of
title 31, United States Code, from funds available before the close of the
subsequent fiscal year.
 `(2) AMOUNT- The reimbursement shall be in an amount equal to that of the
 payment made under section 2517 of title 28, United States Code.
`SEC. 17. INCENTIVES FOR CONSERVATION.
 `(a) CREDITING TAXES ASSESSED AGAINST PRIVATE PROPERTY- One hundred and ten
 percent of the State, county, and local taxes assessed in a calendar year
 against private property that has been designated as critical habitat,
 or is occupied by an introduced population and is managed primarily
 for conservation or stabilization of an endangered or threatened species
 pursuant to section 11(k)(2), may be credited against the Federal individual
 or corporate income tax of the owners of the property for the taxable year
 that begins with or in the calendar year.
 `(b) DEDUCTIBILITY OF CERTAIN EXPENSES- Expenses incurred in any taxable year
 with respect to the manipulation of habitat, preservation of a particular
 successional stage of habitat, or other actions taken to benefit the
 candidate species and threatened or endangered species pursuant to section
 11(k)(2) shall be allowed as a deduction against the adjusted gross income
 for the taxable year of the person incurring the expenses.
`SEC. 18. UNITED STATES BIODIVERSITY FOUNDATION.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established the United States Biodiversity
 Foundation (referred to in this section as the `Foundation'). The Foundation
 shall be a charitable and nonprofit corporation and shall not be an agency
 or establishment of the United States.
 `(b) PURPOSES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The purposes of the Foundation are to encourage through
 financial, administrative, or scientific assistance or to undertake
 or conduct activities that will further the conservation, management,
 propagation, or sustainable use of rare, threatened, or endangered fish,
 wildlife, and plant resources for the benefit of future generations of
 Americans.
 `(2) GRANTS AND CONTRACTS- The Board of Directors of the Foundation shall
 award grants and contracts based on review of projects recommended by the
 National Biodiversity Science Advisory Panel established under subsection
 (h).
 `(c) BOARD OF DIRECTORS- The Foundation shall have a Board of Directors
 (referred to in this section as the `Board') consisting of nine Directors,
 each of whom shall be a citizen of the United States, of which--
 `(1) two Directors shall be Members of Congress and not be of the same party;
 `(2) two Directors shall be representatives of State fish and game
 departments; and
 `(3) three Directors shall be individuals who have successfully propagated
 plants or animals and have done so without the use of public funds.
 `(d) APPOINTMENT AND TERMS-
 `(1) APPOINTMENT- Not later than December 13, 1992--
 `(A) the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives shall jointly appoint the Directors referred to in paragraph
 (1) of subsection (c); and
 `(B) the Secretary of the Interior shall appoint the Directors referred
 to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (c).
 `(2) TERMS- The Directors shall be appointed for terms of 6 years, except
 that the appointing authorities, in making the initial appointments to the
 Board, shall appoint four Directors to a term of 2 years, four Directors
 to a term of 4 years, and five Directors to a term of 6 years.
 `(3) VACANCIES- A vacancy on the Board shall be filled within 60 days of
 the vacancy in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
 `(4) CONSECUTIVE TERMS- No individual may serve more than two consecutive
 terms as a Director.
 `(5) BACKGROUND- Whenever possible, the appointing authorities shall
 appoint individuals who have successfully propagated plants and animals
 and have done so without the use of public funds.
 `(e) CHAIRPERSON- The Chairperson shall be elected by the Board from its
 members for a 2-year term.
 `(f) QUORUM- A majority of the current membership of the Board shall
 constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
 `(g) MEETINGS- The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson at least
 once a year. If a Director misses three consecutive regularly scheduled
 meetings, that individual may be removed from the Board and that vacancy
 filled in accordance with subsection (d).
 `(h) NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY SCIENCE ADVISORY PANEL- The chairperson shall
 appoint for 3-year terms a National Biodiversity Science Advisory Panel
 (referred to in this section as the `Advisory Panel') that shall consist
 of eleven individuals--
 `(1) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in in situ management
 of wildlife;
 `(2) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in ex situ management
 of wildlife;
 `(3) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in in situ management
 of fish;
 `(4) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in aquaculture;
 `(5) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in horticulture;
 `(6) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in game farm
 management;
 `(7) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in agriculture;
 `(8) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in animal husbandry;
 and
 `(9) one of whom must be knowledgeable or experienced in forest management,
and a majority of whom shall not be employed by institutions receiving
public funds.
 `(i) REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES- Members of the Board and Advisory Panel
 shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary
 traveling and subsistence expenses incurred by the members in the performance
 of the duties of the Foundation.
 `(j) GENERAL POWERS-
 `(1) ORGANIZATION- The Board may complete the organization of the
 Foundation by--
 `(A) appointing officers and employees;
 `(B) adopting a constitution and bylaws consistent with the purposes of
 the Foundation and this Act; and
 `(C) undertaking of such other acts as may be necessary to carry out
 this Act.
 `(2) FUNDS- An officer or employee of the Foundation may not be appointed
 until the Foundation has sufficient funds to pay the officer or employee
 for the services of the officer or employer.
 `(3) COMPETITIVE SERVICE- An officer or employee of the Foundation shall be
 appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without
 regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53
 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates,
 except that no individual so appointed may receive pay in excess of the
 annual rate of basic pay in effect for level V of the Executive Schedule
 under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
 `(4) SECRETARY OF THE BOARD- The first officer or employee appointed
 by the Board shall be the Secretary of the Board who (i) shall serve,
 at the direction of the Board, as its chief operating officer, and (ii)
 shall be knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to fish and
 wildlife conservation.
 `(k) ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT AND SERVICES- The Secretary may provide
 personnel, facilities, and other administrative services to the Foundation,
 including reimbursement of expenses under subsection (h), not to exceed
 then current Federal Government per diem rates, for a period of up to 5
 years from the date of the establishment of the Foundation, and may accept
 reimbursement for the services, to be deposited in the Treasury to the
 credit of the appropriations then current and chargeable for the cost of
 providing the services.
 `(l) AUDITS, REPORT REQUIREMENTS, AND PETITION OF ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR
 EQUITABLE RELIEF-
 `(1) AUDITS- For purposes of the Act entitled `An Act for audit of accounts
 of private corporations established under Federal Law', approved August
 30, 1964 (36 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.), the Foundation shall be treated as a
 private corporation established under Federal law.
 `(2) REPORT- The Foundation shall, as soon as practicable after the end
 of each fiscal year, transmit to Congress a report of its activities
 during the year, including a full and complete statement of its receipts,
 expenditures, and investments. If the Foundation--
 `(A) engages in, or threatens to engage in, any act, practice, or policy
 that is inconsistent with the purposes set forth in subsection (b); or
 `(B) refuses, fails, or neglects to discharge its obligations under this
 Act, or threatens to do so,
the Attorney General of the United States may petition in the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia for such equitable relief as
may be necessary or appropriate.
 `(m) RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Foundation--
 `(A) shall have perpetual succession;
 `(B) may conduct business throughout the several States, territories,
 and possessions of the United States; and
 `(C) shall at all times maintain a designated agent authorized to accept
 service of process for the Foundation.
 `(2) SERVICE- The serving of notice to, or service of process on, the agent
 required under paragraph (1)(C), or mailed to the business address of the
 agent, shall be considered as service on or notice to the Foundation.
 `(3) SEAL- The Foundation shall have an official seal selected by the
 Board which shall be judicially noticed.
 `(4) POWERS- The Foundation shall have, in addition to the powers otherwise
 given it under this Act, the usual powers of a corporation acting as a
 trustee including the power--
 `(A) to accept, receive, solicit, hold, administer, and use any gift,
 devise, or bequest, either absolutely or in trust, of real or personal
 property or any income therefrom or other interest therein;
 `(B) to acquire by purchase or exchange any real or personal property or
 interest in property;
 `(C) unless otherwise required by the instrument of transfer, to sell,
 donate, lease, invest, reinvest, retain, or otherwise dispose of any
 property or income from property;
 `(D) to borrow money and issue bonds, debentures, or other debt instruments;
 `(E) to sue and be sued, and complain and defend itself in any court of
 competent jurisdiction, except that the Directors of the Board shall not
 be personally liable, except for gross negligence;
 `(F) to enter into contracts or other arrangements with public agencies
 and private organizations and persons and to make such payments as may be
 necessary to carry out its function; and
 `(G) to do any and all acts necessary and proper to carry out the purposes
 of the Foundation.
 `(5) INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY- For purposes of this section, interests in
 real property shall be treated as including, among other things, easements
 or other rights for preservation, conservation, protection, or enhancement
 by and for the public of natural, scenic, historic, scientific, educational,
 inspirational, or recreational resources.
 `(6) GIFTS- A gift, devise, or bequest may be accepted by the Foundation
 even though it is encumbered, restricted, or subject to beneficial interests
 of private persons if any current or future interest in the gift is for
 the benefit of the Foundation.
 `(n) COMPLIANCE- Actions taken pursuant to and in accordance with a
 conservation grant or contract or other assistance from the Foundation
 shall be considered to be in compliance with this Act and shall not
 require compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.).
`SEC. 19. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (b), there are authorized to be
 appropriated--
 `(1) not to exceed $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $62,500,000 for
 fiscal year 1994, and $75,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996
 to enable the Department of the Interior to carry out the functions and
 responsibilities of the Department under this Act;
 `(2) not to exceed $8,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $9,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1994, and $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996 to enable
 the Department of Commerce to carry out the functions and responsibilities
 of the Department under this Act;
 `(3) not to exceed $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $4,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1994, and $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996 to enable
 the Department of Agriculture to carry out the functions and responsibilities
 of the Department with respect to the enforcement of this Act and the
 Convention that pertain to the importation or exportation of plants; and
 `(4) not to exceed $2,500,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $2,000,000 for each
 of fiscal years 1994 through 2002 to enable the Department of the Interior
 to establish and carry out the United States Biodiversity Foundation in
 accordance with section 18.
 `(b) CONVENTION IMPLEMENTATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to
 the Department of the Interior for purposes of carrying out section 9(e)
 not to exceed $525,000 for fiscal year 1993, and $550,000 for each of
 fiscal years 1994, 1995 and 1996.'.
SEC. 3. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) Sections 104(c)(4)(A)(ii) and 115(b)(2) of the Marine Mammal Protection
 Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1374(c)(4)(A)(ii) and 1383b(b)(2)) are each amended
 by striking `section 4(f)' and inserting `section 4(e)'.
 (b) Section 1(c)(2) of Public Law 99-625 (16 U.S.C. 1536 note) is amended
 by striking `Section 9' and inserting `Section 10'.
 (c) Section 13(a) of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980 (16
 U.S.C. 2912(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `section 8A(e)' and inserting `section 9(e)'; and
 (2) by striking `(16 U.S.C. 1531-1543)' each place it appears and inserting
 `(16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.)'.
 (d) Section 2204 of the African Elephant Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 4224)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking `section 11(a) of the Endangered
 Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1540(a))' and inserting `section 12(a)
 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973'; and
 (2) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking `section 11(e) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16
 U.S.C. 1540(e))' and inserting `section 12(e) of the Endangered Species
 Act of 1973'; and
 (B) by striking `section 11 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16
 U.S.C. 1540(c))' and inserting `section 12 of the Endangered Species Act
 of 1973'.