HR 5609 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5609
To amend the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980 to establish fault-based liability, numerical cleanup standards,
and deadlines for remedial action, and to amend the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 to apply the Superfund minimum tax to additional corporations to provide
additional revenue to carry out the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 9, 1992
Mr. OWENS of Utah introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly
to the Committees on Energy and Commerce, Public Works and Transportation,
and Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980 to establish fault-based liability, numerical cleanup standards,
and deadlines for remedial action, and to amend the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 to apply the Superfund minimum tax to additional corporations to provide
additional revenue to carry out the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Superfund Equitable Liability and Improved
 Cleanup Act'.
SEC. 2. LIABILITY UNDER COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE, COMPENSATION,
AND LIABILITY ACT OF 1980.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO LIABILITY PROVISION- Section 107(a) of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42
 U.S.C. 9607(a)) is amended by striking out `Notwithstanding any other
 provision' and all that follows through `shall be liable for--' and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(1) Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and subject only
 to the defenses set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the following
 persons shall be liable for the amounts referred to in paragraph (2):
 `(A) Any owner or operator of a site or facility, if any such person knew
 or should have known at the time of disposal of any hazardous substance
 at the site or facility that the disposal was likely to result in or cause
 the release of a hazardous substance into the environment in a manner that
 would cause a substantial endangerment to public health or welfare or to
 the environment.
 `(B) Any person, including an owner or operator of a site or facility and
 a subsidiary or parent corporation related to the person, if--
 `(i) the person violated any applicable environmental statute, rule,
 plan approval, or special order in effect at the time any disposal of
 a hazardous substance at the site or facility occurred and the violation
 caused or contributed to any condition presenting a substantial endangerment
 to public health or welfare or the environment at the site or facility; or
 `(ii) the person's action related to any disposal of a hazardous substance
 at the site or facility caused or contributed to any condition presenting
 a substantial endangerment to public health or welfare or the environment
 at the site or facility and that person knew or should have known at the
 time the disposal occurred that the disposal was likely to result in or
 cause the release of a hazardous substance into the environment in a manner
 that would cause such substantial endangerment to public health or welfare
 or the environment or would result in liability under common law in effect
 at the time the disposal occurred, based on standards of conduct for that
 person at the time the disposal occurred.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 107(a) of such Act is
 further amended--
 (1) by inserting before subparagraphs (A) through (D) the following:
 `(2) The persons listed in paragraph (1) shall be liable for--'; and
 (2) by designating the matter beginning with `The amounts recoverable'
 and all that follows through the end of subsection (a) as paragraph (3),
 and indenting the margin of such paragraph so as to align it with the
 preceding paragraphs (1) and (2) of that subsection.
SEC. 3. NUMERICAL CLEANUP STANDARDS UNDER COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE,
COMPENSATION, AND LIABILITY ACT OF 1980.
 (a) NUMERICAL CLEANUP STANDARDS- Subsection (d) of section 121 of the
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980
 (42 U.S.C. 9621(d)) is amended in paragraph (1) by striking out the second
 sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `The Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations not later than 3 years after the date of the
 enactment of the Superfund Equitable Liability and Improved Cleanup Act
 establishing numerical cleanup standards for each hazardous substance,
 pollutant, and contaminant. Such standards shall apply to remedial actions
 at each site or facility on the National Priorities List unless--
 `(A) the Administrator determines that the standards are not sufficiently
 protective of human health or the environment at a particular site or
 facility; or
 `(B) the Administrator grants a waiver of the standards at a particular
 site or facility in response to a petition for such a waiver from a party
 responsible for cleanup at the site or facility.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Such subsection is further amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (2)(A) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `With respect to' and inserting in lieu thereof `In
 establishing numerical cleanup standards for';
 (B) by striking out `if--' and inserting in lieu thereof `the Administrator
 may consider--';
 (C) by inserting before `is legally applicable' the following: `provided
 that any such standard, requirement, criteria, or limitation';
 (D) by striking out `appropriate under the circumstances' and all that
 follows through `criteria, or limitation.' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `appropriate.';
 (E) by striking out `Such remedial action shall require' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `Such numerical cleanup standards shall require'; and
 (F) in the last sentence, by striking out `under the circumstances of the
 release or threatened release.' and inserting in lieu thereof a period.
 (2) Paragraph (2) is amended by striking out subparagraph (B) and
 redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B).
 (3) Paragraph (4) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `numerical cleanup standards'
 means the parts per million concentrations of hazardous substances,
 pollutants, or contaminants in soil, surface water, and ground water which
 must be achieved following the completion of remedial action at any site
 or facility on the National Priorities List in order to assure adequate
 protection of human health and the environment, as determined by the
 Administrator under regulations promulgated under paragraph (1).'.
SEC. 4. DEADLINES FOR REMEDIAL ACTION UNDER COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL
RESPONSE, COMPENSATION, AND LIABILITY ACT OF 1980.
 Section 104(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604(a)) is amended by adding at the
 end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) DEADLINES- The Administrator shall promulgate regulations not later
 than 2 years after the date of the enactment of the Superfund Equitable
 Liability and Improved Cleanup Act establishing deadlines for any person
 who is liable under section 107(a) with respect to a site or facility for
 the completion of--
 `(A) remedial investigation of the site or facility;
 `(B) design of a remedial action for the site or facility; and
 `(C) the construction or other implementation of the remedial action at
 the site or facility.
A civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for each day of violation may be
assessed against a person by the Administrator in the case of a violation
of any deadline applicable to the person pursuant to this paragraph.'.
SEC. 5. RESTRICTION ON SELECTION OF REMEDIES.
 Section 121(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(3) The President may not select the capping of a site or facility as a
 remedial action unless the President determines that compliance with the
 numerical cleanup standards is not technologically feasible.'.
SEC. 6. MODIFICATION TO ENVIRONMENTAL MINIMUM TAX.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) of section 59A(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to environmental tax) is amended by striking `$2,000,000'
 and inserting `$1,000,000'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.