HR 4910 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4910
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act relating to oil and hazardous
substance liability.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 23, 1990
Mr. WYDEN (for himself, Mr. AUCOIN, and Mr. DEFAZIO) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act relating to oil and hazardous
substance liability.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Oil Spill Disaster Prevention Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
 Section 311(a)(14) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321(a)(14)) is amended by inserting `and any other substance
 designated by the Administrator under section 102 of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980' after
 `subsection (b)(2) of this section'.
SEC. 3. NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN ENFORCEMENT.
 Section 311(j) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by inserting `CIVIL PENALTY- ' after `(2)';
 (B) by inserting `(A) IN GENERAL- ' before `Any owner';
 (C) by striking `$5,000 for each such violation' and inserting `$25,000
 per day per violation';
 (D) by inserting after the 4th sentence the following new sentence: `Such
 hearing shall not be subject to section 554 or 556 of title 5, United
 States Code, but must provide a reasonable opportunity for the owner,
 operator, or other person charged to be heard and to present evidence.';
 (E) by striking `the gravity of the violation, and the demonstrated good
 faith of the owner, operator, or other person charged in attempting to
 achieve rapid compliance after notification of a violation' and inserting
 `the risks presented by the violation, the economic benefits accruing to
 the owner, operator, or other person charged as a result of the violation,
 and any extraordinary efforts undertaken by the owner, operator, or other
 person charged in attempting to achieve compliance before the Administrator
 commenced an action under this paragraph';
 (F) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 `(B) COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- If any person fails to pay a
 civil penalty assessed by the Administrator under subparagraph (A) after
 the order making the assessment has become final, the Administrator shall
 request the Attorney General to bring a civil action in an appropriate
 district court to recover the amount assessed (plus interest at currently
 prevailing rates from the date of the final order). In such an action, the
 validity, amount, and appropriateness of such penalty shall not be subject
 to review. Any person who fails to pay on a timely basis the amount of an
 assessment of a civil penalty under subparagraph (A) shall be required to
 pay, in addition to such amount and interest, attorneys fees and costs of
 collection proceedings and a quarterly nonpayment penalty for each quarter
 during which such failure to pay persists. Such nonpayment penalty shall be
 in an amount equal to 20 percent of the aggregate amount of such person's
 penalties and nonpayment penalties which are unpaid as of the beginning
 of such quarter.
 `(C) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any person against whom a civil penalty is assessed
 under subparagraph (A) may obtain review of such assessment in the United
 States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia or for any other
 circuit in which such person resides or transacts business by filing a
 notice of appeal in such court within the 30-day period beginning on the
 date the civil penalty order is issued and by simultaneously sending a copy
 of such notice by certified mail to the Administrator and the Attorney
 General. The Administrator shall promptly file in such court a certified
 copy of the record upon which the order was issued. Such court shall not
 set aside or remand such order unless there is not substantial evidence
 in the record, taken as a whole, to support the finding of a violation
 or unless the Administrator's assessment of the penalty constitutes an
 abuse of discretion and shall not impose additional civil penalties for
 the same violation unless the Administrator's assessment of the penalty
 constitutes an abuse of discretion.'; and
 (G) by indenting subparagraph (A), as designated by subparagraph (B) of
 this paragraph, and aligning such subparagraph (A) with subparagraphs (B)
 and (C), as added by subparagraph (F) of this paragraph; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- Whenever, on the basis of any information available
 to him, the Administrator finds that any person described in paragraph
 (2) is violating or has violated any regulation or other requirement
 issued or established to carry out paragraph (1), the Administrator shall
 issue an order requiring such person to comply with such regulation or
 other requirement. The Administrator may require such person to conduct an
 environmental audit of the affected facility and any other similarly situated
 facility under the control or ownership of such person and may require such
 person to provide any information to the Administrator which is reasonably
 related to evaluating the potential for future violations or remediating
 any existing violation. Any order issued under this subsection shall be by
 personal service, shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the
 violation, and shall specify a time for compliance not to exceed 60 days. In
 any case in which an order under this subsection is issued to a corporation,
 a copy of such order shall be served on any appropriate corporate officer.
 `(4) JUDICIAL REMEDIES-
 `(A) DE NOVO ENFORCEMENT- The Administrator is authorized to commence a
 civil action for appropriate relief, including a permanent or temporary
 injunction and assessment of a civil penalty, for any violation for which
 the Administrator is authorized to issue a compliance order under paragraph
 (3). Any action under this subparagraph may be brought in the district court
 of the United States for the district in which the defendant is located
 or resides or is doing business. Such court shall have jurisdiction
 to restrain such violation and to require compliance and such other
 relief as may be appropriate, including but not limited to requiring the
 defendant to conduct an environmental audit of the affected facility or any
 other similarly situated facility under the control or ownership of the
 defendant. Upon a finding of liability, such court shall assess a civil
 penalty of not more than $25,000 per day per violation. In determining
 the amount of the penalty that shall be assessed under this subparagraph,
 the court shall consider the risks presented by the violation, the economic
 benefits accrued as a result of the violation, and any extraordinary efforts
 undertaken by the defendant to achieve compliance before the Administrator
 commenced an action under this subparagraph.
 `(B) ENFORCEMENT OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS- The Administrator is authorized
 to commence a civil action for violation of any compliance order issued
 under paragraph (3). Any action under this subparagraph may be brought
 in the district court of the United States for the district in which the
 defendant is located or resides or is doing business, and such court shall
 have jurisdiction to assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per day.
 `(5) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who--
 `(A) negligently violates any regulation or other requirement issued
 or established to carry out paragraph (1), shall be subject to the same
 punishment set forth for a negligent violation under section 309(c)(1)
 of this Act;
 `(B) knowingly violates any regulation or other requirement issued or
 established to carry out paragraph (1), shall be subject to the same
 punishment set forth for a knowing violation under section 309(c)(2)
 of this Act;
 `(C) knowingly violates any regulation or other requirement issued or
 established to carry out paragraph (1) and knows at the time that he thereby
 places another person in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury,
 shall be subject to the same defenses, definitions, and punishment set forth
 for a knowing endangerment violation under section 309(c)(3) of this Act; or
 `(D) knowingly makes any false material statement, representation, or
 certification in any document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
 to any regulation or other requirement issued or established to carry out
 paragraph (1), shall be subject to the same punishment set forth for a
 false statement under section 309(c)(4) of this Act.'.