HR 5372 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5372
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 25, 1990
Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN (for himself and Mr. SIKORSKI) introduced the following
bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to reduce the levels of lead in
the environment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION. 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Lead Pollution Prevention Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT- The Toxic Substances
 Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) is amended by adding after title III
 the following new title:
`TITLE IV--LEAD POLLUTION PREVENTION
`SEC. 401. FINDINGS AND POLICY.
 `(a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) lead poisoning is the most prevalent disease of environmental
 origin among our Nation's children, with children under seven years of
 age at special risk because of their susceptibility to lead's potency as
 a neurologic toxin;
 `(2) at exposure levels that are commonly experienced, the effects of
 lead on children include permanent, significant neurologic impairment and
 additional health effects occur in adults exposed to similar exposure levels;
 `(3) because of the practical difficulties of removing lead already
 dispersed into the environment, children and adults will continue to be
 exposed to such lead for years;
 `(4) as a result of decades of highly dispersive uses of lead in a variety
 of products, contamination of the environment with unacceptable levels of
 lead is widespread;
 `(5) the continued manufacture, import, processing, use, and disposal of
 lead-containing products causes further releases of lead to the environment
 and such releases contribute to further environmental contamination and
 resultant exposure to lead; and
 `(6) methods to reduce existing lead exposure levels must be improved,
 especially through the development of more effective and affordable
 methods for abating lead-based paint, which is a major cause of childhood
 lead poisoning.
 `(b) POLICY- It is the policy of the United States that further releases of
 lead to the environment should be minimized and means should be developed
 and implemented to reduce exposures to existing sources of environmentally
 dispersed lead.
`SEC. 402. RESTRICTIONS ON CONTINUING USES OF CERTAIN LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RESTRICTIONS- Except as provided under subsections (b), (c),
 and (d), beginning one year after the date of the enactment of this title,
 no person may manufacture, process, or distribute in commerce any of the
 following product categories:
 `(1) Paint containing more than 0.06 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(2) Solder containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(3) Plastic additives, printing inks, or pigments containing more than
 0.06 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(4) Plumbing fittings containing more than 2 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(5) Pesticides (as defined in section 2(u) of the Federal Insecticide,
 Rodenticide, and Fungicide Act (7 U.S.C. 136(u)) containing more than 0.1
 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(6) Construction materials, including roofing, siding, and soundproofing
 materials, containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(7) Fertilizers containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(8) Glazes, enamels, and frits containing more than 0.06 percent lead by
 dry weight.
 `(9) Toy and recreational game pieces containing more than 0.1 percent
 lead by dry weight.
 `(10) Curtain weights containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(11) Fishing weights containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(12) Stained-glass came containing more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight.
 `(13) Foils for wine bottles containing more than 0.1 percent lead by
 dry weight.
 `(b) MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS- (1) The Administrator may, after public
 notice and opportunity for comment, promulgate regulations to modify,
 pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (3), the percentage of the allowable lead
 content for a product category described in subsection (a).
 `(2) The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph (1), establish by
 regulation a percentage of the allowable lead content that is less than the
 percentage specified under subsection (a) for any product category described
 in that subsection if the Administrator determines that a reduction in the
 percentage of allowable lead content is necessary to protect human health
 or the environment.
 `(3)(A) The Administrator may, pursuant to paragraph (1), establish by
 regulation a percentage by dry weight of the allowable lead content for
 a product category described in subsection (a) that is greater than the
 percentage specified for the product category under such subsection if
 the Administrator determines that--
 `(i) increasing the percentage of the allowable lead content for the
 product category will protect human health and the environment; and
 `(ii) no comparable substitute is available at the time of the promulgation
 of such regulation.
 `(B) If the Administrator establishes by regulation an increased percentage
 of the allowable lead content for a product category pursuant to this
 paragraph, the regulation establishing such percentage shall terminate 3
 years after the date such regulation becomes final.
 `(c) STATEMENTS BY ADMINISTRATOR RELATING TO MODIFICATIONS OF RESTRICTIONS-
 In promulgating any regulation under subsection (b) or (d) with respect
 to the allowable lead content under a product category, the Administrator
 shall, prior to the promulgation of a final regulation, consider and publish
 a statement with respect to the effects of the proposed allowable lead
 content level for the product category on human health and the environment
 and the magnitude of the exposure of human beings and the environment to
 such lead content.
 `(d) REVIEW OF INVENTORIED PRODUCTS- (1) Not later than 18 months after
 the date of the enactment of this title, the Administrator shall review the
 products identified in the compilation of inventory information described
 in section 403(b) and identify the percentages of lead used in such products.
 `(2) Upon completion of the review under paragraph (1), if the Administrator
 determines that a reduction in the percentage of the allowable lead
 content for a product category is necessary to protect human health or the
 environment, or that a comparable substitute product for a product category
 is available at the time of completion of the review, the Administrator
 shall promulgate a regulation to reduce the percentage of the allowable
 lead content for such category or to prohibit any lead content in the
 product category.
 `(e) CANS FOR FOOD- No person may--
 `(1) beginning 6 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 manufacture or import; or
 `(2) beginning 18 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 distribute in commerce;
any can containing food for human consumption, or intended for such use,
containing solder that has a lead content greater than 0.1 percent by
dry weight.
 `(f) SALE OF GASOLINE- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, beginning
 6 months after the date of the enactment of this title, no person may
 offer for sale gasoline that contains any lead additives for a price that
 is less than the lowest price at which unleaded gasoline is offered for
 sale at the same establishment.
`SEC. 403. INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS; EMISSIONS REPORTING
REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) INVENTORY OF LEAD-CONTAINING PRODUCTS- (1) Not later than 12 months
 after the date of the enactment of this title, each person who manufactures,
 processes, or imports any product that contains more than 0.1 percent lead
 by dry weight shall notify the Administrator in writing of such manufacture,
 processing, or importing specifying the following inventory information:
 `(A) The type of product manufactured, processed, or imported.
 `(B) The quantity of such product manufactured, processed, or imported.
 `(C) The amount of lead used in the manufacturing or processing of the
 product or the amount of lead contained in the imported product.
 `(D) Other information as the Administrator may, by regulation, require.
 `(2) Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the
 requirements under paragraph (1) and other related information that the
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(b) COMPILATION OF INVENTORY INFORMATION- Not than later 15 months after
 the date of enactment of this title, the Administrator shall publish
 a compilation of the inventory information reported under subsection
 (a)(1). In compiling such information the Administrator may, to the
 extent consistent with the purpose of this title, in lieu of listing a
 product individually, list a category of products in which such product is
 included. The Administrator shall list such inventory information in such
 a manner as to ensure the protection of classified information and trade
 secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information
 described in paragraphs (1) and (4) of section 552(b) of title 5, United
 States Code.
 `(c) LEAD EMISSION REPORTS FROM CERTAIN FACILITIES- (1) Beginning 12 months
 after the date of the enactment of this title, and annually thereafter,
 the owner or operator of any--
 `(A) primary lead smelter or primary lead refiner, as defined by the
 Administrator;
 `(B) secondary lead smelter, as defined in section 406(c)(2), or secondary
 lead refiner; and
 `(C) battery manufacturing operation, as defined by the Administrator;
shall report to the Administrator concerning emissions of lead to air, water,
and land from each such facility.
 `(2) The reports described in paragraph (1) shall--
 `(A) be in such form as the Administrator shall require by regulation; and
 `(B) be based on monitoring of point-source emissions and estimates of
 fugitive emissions.
 `(3) Each smelter, refinery, or facility described in paragraph (1) shall,
 not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 be equipped with emissions monitoring devices that meet requirements that
 the Administrator shall require by regulation.
 `(4) Not later than 6 months after receiving the reports required under
 paragraph (1), the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register
 the emissions data contained in such reports.
 `(5) Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the
 requirements of this subsection and other related information that the
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this section, the terms `manufacture'
 and `process' mean manufacture or process for commercial purposes, as
 defined in section 8(f).
`SEC. 404 PRODUCT LABELING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment
 of this title, each person who manufactures or imports any product that
 contains more than 0.1 percent lead by dry weight shall indicate on the
 product label the percentage of lead content in the product.
 `(2) Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the
 requirements under paragraph (1) and other related information that the
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(b) LABELING REGULATIONS- Not later than 9 months after the date of the
 enactment of this title, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations with
 respect to the wording, type size, and placement of the labels described
 in subsection (a).
 `(c) INTERIM REQUIREMENTS- If the promulgation of a final regulation with
 respect to a product described in subsection (a) is delayed beyond the date
 specified in subsection (b), then until such time as a final regulation is
 promulgated, a label shall be affixed to the product and shall contain, in
 letters the same size as the largest letter otherwise affixed to the label
 or packaging of the product, the following words: `Warning; Contains Lead'.
`SEC. 405. MANUFACTURING OR PROCESSING NOTICES FOR NEW LEAD-CONTAINING
PRODUCTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) Beginning 30 days after the date of the publication
 of the compilation of inventory information described in section 403(b),
 no person may manufacture or process a product that has a lead content of
 greater than 0.1 percent unless such product is described in the compilation
 of inventory information or unless--
 `(A) such person submits to the Administrator, not later than 120 days
 before commencing such manufacture or processing, a notice in the same
 manner as described in the requirements for a notice under section 5(d);
 `(B) such person complies with any applicable requirements for the submission
 of test data described in section 5(b); and
 `(C) the Administrator has determined that--
 `(i) the manufacture, processing, use, and disposal of the product is not
 likely to contribute to the dispersion of lead into the environment; and
 `(ii) no comparable product is available in commerce.
 `(2) Not later than 15 days after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register notice of the
 requirements of this subsection and other related information that the
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 `(b) EFFECT OF FAILURE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR TO ISSUE A DETERMINATION- The
 failure of the Administrator to issue a determination under subsection
 (a)(1)(C) within 60 days after receiving of the notice described in
 subsection (a)(1)(A) of such subsection shall be deemed a denial of such
 a determination.
`SEC. 406. RECYCLING OF LEAD-ACID BATTERIES.
 `(a) BATTERY RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) PROHIBITION- No person may discard or otherwise dispose of a used
 lead-acid battery in a manner other than by recycling in accordance with
 this section.
 `(2) GENERAL REQUIREMENT- A person other than a person described in
 paragraph (3), (4), or (5) shall discard or otherwise dispose of used
 lead-acid batteries only by delivery to one of the following:
 `(A) A person who sells lead-acid batteries at retail or wholesale.
 `(B) A secondary lead smelter, the owner or operator of which certifies to
 such person that the facility is operating in compliance with all applicable
 State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid battery reclamation.
 `(C) A collection or recycling facility, the owner or operator of which
 certifies to such person that the facility is operating in compliance
 with all applicable State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid
 battery reclamation.
 `(3) RETAILERS- A person who sells lead-acid batteries at retail shall
 discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries only by delivery
 to one of the following:
 `(A) A person who sells lead-acid batteries at wholesale.
 `(B) A secondary lead smelter, the owner or operator of which certifies to
 such person that the facility is operating in compliance with all applicable
 State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid battery reclamation.
 `(C) A battery manufacturer.
 `(D) A collection or recycling facility, the owner or operator of which
 certifies to such person that the facility is operating in compliance
 with all applicable State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid
 battery reclamation.
 `(4) WHOLESALERS- A person who sells lead-acid batteries at wholesale shall
 discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries only by delivery
 to one of the following:
 `(A) A secondary lead smelter, the owner or operator of which certifies to
 such person that the facility is operating in compliance with all applicable
 State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid battery reclamation.
 `(B) A battery manufacturer.
 `(C) A collection or recycling facility, the owner or operator of which
 certifies to such person that the facility is operating in compliance
 with all applicable State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid
 battery reclamation.
 `(5) MANUFACTURERS- A person who manufactures lead-acid batteries shall
 discard or otherwise dispose of used lead-acid batteries only by delivery
 to one of the following:
 `(A) A secondary lead smelter, the owner or operator of which certifies to
 such person that the facility is operating in compliance with all applicable
 State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid battery reclamation.
 `(B) A collection or recycling facility, the owner or operator of which
 certifies to such person that the facility is operating in compliance
 with all applicable State and Federal laws relating to spent lead-acid
 battery reclamation.
 `(b) BATTERY COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) RETAILERS- (A) A person who sells, or offers for sale, lead-acid
 batteries at retail shall accept from customers, if offered by customers,
 used lead-acid batteries of the same type as the batteries sold and in
 a quantity approximately equal to the number of batteries sold. The used
 lead-acid batteries shall be accepted at the place where lead-acid batteries
 are offered for sale.
 `(B)(i) A retailer described in subparagraph (a) shall post a written
 notice for customers that contains information about this section, including
 statements about the illegality of improperly discarding used motor vehicle
 batteries and other types of lead-acid batteries, the requirement that
 retailers must accept used lead-acid batteries for recycling, and the
 other provisions of this section.
 `(ii) The notice shall be in such size and format, and contain such
 other information, as the Administrator prescribes in regulations. Such
 regulations shall include a model notice for use by retailers.
 `(C) The Administrator may inspect any establishment subject to this
 subsection and may issue warnings and citations to any person who fails
 to comply with any provision of this subsection. Any person who fails
 to post the notice required by subparagraph (B) after a warning by the
 Administrator is subject to a fine of not more than $1000 per day.
 `(2) WHOLESALERS- (A) A person who sells, or offers for sale, lead-acid
 batteries at wholesale shall accept from customers, if offered by customers,
 used lead-acid batteries of the same type as the batteries sold.
 `(B) In the case of a wholesaler who sells lead-acid batteries to a retailer,
 the wholesaler shall provide for removing used lead-acid batteries at the
 retailer's place of business. Such removal shall occur not later than
 90 days after the retailer notifies the wholesaler that there are used
 lead-acid batteries ready for removal.
 `(3) MANUFACTURERS- A person who manufactures lead-acid batteries shall
 accept from customers, if offered by customers, used lead-acid batteries
 of the same type as the batteries sold.
 `(4) PROHIBITION ON CHARGES- No person subject to this subsection may charge
 a fee to a customer for accepting a used lead-acid battery from the customer.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) LEAD-ACID BATTERY- The term `lead-acid battery' means any battery
 that consists of lead and sulfuric acid, is used as a power source, and
 has an electromotive force of 6 volts or more.
 `(2) SECONDARY LEAD SMELTER- The term `secondary lead smelter' means a
 facility which produces metallic lead from various forms of lead scrap,
 including used lead-acid batteries. Such a facility also may produce
 plastic chips that are sent for reprocessing.
`SEC. 407. PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES.
 `(a) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a
 person who violates section 402, 403, 404, 405, or 406 shall be liable to
 the United States for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000
 for each such violation. Each instance of violation shall constitute
 a separate violation and each day a violation continues shall, for the
 purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation.
 `(2) A civil penalty for a violation of this section shall be assessed
 and an order assessing a civil penalty shall be issued according to the
 procedure described in section 16(a)(2). A person assessed such a penalty
 may file a petition for judicial review in accordance with the procedures
 described in section 16(a)(3). If a person fails to pay an assessment of
 a civil penalty the Attorney General may recover the amount assessed under
 the procedures described in section 16(a)(4).
 `(b) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Except as otherwise provided in this title,
 any person who knowingly or wilfully violates section 402, 403, 404, 405,
 or 406, shall, in addition to or in lieu of any civil penalty which may be
 imposed under subsection (a) for such violation, be subject to a criminal
 fine of not more than $25,000 for each such violation, or to imprisonment
 for not more than one year, or both.
`SEC. 408. LEAD ABATEMENT AND MEASUREMENT.
 `(a) PROGRAM TO PROMOTE LEAD EXPOSURE ABATEMENT- The Administrator,
 in cooperation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the
 Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 shall undertake a comprehensive program to promote safe, effective, and
 affordable monitoring, detection, and abatement of lead-based paint and
 other lead exposure hazards. The program shall, at a minimum, include the
 components described in subsections (b) through (k).
 `(b) STANDARDS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING LABORATORIES- In consultation
 with the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National
 Institute of Standards and Technology, the Administrator shall establish
 protocols, criteria, and minimum performance standards for laboratory
 analysis of lead in paint films, soil, and dust. Not more than 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of this title, the Administrator shall
 establish certification programs to assure the quality and consistency of
 laboratory analyses, unless the Administrator determines that effective
 voluntary accreditation programs are in place and operating on a nationwide
 basis at the time of such determination.
 `(c) STANDARDS FOR BLOOD ANALYSIS LABORATORIES- (1) In consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the
 Centers for Disease Control, the Administrator shall establish protocols,
 criteria, and minimum performance standards for laboratory analysis of lead
 in blood. Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this
 title, the Administrator shall establish certification programs to assure
 the quality and consistency of laboratory analyses, unless the Administrator
 determines that effective voluntary accreditation programs are in place
 and operating on a nationwide basis at the time of such determination.
 `(2) An accreditation or certification program under this subsection shall
 include provisions for reporting results of blood-lead analyses to the
 Administrator and to the Director of the Centers for Disease Control on an
 ongoing basis in such form as the Administrator shall require by regulation.
 `(d) CONTRACTOR TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION- (1) Not later than 12 months
 after the date of the enactment of this title, the Administrator in
 consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director
 of National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, shall develop
 minimum core curricula for technical training courses for lead-based paint
 abatement workers, supervisors, designers, inspectors, and building owners.
 `(2) The courses described in paragraph (1) shall address generic factors,
 as determined by the Administrator in consultation with the individuals
 described in paragraph (1), associated with lead testing and abatement in
 various types of housing units, including public and private single and
 multifamily housing units.
 `(3) The Administrator shall assure the quality, comprehensiveness,
 and effectiveness of the training courses described in paragraph (2) by
 evaluating training programs and shall encourage the development of State
 certification programs or national proficiency tests.
 `(4) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 the Administrator and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall
 jointly report to the Congress their assessment of abatement training
 capacity and the quality of ongoing abatement work.
 `(e) DETECTION TECHNOLOGIES- (1) In consultation with the Secretary of
 Housing and Urban Development and the Secretary of Commerce, acting through
 the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the
 Administrator shall evaluate emerging products and emerging techniques,
 as defined by the Administrator, for detecting lead in paint films and
 dust, including x-ray fluorescence devices, on-site chemical spot testers,
 and laboratory methods.
 `(2) In consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
 and the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National
 Institute of Standards and Technology, the Administrator shall develop
 criteria, standards, and testing protocol to assure reliable, accurate,
 and effective detection technologies.
 `(f) EVALUATION OF ABATEMENT AND IN-PLACE MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES TO
 REDUCE LEAD DUST LEVELS- (1) Not later than 36 months after the date of
 the enactment of this title, the Administrator, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, shall submit a report to the
 Congress concerning the short-term and long-term efficacy and effectiveness
 of various abatement and in-place management techniques in reducing lead
 dust levels. The assessment of such in-place management techniques shall
 be based on resultant and subsequent levels of lead dust.
 `(2) The report described in paragraph (1) shall review the cost
 effectiveness and reasonableness of State standards for postabatement lead
 dust levels in effect immediately preceding the date of the issuance of
 such report.
 `(g) EVALUATION OF EMERGING ABATEMENT TECHNOLOGIES- (1) In consultation
 with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Secretary
 of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Institute of
 Standards and Technology, the Administrator shall establish a program for
 the evaluation of existing and new products and procedures for encapsulating
 or removing lead-based paint.
 `(2) The products and procedures described in paragraph (1) shall be
 evaluated for safety, effectiveness, durability, and other relevant
 performance characteristics, as determined by the Administrator in
 consultation with the individuals described in paragraph (1), and based
 on written performance criteria and standards that the Administrator shall
 develop in consultation with such individuals.
 `(3) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this
 title, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register a list of
 the products and procedures that the Administrator has determined to meet
 the performance standards and criteria developed by the Administrator.
 `(4) The Administrator shall update and publish the list described in
 paragraph (3)--
 `(A) not later than 30 months after the date of the enactment of this title;
 `(B) not later than 42 months after that date; and
 `(C) at any time subsequent to that date as the Administrator determines
 to be appropriate.
 `(h) CLASSIFICATION OF ABATEMENT WASTES- (1) Not later than 6 months after
 the date of the enactment of this title, the Administrator shall issue
 guidelines for the management of lead-based paint abatement debris. Such
 guidelines shall describe steps for segregating wastes from lead-based paint
 abatement projects in order to minimize the volume of material qualifying
 as hazardous solid waste.
 `(2) Beginning 7 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 if the requirements of paragraph (1) have not been met, no appropriated
 moneys may be expended by the Environmental Protection Agency for the
 purpose of funding travel for employees to engage in official business of
 the Environmental Protection Agency outside of the United States and the
 territories of the United States. The prohibition under this paragraph
 shall terminate on the date that the requirements of paragraph (1) are met.
 `(i) EXPOSURE STUDY- (1) In consultation with the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease
 Control, the Administrator shall undertake a long-term research project
 to study the sources of lead exposure in children who have elevated blood
 lead levels, or other indicators of elevated lead body burden, as defined
 by the Centers for Disease Control.
 `(2) The research project described in paragraph (1) shall examine the
 relative contributions to lead body burden from the following:
 `(A) Drinking water.
 `(B) Food.
 `(C) Lead-based paint and dust from lead-based paint.
 `(D) Exterior sources such as ambient air and lead in soil.
 `(3) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this title,
 and once every 12 months thereafter, the Administrator shall submit a report
 to the Congress concerning the research project described in paragraph (1).
 `(j) PUBLIC EDUCATION- (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 in consultation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
 the Administrator, shall sponsor public education and outreach activities
 to increase public awareness of--
 `(A) the scope and severity of lead poisoning from household sources; and
 `(B) the need for careful, quality, abatement, and management actions.
 `(2) The activities described in paragraph (1) shall be designed to provide
 educational services and information to--
 `(A) health professionals;
 `(B) other groups that the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in
 consultation with the individuals described in paragraph (1), determines
 to be appropriate; and
 `(C) the general public.
 `(k) SOIL LEAD GUIDELINES- Not later than 18 months after the date of the
 enactment of this title, the Administrator shall issue guidelines concerning
 the action levels for lead in soil at which appropriate action, as required
 by regulations that the Administrator shall promulgate, must be taken.
 `(l) COORDINATOR FOR LEAD ACTIVITIES- Not later than 30 days after the
 date of the enactment of this title, the Administrator shall appoint, from
 among the employees of the Office of the Administrator in the Environmental
 Protection Agency, a Coordinator for Lead Activities to coordinate the
 activities conducted by the Agency, or in conjunction with the Agency,
 relating to the prevention of lead poisoning, the reduction of lead exposure,
 and lead abatement.
`SEC. 409. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTERS FOR THE PREVENTION OF LEAD
POISONING.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES- (1) There is established a grant
 program to establish one or more Centers for the Prevention of Lead Poisoning
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as a `Center').
 `(2) The Administrator shall award grants to one or more accredited
 institutions of higher education in the United States for the purpose
 of establishing and funding a Center. Each such Center shall assist the
 Administrator in carrying out the functions of this title.
 `(b) APPLICATIONS- The head of any institution of higher education in
 the United States may submit to the Administrator an application to be
 designated as a site of a Center. The application shall be in such form and
 containing such information as the Administrator may require by regulation.
 `(c) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Administrator shall select grant recipients
 from the applicants in accordance with the following criteria:
 `(1) The capability of the applicant institution to provide leadership in
 making national contributions to the prevention of lead poisoning.
 `(2) The demonstrated capacity of the applicant institution to conduct
 relevant research.
 `(3) The appropriateness of the projects proposed to be carried out by
 the applicant institution.
 `(4) The assurance of the applicant institution of a commitment of at
 least $100,000 in budgeted institutional funds to relevant research upon
 receipt of such grant.
 `(5) The presence at the applicant institution of an interdisciplinary
 staff with demonstrated expertise in lead poisoning prevention.
 `(6) The demonstrated ability of the applicant institution to disseminate
 results of relevant research and educational programs through an
 interdisciplinary continuing education program.
 `(d) FEDERAL SHARE- The Federal share of a grant under this section shall
 not exceed 80 percent of the costs of establishing and operating a Center
 and related research activities carried out by the Center.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS- The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601
 and following) is amended by adding at the end of the table of contents
 in section 1 the following:
`TITLE IV--LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION
`Sec. 401. Findings and policy.
`Sec. 402. Restrictions on continuing uses of certain lead-containing products.
`Sec. 403. Inventory of lead-containing products.
`Sec. 404. Product liability.
`Sec. 405. Manufacturing or processing notices for new lead-containing
products.
`Sec. 406. Recycling of lead-acid batteries.
`Sec. 407. Prohibited acts; penalties.
`Sec. 408. Lead abatement and measurement.
`Sec. 409. Establishment of national centers for the prevention of lead
poisoning.'.
SEC. 3. REPORTING OF BLOOD-LEAD LEVELS; BLOOD LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE
PROJECT.
 (a) REPORTING OF BLOOD-LEAD LEVELS- (1) The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Secretary'),
 acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control (hereinafter
 in this section referred to as the `Director'), shall encourage State
 public health officials to report blood-lead measurements to the Director.
 (2) Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress that--
 (A) describes the status of blood-lead reporting; and
 (B) evaluates the feasibility and desirability of instituting a national
 requirement for mandatory preschool blood-lead screening.
 (3) Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, shall submit a report to the Congress assessing the
 effectiveness of the blood-lead reporting provisions under regulations
 establishing the accreditation and certification programs for blood analysis
 laboratories described in section 408(c) of the Toxic Substances Control
 Act, as added by this Act.
 (b) ESTABLISHMENT OF BLOOD-LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE PROJECT- Subpart 2
 of part C of title IV the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 258b and
 following), is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 424. BLOOD-LEAD LABORATORY REFERENCE PROJECT.
 `The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of
 the Centers for Disease Control, shall establish a blood-lead laboratory
 reference project to assist States and local governments in establishing,
 maintaining, improving, and assuring the quality of laboratory measurements
 performed for childhood lead poisoning prevention programs. The project
 shall include--
 `(1) collaboration with manufacturers of analytical instruments to develop
 blood lead measurement devices that are accurate, portable, precise,
 rugged, reliable, safe, and of reasonable cost;
 `(2) the development of improved techniques for safe, contamination-free
 blood sample collection; and
 `(3) assistance to State and local laboratories in the form of reference
 materials, equipment, supplies, training, consultation, and technology
 development for quality assurance, capacity expansion, and technology
 transfer.'.
SEC. 4. REVISED NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARD FOR LEAD.
 Section 109 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7409) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(e) REVISED NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARD FOR LEAD- Unless
 the Administrator promulgates a revised national ambient air quality
 standard for lead pursuant to subsection (d) within 12 months after the
 date of the enactment of this subsection, the revised standard shall be
 0.5 micrograms per cubic meter over a quarterly averaging period. The
 standard may be revised subsequently pursuant to otherwise applicable
 rulemaking procedures.'.
SEC. 5. REVISED NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATION FOR LEAD.
 Section 1412 of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(f) REVISED NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATION FOR LEAD- Unless the
 Administrator promulgates, within 12 months after the date of the enactment
 this subsection, a revised national primary drinking water regulation for
 lead that includes a maximum contaminant levels measured at the end-user's
 tap, a revised national primary drinking water regulation for lead shall
 be promulgated that shall--
 `(1) include a maximum contaminant level of 5 micrograms per liter measured
 at the end-user's tap; and
 `(2) require quarterly monitoring of lead at end-users' taps pursuant to
 guidelines issued by the Administrator.
 The standard may be revised subsequently pursuant to otherwise applicable
 rulemaking procedures.'.
SEC. 6. UPDATE OF 1988 REPORT TO CONGRESS ON CHILDHOOD LEAD POISONING.
 Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 and every 24 months thereafter, the Administrator of the Agency for
 Toxic Substances and Disease Registry shall submit to the Congress a
 report updating the report submitted pursuant to subsection (f)(1) of
 section 118 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986
 (100 Stat. 1657). Such updated report shall include, at a minimum, revised
 estimates of the prevalence of elevated lead levels among children in the
 population of the United States.
SEC. 7. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of
 this Act--
 (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1991;
 (2) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1992;
 (3) $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1993; and
 (4) $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.