S 1082 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1082
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to prohibit the export from and
import into the United States of hazardous and additional waste except
in compliance with the requirements of this bill.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 15 (legislative day, APRIL 25), 1991
Mr. CHAFEE (by request) introduced the following bill; which was read twice
and referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to prohibit the export from and
import into the United States of hazardous and additional waste except
in compliance with the requirements of this bill.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) This Act may be cited as the `Hazardous and Additional Waste Export
 and Import Act of 1991'.
 (b) The purpose of this Act is to implement the Basel Convention on the
 Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal,
 done at Basel, Switzerland, March 22, 1989.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; statement of purpose; table of contents.
Sec. 2. International shipments of hazardous and additional waste.
`Subtitle K--Exports and Imports of Hazardous and Additional Waste
`Sec. 12001. Definitions.
`Sec. 12002. Prohibition of hazardous and additional waste exports and imports.
`Sec. 12003. Exceptions to prohibition.
`Sec. 12004. Requirements for exports.
`Sec. 12005. Requirements for imports.
`Sec. 12006. Imports of waste generated or managed by or on behalf of the
United States.
`Sec. 12007. Requirements for transit through the United States.
`Sec. 12008. Authorities of the President.
`Sec. 12009. Antarctic treaty area.
`Sec. 12010. Reporting.
`Sec. 12011. Fees.
`Sec. 12012. Federal enforcement.
`Sec. 12013. Effective date.
Sec. 3. Objectives and national policy.
Sec. 4. Retention of existing authority.
Sec. 5. Conforming amendments.
SEC. 2. INTERNATIONAL SHIPMENTS OF HAZARDOUS AND ADDITIONAL WASTE.
 The Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.), is
 further amended by adding the following new subtitle at the end thereof:
`Subtitle K--Exports and Imports of Hazardous and Additional Waste
`SEC. 12001. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this subtitle--
 `(1) `Additional waste' shall include--
 `(A) municipal solid waste;
 `(B) municipal incinerator ash;
 `(C) infectious waste;
 `(D) waste provided special status domestically under sections 3001(b)(2)
 and 3001(b)(3) of this title, if such waste exhibits a characteristic
 of hazardous waste identified under section 3001;
 `(E) all waste which meets the regulatory definition of hazardous waste
 under this title, but which has been provided regulatory exemptions from
 any or all hazardous waste regulations domestically; and,
 `(F) any waste identified in regulations promulgated by the President as
 necessary to implement the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
 Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal and any amendments thereto;
 `(2) `Export' shall include any attempt to export;
 `(3) `Exporter' shall include any person who attempts to export;
 `(4) `Hazardous waste' means any waste which is identified or listed either
 presently or in the future under section 3001 of this title;
 `(5) `Import' shall include any attempt to import; and
 `(6) `Importer' shall include any person who attempts to import.
`SEC. 12002. PROHIBITION OF HAZARDOUS AND ADDITIONAL WASTE EXPORTS AND
IMPORTS.
 `(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to export from or import into the
 United States any hazardous or additional waste as defined in section 12001,
 except as provided in section 12003 and section 12006.
 `(b) For purposes of this subtitle, `export' and `import' do not include--
 `(1) any transport for the purpose of disposal or disposal of hazardous
 or additional waste pursuant to or in compliance with a permit issued
 under the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (33 U.S.C.
 1401 et seq.);
 `(2) any discharge of hazardous or additional waste subject to regulation
 or standard under the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships (33 U.S.C. 1901
 et seq.); and,
 `(3) any transboundary movement of hazardous or additional waste generated
 or managed exclusively--
 `(A) by United States Government activities or facilities located abroad, or
 `(B) on board United States sovereign immune vessels or state aircraft,
into an area under the national jurisdiction of the United States for further
use, recycling, or disposal, provided that such waste is not unloaded before
reaching an area under the national jurisdiction of the United States.
 `(c) In accordance with sections 12001 and 12002 (a) and (b), the President
 shall promulgate regulations defining `export' and `import' for purposes of
 this subtitle and shall include actions involved in transboundary movements
 of hazardous or additional waste, including transit through countries
 prior to arrival of the waste at its ultimate destination. Movement
 through the territorial seas of a country consistent with international
 navigational rights and freedoms shall not, by itself, imply that such
 country is a transit country under this subtitle.
 `(d)(1) The following waste, when exported or imported for the purpose
 of recycling, is excluded from the provisions of this subtitle, except
 for the provisions of section 12009--
 `(A) scrap metal;
 `(B) waste paper, scrap textiles, waste glass, and waste plastic, when
 separated from municipal solid waste; and,
 `(C) any other solid waste separated from municipal solid waste if the
 President, after notice and comment, determines that there is no evidence
 that the excluded solid waste would have significant adverse effects on
 health and the environment.
 `(2) Any person may petition the President for a determination under
 subparagraph (1)(C). Within twelve months of receipt of such a petition,
 or as soon as practicable thereafter, the President shall publish in
 the Federal Register a decision to grant or deny the petition.
 `(e) The following materials are excluded from the provisions of this
 subtitle, except for the provisions of section 12009--
 `(1) source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the
 Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923), that is excluded
 from the definition of solid waste found in section 1004(27) of this title;
 `(2) spent nuclear fuel, as defined in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982,
 as amended (96 Stat. 2201); and,
 `(3) hazardous or additional waste when mixed with materials listed in
 paragraphs (1) or (2) that, as a result of being radioactive, are subject
 to other international control systems, including international instruments,
 applying specifically to radioactive materials.
`SEC. 12003. EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION.
 `(a) The prohibition of section 12002 shall not apply to exports or imports
 of hazardous or additional waste made pursuant to and in compliance with--
 `(1) any bilateral or regional agreement regarding waste export and import
 between the United States and the government of an exporting or importing
 country which is in effect on the date of enactment of this subtitle
 (including any amendment, renewal, or extension of such an agreement prior
 to the effective date of regulations promulgated under this subtitle) and,
 `(2) the provisions of section 3017 and any regulations promulgated
 pursuant thereto.
 `(b) The prohibition of section 12002 shall not apply to exports or imports
 of hazardous or additional waste made pursuant to and in compliance with--
 `(1)(A) any agreement described in paragraph (a)(1) that is amended, renewed,
 or extended after the effective date of regulations promulgated under
 this subtitle, provided that any such amendment, renewal, or agreement is
 compatible with the environmentally sound management of such hazardous or
 additional waste, or
 `(B) a bilateral or regional agreement regarding waste export or import
 that the United States, in the sole discretion of the President, has entered
 into with the government of an exporting or importing country or competent
 regional economic integration organization after the date of enactment of
 this subtitle: Provided, That any such agreement requires--
 `(i) environmentally sound management of the hazardous or additional
 waste, and
 `(ii) compliance with any applicable Federal laws and the requirements of
 any applicable State program authorized under this title; and,
 `(2) the provisions of section 12004 (for exports), section 12005
 (for imports) and any regulations promulgated to implement any agreements
 described in paragraph (1) and this subtitle.
 `(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), it shall
 be unlawful to--
 `(1) export hazardous or additional waste pursuant to subsection (a)
 if the exporter knows or has reason to know that such waste will not be
 managed in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with the laws
 of the importing and transit countries;
 `(2) import hazardous or additional waste pursuant to subsection (a)
 if the importer knows or has reason to know that such waste will not be
 managed in accordance with applicable Federal laws or the requirements of
 any applicable State program authorized under this title;
 `(3) export hazardous or additional waste pursuant to subsection (b)
 if the exporter knows or has reason to know that such waste will not
 be managed as specified in the contract required by subsection 12004(d)
 or the notification and consent required by subsections 12004(a) and (b); or,
 `(4) import hazardous or additional waste pursuant to subsection (b)
 if the importer knows or has reason to know that such waste will not
 be managed as specified in the contract required by subsection 12005(b)
 or the notification and consent required by subsection 12005(a).
`SEC. 12004. REQUIREMENTS FOR EXPORTS.
 `Exports of any hazardous or additional waste made pursuant to subsection
 12003(b) shall be subject to the requirements of this section and any
 regulations promulgated to implement this subtitle.
 `(a) The exporter shall provide written notice of the proposed export to the
 President to forward through the Secretary of State to the government of
 the importing country. Such notice shall be sufficient for the government
 of the importing country to make an informed decision, and the consent of
 the government of the importing country must be obtained prior to export
 from the United States.
 `(b) The exporter shall provide written notice of the proposed export to
 the President to forward through the Secretary of State to the government
 of any transit country. Such notice shall be sufficient for the government
 of the transit country to make an informed decision, and consent of the
 government of the transit country must be obtained prior to export from
 the United States.
 `(c) To the extent required by section 3002 of this title and by the
 Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508), generators of
 hazardous or additional waste who export such waste must make efforts to
 minimize the generation of such waste and document such efforts.
 `(d) A written contract between the exporter and the importer must
 exist prior to commencing the export. Such contract must specify how the
 hazardous or additional waste will be managed in an environmentally sound
 manner. A copy of such contract shall be provided to the President as part
 of notification of intent to export.
 `(e) Within sixty calendar days of receiving information from any source
 indicating that a shipment of hazardous or additional waste has not been
 delivered to the facility designated in the notification or managed as
 specified in the notification, consent, and contract, the exporters and
 generators of such waste shall either--
 `(1) accept legal and financial responsibility for--
 `(A) arranging for the acceptance of the hazardous or additional waste by
 an alternative facility and delivering the hazardous or additional waste
 to that facility in compliance with all requirements of this subtitle, or
 `(B) returning the hazardous or additional waste to the United States in
 compliance with the requirements of this subtitle, any other applicable
 Federal laws, and the requirements of any applicable State program authorized
 under this title, or
 `(2) notify the President, within twenty days of receipt of such information,
 that they have declined to accept responsibility because they believe the
 information is unreliable or invalid.
 `(f) Upon receipt of the notice specified in subsection (e)(2) of this
 section the President may--
 `(1) request the exporter or generator to obtain more information,
 reconsider acceptance of responsibility, and notify the President of the
 new decision, or
 `(2) after either a first or second decision to decline responsibility,
 use the enforcement authorities in section 12008(d) to perform the actions
 specified in subsection (e)(1) of this section and to recover costs.
 `(g) The exporter shall ensure that--
 `(1) all signatures required for movement documents are obtained, and
 `(2) all required movement documents accompany the hazardous or additional
 waste to the importing facility.
 `(h) The exporter shall comply with any financial responsibility
 requirements promulgated by the President. The exporter shall also comply
 with any bonding, insurance, guarantee, and other financial responsibility
 requirements of the importing and transit countries.
 `(i) The President may, subject to the written consent of the importing
 and transit countries, allow the exporter to use a general notification
 and consent procedure where hazardous or additional waste having the same
 physical and chemical characteristics are shipped regularly to the same
 disposer via--
 `(1) the same customs office of exit of the United States;
 `(2) the same customs office of entry of the importing country; and,
 `(3) the same customs offices of entry and exit of any transit countries.
Such general notification and consent may cover multiple shipments of
hazardous or additional waste during a maximum period of twelve months.
`SEC. 2005. REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPORTS.
 `Imports of any hazardous or additional waste into the United States made
 pursuant to subsection 12003(b) shall be subject to the requirements of
 this section, any regulations promulgated to implement the requirements
 of this subtitle, all other applicable Federal laws, and the requirements
 of any applicable State program authorized under this title.
 `(a) Prior to importing hazardous or additional waste into the United States,
 the importer must provide to the President a written notice, which the
 importer has obtained through the Secretary of State from the government of
 the exporting country, that the exporting country has notified the United
 States of the proposed export and seeks the consent of the United States
 to the import of the specified waste. Prior to importing the waste into the
 United States, the importer must obtain the written consent of the President
 to the import of such waste. The importer may not participate in the import
 until the President's written consent to the import has been obtained.
 `(b) A written contract between the importer and the exporter must exist
 prior to import into the United States. Such contract must specify how
 such waste will be managed in accordance with applicable Federal laws and
 the requirements of any applicable State program authorized under this
 title. A copy of such contract shall be provided to the President prior
 to the issuance of the President's consent to the import.
 `(c) If the importer fails to deliver the hazardous or additional waste
 to the facility designated in the notification, consent, and contract,
 the importer shall be legally and financially responsible for--
 `(1) delivering such waste to an alternative facility in compliance with all
 requirements of this subtitle, with applicable Federal laws, and with the
 requirements of any applicable State program authorized under this title, or
 `(2) returning such waste to the exporting country in compliance with all
 requirements of this subtitle.
 `(d) The importer shall ensure that--
 `(1) all signatures required for movement documents are obtained, and
 `(2) all required movement documents accompany the hazardous or additional
 waste to the importing facility.
 `(e) The importer shall comply with any financial responsibility
 requirements promulgated by the President. The importer shall also comply
 with any bonding, insurance, guarantee, and other financial responsibility
 requirements of the exporting and transit countries.
 `(f) The President may, subject to the written consent of the exporting
 and transit countries, allow the importer to use a general notification
 and consent procedure where hazardous or additional waste having the same
 physical and chemical characteristics are shipped regularly to the same
 disposer via--
 `(1) the same customs office of exit of the exporting country;
 `(2) the same customs office of entry of the United States; and,
 `(3) the same customs offices of entry and exit of any transit countries.
Such general notification and consent may cover multiple shipments of
hazardous or additional waste during a maximum period of twelve months.
`SEC. 12006. IMPORTS OF WASTE GENERATED OR MANAGED BY OR ON BEHALF OF THE
UNITED STATES.
 `(a) Consistent with the environmentally sound management of hazardous
 or additional waste generated or managed by or on behalf of the United
 States Government, the President may determine the procedures by which all
 such waste or individual shipments of such waste may be managed abroad or
 imported into the United States.
 `(b) The President may exempt an individual shipment of waste by any
 department, agency, or instrumentality in the Executive Branch from
 compliance with the requirements of this subtitle if he determines it to be
 in the paramount interest of the United States to do so. The President shall
 report each January to the Congress all exemptions from the requirements
 of this subtitle granted during the preceding calendar year, together with
 his reason for granting each such exemption.
`SEC. 12007. REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSIT THROUGH THE UNITED STATES.
 `All imports of hazardous or additional waste into the United States solely
 for purposes of transit through the United States to another country shall
 be subject to this section.
 `(a) No person may import hazardous or additional waste into the United
 States for transit through the United States to another country without
 the prior written consent of the President. No person may participate
 in the transit of such waste until the President's written consent has
 been obtained.
 `(b) Prior to importing hazardous or additional waste into the United
 States for transit purposes, the person responsible for the transit shall
 provide to the President--
 `(1) a written notice, which such person has obtained through the Secretary
 of State from the government of the exporting country, in which the
 government of the exporting country notifies the United States of the
 proposed export and requests the consent of the United States to the
 transit of the specified waste through the United States;
 `(2) copies of the consent to transit of any other transit countries for
 the specified waste; and
 `(3) a copy of the consent to import of the country in which final disposal
 of the specified waste will occur.
 `(c) Upon completion of the transit, the person responsible for the transit
 shall provide to the President notice that the transit has been completed.
`SEC. 12008. AUTHORITIES OF THE PRESIDENT.
 `(a) Authority to Promulgate Regulations-
 `(1) Not later than eighteen months after the date of enactment of this
 subtitle, the President shall promulgate any regulations necessary to
 implement and enforce the requirements of this subtitle, including the
 requirements applicable to bilateral or regional agreements referred to
 in this subtitle. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to,
 provisions for: notification, tracking, manifesting, packaging, labelling,
 reporting, recordkeeping, financial responsibility, transportation,
 enforcement and any other information required to be included in
 contracts. As part of these regulations, the President shall define the
 criteria to be used by the United States in determining whether a hazardous
 or additional waste to be exported from the United States will be managed in
 an environmentally sound manner, as required to fulfill the United States'
 obligations under the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
 Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal.
 `(2) Such regulations shall include provisions applicable to bilateral or
 regional agreements on environmentally sound recycling of hazardous and
 additional waste. In promulgating such provisions, the President shall
 take into account the need to promote environmentally sound recycling of
 hazardous and additional waste and the importance of international trade
 in recyclable materials.
 `(3) Regulations promulgated pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be
 effective sixty days after the date of promulgation, unless the President
 determines that a greater period of time is necessary to allow regulated
 persons to come into compliance.
 `(4) The President, at any time, may revise such regulations as he deems
 appropriate.
 `(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, regulations promulgated
 pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) may be promulgated in interim final form
 without prior opportunity for public comment. The President shall provide
 an opportunity for public comment on the interim final regulations and,
 thereafter, shall promulgate such regulations in final form within eighteen
 months of the date such regulations were issued in interim final form.
 `(6) In exercising any authority under this subtitle, the President shall
 not, for purposes of 29 U.S.C. 653(b)(1), be deemed to be exercising
 statutory authority to prescribe or enforce standards or regulations
 affecting occupational safety and health.
 `(b) AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT EXPORTS AND IMPORTS- As required to fulfill
 the United States' obligations under the Basel Convention on the Control of
 Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, the President
 may issue an order prohibiting by particular source, shipment, or class--
 `(1) exports of hazardous or additional waste from the United States where
 he has reason to believe the waste to be exported would not be managed
 in an environmentally sound manner notwithstanding the consent of the
 importing country or other entity or the existence of a bilateral or
 regional agreement between the United States and the importing country;
 `(2) imports of hazardous or additional waste into the United States where
 he has reason to believe such imports or the subsequent management of such
 waste would be in violation of applicable Federal laws or the applicable
 requirements of any State program authorized under this title;
 `(3) exports from or imports into the United States of hazardous or
 additional waste where the President has reason to believe that the
 shipment(s) involved may not proceed in accordance with--
 `(A) the contract specified in subsection 12004(d) or subsection 12005(b), or
 `(B) any requirements of the bilateral or regional agreements between the
 countries; or
 `(4) exports from or imports into the United States of hazardous or
 additional waste where such exports or imports would otherwise be
 inconsistent with the international obligations of the United States.
Such orders shall be immediately effective. However, the President shall
conduct a hearing if, within thirty days of issuance of the order, any person
or persons named therein or affected by the order submits written notification
requesting a hearing. Following the hearing, the President may modify or
reissue the order. The proscribed exports or imports may not proceed during
the pendency of any administrative hearing or judicial proceeding challenging
an order issued by the President pursuant to this subsection. Judicial review
of such orders shall be limited to the administrative record.
 `(c) EMERGENCY ORDERS- Notwithstanding any other authorities provided by
 this subtitle, the President may issue an emergency order to prohibit the
 export or import of hazardous or additional waste by particular source,
 shipment, or class from or to a specific country for a period not to exceed
 forty-five days--
 `(1) where the President has reason to believe that the export or import
 may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to health or the
 environment within or outside the United States, or
 `(2) where there is a request to the President by the government of an
 importing or exporting country for emergency action in support of that
 country's enforcement efforts related to the export or import of hazardous
 or additional waste.
There shall be no judicial review of such emergency order except in the
context of an action brought by the President to enforce such order. The
President shall have the authority to extend the emergency order after
notice and opportunity for a hearing for a period not to exceed an additional
ninety calendar days, except that in the case of an imminent and substantial
endangerment, the order shall be effective until the President determines
that the endangerment is no longer imminent. Any extension of the initial
emergency order shall be subject to judicial review, and such review shall
be limited to the administrative record.
 `(d) AUTHORITY TO CONTROL HAZARDOUS AND ADDITIONAL WASTE EXPORTS THAT ARE
 NOT DELIVERED- Within sixty calendar days from the date that the President,
 relying on information received, notifies any exporter or generator of
 hazardous or additional waste that a shipment has not been delivered to the
 importing facility and managed as specified in the notification, consent
 or contract, the President may elect to perform the actions required by
 subsection 12004(e) if the exporters or generators have not completed
 alternative disposition. If the President elects to perform these actions,
 he shall provide notice to the appropriate exporters or generators. The
 exporters or generators shall be liable for all costs incurred by the
 President in arranging for or conducting such disposition, including any
 liability resulting from the treatment, storage, or disposal of the wastes,
 and, including but not limited to, costs of arranging for or conducting
 transportation, storage, and disposal of the waste, as well as attorneys'
 fees incurred by the United States in seeking recovery of its costs. The
 United States may recover all such costs and fees from the exporters or
 generators in the United States District Court for the district in which
 the cost was incurred, or in which any of the exporters or generators reside
 or have their principal place of business, or in the District of Columbia.
 `(e) AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE PORTS- The President may by regulation limit or
 restrict to specifically designated ports in the United States shipments of--
 `(1) particular hazardous or additional waste for export or import, or
 `(2) all hazardous or additional waste for export or import.
`SEC. 12009. ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA.
 `(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to export hazardous or additional waste for treatment,
 incineration, storage, disposal, or recycling to any location south of 60
 degrees south latitude.
 `(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed as contravening or
 superseding--
 `(1) any obligations under any international treaty, convention, or
 agreement if such treaty, convention, or agreement is in force with respect
 to the United States on the date of enactment of this subtitle, and if it
 is compatible with the environmentally sound management of hazardous or
 additional waste, or
 `(2) the provisions of any statute which implements any such treaty,
 convention, or agreement.
`SEC. 12010. REPORTING.
 `Beginning in the calendar year following the effective date of regulations
 promulgated pursuant to this subtitle, all persons who export or import
 hazardous or additional waste under this subtitle shall report no later
 than March 1 of each calendar year to the President summarizing the
 types, quantities, frequency, routes, ultimate destination, and any known
 disposition of all such hazardous and additional waste exported, imported,
 or for which notice of export or import was provided during the preceding
 calendar year, and any such information that the President may require
 by regulation.
`SEC. 12011. FEES.
 `The President shall promulgate and revise regulations establishing fees
 to be paid by persons who export or import any hazardous or additional
 waste. These fees may be used to recover all reasonable costs incurred by
 the President in carrying out the requirements of this subtitle. Any fees
 collected under this section shall be deposited in miscellaneous receipts
 of the United States Treasury.
`SEC. 12012. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a)(1) COMPLIANCE ORDERS- Whenever, on the basis of any information, the
 President determines that any person has violated, or is in violation of,
 any requirement or prohibition or order in effect under this subtitle or
 section 3017 (including any requirement or prohibition in effect under
 regulations promulgated under this subtitle or under section 3017), the
 President may--
 `(A) issue an order assessing a civil penalty for any past or current
 violation; or
 `(B) issue an order requiring compliance immediately or within a specified
 time period.
 `(2) CIVIL ACTIONS- Any order issued pursuant to this subsection shall
 state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation. In addition,
 the President may commence a civil action in the United States District
 Court in the district in which the violation occurred or in the district in
 which the defendant resides or maintains a principal place of business or in
 the District of Columbia, for appropriate relief, including a temporary or
 permanent injunction, assessment of penalties, recovery of costs incurred
 by the United States for disposition of waste, and recovery of attorneys'
 fees incurred by the United States in prosecuting violations of this
 subtitle or in seeking recovery of costs.
 `(3) NOTICE TO STATES- In the case of a violation of any requirements of
 this subtitle where such violation occurs in a State which is authorized to
 carry out a waste program under this title, the President, or the Attorney
 General as the case may be, shall give notice to the State in which such
 violation has occurred prior to issuing an order or commencing a civil
 action under this section.
 `(4) ORDERS AND JUDGMENTS ASSESSING PENALTIES- Any penalty assessed in
 an administrative order, or a judgment of the District Court under this
 subsection shall not exceed $25,000 per day plus attorney's fees for each
 day of noncompliance with a requirement or prohibition in effect under
 this subtitle. In assessing such a penalty, the President or the court,
 as appropriate, shall take into consideration (in addition to such other
 factors as justice may require) the size of the business, the economic impact
 of the penalty on the business, the violator's full compliance history and
 good faith efforts to comply, the duration of the violation as established
 by any credible evidence, payment by the violator of penalties previously
 assessed for the same violation, the economic benefit of noncompliance,
 and the seriousness of the violation.
 `(5) PUBLIC HEARING- Any order issued under this subsection shall become
 final unless, not later than thirty days after the order is served,
 any person or persons named therein submit(s) written notification to
 the President requesting a hearing. Upon such request, the President
 shall conduct a public hearing. In connection with any proceeding under
 this subsection, the President may issue subpoenas for the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers, books,
 and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery and other procedures
 for hearings.
 `(6) VIOLATION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS- If a violator fails to take corrective
 action within the time specified in a compliance order issued under this
 subsection, the President may assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000
 per day plus attorney's fees for each day of continued noncompliance with
 the order, in addition to any penalties assessed in the order.
 `(b) CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF EMERGENCY ORDERS- Upon receipt of evidence that
 an export or import may present an imminent and substantial endangerment
 to health or the environment within or outside the United States, or upon
 receipt of a request by the government of an importing or exporting country
 for emergency action in support of that country's enforcement efforts
 related to the export or import of hazardous or additional wastes, the
 President may bring suit on behalf of the United States in the appropriate
 United States district court to--
 `(1) immediately restrain any person causing or contributing to the alleged
 endangerment;
 `(2) enforce the order; or,
 `(3) take such other action as may be necessary.
 `(c) Criminal Violations and Penalties-
 `(1) VIOLATIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE- Any person who--
 `(A) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any application, label, manifest, record,
 report, notification, or other document filed, maintained, or used for
 purposes of compliance with this subtitle or any regulations promulgated
 under the authority of this subtitle, or with bilateral or regional
 agreements for the export or import of hazardous or additional waste;
 `(B) knowingly destroys, alters, conceals, or fails to file any report or
 other document required to be maintained or filed for purposes of compliance
 with this subtitle or with regulations promulgated under authority of this
 subtitle, or with bilateral or regional agreements for the export or import
 of hazardous or additional waste;
 `(c) knowingly exports or imports a hazardous or additional waste--
 `(i) in the absence of a bilateral or regional agreement with the government
 of an exporting or receiving country;
 `(ii) where there exists a bilateral or regional agreement pursuant to this
 subtitle or section 3017 and the export or import is not in conformity with
 that agreement, applicable provisions of this subtitle or section 3017,
 and with any applicable regulations; or
 `(iii) from or to a country for which the President has prohibited the
 export or import of hazardous or additional waste;
 `(D) knowingly transports or causes the transport of a hazardous or
 additional waste through the land, territory, or internal waters of a
 transit country without first notifying and receiving the consent of the
 transit country in violation of this subtitle; or
 `(E) knowingly violates any material requirements [not otherwise encompassed
 by subparagraphs (A) through (D)] of this subtitle, of section 3017, of
 any regulations promulgated under this subtitle or section 3017, or of
 any order issued under this subtitle;
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine pursuant to title 18 United States
Code for each day of violation, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed two
years (for violations of subparagraphs (C) and (D) a term not to exceed five
years), or both. If the conviction is for a violation committed after a first
conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum punishment under
this paragraph shall be doubled with respect to both fine and imprisonment.
 `(2) KNOWING ENDANGERMENT- Any person who knowingly transports, treats,
 or stores for purposes of export or import, or who knowingly exports or
 imports any hazardous or additional waste in violation of paragraph (1),
 (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of section 3008(d) of this title, as amended,
 section 3017 of this title, as amended, or subparagraphs (1)(A) through
 (E) of this subsection, and who knows at that time that he thereby places
 another person in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, shall,
 upon conviction, be subject to a fine pursuant to title 18 United States
 Code, or imprisonment for not more than fifteen years, or both. Any person
 who is an organization shall, upon conviction of violating this paragraph,
 be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,000. If the conviction is for
 a violation committed after a first conviction of such person under this
 paragraph, the maximum punishment under this paragraph shall be doubled
 with respect to both fine and imprisonment.
 `(3) SPECIAL RULES- For the purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection--
 `(A) A person's state of mind is knowing with respect to--
 `(i) his conduct, if he is aware of the nature of his conduct;
 `(ii) an existing circumstance, if he is aware or believes that the
 circumstance exists; or
 `(iii) a result of this conduct, if he is aware or believes that his conduct
 is substantially certain to cause danger of death or serious bodily injury.
 `(B) In determining whether a defendant who is a natural person knew that
 his conduct placed another person in imminent danger of death or serious
 bodily injury--
 `(i) the person is responsible only for actual awareness or actual belief
 that he possessed; and
 `(ii) knowledge possessed by a person other than the defendant but not by
 the defendant himself may not be attributed to the defendant.
`Provided, That in proving the defendant's possession of actual knowledge,
circumstantial evidence may be used, including evidence that the defendant
took affirmative steps to shield himself from relevant information.
 `(C) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution that the conduct charged
 was consented to by the person endangered and that the danger and conduct
 charged were reasonably foreseeable hazards of--
 `(i) an occupation, a business, or a profession; or
 `(ii) medical treatment or medical or scientific experimentation conducted
 by professionally approved methods, and such other person had been made
 aware of the risks involved prior to giving consent.
The defendant may establish an affirmative defense under this subparagraph
by a preponderance of the evidence.
 `(D) All general defenses, affirmative defenses, and bars to prosecution
 that may apply with respect to other Federal criminal offenses may apply
 under paragraph (2).
 `(E) The term `organization' means a legal entity, other than a government,
 established or organized for any purpose, and such term includes a
 corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company,
 foundation, institution, trust, society, union, or any other association
 of persons.
 `(F) The term `serious bodily injury' means--
 `(i) bodily injury which involves a substantial risk of death;
 `(ii) unconsciousness;
 `(iii) extreme physical pain;
 `(iv) protracted and obvious disfigurement; or,
 `(v) protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member,
 organ, or mental faculty.
 `(d) Forfeiture-
 `(1) Any property, real or personal, used or maintained, or traceable to
 property used or maintained, in violation of any of the provisions of this
 subtitle shall be subject to forfeiture.
 `(2) For purposes of this section, the provisions of the customs laws
 relating to the seizure, summary, and judicial forfeiture, condemnation
 of property for violation of the customs laws, the disposition of such
 property or the proceeds from the sale thereof, the remission or mitigation
 of such forfeitures, and the compromise of claims (19 U.S.C. 1602 et seq.),
 insofar as they are applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions
 of this subtitle, shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred, or
 alleged to have been incurred, under this section, except that such duties
 as are imposed upon the customs officer or any other person with respect
 to the seizure and forfeiture of property under the customs laws shall be
 performed with respect to seizures and forfeitures of property under this
 section by such officers, agents, or other person as may be authorized by
 the President. No forfeiture, remission, or mitigation of any forfeiture
 shall occur without the consent of the President.
 `(e) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND SUSPENSION- Any order or judgment issued
 under this section may include--
 `(1) a requirement that any person named in the order or judgment arrange
 for and take financial responsibility for--
 `(A) the return of a waste to the United States in compliance with the
 requirements of this subtitle, any other applicable Federal laws, and the
 requirements of any applicable State program authorized under this title, or
 `(B) the delivery of a waste to some alternative country for environmentally
 sound management in compliance with the requirements of this subtitle and
 subject to the approval of the President; and
 `(2) a suspension, prohibition, or injunction against any person from
 participating, directly or indirectly, in any manner or capacity, in any
 transaction involving hazardous or additional waste that is exported or
 to be exported from, or imported or to be imported into, the United States.
 `(f) Responsibility for Illegal Exports and Imports-
 `(1) In addition to any sanction or other relief authorized by this subtitle,
 any person who--
 `(A) exports a hazardous or additional waste from the United States in a
 manner which--
 `(i) is not in compliance with the pertinent bilateral or regional agreement,
 `(ii) is not in compliance with the provisions of this subtitle or
 regulations promulgated pursuant to this subtitle,
 `(iii) is not in compliance with the provisions of all applicable Federal
 laws and the applicable requirements of any State program authorized under
 this title, or
 `(iv) fails in any material manner to conform to the notice and other
 documentation required by the President and the consent of the government
 of the importing country and any transit countries; or
 `(B) obtains or attempts to obtain the consent of the government of an
 importing or transit country through falsification, misrepresentation
 or fraud;
must arrange for and take financial responsibility for the return to the
United States of the hazardous or additional waste (including any waste
seized pursuant to this subtitle) to the maximum extent practicable or
otherwise arrange for and take financial responsibility for alternative
environmentally sound management of the hazardous or additional waste. Any
return or alternative management of hazardous or additional waste pursuant
to this paragraph shall be in compliance with Federal laws, including this
subtitle and any regulations promulgated thereto, as well as the requirements
of any applicable State program authorized under this title. The United States
may elect to perform the actions specified in this paragraph if the exporter
has not arranged for the acceptance of the hazardous or additional waste by
an alternative facility and has not delivered the hazardous or additional
waste to that facility within sixty calendar days from the date that the
United States receives valid information indicating that an illegal export
has occurred. The exporter shall be liable to the United States for all costs
incurred in arranging for such management and in seeking recovery of costs,
including attorney's fees.
 `(2) In addition to any sanction or other relief authorized by this subtitle,
 any person who--
 `(A) imports a hazardous or additional waste into the United States in a
 manner which--
 `(i) is not in compliance with the pertinent bilateral or regional agreement,
 `(ii) is not in compliance with the provisions of this subtitle or
 regulations promulgated pursuant to this subtitle,
 `(iii) is not in compliance with the provisions of all applicable Federal
 laws and the applicable requirements of any State program authorized under
 this title, or
 `(iv) fails in any material manner to conform to the notice, consent,
 or other documentation required or provided by the President; or
 `(B) obtains or attempts to obtain the consent of the United States or the
 government of a transit country through falsification, misrepresentation,
 or fraud;
must arrange for and take financial responsibility for the return to the
exporting country of the hazardous or additional waste (including any
waste seized pursuant to this subtitle) to the maximum extent practicable
or otherwise arrange for and take financial responsibility for alternative
environmentally sound management of the hazardous or additional waste in the
United States. Any return or alternative management of hazardous or additional
waste pursuant to this paragraph shall be in compliance with all applicable
Federal laws, including this subtitle, and any regulations promulgated thereto,
as well as the requirements of any applicable State program authorized under
this title. The United States may elect to perform the actions specified
in this paragraph if the importer has not arranged for the acceptance of
the hazardous or additional waste by an alternative facility and has not
delivered the hazardous or additional waste to that facility within sixty
calendar days from the date that the United States receives valid information
indicating that an illegal import has occurred. The importer shall be liable
to the United States for all costs incurred in arranging for such disposition,
and in seeking recovery of such costs, including attorney's fees.
`SEC. 12013. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 `Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this subtitle shall take
 effect on the date of enactment.'.
SEC. 3. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL POLICY.
 Section 1003(a) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6902(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `and' at the end of paragraph (10);
 (2) by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting
 in lieu thereof `; and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end, the following new paragraph--
 `(12) assuring that the export from and import into the United States
 of hazardous and additional waste is undertaken in compliance with the
 provisions of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements
 of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal.'.
SEC. 4. RETENTION OF EXISTING AUTHORITY.
 Section 3017 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 6938),
 and all regulations promulgated pursuant to that section, will remain
 effective for hazardous waste exported or imported under subsection 12003(a)
 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended. Section 3017 of the Solid
 Waste Disposal Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated pursuant to that
 section will only remain effective for hazardous waste exported or imported
 under subsection 12003(b) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended,
 until the effective date of regulations promulgated pursuant to this Act.
SEC. 5. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) The table of contents of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended to
 add the following new items after the items relating to subtitle J--
`Subtitle K--Exports and Imports of Hazardous and Additional Waste
`Sec. 12001. Definitions.
`Sec. 12002. Prohibition of hazardous and additional waste exports and imports.
`Sec. 12003. Exceptions to prohibition.
`Sec. 12004. Requirements for exports.
`Sec. 12005. Requirements for imports.
`Sec. 12006. Imports of waste generated or managed by or on behalf of the
United States.
`Sec. 12007. Requirements for transit through the United States.
`Sec. 12008. Authorities of the President.
`Sec. 12009. Antarctic treaty area.
`Sec. 12010. Reporting.
`Sec. 12011. Fees
`Sec. 12012. Federal enforcement.
`Sec. 12013. Effective date.
 (b) Section 3008 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6928) is
 amended by--
 (1) deleting section 3008(d)(6) and renumbering section 3008(d)(7) as
 3008(d)(6); and
 (2) deleting `or exports' from section 3008(e).
 (c) Section 3017 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6928) is
 amended by--
 (1) inserting `or additional waste identified under subtitle K' in
 section 3017(a) after `any hazardous waste identified or listed under
 this subchapter';
 (2) deleting `hazardous' in section 3017(a)(1)(B);
 (3) inserting at the end of section 3017(b), the following--
`Regulations promulgated pursuant to this section are hereby made immediately
applicable to additional wastes when identified in subtitle K.';
 (4) inserting `or additional waste identified under subtitle K' in section
 3017(c) after the phrase `a hazardous waste identified or listed under
 this subchapter,';
 (5) deleting the word `hazardous' from the phrase `before such hazardous
 waste is scheduled' in section 3017(c);
 (6) deleting `hazardous' and inserting `such' in section 3017(c)(2);
 (7) deleting `hazardous' in section 3017(c)(5);
 (8) inserting `or additional' in section 3017(d)(2) before the first
 appearance of `hazardous,' and deleting `hazardous' the second time it
 appears in section 3017(d)(2);
 (9) deleting `hazardous' and inserting `such' in section 3017(d)(4);
 (10) deleting section 3017(f) and renumbering section 3017(g) as 3017(f)
 and section 3017(h) as 3017(g);
 (11) inserting `or additional wastes identified under subtitle K' in section
 3017(g) after `under section 6921 of this title' and deleting the second
 occurrence of `hazardous'; and,
 (12) inserting `or subtitle K' after `section 6922 or 6923' in section
 3017(h).
 (d) Section 3 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, (33
 U.S.C. 1402(c)), is amended by inserting `or material which derives from
 the normal operation of a vessel discharging the material, the discharge
 of which is subject to the International Convention for the Prevention
 of Pollution from Ships, 1973, and annexes and protocols thereto or any
 other international agreements to which the United States is a party'
 after the phrase `meaning of section 1233 of this title'.
 (e) Section 101(b) of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act,
 (33 U.S.C. 1411(b)), is amended as follows:
 (1) by inserting the words `jurisdiction of the' after the phrase `no
 person shall dump any material transported from a location outside the'; and,
 (2) by striking the entire paragraph (2) and inserting in lieu thereof
 `into the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States.'.
 (f) Section 102 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act,
 (33 U.S.C. 1412), is amended by adding the following new subsection to
 the end thereof--
 `(f) No permit may be issued under this title for dumping, or transportation
 for purposes of dumping material into ocean waters within the area south
 of 60 degrees south latitude.'.