[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 706 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 706

 To strengthen transparency and accountability within the Federal 
 Government, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 22, 2019

 Mr. Ted Lieu of California (for himself, Mr. Gallego, Ms. Eshoo, Ms. 
 Sanchez, and Mr. Cicilline) introduced the following bill; which was 
 referred to the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and in addition to 
 the Committees on the Judiciary, Ways and Means, and House 
 Administration, for a period to be subsequently determined by the 
 Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To strengthen transparency and accountability within the Federal 
 Government, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Restoring the 
Public Trust Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--NO PERSONAL ENRICHMENT FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES

 Subtitle A--Stop Waste And Misuse by the President

Sec. 101. Short title.
Sec. 102. Findings.
Sec. 103. Reimbursal for costs of protection.
 Subtitle B--Stop Waste And Misuse by Presidential Flyers Landing Yet 
 Evading Rules and Standards

Sec. 111. Short title.
Sec. 112. Prohibition on use of funds for travel on private aircraft.
 Subtitle C--E. Scott Pruitt Accountability for Government Officials

Sec. 121. Short title.
Sec. 122. Findings.
Sec. 123. Use of public office for private gain.
 Subtitle D--Curb Objectionable Redirection of Resources and 
 Unconstitutional Payments to Trump

Sec. 131. Short title.
Sec. 132. Findings.
Sec. 133. Sense of the Congress.
Sec. 134. Reports.
Sec. 135. Definitions.
 Subtitle E--Relatives In Government Getting Employment Dishonorably

Sec. 141. Short title.
Sec. 142. Employment of relatives; restrictions.
 Subtitle F--Determining if Regulatory Actions are in the Interest of 
 the Nation or the Swamp

Sec. 151. Short title.
Sec. 152. Requiring greater transparency for regulatory conflicts of 
 interest.
Sec. 153. ACUS study and report on regulatory conflicts of interest.
Sec. 154. Judicial review.
Sec. 155. Effective date.
 TITLE II--ROOTING OUT CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 Subtitle A--Commonsense Legislation Ensuring Accountability by 
 Reporting Access of Non-Cleared Employees to Secrets

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Report on security clearances for individuals working in the 
 White House and Executive Office of the 
 President.
 Subtitle B--Divestiture of Certain Financial Interests of Federal 
 Officers and Employees and Spouses

Sec. 211. Divestiture of certain financial interests of Federal 
 officers and employees and spouses.
 Subtitle C--Presidential Tax Transparency

Sec. 221. Short title.
Sec. 222. Presidential and Vice Presidential tax transparency.
 Subtitle D--White House Open Data

Sec. 231. Short title.
Sec. 232. White House visitor log and employee information.
 Subtitle E--Prohibitions on Making Certain Contracts with Federal 
 Government or Receiving Federal Funds

Sec. 241. Prohibitions on making certain contracts with Federal 
 Government or receiving Federal funds.
 TITLE III--INCREASED OVERSIGHT AND STRENGTHENING AGENCIES RESPONSIBLE 
 FOR ROOTING OUT CORRUPTION

Sec. 301. Congressional notification of change in status of Inspector 
 General.
Sec. 302. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an Inspector 
 General.

 TITLE I--NO PERSONAL ENRICHMENT FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES

 Subtitle A--Stop Waste And Misuse by the President

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Stop Waste And Misuse by the 
President Act of 2019'' or the ``SWAMP Act of 2019''.

SEC. 102. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) Presidential travel to commercial entities owned in 
 whole or in part by the President or First Family results in 
 the American taxpayer effectively subsidizing the President's 
 businesses.
 (2) Given current expenditures, President Trump is on track 
 to spend more during his first year of office than all eight 
 years of the Obama administration combined.
 (3) It is unacceptable for the President to maintain an 
 interest in traveling to properties in which he has a direct 
 financial interest, as the U.S. Government is responsible for 
 renting space for personnel in said private commercial 
 entities.
 (4) Every time the President travels to Mar-a-Lago, he 
 necessarily promotes his private business interests via free 
 press at the Government's expense.
 (5) The State Department's recent promotion of Mar-a-Lago 
 on its official website raises serious ethics concerns.
 (6) As of April 14, 2017, President Trump has cost the U.S. 
 taxpayer unprecedented amounts of money, including the 
 following estimated costs:
 (A) For trips to Mar-a-Lago:
 (i) Total cost for security in Palm Beach: 
 $3,700,000 (each trip).
 (ii) Roundtrip flights from Joint Base 
 Andrews, Maryland, to West Palm, Florida: 
 $700,000.
 (iii) Overtime for local law enforcement 
 during Trump's trips: $60,000/day.
 (iv) Total golf cart rentals ordered by the 
 Secret Service ``for POTUS visit'': $35,185.
 (v) Estimated loss of business due to 
 airport closure: $30,000/weekend.
 (B) For Trump Tower:
 (i) Request for additional Secret Service 
 funding to secure Trump Towers: $60,000,000.
 (ii) New York Police Department security 
 costs: $127,000-$146,000/day.
 (iii) ``Elevator services'' ordered by the 
 Secret Service: $64,000.
 (iv) Air Force One flights to New York 
 City: $180,000/hour.
 (7) The proposed 2017 Federal spending bill includes 
 reimbursements for millions of dollars spent by Florida and New 
 York to protect the President and First Family, and facilitate 
 their travel. While localities should be reimbursed, the 
 taxpayer should not be responsible for said reimbursement.

SEC. 103. REIMBURSAL FOR COSTS OF PROTECTION.

 In the case of a person whom the United States Secret Service is 
authorized to protect under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 3056(a) of 
title 18, United States Code, if that person, while traveling for 
official business or for personal purposes, stays in a hotel or other 
establishment providing daily-rate accommodation in which that person 
has an ownership or financial interest, that person shall reimburse to 
the Treasury--
 (1) any amount expended by the United States Secret Service 
 for the provision of such protection; and
 (2) any amount expended for other costs incurred by the 
 Government pertaining to that stay.

 Subtitle B--Stop Waste And Misuse by Presidential Flyers Landing Yet 
 Evading Rules and Standards

SEC. 111. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Stop Waste And Misuse by 
Presidential Flyers Landing Yet Evading Rules and Standards Act'' or 
the ``SWAMP FLYERS Act''.

SEC. 112. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR TRAVEL ON PRIVATE AIRCRAFT.

 (a) In General.--Beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
Act, no Federal funds appropriated or otherwise made available in any 
fiscal year may be used to pay the travel expenses of any senior 
political appointee for travel on official business on a non-
commercial, private, or chartered flight.
 (b) Exceptions.--The limitation in subsection (a) shall not apply--
 (1) if no commercial flight was available for the travel in 
 question, consistent with subsection (c); or
 (2) to any travel on aircraft owned or leased by the 
 Government.
 (c) Certification.--
 (1) In general.--Any senior political appointee who travels 
 on a non-commercial, private, or chartered flight under the 
 exception provided in subsection (b)(1) shall, not later than 
 30 days after the date of such travel, submit a written 
 statement to Congress certifying that no commercial flight was 
 available.
 (2) Penalty.--Any statement submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall be considered a statement for purposes of applying 
 section 1001 of title 18, United States Code.
 (d) Definition of Senior Political Appointee.--In this subtitle, 
the term ``senior political appointee'' means any individual 
occupying--
 (1) a position listed under the Executive Schedule 
 (subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code);
 (2) a Senior Executive Service position that is not a 
 career appointee as defined under section 3132(a)(4) of such 
 title; or
 (3) a position of a confidential or policy-determining 
 character under schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5, 
 Code of Federal Regulations.

 Subtitle C--E. Scott Pruitt Accountability for Government Officials

SEC. 121. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``E. Scott Pruitt Accountability 
for Government Officials Act of 2019''.

SEC. 122. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) During his time as Administrator of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, Scott Pruitt faced more than 12 separate 
 ethics investigations including by the Environmental Protection 
 Agency Inspector General, the Committee on Oversight and Reform 
 of the House of Representatives, the Executive Office of the 
 President, the Government Accountability Office, and the U.S. 
 Office of Special Counsel.
 (2) On October 2, 2017, the Department of the Interior's 
 Inspector General confirmed they were investigating Secretary 
 Ryan Zinke's taxpayer-funded flights, including $12,375 on a 
 chartered flight from Las Vegas to Montana where he spoke to a 
 hockey team that is owned by one of Secretary Zinke's largest 
 political donors.
 (3) On March 14, 2018, CNN reported that Secretary of 
 Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson knew about a dining 
 set worth $31,000 that was ordered for Carson's office, 
 knowledge of which he had previously denied.
 (4) On March 20, 2018, it was publicly reported that Scott 
 Pruitt secured a sub-market lease for a Washington, DC, 
 condominium owned by the wife of a lobbyist who represented 
 clients with matters pending before the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, and told the Washington Examiner that he was 
 ``dumbfounded that that's controversial''.
 (5) On April 4, 2018, the New York Times reported that 
 Scott Pruitt used a loophole in the Safe Water Drinking Act to 
 give raises to his aides that had been explicitly denied by the 
 White House.
 (6) On April 16, 2018, the Washington Post reported that 
 Scott Pruitt had spent nearly $3,000,000 of taxpayer funds on 
 security and travel since taking office in February 2017.
 (7) On April 26, 2018, Politico reported that Scott Pruitt 
 spent over $105,000 of taxpayer funds on first-class flights, 
 citing since-debunked threats to his personal security.
 (8) On June 5, 2018, the Washington Post reported that 
 Scott Pruitt used official channels to pressure Chick-fil-A 
 Chief Executive Officer Dan Cathy into securing a restaurant 
 franchise for his wife.
 (9) On June 6, 2018, the Washington Post reported that 
 Scott Pruitt forced aides to help him secure a used ``Trump 
 Home Luxury Plush Euro Pillow Top''.
 (10) On June 8, 2018, the Washington Post reported that 
 Scott Pruitt forced his security detail to help him acquire 
 high-end hand lotion and to pick up his dry cleaning.
 (11) On July 2, 2018, the Washington Post reported that 
 Scott Pruitt recruited a staff member to help his wife find a 
 job, the salary for which he stipulated should be no less than 
 $200,000.
 (12) On July 5, 2018, Scott Pruitt resigned amid myriad 
 scandals and massive public pressure.
 (13) On July 13, 2018, Forbes reported on Wilbur Ross' 
 massive conflicts of interest, including having taken meetings 
 with a trade association whose members included a car 
 manufacturer whose investors included Ross himself. The same 
 report noted that Wilbur Ross took meetings with companies 
 whose investors included his wife.
 (14) On July 13, 2018, The New York Times reported that Tom 
 Price repeatedly violated Government travel rules, wasting at 
 least $314,000 of taxpayer funds by using chartered jets and 
 military air travel instead of commercially available flights.

SEC. 123. USE OF PUBLIC OFFICE FOR PRIVATE GAIN.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 93 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1925. Use of public office for private gain
 ``(a) Use for Private Gain.--Whoever, being a covered Federal 
officer or employee, uses his public office for--
 ``(1) his own private gain;
 ``(2) the endorsement of any product, service or 
 enterprise; or
 ``(3) the private gain of a friend, relative, or a person 
 with whom the covered Federal officer or employee is affiliated 
 in a nongovernmental capacity, including a nonprofit 
 organization of which the covered Federal officer or employee 
 is an officer or member, and a person with whom the employee 
 has or seeks employment or business relations,
shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than one year, or 
in the case of a willful violation, not more than 5 years, or both.
 ``(b) Coercion.--Whoever, being a covered Federal officer or 
employee, uses or permits the use of his Government position or title 
or any authority associated with his public office in a manner that is 
intended to coerce or induce another person, including a subordinate, 
to provide any benefit, financial or otherwise, to himself or to a 
friend, relative, or person with whom the covered Federal officer or 
employee is affiliated in a nongovernmental capacity, shall be fined 
under this title, imprisoned not more than one year, or in the case of 
a willful violation, not more than 5 years, or both.
 ``(c) Covered Federal Officer or Employee.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `covered Federal officer or employee' means any of 
the following officers or employees of the Federal Government:
 ``(1) Assistant to the President for National Security 
 Affairs.
 ``(2) Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff.
 ``(3) Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff.
 ``(4) Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff 
 for Communications (or Director of Communications).
 ``(5) Assistant to the President and Press Secretary.
 ``(6) Senior Advisor to the President.
 ``(7) Assistant to the President and Staff Secretary.
 ``(8) Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and 
 Counterterrorism.
 ``(9) Assistant to the President and Counselor to the 
 President.
 ``(10) Director of the National Economic Council.
 ``(11) Director of the Domestic Policy Council.
 ``(12) Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff or 
 Deputy Chief of Staff to the Vice President.
 ``(13) Special Assistant to the President and Director of 
 Communications for the Vice President.
 ``(14) Press Secretary to the Vice President.
 ``(15) Senior Advisor to the Vice President.
 ``(16) Deputy Assistant to the President and National 
 Security Advisor or Deputy National Security Advisor to the 
 Vice President.
 ``(17) Deputy Assistant to the President and Counselor to 
 the Vice President.
 ``(18) Assistant to the President and White House Counsel.
 ``(19) Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
 ``(20) Any officer or employee whose appointment is made by 
 the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 ``(21) The President.
 ``(22) The Vice President.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 93 of 
title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
related to section 1924 the following:

``1925. Use of public office for private gain.''.

 Subtitle D--Curb Objectionable Redirection of Resources and 
 Unconstitutional Payments to Trump

SEC. 131. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Curb Objectionable Redirection 
of Resources and Unconstitutional Payments to Trump Act'' or the 
``CORRUPT Act''.

SEC. 132. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Kleptocracy is a tool used by autocratic leaders, 
 including Vladimir Putin, to exploit state resources; it 
 involves the operation of sophisticated networks for the 
 purpose of self-enrichment.
 (2) Unlike prior presidents, President Trump has refused to 
 sell his business interests or divest himself of assets that 
 present potential conflicts of interest.
 (3) Article I of the Constitution states that ``no Person 
 holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, 
 without the consent of the Congress, accept any present, 
 emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any 
 King, Prince, or foreign State''.
 (4) Foreign governments and foreign-held companies have 
 already shifted business to the President's companies in order 
 to curry favor with the Administration.
 (5) According to reports, the Trump International Hotel has 
 generated at least $19,700,000 in income for the President 
 between September 2016 and April 2017.
 (6) The National Security Council and State Department have 
 allegedly used taxpayers' money to pay for staff to stay at 
 Trump hotels and resorts, thereby benefitting the President.

SEC. 133. SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) kleptocrats such as Vladimir Putin pose a threat to 
 United States national security by undermining financial and 
 Government institutions;
 (2) the United States must take all steps necessary to 
 defend itself against kleptocratic practices; and
 (3) Federal funds should not be expended in a manner that 
 enriches the President or any of his close relatives or 
 associates.

SEC. 134. REPORTS.

 (a) Agency Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the head of each agency shall submit to the 
Office of Government Ethics a report on the amount expended by that 
agency in fiscal year 2018 at, or any payments made to, any covered 
property and shall include--
 (1) any hotel stay using per diem or other funds; or
 (2) the rental of any conference room or meeting facility.
 (b) Office of Government Ethics Report.--Not later than 120 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Office of Government 
Ethics shall submit to Congress a comprehensive report on funds 
expended by any agency at, or any payments made to, a covered property 
in fiscal year 2018.
 (c) Annual Report.--At the end of the next fiscal year following 
the date of the enactment of this Act, and at the end of each fiscal 
year thereafter, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall submit to Congress a report on the direct and indirect ways that 
funds appropriated to agencies have benefitted a covered property, 
including--
 (1) funds expended by any agency at, or any payments made 
 to, a covered property in the previous fiscal year;
 (2) regulatory actions in the previous fiscal year with a 
 beneficial impact on a covered property; and
 (3) indirect expenditures with vendors conducting more than 
 $1,000,000 in business with a covered individual or with the 
 owners of a covered property in the previous fiscal year.

SEC. 135. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Agency.--The term ``agency''--
 (A) has the meaning given the term--
 (i) ``Executive agency'' under section 105 
 of title 5, United States Code; and
 (ii) ``military department'' under section 
 102 of title 5, United States Code; and
 (B) means--
 (i) any other establishment in the 
 executive branch (including the Executive 
 Office of the President, the United States 
 Postal Service, and the Postal Regulatory 
 Commission);
 (ii) an office, agency, or other 
 establishment in the legislative branch; and
 (iii) an office, agency, or other 
 establishment in the judicial branch.
 (2) Covered individual.--The term ``covered individual'' 
 means--
 (A) the President;
 (B) a relative of the President; and
 (C) with respect to an agency that is an Executive 
 department, the head of the Executive department.
 (3) Covered property.--The term ``covered property'' 
 means--
 (A) any property controlled by the Trump 
 Organization; or
 (B) an organization or business controlled by or 
 associated with a covered person (including any known 
 shell company), any member of the President's family, 
 or any employee of the Trump Organization.
 (4) Executive department.--The term ``Executive 
 department'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of 
 title 5, United States Code.

 Subtitle E--Relatives In Government Getting Employment Dishonorably

SEC. 141. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Relatives In Government Getting 
Employment Dishonorably Act'' or the ``RIGGED Act''.

SEC. 142. EMPLOYMENT OF RELATIVES; RESTRICTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3110 of title 5, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A) by inserting ``, including 
 the White House Office and the Executive Office of the 
 President'' after ``Executive agency'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) `civilian position' means any existing or newly 
 created position in an agency, including a position acting in a 
 professional or official capacity as a consultant or advisor, 
 regardless of whether such position is voluntary, gratuitous, 
 or authorized by law to be compensated;'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``A public official may 
 not'' and inserting ``Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, a public official may not''; and
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by inserting ``shall be removed immediately 
 and'' after ``in violation of this section''; and
 (B) by striking ``as pay'' and inserting ``as 
 salary or expenses''.
 (b) Application of Prohibited Personnel Practices.--Section 
2302(a)(2)(C) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
``, including the White House Office,'' after ``Executive agency''.

 Subtitle F--Determining if Regulatory Actions are in the Interest of 
 the Nation or the Swamp

SEC. 151. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Determining if Regulatory 
Actions are in the Interest of the Nation or the Swamp Act of 2019'' or 
the ``DRAIN the Swamp Act of 2019''.

SEC. 152. REQUIRING GREATER TRANSPARENCY FOR REGULATORY CONFLICTS OF 
 INTEREST.

 (a) In General.--Part I of title 5, United States Code, is amended 
by inserting after chapter 6, the following new chapter:

 ``CHAPTER 6A--PUBLICATION OF INFORMATION RELATING TO REGULATORY 
 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

``621. Definitions.
``622. Agency submission to Comptroller General.
``Sec. 621. Definitions
 ``In this chapter:
 ``(1) Agency; rule; rule making.--The terms `agency', 
 `rule', and `rule making' have the meanings given those terms 
 in section 551.
 ``(2) Major rule.--The term `major rule' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 804.
 ``(3) Regulatory conflict of interest.--The term 
 `regulatory conflict of interest' means a major rule that has a 
 substantial pecuniary benefit to a covered person.
 ``(4) Covered person.--The term `covered person' means the 
 President, senior advisors to the President, including special 
 advisors that do not receive an official salary, the head of 
 the agency issuing the rule, the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget, the Administrator of the Office of 
 Information and Regulatory Affairs, or any individual who 
 serves on a Regulatory Reform Task Force established by section 
 3 of Executive Order 13777.
``Sec. 622. Agency submission to Comptroller General
 ``(a) Regulatory Conflicts of Interest.--Not later than September 
30 of each fiscal year, the head of each agency shall submit to the 
Comptroller General of the United States in such a manner as the 
Comptroller General may reasonably require, for each major rule that 
the agency proposes or finalizes during that fiscal year, an assessment 
and quantification of any regulatory conflict of interest pertaining to 
that major rule.
 ``(b) Exception.--Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any rule 
that an agency for good cause finds (and incorporates the finding and a 
brief statement of each reason therefor in the rule issued) that notice 
and public procedure thereon are impracticable, unnecessary, or 
contrary to the public interest.
 ``(c) Major Rules.--Before a major rule may take effect, the head 
of the agency promulgating such rule shall submit to the Comptroller 
General and publish in the Federal Register the report required 
pursuant to subsection (a).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part I of title 
5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating 
to chapter 6, the following new item:

``6A. Publication of Information Relating to Regulatory 621''.
 Conflicts of Interest.

SEC. 153. ACUS STUDY AND REPORT ON REGULATORY CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.

 (a) In General.--The Administrative Conference of the United States 
shall conduct a study on--
 (1) compliance by agencies with this subtitle and the 
 amendments made by this subtitle; and
 (2) effective measures to minimize regulatory conflicts of 
 interest (as that term is defined in section 621(3) of title 5, 
 United States Code, as added by section 152(a)).
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Administrative Conference of the United States shall 
submit to Congress a report that contains the findings of the study 
conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 154. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) Agency Statements on Regulatory Conflicts of Interest.--
 (1) In general.--Compliance or noncompliance by any agency 
 with the provisions of chapter 6A of title 5, United States 
 Code, as added by section 152(a), shall be subject to judicial 
 review only in accordance with this section.
 (2) Limited review of agency compliance or noncompliance.--
 (A) In general.--Agency compliance or noncompliance 
 with the provisions of chapter 6A of title 5, United 
 States Code, as added by section 152(a), shall be 
 subject to judicial review only under section 706(1) of 
 title 5, United States Code, and only as provided under 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Failure to prepare written statement.--If an 
 agency fails to prepare the written statement 
 (including the preparation of the estimates, analyses, 
 statements, or descriptions) under such chapter, a 
 court may compel the agency to prepare such written 
 statement.
 (3) Review of agency rules.--In any judicial review under 
 any other Federal law of an agency rule for which a written 
 statement is required under such chapter 6A, the inadequacy or 
 failure to prepare such statement shall not be used as a basis 
 for staying, enjoining, invalidating or otherwise affecting 
 such agency rule.
 (4) Certain information as part of record.--Any information 
 generated under such chapter 6A that is part of the rule making 
 record for judicial review under the provisions of any other 
 Federal law may be considered as part of the record for 
 judicial review conducted under such other provisions of 
 Federal law.
 (5) Application of other federal law.--For any petition 
 under paragraph (2) the provisions of such other Federal law 
 shall control all other matters, such as exhaustion of 
 administrative remedies, the time for and manner of seeking 
 review and venue, except that if such other Federal law does 
 not provide a limitation on the time for filing a petition for 
 judicial review that is less than 1 year, such limitation shall 
 be 1 year after a final rule is promulgated by the appropriate 
 agency.
 (b) Judicial Review and Rule of Construction.--Except as provided 
in subsection (a)--
 (1) any information submitted under this section shall not 
 be subject to judicial review; and
 (2) no provision of this subtitle shall be construed to 
 create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, 
 enforceable by any person in any administrative or judicial 
 action.

SEC. 155. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall take effect beginning on the date of the 
enactment of this Act and shall apply to any agency rule for which a 
general notice of proposed rule making is made on or after such date.

 TITLE II--ROOTING OUT CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 Subtitle A--Commonsense Legislation Ensuring Accountability by 
 Reporting Access of Non-Cleared Employees to Secrets

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Commonsense Legislation 
Ensuring Accountability by Reporting Access of Non-Cleared Employees to 
Secrets Act'' or the ``CLEARANCES Act''.

SEC. 202. REPORT ON SECURITY CLEARANCES FOR INDIVIDUALS WORKING IN THE 
 WHITE HOUSE AND EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

 (a) In General.--Subpart I of part III of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended by adding after section 10106 the following:

 ``CHAPTER 102--SECURITY CLEARANCES

``Sec.
``10201. Report on individuals working in the White House and Executive 
 Office of the President.
``Sec. 10201. Report on individuals working in the White House and 
 Executive Office of the President
 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 3 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section and every 3 months thereafter, the President 
shall submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on 
security clearance information on any individual working in the White 
House or the Executive Office of the President, including--
 ``(1) the President's staff or any other individual in the 
 White House or Office whose function is to advise or assist the 
 President; and
 ``(2) any individual who is detailed from the Government, a 
 university, a think tank, or the private sector to the White 
 House or the Office.
 ``(b) Report Requirements.--A report submitted under subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 ``(1) The name and position of any individual working in 
 the White House or the Office and who holds a security 
 clearance.
 ``(2) With respect to any detailee, the entity or agency 
 from which the individual was detailed from.
 ``(3) With respect to any clearance listed pursuant to 
 paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) whether the clearance is temporary or 
 permanent and level of the clearance;
 ``(B) the date the background investigation was 
 initiated and the date of adjudication (if any); and
 ``(C) the date of any interim reports or 
 notifications from the investigating agency.
 ``(4) The name and position of any individual working in 
 the White House or the Office who was granted a security 
 clearance by the President or other authorizing personnel 
 despite an unfavorable recommendation from the White House 
 Security Office or an agency, and the date the decision was 
 made to grant the clearance.
 ``(5) The name and position of any individual not contained 
 in any list above whom the President has provided access to 
 classified information, the date the information was so 
 provided, and the level of classification of the information.
 ``(6) The name and position of any individual working in 
 the White House or Office--
 ``(A) whose security clearance has been revoked or 
 suspended and the date of such revocation or 
 suspension; or
 ``(B) who held an interim security clearance for a 
 period longer than one year, and a justification from 
 the White House Counsel as to why it is in the national 
 security interest of the United States to keep the 
 employee in the position without a permanent security 
 clearance.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section--
 ``(1) the term `appropriate congressional committees' 
 means--
 ``(A) the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence and the Committees on Oversight and Reform 
 and the Judiciary of the House of Representatives; and
 ``(B) the Select Committee on Intelligence and the 
 Committees on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs and the Judiciary of the Senate; and
 ``(2) the term `Office' means the Executive Office of the 
 President.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for such title is 
amended by adding after the item relating to chapter 101 the following:

``102. Security Clearances.................................. 10201''.

 Subtitle B--Divestiture of Certain Financial Interests of Federal 
 Officers and Employees and Spouses

SEC. 211. DIVESTITURE OF CERTAIN FINANCIAL INTERESTS OF FEDERAL 
 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND SPOUSES.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``covered significant business interest''--
 (A) means any financial interest of a covered 
 officer or employee in a corporation, company, 
 association, firm, partnership, proprietorship, or any 
 other business entity of which the covered officer or 
 employee is--
 (i) a trustee;
 (ii) a partner;
 (iii) an officer;
 (iv) a director; or
 (v) a shareholder who holds more than 10 
 percent of any class of equity securities; and
 (B) does not include any financial interest 
 consisting of obligations issued by the Treasury, 
 diversified mutual funds that qualify for a regulatory 
 exemption, or residential property that is not held for 
 the production of rental or other income;
 (2) the terms ``conflict-free holding'' and ``qualified 
 blind trust'' have the meanings given those terms in sections 
 102(f)(3) and 102(f)(8), respectively, of the Ethics in 
 Government Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.); and
 (3) the term ``covered officer or employee'' means--
 (A) any individual occupying a position--
 (i) listed under the Executive Schedule 
 (subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United 
 States Code);
 (ii) in the Senior Executive Service as a 
 noncareer appointee (as that term is defined in 
 section 3132(a) if such title);
 (iii) of a confidential or policy-
 determining character under schedule C of 
 subpart C of part 213 of title 5, Code of 
 Federal Regulations; or
 (iv) in the executive branch whose 
 appointment is made by the President, by and 
 with the advice and consent of the Senate; and
 (B) any individual occupying any of the following 
 positions:
 (i) Assistant to the President for National 
 Security Affairs.
 (ii) Assistant to the President and Chief 
 of Staff.
 (iii) Assistant to the President and Deputy 
 Chief of Staff.
 (iv) Assistant to the President and Deputy 
 Chief of Staff for Communications (or Director 
 of Communications).
 (v) Assistant to the President and Press 
 Secretary.
 (vi) Senior Advisor to the President.
 (vii) Assistant to the President and Staff 
 Secretary.
 (viii) Assistant to the President for 
 Homeland Security and Counterterrorism.
 (ix) Assistant to the President and 
 Counselor to the President.
 (x) Director of the National Economic 
 Council.
 (xi) Director of the Domestic Policy 
 Council.
 (xii) Assistant to the President and Chief 
 of Staff or Deputy Chief of Staff to the Vice 
 President.
 (xiii) Special Assistant to the President 
 and Director of Communications for the Vice 
 President.
 (xiv) Press Secretary to the Vice 
 President.
 (xv) Senior Advisor to the Vice President.
 (xvi) Deputy Assistant to the President and 
 National Security Advisor or Deputy National 
 Security Advisor to the Vice President.
 (xvii) Deputy Assistant to the President 
 and Counselor to the Vice President.
 (xviii) Assistant to the President and 
 White House Counsel.
 (b) Divestiture of Covered Significant Business Interest.--
 (1) In general.--A covered officer or employee or the 
 spouse of any such an officer or employee shall divest of any 
 covered significant business interest by transferring such 
 interest to a qualified blind trust.
 (2) Trustee duties.--Within a reasonable period of time 
 after the date a covered significant business interest is 
 transferred to a qualified blind trust under paragraph (1), the 
 trustee of the qualified blind trust shall--
 (A) sell the interest; and
 (B) use the proceeds of the sale of the interest to 
 purchase conflict-free holdings.
 (c) Enforcement.--The Attorney General, the attorney general of any 
State, or any person aggrieved by any violation of subsection (b) may 
seek declaratory or injunctive relief in a court of competent 
jurisdiction if there is probable cause to believe that a covered 
officer or employee or the spouse of such an officer or employee has 
not complied with such subsection.

 Subtitle C--Presidential Tax Transparency

SEC. 221. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Tax Transparency Act of 
2019''.

SEC. 222. PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE PRESIDENTIAL TAX TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) The term ``covered candidate'' means a candidate of a 
 major party in a general election for the office of President 
 or Vice President.
 (2) The term ``major party'' has the meaning given the term 
 in section 9002 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (3) The term ``income tax return'' means, with respect to 
 an individual, any return (as such term is defined in section 
 6103(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) of such 
 individual other than--
 (A) information returns issued to persons other 
 than such individual; and
 (B) declarations of estimated tax.
 (4) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the 
 Treasury or the delegate of the Secretary.
 (b) Disclosure.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Candidates for president and vice president.--
 Not later than the date that is 15 days after the date 
 on which an individual becomes a covered candidate, the 
 individual shall submit to the Federal Election 
 Commission a copy of the individual's income tax 
 returns for the 10 most recent taxable years for which 
 a return has been filed with the Internal Revenue 
 Service.
 (B) President and vice president.--With respect to 
 each taxable year for an individual who is the 
 President or Vice President, not later than the due 
 date for the return of tax for the taxable year, such 
 individual shall submit to the Federal Election 
 Commission a copy of the individual's income tax 
 returns for the taxable year and for the 9 preceding 
 taxable years.
 (C) Transition rule for sitting presidents and vice 
 presidents.--Not later than the date that is 30 days 
 after the date of enactment of this section, an 
 individual who is the President or Vice President on 
 such date of enactment shall submit to the Federal 
 Election Commission a copy of the income tax returns 
 for the 10 most recent taxable years for which a return 
 has been filed with the Internal Revenue Service.
 (2) Failure to disclose.--If any requirement under 
 paragraph (1) to submit an income tax return is not met, the 
 chairman of the Federal Election Commission shall submit to the 
 Secretary a written request that the Secretary provide the 
 Federal Election Commission with the income tax return.
 (3) Publicly available.--The chairman of the Federal 
 Election Commission shall make publicly available each income 
 tax return submitted under paragraph (1) in the same manner as 
 a return provided under section 6103(l)(23) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section).
 (4) Treatment as a report under the federal election 
 campaign act of 1971.--For purposes of the Federal Election 
 Campaign Act of 1971, any income tax return submitted under 
 paragraph (1) or provided under section 6103(l)(23) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this section) shall, 
 after redaction under paragraph (3) or subparagraph (B)(ii) of 
 such section, be treated as a report filed under the Federal 
 Election Campaign Act of 1971.
 (c) Disclosure of Returns of Presidents and Vice Presidents and 
Certain Candidates for President and Vice President.--
 (1) In general.--Section 6103(l) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(23) Disclosure of return information of presidents and 
 vice presidents and certain candidates for president and vice 
 president.--
 ``(A) In general.--Upon written request by the 
 chairman of the Federal Election Commission under 
 section 1(b)(2) of the Presidential Tax Transparency 
 Act of 2019, the Secretary shall provide copies of any 
 return which is so requested to officers and employees 
 of the Federal Election Commission whose official 
 duties include disclosure or redaction of such return 
 under this paragraph.
 ``(B) Disclosure to the public.--
 ``(i) In general.--The chairman of the 
 Federal Election Commission shall make publicly 
 available any return which is provided under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Redaction of certain information.--
 Before making publicly available under clause 
 (i) any return, the chairman of the Federal 
 Election Commission shall redact such 
 information as the Federal Election Commission 
 and the Secretary jointly determine is 
 necessary for protecting against identity 
 theft, such as social security numbers.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 6103(p)(4) of such Code 
 is amended--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by 
 striking ``or (22)'' and inserting ``(22), or (23)''; 
 and
 (B) in subparagraph (F)(ii) by striking ``or (22)'' 
 and inserting ``(22), or (23)''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to disclosures made on or after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle D--White House Open Data

SEC. 231. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``White House Open Data Act''.

SEC. 232. WHITE HOUSE VISITOR LOG AND EMPLOYEE INFORMATION.

 (a) Requirement To Publish.--Except as provided in subsection (b), 
not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Executive Office of the President shall make available on a publicly 
available website in an easily searchable and downloadable format the 
following information:
 (1) Visitor records for any location where the President or 
 Vice President regularly conducts official business, which 
 shall--
 (A) include the name of each visitor, the name of 
 each individual with whom the visitor met, and the 
 purpose of the visit; and
 (B) shall be updated every 30 days.
 (2) The annual salary of each White House employee, which 
 shall be updated quarterly.
 (3) The most recent financial disclosure statement for each 
 White House employee filed pursuant to the Ethics in Government 
 Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), which shall be updated annually.
 (b) Exceptions.--Except as provided in subsection (c)(3), the 
requirement described in subsection (a) does not apply to any visitor 
record that relates to--
 (1) the social security number, taxpayer identification 
 number, birth date, home address, or personal phone number of 
 an individual, the name of an individual who is less than 18 
 years old, or a financial account number;
 (2) a law enforcement concern;
 (3) a national security threat;
 (4) the personal safety of an employee of the Executive 
 Office of the President; or
 (5) personal visits that do not involve any official or 
 political business.
 (c) Records Withheld.--With respect to a visitor record excepted 
under subsection (b), the Executive Office of the President shall--
 (1) disclose the number of records withheld every 30 days;
 (2) post any such excepted record on the website described 
 under subsection (a) if the Executive Office of the President 
 determines that the record is no longer subject to an exception 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (3) notwithstanding subsection (b), post any reasonably 
 segregable portion that is not covered by an exception 
 described in subsection (b) of any such excepted record on the 
 website described under subsection (a).

 Subtitle E--Prohibitions on Making Certain Contracts with Federal 
 Government or receiving Federal funds

SEC. 241. PROHIBITIONS ON MAKING CERTAIN CONTRACTS WITH FEDERAL 
 GOVERNMENT OR RECEIVING FEDERAL FUNDS.

 (a) Contracts With Federal Government.--
 (1) Prohibition.--The following may not enter into or 
 benefit from a contract or agreement with the Federal 
 Government, or any part thereof:
 (A) The President.
 (B) The Vice President.
 (C) An immediate family member of the President.
 (D) An immediate family member of the Vice 
 President.
 (E) A covered significant business interest.
 (2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to the 
 following:
 (A) A contract or agreement with the Federal 
 Government entered into or negotiated before or after 
 the period in which the President or the Vice 
 President, as applicable, serves in office.
 (B) A contract for employment with the Federal 
 Government or a contract for service in the Armed 
 Forces, or any benefits provided under such employment 
 or service.
 (b) Receipt of Federal Funds.--
 (1) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Federal Government may not obligate or expend Federal funds 
 with the President, the Vice President, or a covered 
 significant business interest.
 (2) Exceptions.--
 (A) Entitlements.--The Federal Government may 
 obligate or expend Federal funds the President or the 
 Vice President is entitled to by law for discharging an 
 official duty, including annual salary.
 (B) Obligations.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to 
 Federal funds obligated or expended before or after the 
 period in which the President or the Vice President, as 
 applicable, serves in office.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to 
limit any payment to the President, the Vice President, an immediate 
family member of the President or Vice President, or covered 
significant business interest of any Federal benefit for which the 
President, the Vice President, an immediate family member of the 
President or Vice President, or covered significant business interest 
would otherwise be eligible.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Contract or agreement with federal government.--The 
 term ``contract or agreement with the Federal Government'' 
 means a procurement contract or grant, a land use contract, or 
 a lease created, funded, or controlled by the Federal 
 Government, respectively.
 (2) Covered significant business interest.--The term 
 ``covered significant business interest'' means any 
 corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, 
 proprietorship, or any other business entity of which the 
 President, the Vice President, an immediate family member of 
 the President, or an immediate family member of the Vice 
 President is--
 (A) a trustee;
 (B) a partner;
 (C) an officer;
 (D) a director; or
 (E) a shareholder who holds more than 10 percent of 
 any class of equity securities.
 (3) Immediate family member.--The term ``immediate family 
 member'' means a spouse, parent, sibling, child, or dependent 
 relative.
 (e) Application.--
 (1) Contract or agreement with federal government.--The 
 prohibition under subsection (a)(1) applies to contracts or 
 agreements with the Federal Government entered into, revised, 
 or renewed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Federal funds.--The prohibition under subsection (a)(2) 
 applies to Federal funds obligated after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.

 TITLE III--INCREASED OVERSIGHT AND STRENGTHENING AGENCIES RESPONSIBLE 
 FOR ROOTING OUT CORRUPTION

SEC. 301. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE IN STATUS OF INSPECTOR 
 GENERAL.

 (a) Change in Status of Inspector General of Offices.--Section 3(b) 
of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``, is placed on paid or unpaid non-duty 
 status,'' after ``is removed from office'';
 (2) by inserting ``, change in status,'' after ``any such 
 removal''; and
 (3) by inserting ``, change in status,'' after ``before the 
 removal''.
 (b) Change in Status of Inspector General of Designated Federal 
Entities.--Section 8G(e)(2) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``, is placed on paid or unpaid non-duty 
 status,'' after ``office'';
 (2) by inserting ``, change in status,'' after ``any such 
 removal''; and
 (3) by inserting ``, change in status,'' after ``before the 
 removal''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 302. PRESIDENTIAL EXPLANATION OF FAILURE TO NOMINATE AN INSPECTOR 
 GENERAL.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 33 of title 5, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3349d the following 
new section:
``Sec. 3349e. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an 
 Inspector General
 ``If the President fails to make a formal nomination for a vacant 
Inspector General position within the period beginning on the date on 
which the vacancy occurred and ending on the day that is 210 days after 
that date, the President shall communicate, within 30 days after the 
end of such period, to Congress in writing --
 ``(1) the reasons why the President has not yet made a 
 formal nomination; and
 ``(2) a target date for making a formal nomination.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 33 of 
title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to 3349d the following new item:

``3349e. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an Inspector 
 General.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to 
any vacancy first occurring on or after that date.
 <all>