S 565 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 565
To authorize a new corporation to support State and local strategies for
achieving more affordable housing; to increase homeownership; and for other
purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 15 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. CRANSTON (for himself, Mr. D'AMATO, Mr. KERRY, Mr. HEINZ, Mr. RIEGLE,
Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. SARBANES, Mr. DODD, Mr. DIXON, Mr. SASSER, Mr. SANFORD,
Mr. SHELBY, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. BRYAN, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. BINGAMAN, Mr. BUMPERS,
Mr. BURDICK, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr. GORTON, Mr. KASTEN, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. LAUTENBERG,
Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. PELL, Mr. REID, Mr. SIMON, and Mr. WILSON)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Finance
A BILL
To authorize a new corporation to support State and local strategies for
achieving more affordable housing; to increase homeownership; and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `National Affordable Housing Act'.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. Short title.
TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS AND POLICIES
Sec. 101. The national housing goal.
Sec. 102. Objective of national housing policy.
Sec. 103. Purposes of the National Affordable Housing Act.
Sec. 104. Definitions.
Sec. 105. State and local housing strategies.
TITLE II--HOMEOWNERSHIP
Sec. 201. Purpose.
Subtitle A--FHA Amendments
Sec. 211. FHA amendments.
Subtitle B--Savings for a Downpayment
Sec. 221. Certain retirement plans authorized to make equity investments in
principal residences of participants.
Sec. 222. Loans used to acquire principal residences.
Sec. 223. Mortgage revenue bonds and mortgage certificates.
TITLE III--INVESTMENT IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Purposes.
Sec. 303. Establishment of Home Corporation.
Sec. 304. Authorization.
Subtitle A--Housing Opportunity Partnerships (HOP)
Sec. 311. Authority.
Sec. 312. Eligible uses of investment.
Sec. 313. Development of model programs.
Sec. 314. Income targeting.
Sec. 315. Qualification as affordable housing.
Sec. 316. Participation by States and local governments.
Sec. 317. Allocation of resources.
Sec. 318. Housing investment trust funds.
Sec. 319. Repayment of investment.
Sec. 320. Matching requirements.
Sec. 321. Private-public partnership.
Sec. 322. Distribution of assistance.
Sec. 323. Set-aside for nonprofit community organizations.
Sec. 324. Penalties for misuse of funds.
Sec. 325. Limitation on jurisdictions under court order.
Subtitle B--Mortgage Credit Enhancement
Sec. 331. Authority.
Sec. 332. Authority to contract.
Sec. 333. Terms.
Sec. 334. Requirements.
Sec. 335. Reduced risk of loss.
Sec. 336. Requirements required to relate to purpose of subtitle.
Sec. 337. Fees.
Sec. 338. Subrogation.
Subtitle C--Other Support for State and Local Housing Strategies
Sec. 351. Authority.
Sec. 352. Priorities for capacity development.
Sec. 353. Eligible organizations.
Sec. 354. Research in housing affordability.
Subtitle D--General Authority of the HOME Corporation
Sec. 361. General powers.
Sec. 362. Offices.
Sec. 363. Appointment of officers and employees.
Sec. 364. Exemption from certain taxes.
Sec. 365. Federal Reserve banks to act as fiscal agents.
Sec. 366. Investment of funds.
Sec. 367. SEC exemption.
Sec. 368. Immunities and priorities.
Sec. 369. Income and revenues.
Sec. 370. Presumption of compliance.
Sec. 371. Exclusive use of name.
Sec. 372. Government Corporation Control Act.
Subtitle E--General Provisions
Sec. 381. Nondiscrimination.
Sec. 382. Audit and accountability.
Sec. 383. Performance reports by participating jurisdictions.
Sec. 384. Citizen participation.
Sec. 385. Labor.
Sec. 386. Interstate agreements.
Sec. 387. Environmental review.
TITLE IV--AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING
Subtitle A--Preservation of Affordable Rental Housing
Sec. 401. Office of Affordable Housing Preservation.
Sec. 402. Cooperation with State and local governments.
Sec. 403. Mediation to assist low-income affordability.
Subtitle B--Low-Income Rental Assistance
Sec. 421. Purpose.
Sec. 422. Revised section 8 program.
Sec. 423. Timeliness of regulations.
Sec. 424. Transitional rule.
TITLE V--HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
Subtitle A--Assistant Secretary for Supportive Housing
Sec. 501. Establishment of Assistant Secretary for Supportive Housing.
Subtitle B--Supportive Housing for the Elderly
Sec. 511. Supportive housing for the elderly.
Sec. 512. Project retrofit.
Subtitle C--Supportive Housing for the Handicapped
Sec. 521. Supportive housing for the handicapped.
Subtitle D--Supportive Housing for the Homeless
Sec. 531. Amendment to McKinney Act.
Sec. 532. Definition of `homeless person'.
Sec. 533. Transitional rule.
Sec. 534. Conforming amendment.
TITLE VI--LOW-INCOME PUBLIC HOUSING
Sec. 601. Purpose.
Subtitle A--Public Housing Development
Sec. 611. Development and reconstruction of public housing.
Sec. 612. Replacement housing.
Subtitle B--Authorizations
Sec. 621. Authorization of operating subsidies.
Sec. 622. Authorization of public housing development and CIAP.
Subtitle C--Project Independence
Sec. 631. Purpose.
Sec. 632. Project independence.
Sec. 633. Conforming amendments.
Subtitle D--National Commission on Severely Distressed Public Housing
Sec. 641. Purpose.
Sec. 642. Establishment of Commission.
Sec. 643. Membership of Commission.
Sec. 644. Functions of the Commission.
Sec. 645. Powers of Commission.
Sec. 646. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE VII--RURAL HOUSING
Sec. 701. Purpose.
Sec. 702. Program authorizations.
Sec. 703. Section 502 deferred repayment.
Sec. 704. Housing in underserved areas.
Sec. 705. Transfer of section 502 inventory for use under section 515.
TITLE VIII--AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE
Sec. 801. Low-income housing credit.
TITLE IX--REPEALS AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Sec. 901. Amendment to title I of the Housing and Community Development Act
of 1974.
Sec. 902. Conforming amendments relating to investments.
Sec. 903. Compensation of HOME Corporation officials.
TITLE I--GENERAL PROVISIONS AND POLICIES
SEC. 101. THE NATIONAL HOUSING GOAL.
 The Congress affirms the national goal that every American family be able
 to afford a decent home in a suitable environment.
SEC. 102. OBJECTIVE OF NATIONAL HOUSING POLICY.
 The objective of national housing policy shall be to strengthen a nationwide
 system of public and private institutions able--
 (1) to ensure that no resident of the United States is without either
 access to decent shelter or assistance in avoiding homelessness;
 (2) to increase the Nation's supply of decent housing that is affordable to
 low-income and moderate-income families and accessible to job opportunities;
 (3) to improve housing opportunities for all residents of the United States,
 particularly members of disadvantaged minorities;
 (4) to help make neighborhoods safe and livable;
 (5) to expand opportunities for homeownership; and
 (6) to provide every American community with a reliable, readily available
 supply of mortgage finance at the lowest possible interest rates.
SEC. 103. PURPOSES OF THE NATIONAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING ACT.
 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to help families not owning a home to save for a down payment for the
 purchase of a home;
 (2) to retain wherever feasible as housing affordable to low-income families
 those dwelling units produced for such purpose with Federal assistance;
 (3) to extend and strengthen partnerships among all levels of government
 and the private sector, including for-profit and nonprofit organizations,
 in the production and operation of housing affordable to low-income and
 moderate-income families;
 (4) to expand and improve Federal rental assistance for very low-income
 families; and
 (5) to increase the supply of supportive housing, which combines structural
 features and services needed to enable persons with special needs to live
 with dignity and independence.
SEC. 104. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) The term `unit of general local government' means a city, town,
 township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose political
 subdivision of a State; Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin
 Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia and Palau,
 or a general purpose political subdivision thereof; and a consortium of
 such political subdivisions recognized by the Secretary in accordance with
 section 316(2)(B) of this Act.
 (2) The term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any agency or
 instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and
 designated by the chief executive to act on behalf of the jurisdiction
 with regard to provisions of this Act.
 (3) The term `jurisdiction' means a State or unit of general local
 government.
 (4) The term `participating jurisdiction' means any State or unit of general
 local government whose comprehensive affordable housing strategy has been
 approved by the Secretary in accordance with section 105 of this Act.
 (5) The term `nonprofit organization' means any private, nonprofit
 organization that--
 (A) is organized under State or local laws,
 (B) has no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any member,
 founder, contributor, or individual,
 (C) complies with standards of financial accountability acceptable to the
 Secretary, and
 (D) has among its purposes significant activities related to the provision of
 decent housing that is affordable to low-income and moderate-income persons.
 (6) The term `nonprofit community organization' means a nonprofit
 organization that--
 (A) has among its purposes the provision of decent housing that is affordable
 to low-income and moderate-income persons, and
 (B) has a governing body comprised predominantly of representatives of
 the local community or communities in which the organization will carry
 out activities assisted under this Act.
 (7) The term `government-sponsored mortgage finance agencies' means the
 Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
 Corporation, and the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation.
 (8) The term `very low-income families' means low-income families whose
 incomes do not exceed 50 percent of the median family income for the
 area, as determined by the Secretary with adjustments for smaller and
 larger families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings
 higher or lower than 50 percent of the median for the area on the basis
 of the Secretary's findings that such variations are necessary because of
 prevailing levels of construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually
 high or low family incomes.
 (9) The term `low-income families' means families whose incomes do not
 exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by the
 Secretary with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that the
 Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent
 of the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that
 such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction
 costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
 (10) The term `moderate-income families' means families whose incomes do
 not exceed the median family income for the area, as determined by the
 Secretary with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that
 the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than the median
 for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that such variations
 are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair
 market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
 (11) The term `families' includes families consisting of a single person in
 the case of (A) a person who is at least 62 years of age, or is handicapped
 within the meaning of section 521(j)(2) of this Act, (B) a displaced person,
 (C) the remaining member of a tenant family, and (D) other single persons
 in circumstances described in regulations of the Secretary.
SEC. 105. STATE AND LOCAL HOUSING STRATEGIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide assistance directly to a
 jurisdiction only if--
 (1) the jurisdiction submits to the Secretary a comprehensive housing
 affordability strategy (hereafter in this section referred to as the
 `housing strategy');
 (2) the jurisdiction submits annual updates of the housing strategy; and
 (3) the housing strategy, and any annual update of such strategy, is
 approved by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall establish such dates and manner for the submission and
approval of housing strategies under this section that the Secretary determines
will facilitate orderly program management by jurisdictions and provide for
timely investment or other use of funds made available under this Act.
 (b) CONTENTS- A housing strategy submitted under this section shall be in
 a form that the Secretary determines to be appropriate for the assistance
 the jurisdiction may be provided under this Act and shall--
 (1) describe the jurisdiction's estimated housing needs projected for
 the ensuing 5-year period, and the jurisdiction's need for assistance
 for low-income and moderate-income persons under this Act, specifying
 such needs for different types of tenure and for different categories
 of residents, such as very low-income, low-income, and moderate-income
 persons, the elderly, single persons, large families, and other categories
 of residents that the Secretary determines to be appropriate;
 (2) describe the nature and extent of homelessness within the jurisdiction,
 providing an estimate of the special needs of various categories of persons
 who are homeless or threatened with homelessness, a brief inventory of
 facilities and services to assist such persons, and a description of the
 jurisdiction's strategy for providing such persons with permanent housing;
 (3) describe the significant characteristics of the jurisdiction's housing
 market, indicating how those characteristics will influence the use of
 funds made available under this Act for rental assistance, production of
 new units, rehabilitation of old units, or acquisition of existing units;
 (4) explain how the cost of housing or the incentives to develop, maintain,
 or improve affordable housing in the jurisdiction are affected by public
 policies, particularly by policies of the jurisdiction, including tax
 policies affecting land and other property, land use controls, building
 codes, fees and charges, growth limits, and policies that affect the return
 on residential investment, and describe the jurisdiction's strategy to
 remove or ameliorate any negative effects of such policies;
 (5) explain the institutional structure, including private industry,
 nonprofit organizations, and public institutions, through which the
 jurisdiction will carry out its housing strategy, assessing the strengths
 and gaps in that delivery system and describing what the jurisdiction will
 do to overcome those gaps;
 (6) indicate resources from private and public sources other than this
 Act that are reasonably expected to be made available to carry out the
 purposes of this Act, explaining how funds made available under this Act
 will leverage those additional resources;
 (7) set forth the jurisdiction's plan for investment or other use of
 funds made available under this Act during the ensuing year or such
 longer period as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, indicating
 the general priorities for allocating investment geographically within
 the jurisdiction and among different activities and housing needs;
 (8) describe the means of cooperation and coordination among the State and
 any participating units of general local government in the development,
 submission, and implementation of their housing strategies;
 (9) describe the standards and procedures according to which the jurisdiction
 will monitor activities authorized under this Act and ensure long-term
 compliance with the provisions of this Act; and
 (10) include a certification that the jurisdiction will affirmatively
 further fair housing.
The Secretary may provide for the submission of abbreviated housing strategies
by jurisdictions that are not otherwise expected to be participating
jurisdictions under this Act. Such an abbreviated housing strategy shall be
appropriate to the types and amounts of assistance the jurisdiction is to
receive as determined by the Secretary.
 (c) APPROVAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall review the housing strategy upon
 receipt. Not later than 60 days after receipt by the Secretary, the housing
 strategy shall be approved unless the Secretary determines before that
 date that the housing strategy is inconsistent with the purposes of this
 Act or does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (b). During the
 18-month period following enactment of this Act, the Secretary may extend
 the review period to not longer than 90 days.
 (2) ACTIONS IN CASE OF DISAPPROVAL- If the Secretary disapproves the housing
 strategy, the Secretary shall immediately notify the jurisdiction of such
 disapproval. Not later than 15 days after the Secretary's disapproval, the
 Secretary shall inform the jurisdiction in writing of (A) the reasons for
 disapproval, and (B) actions that the jurisdiction could take to meet the
 criteria for approval. If the Secretary fails to inform the jurisdiction
 of the reasons for disapproval within such 15-day period, the housing
 strategy shall be deemed to have been approved.
 (3) AMENDMENTS AND RESUBMISSION- The Secretary shall, for a period of not
 less than 45 days following the date of first disapproval, permit amendments
 to, or the resubmission of, any housing strategy that is disapproved. The
 Secretary shall approve or disapprove a housing strategy not less than 30
 days after receipt of such amendments or resubmission.
 (d) PERFORMANCE REVIEWS- (1) Each participating jurisdiction shall annually
 review and report, in a form acceptable to the Secretary, on the progress it
 has made in carrying out its housing strategy, which report shall indicate
 the number of very low-income, low-income, and moderate-income persons
 that will be assisted with funds made available under this Act.
 (2) The Secretary shall (A) establish dates for submission of reports under
 this subsection, and (B) review such reports and make such recommendations
 as the Secretary deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Act.
 (3) If a jurisdiction fails to submit a report satisfactory to the Secretary
 in a timely manner, assistance to the jurisdiction under this Act may be--
 (A) suspended until a report satisfactory to the Secretary is submitted; or
 (B) withdraw and reallocated among participating jurisdictions in accordance
 with section 316(5) of this Act if the Secretary finds, after notice
 and opportunity for a hearing, that the jurisdiction will not submit a
 satisfactory report.
 (e) CERTIFICATION- The Secretary may by regulation or otherwise, as deemed
 by the Secretary to be appropriate, require any application for assistance
 under this Act to contain or be accompanied by a certification by an
 appropriate State or local public official that the proposed activities
 are consistent with the housing strategy of the jurisdiction to be served.
TITLE II--HOMEOWNERSHIP
SEC. 201. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this title is to improve homeownership opportunities for
 first-time homebuyers and for other persons who have not owned a home for
 at least 3 years by--
 (1) making the downpayment on a principal residence eligible as an investment
 of funds from an individual retirement account or a 401(k) retirement plan,
 (2) matching FHA mortgage insurance ceilings more closely to regional
 median home prices,
 (3) providing for lower downpayments on FHA insured mortgages under certain
 conditions, and
 (4) extending the mortgage revenue bond and mortgage credit certificate
 programs.
Subtitle A--FHA Amendments
SEC. 211. FHA AMENDMENTS.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY FOR INSURANCE; MORTGAGE LIMITS- Section 203(b)(2) of the
 National Housing Act is amended--
 (1) by striking all through `value in excess of $25,000.' the first time
 it appears and inserting the following:
 `(2) Involve a principal obligation (including such initial service charges,
 appraisal, inspection, and other fees as the Secretary shall approve)
 in an amount not to exceed the lesser of--
 `(A) a ceiling that equals 95 percent of the median sales price of homes
 within a time period designated by the Secretary for the State, for a
 metropolitan statistical area that includes portions of more than one State,
 or for an area within a State, if the Secretary determines that such area
 must be designated to provide fair access to insurance under this section
 for moderate-income and middle-income homebuyers; or
 `(B) except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, an amount equal to--
 `(i) the sum of (I) 97 per centum of $50,000 of the appraised value of the
 property, as of the date the mortgage is accepted for insurance, and (II)
 95 per centum of such value in excess of $50,000; or
 `(ii) 97 per centum of the appraised value of the property as of the date
 the mortgage is accepted for insurance if (I) the mortgagor is a first-time
 homebuyer; (II) the mortgagor completes a program of financial counseling,
 offered by a qualified home ownership counseling agency approved by the
 Secretary under section 106(a)(2) of the Housing and Urban Development Act
 of 1968; and (III) the mortgage is secured by the principal residence of
 the mortgagor.'; and
 (2) by striking `For the purpose of the preceding sentence, the term `area'
 means' and inserting the following:
`For the purpose of the preceding sentence--
 `(i) any person or party requesting the designation of an area within a
 State under subparagraph (A) shall submit to the Secretary justification
 for such designation in a form satisfactory to the Secretary;
 `(ii) the term `first-time homebuyer' means an individual and his spouse
 who have had no ownership interest in a residence during the 3-year period
 ending on the date of the acquisition of the dwelling unit; and
 `(iii) the term `area' means'.
 (b) COUNSELING- Section 106(a)(2) of the Housing and Urban Development
 Act of 1968 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting `with mortgages insured under
 section 203(b)(2)(B)(ii) and' before `assisted under section 235'; and
 (2) by inserting the following after the last sentence: `The Secretary
 shall provide such services only through contracts with private or public
 organizations that are approved by the Secretary, according to such standards
 as the Secretary shall establish, as having demonstrated special competence
 and knowledge in counseling low-income and moderate-income families. Such
 approval shall be subject to review and reaffirmed not less frequently
 than every 2 years'.
 (c) ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGES- Section 251 of the National Housing is
 amended--
 (1) by striking the last two sentences of subsection (a); and
 (2) by striking subsections (b) and (c) and inserting the following:
 `(b)(1) In addition to insurance provided under subsection (a), the
 Secretary may insure adjustable rate mortgages that incorporate terms
 and conditions that the Secretary determines to be generally accepted in
 the mortgage market if the Secretary finds that the new mortgage does not
 expose the insurance fund to excessive risk of loss, taking into account
 the mortgage insurance premium that will be charged.
 `(2) The Secretary shall insure that the underwriting standards and
 procedures for adjustable rate mortgages are such that mortgages are not
 made available to mortgagors who would be exposed to undue risk of default.
 `(c)(1) The mortgagee shall explain the nature of the obligation fully
 and in writing to the mortgagor not later than on the date upon which the
 mortgagee provides the prospective mortgagor with a loan application. The
 mortgage may be accepted for insurance only if the mortgagor certifies
 that he or she fully understands the obligation.
 `(2) Such mortgagee disclosure shall include all of the following items:
 `(A) the fact that the mortgage interest rate may change, and an explanation
 of how changes correspond to changes in the interest rate index;
 `(B) identification of the interest rate index, its source of publication
 and availability;
 `(C) the frequency with which interest rate levels and monthly payments
 will be adjusted and the length of the interval that will precede the
 initial adjustment; and
 `(D) a hypothetical monthly payment schedule that displays the maximum
 potential increases in monthly payments to the mortgagor over the first 10
 years of the mortgage, subject to the provisions of the mortgage instrument.
 `(3) At least 30 days before any adjustment to a mortgagor's monthly
 payment may occur, the mortgagee must advise the mortgagor of the following:
 `(A) the new mortgage interest rate and amount of the monthly payment; and
 `(B) the current index interest rate value and how the payment adjustment
 was calculated.'.
 (d) INDUSTRY ACCEPTED MORTGAGE PROGRAMS- Title II of the National Housing
 Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
`INSURANCE OF INDUSTRY ACCEPTED MORTGAGES
 `SEC. 256. (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary is authorized to insure and make
 commitments to insure mortgages under this section if--
 `(1) the Secretary finds that the type of mortgage has achieved general
 acceptance in the private mortgage market;
 `(2) the mortgagee is approved by the Secretary;
 `(3) the property securing the mortgage is a 1- to 4-family residence to
 be occupied by the mortgagor; and
 `(4) the amount of the mortgage does not exceed the dollar amount and
 loan-to-value limitations contained in section 203(b)(2).
 `(b) LIMITATION- The aggregate number of mortgages insured under this
 section during a fiscal year may not exceed 10 percent of the highest
 aggregate number of mortgages insured by the Secretary under this title
 during any preceding fiscal year.
 `(c) REPORTS- Not later than December 31 of each year, the Secretary shall
 transmit to the Congress a detailed report in each category of mortgage
 insurance provided under this section during the preceding fiscal year.'.
Subtitle B--Savings for a Downpayment
SEC. 221. CERTAIN RETIREMENT PLANS AUTHORIZED TO MAKE EQUITY INVESTMENTS IN
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCES OF PARTICIPANTS.
 (a) EXEMPTION FROM PROHIBITED TRANSACTION RULES- Section 4975 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection
 (j) and by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsection:
 `(i) SPECIAL RULE FOR HOME EQUITY PARTICIPATION ARRANGEMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The prohibition provided in subsection (c) shall not
 apply to any qualified home equity participation arrangement.
 `(2) QUALIFIED HOME EQUITY PARTICIPATION ARRANGEMENT- For purpose of
 this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified home equity participation arrangement'
 means an arrangement--
 `(i) under which an individual retirement plan or qualified cash or
 deferred arrangement under section 401(k) distributes amounts to an
 eligible participant for the acquisition of any dwelling unit which within
 a reasonable time is to be used (determined at the time the arrangement
 is entered into) as the principal residence of the eligible participant
 in exchange for an ownership interest in such residence, and
 `(ii) with respect to which the requirements of the other subparagraphs
 of this paragraph are met.
 `(B) OWNERSHIP INTEREST REQUIREMENT- The ownership interest described in
 subparagraph (A) shall--
 `(i) be a fee interest in such property equal to the percentage which--
 `(I) the amount distributed to the eligible participant and invested in
 the dwelling unit, bears to
 `(II) the acquisition cost of the dwelling unit,
 `(ii) by its terms requires repayment in full upon the sale or other
 transfer of the dwelling unit (except in the case of a transfer to a
 spouse as a result of the death of a spouse), and
 `(iii) may not be used as security for any loan secured by any interest
 in the dwelling unit.
 `(C) LIMITATION ON PURCHASE PRICE- This paragraph shall not apply to
 an arrangement if the acquisition cost of the dwelling unit exceeds 110
 percent of the average area purchase price applicable to such dwelling unit
 (as determined under section 143(e)(2) after application of sections 143(e)
 (3) and (4)).
 `(D) LIMITATION ON AMOUNT- This paragraph shall not apply to any arrangement
 if the aggregate amounts provided to the eligible participant exceed the
 greater of--
 `(i) $10,000, or
 `(ii) the amount which bears the same ratio to $10,000 as--
 `(I) the average area purchase price applicable to the dwelling unit
 (as determined under subparagraph (C)), bears to
 `(II) the average purchase price for the United States (as so determined).
In no event shall the amounts so provided exceed the balance in the individual
retirement plan or qualified cash or deferred arrangement immediately before
the arrangement is entered into, reduced by 67 percent of the contributions
to such plan or qualified cash or deferred arrangement during the 12-month
period ending on the date the arrangement is entered into.
 `(3) ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANT- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `eligible participant' means an individual--
 `(A) on whose behalf an individual retirement plan is established or who
 is a participant in a qualified cash or deferred arrangement under section
 401(k), and
 `(B) who (and whose spouse) has had no present ownership interest in a
 principal residence during the 3-year period ending on the date of the
 acquisition of the dwelling unit to which this subsection applies.
 `(4) ACQUISITION; ACQUISITION COST- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) ACQUISITION- The term `acquisition' includes construction and
 reconstruction.
 `(B) ACQUISITION COST- The term `acquisition cost' has the meaning given
 such term by section 143(k)(3).
 `(5) AMOUNT NOT TREATED AS DISTRIBUTIONS- For purposes of this title,
 amounts made available under a qualified equity participation arrangement
 shall not be treated as distributions by, or loans made or secured by,
 an individual retirement plan or qualified cash or deferred arrangement.'.
SEC. 222. LOANS USED TO ACQUIRE PRINCIPAL RESIDENCES.
 (a) INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT PLAN- Section 408(e) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(7) LOANS USED TO PURCHASE A HOME BY FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Paragraphs (3) and (4) shall not apply to any qualified
 home purchase loan made, or secured, by an individual retirement account.
 `(B) QUALIFIED HOME PURCHASE LOAN- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `qualified home purchase loan' means a loan--
 `(i) made to the individual on whose behalf the individual retirement account
 is established, but only if such individual is a first-time homeowner,
 `(ii) the proceeds of which are used by such an individual as a down payment
 on a dwelling unit which within a reasonable period of time (determined
 at the time the loan is made) is to be used as the principal residence of
 such individual,
 `(iii) is secured by the dwelling unit,
 `(iv) by its terms requires substantially level amortization over a period
 not greater than 15 years beginning with the date which is 1 year after
 the date of acquisition of the dwelling unit, and
 `(v) which bears interest at a rate not greater than the prevailing market
 rate for the area in which the dwelling unit is located.
 `(C) LIMITATIONS ON PURCHASE PRICE AND AMOUNT OF LOAN- A loan shall not
 be treated as a qualified home purchase loan unless the requirements of
 subparagraphs (C) and (D) of section 4975(i)(2) are met.
 `(D) FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `first-time homebuyer' means any individual who (and whose spouse) has had
 no present ownership interest in a principal residence during the 3-year
 period ending on the date of the acquisition of the dwelling unit to which
 this paragraph applied.'.
 (b) QUALIFIED CASH OR DEFERRED ARRANGEMENT- Section 72(p)(3)(B) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new sentence: `In the case of any loan secured by amounts
 attributable to elective 401(k) deferrals, subparagraph (A) shall not apply
 during any period such loan is a qualified home purchase loan (within the
 meaning of section 408(e)(7) but made from a qualified cash or deferred
 arrangement under section 401(k)).
 (c) PROHIBITED TRANSACTION- Section 4975(d) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 is amended by striking out `or' at the end of paragraph (14),
 by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting `;
 or', and by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph:
 `(16) any loan that is a qualified home purchase loan (as defined in
 section 408(e)(7) or 72(p)(3)(B).'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 loans made after December 31, 1988, in taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 223. MORTGAGE REVENUE BONDS AND MORTGAGE CERTIFICATES.
 (a) MORTGAGE REVENUE BONDS- Subparagraph (B) of section 143(a)(1)(B)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking out `1989'
 and inserting `1992'.
 (b) MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATES- Subsection (h) of section 25 of such
 Code is amended by striking out `1989' and inserting `1992'.
TITLE III--INVESTMENT IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `HOME Corporation Act'.
SEC. 302. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this title are--
 (1) to expand the capacity of State and local governments throughout the
 United States to design and implement strategies for achieving an adequate
 supply of affordable housing for low-income and moderate-income Americans;
 (2) to provide participating States and localities with one institution,
 the Government National HOME Corporation in the Department of Housing
 and Urban Development, that is charged with responsibility to promote the
 development of partnerships among the Federal, State, and local governments,
 private industry, and nonprofit organizations able to utilize effectively
 all available resources for affordable housing;
 (3) to develop and refine, on an ongoing basis, a selection of model programs
 incorporating the most effective methods for providing affordable housing,
 and accelerate the application of such methods where appropriate throughout
 the United States to achieve the prudent and efficient use of funds made
 available under this title;
 (4) to increase the investment of private capital and the use of private
 sector resources in the provision of affordable housing;
 (5) to allocate Federal funds for investment in affordable housing among
 participating States and units of general local government by formula and
 incentive allocation;
 (6) to leverage those funds with State and local matching contributions
 and private investment;
 (7) to establish for each participating jurisdiction a housing investment
 trust fund with a line of credit for investment in affordable housing,
 with repayments back to the housing investment trust fund being made
 available for reinvestment by the jurisdiction; and
 (8) to provide credit enhancement through guarantees of pools of qualifying
 mortgages, utilizing the capacities of existing agencies and mortgage
 finance institutions when most efficient and supplementing their activities
 when necessary.
SEC. 303. ESTABLISHMENT OF HOME CORPORATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is created a body corporate to be known as the
 Government National HOME Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the
 `HOME Corporation'), which shall be in the Department of Housing and Urban
 Development. The HOME Corporation shall have succession until dissolved
 by Act of Congress.
 (b) POWERS AND DUTIES IN SECRETARY- All the powers and duties of the
 HOME Corporation shall be vested in the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development, and the HOME Corporation shall be administered under the
 direction of the Secretary. Within the limitations of law, the Secretary
 shall determine the general policies which shall govern the operations of
 the HOME Corporation, and shall have power to adopt, amend, and repeal
 bylaws governing the performance of the powers and duties granted to or
 imposed upon it by law.
 (c) APPOINTMENT OF PRESIDENT- There is established in the Department
 of Housing and Urban Development the position of President, Government
 National HOME Corporation, which position shall be filled by appointment
 by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (d) GENERAL AUTHORITIES- The HOME Corporation shall be subject to the
 provisions of, and have the general authority provided in, subtitle D.
SEC. 304. AUTHORIZATION.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title
 $3,000,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $3,129,000,000 for fiscal year
 1991, of which $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $12,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1991 shall be for activities authorized under subtitle C. Any funds
 appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.
Subtitle A--Housing Opportunity Partnerships (HOP)
SEC. 311. AUTHORITY.
 The Secretary, acting through the HOME Corporation, is authorized to make
 funds available to participating jurisdictions for investment to expand the
 supply of affordable housing in accordance with provisions of this subtitle.
SEC. 312. ELIGIBLE USES OF INVESTMENT.
 (a) HOUSING USES- Funds made available under this subtitle may be used
 by participating jurisdictions to improve rental and homeownership
 affordability through the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, or
 moderate or substantial rehabilitation of affordable housing, including
 real property acquisition, site improvement, conversion, demolition, and
 other expenses, including relocation expenses of any displaced persons,
 families, businesses, or organizations.
 (b) INVESTMENTS- Participating jurisdictions shall have discretion to
 invest funds made available under this subtitle as equity investments,
 interest-bearing loans, noninterest-bearing loans or advances, interest
 subsidies or other forms of assistance that the Secretary has not determined
 to be inconsistent with the purposes of this subtitle. Each participating
 jurisdiction shall have the right to establish the terms of assistance.
 (c) PROHIBITED USES- Funds made available under this subtitle may not be
 used to--
 (1) defray any administrative cost of a participating jurisdiction,
 (2) provide direct rental assistance to tenants,
 (3) provide assistance authorized under section 9 of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937,
 (4) carry out activities authorized under section 14 of the Housing Act
 of 1937, or
 (5) provide assistance to eligible low-income housing under the Emergency
 Low Income Housing Preservation Act of 1987.
SEC. 313. DEVELOPMENT OF MODEL PROGRAMS.
 The HOME Corporation shall--
 (1) in cooperation with participating jurisdictions, government-sponsored
 mortgage finance agencies, housing organizations, the private sector
 and other appropriate parties, develop, test, evaluate, refine, and, as
 necessary, replace a selection of model programs designed to carry out
 the purposes of this title;
 (2) make available to participating jurisdictions alternative model programs,
 which shall include suggested guidelines, procedures, forms, legal documents
 and such other elements as the HOME Corporation determines to be appropriate;
 (3) assure, insofar as is feasible, the availability of an appropriate
 variety of model programs designed for local market conditions, housing
 problems, project characteristics, and managerial capacities as they differ
 among participating jurisdictions;
 (4) negotiate and enter into agreements with agencies of the Federal
 Government, participating jurisdictions, private financial institutions,
 government-sponsored mortgage finance agencies, nonprofit community
 organizations, and other entities to provide such services, products or
 financing as may be required for the implementation of a model program;
 (5) provide detailed information on model programs as requested by private
 financial institutions, developers, nonprofit community organizations and
 other interested parties; and
 (6) encourage the use of such model programs to achieve efficiency, economies
 of scale, and effectiveness in the investment of funds made available
 under this subtitle through third-party training, printed materials,
 and such other means of support as the HOME Corporation determines will
 achieve the purpose of this subtitle.
Except as provided in section 324(2), each participating jurisdiction shall
have the discretion to adopt one or more model programs, adapt one or more
model programs to its own requirements, design additional forms of assistance
by itself or in cooperation with other participating jurisdictions, and
suggest additional model programs for adoption by the HOME Corporation as
the participating jurisdiction may deem appropriate.
SEC. 314. INCOME TARGETING.
 Each participating jurisdiction shall invest funds made available under
 this subtitle within each fiscal year so that--
 (1) not less than 40 percent of such funds are invested with respect
 to dwelling units that are occupied by households that qualify as very
 low-income families at the time of initial occupancy or at the time funds
 are invested, whichever is later;
 (2) not less than 80 percent of such funds, including funds under paragraph
 (1), are invested with respect to dwelling units that are occupied by
 households that qualify as low-income families at the time of initial
 occupancy or at the time funds are invested, whichever is later; and
 (3) all such funds are invested with respect to housing that qualifies as
 affordable housing under section 315.
SEC. 315. QUALIFICATION AS AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
 (a) RENTAL HOUSING-
 (1) QUALIFICATION- Housing that is for rental shall qualify as affordable
 housing under this title only if the housing--
 (A) bears rents not greater than the existing fair market rent for comparable
 units in the area as established by the Secretary under section 8 of the
 United States Housing Act of 1937, unless the Secretary finds that the
 existing fair market rents in the area would not support the continued
 financial viability of the project;
 (B) has not less than 20 percent of the units (i) occupied by very
 low-income families who pay as a contribution toward rent (excluding any
 Federal or State rental subsidy provided on behalf of the family) not more
 than 30 percent of the family's monthly adjusted income as determined by
 the Secretary, or (ii) occupied by very low-income families and bearing
 rents not greater than the qualified rent under paragraph (2);
 (C) is occupied only by households that qualify as low-income families;
 (D) is not refused for leasing to a holder of a rental credit, voucher,
 or certificate of eligibility under section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937
 because of the status of the prospective tenant as a holder of such rental
 credit, voucher, or certificate of eligibility; and
 (E) will remain affordable, according to binding commitments satisfactory
 to the Secretary, for its remaining useful life or for such other period
 that the Secretary determines is the longest feasible period of time
 consistent with sound economics and the purpose of this title.
 (2) QUALIFYING RENT- For purposes of this section, the qualifying rent
 shall be a rent determined for the area by the Secretary that--
 (A) in the case of a unit with not more than 1 bedroom, does not exceed
 30 percent of the monthly income of a very low-income family of 1 person; and
 (B) in the case of a unit with more than 1 bedroom, does not exceed the
 result of multiplying the number of bedrooms times 30 percent of the mean of
 (i) the monthly income of a very low-income family of 1 person, and (ii)
 the monthly income of a very low-income family of 2 persons.
When determining the qualifying rent under this paragraph, the Secretary
shall consider a very low-income family to be a family whose income is
50 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined by the
Secretary with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that the
Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 percent of
the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that such
variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs
or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
 (3) INCREASES IN TENANT INCOME- Housing shall qualify as affordable housing
 despite a temporary noncompliance with subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph
 (1) if such noncompliance is caused by increases in the incomes of existing
 tenants and if actions satisfactory to the Secretary are being taken to
 ensure that all vacancies are filled to correct such noncompliance as
 soon as possible. Tenants who no longer qualify as low-income families
 shall pay as rent not less than 30 percent of the family's monthly income,
 as recertified annually.
 (4) MIXED-INCOME PROJECT- Housing that accounts for less than 100 percent
 of the dwelling units in a project shall qualify as affordable housing if
 such housing meets the criteria of this section.
 (b) HOMEOWNERSHIP- Housing that is for homeownership shall qualify as
 affordable housing under this title only if the housing--
 (1) has an initial purchase price that does not exceed 95 percent of the
 median purchase price for the area, as determined by the Secretary with
 such adjustments for differences in structure and for new and old housing
 as the Secretary determines to be appropriate;
 (2) is the principal residence of an owner whose family qualifies as a
 moderate-income family at the time of purchase;
 (3) provides ownership opportunities to families with a broad range
 of incomes below the area median income, including a preponderance of
 low-income families; and
 (4) is made available for initial purchase only to persons who (and whose
 spouse) have had no present ownership interest in a principal residence
 during the previous 3-year period and for subsequent purchase only to
 persons who meet the qualifications specified under paragraph (2).
SEC. 316. PARTICIPATION BY STATES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
 The Secretary shall designate a State or unit of general local government
 to be a participating jurisdiction when it complies with procedures that
 the Secretary shall establish by regulation, which procedures shall provide
 for the following:
 (1) ALLOCATION- Not later than 20 days after funds to carry out this
 subtitle became available (or, during the first year after enactment of
 this Act, not later than 20 days after (A) funds to carry out this subtitle
 are provided in an appropriation Act, or (B) regulations to implement
 this subtitle are promulgated, whichever is later), the Secretary shall
 allocate funds in accordance with section 317 and promptly notify each
 jurisdiction receiving a formula allocation of its allocation amount. If
 a jurisdiction is not already a participating jurisdiction, the Secretary
 shall inform the jurisdiction in writing how the jurisdiction may become
 a participating jurisdiction.
 (2) ELIGIBILITY- A jurisdiction receiving a formula allocation under
 section 317 shall be eligible to become a participating jurisdiction if
 its formula allocation is $2,000,000 or greater, or if--
 (A) the Secretary finds that--
 (i) the jurisdiction is the city with the largest population in a
 metropolitan area, has a local housing authority, and has demonstrated a
 capacity to carry out provisions of this subtitle, and
 (ii) the State has authorized the Secretary to transfer to the jurisdiction
 a portion of the State's allocation that is equal to or greater than the
 difference between the jurisdiction's formula allocation and $2,000,000; or
 (B) geographically contiguous units of general local government have formed
 a consortium that, in the determination of the Secretary--
 (i) has sufficient authority and administrative capability to act on behalf
 of its member jurisdictions in carrying out the purposes of this Act,
 (ii) will, according to a written certification by the State (or States,
 if the consortium includes jurisdictions in more than one State), direct
 its activities to alleviation of the State's or the States' most severe
 housing problems, and
 (iii) is comprised only of jurisdictions that have received a formula
 allocation for the fiscal year. Such a consortium shall be deemed to be
 a unit of general local government for purposes of this subtitle.
 (C) If a jurisdiction has met the requirements of subparagraph (A), the
 jurisdiction's formula allocation for a fiscal year shall subsequently
 be deemed to equal the sum of the jurisdiction's allocation under
 section 317(a)(1) and the amount the State has agreed to transfer to the
 jurisdiction. The formula allocation for a consortium that has met the
 requirements under subparagraph (B) shall equal the total of the formula
 allocations of its member jurisdictions.
 (3) NOTIFICATION- If an eligible jurisdiction notifies the Secretary in
 writing, not later than 30 days after receiving notification under paragraph
 (1), of its intention to become a participating jurisdiction, the Secretary
 shall reserve an amount equal to the jurisdiction's allocation (plus any
 reallocations for which the jurisdiction is eligible under section 317(d)(1))
 pending the jurisdiction's designation as a participating jurisdiction. The
 Secretary shall reallocate, by formula in accordance with section 317(d),
 any funds reserved under the previous sentence if the Secretary determines
 that the jurisdiction will not meet the requirements for designation as
 a participating jurisdiction within a reasonable period of time.
 (4) SUBMISSION OF STRATEGY- Not later than 90 days after providing
 notification under paragraph (3), an eligible jurisdiction shall submit to
 the Secretary a comprehensive housing affordability strategy in accordance
 with section 105.
 (5) REALLOCATION- If the Secretary determines that a jurisdiction has
 failed to meet the requirements of the previous 3 paragraphs or if the
 Secretary, after providing for amendments and resubmissions in accordance
 with section 105(c)(3), disapproves the jurisdiction's comprehensive housing
 affordability strategy, the Secretary shall reallocate any funds reserved
 for the jurisdiction as follows:
 (A) STATE- If a State has failed to meet the requirements, the Secretary
 shall--
 (i) make 50 percent of any funds reserved for the State available by
 incentive allocation among applications submitted by units of general local
 government within the State or consortia that include units of general
 local government within the State, insofar as approvable applications
 meeting the selection criteria under section 317(c) are received within
 12 months after the funds become available for the incentive allocation, and
 (ii) reallocate the remainder by formula in accordance with section 317(d).
 (B) LOCAL- If a unit of general local government has failed to meet the
 requirements and is located in a State that is a participating jurisdiction,
 the Secretary shall reallocate to the State any funds reserved for the
 locality.
 (C) DIRECT REALLOCATION- If a unit of general local government has failed to
 meet the requirements and is located in a State that is not a participating
 jurisdiction, the Secretary shall--
 (i) make 50 percent of any funds reserved for the locality available for
 use within the State by incentive allocation among units of general local
 government and nonprofit community organizations, insofar as approvable
 applications meeting the selection criteria under section 317(c) are
 received within 12 months after the funds become available for the
 incentive allocation with priority going to applications for affordable
 housing within the locality or its immediate vicinity, and
 (ii) reallocate the remainder in accordance with section 317(d).
 (D) CERTAIN JURISDICTIONS DEEMED TO BE PARTICIPATING JURISDICTIONS- If a
 State or unit of general local government is meeting the requirements of
 paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), it shall be deemed to be a participating
 jurisdiction for purposes of reallocation under this paragraph.
 (6) DESIGNATION- The Secretary shall designate an eligible jurisdiction
 to be a participating jurisdiction as soon as its comprehensive housing
 affordability strategy is approved in accordance with section 105.
 (7) CONTINUOUS DESIGNATION- Once a State or unit of general local government
 is designated a participating jurisdiction, it shall remain a participating
 jurisdiction for subsequent fiscal years, except as provided in paragraph
 (8). The provisions of paragraphs (2) through (5) shall not apply to
 participating jurisdictions.
 (8) REVOCATION- The Secretary may revoke a jurisdiction's designation as
 a participating jurisdiction if--
 (A) the Secretary finds, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing,
 that the jurisdiction is unwilling or unable to carry out the provisions
 of this title, or
 (B) the jurisdiction's allocation falls below $2,000,000 for 3 consecutive
 years, below $1,750,000 for 2 consecutive years, or the jurisdiction does
 not receive a formula allocation of $1,500,000 or more in any 1 year.
If a jurisdiction's designation as a participating jurisdiction is revoked, any
remaining line of credit in the jurisdiction's housing investment trust fund
established under section 318 shall be reallocated by formula in accordance
with section 317(d).
SEC. 317. ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall allocate among participating
 jurisdictions such funds as are approved in an appropriations Act to carry
 out this subtitle as follows:
 (1) 80 percent of the funds approved in an appropriations Act shall be
 allocated according to a formula established under subsection (b). Of
 the funds made available under the previous sentence, the Secretary shall
 allocate 50 percent among units of general local government and 50 percent
 among States.
 (2) 20 percent of the funds approved in an appropriations Act shall be
 allocated according to an incentive allocation as provided in subsection (c).
 (b) Formula Allocation-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall issue regulations establishing an
 allocation formula that reflects each jurisdiction's share of the Nation's
 need for an increased supply of affordable housing for low-income and
 moderate-income families of differing size, as identified by objective
 measures of tightness in the housing market, inadequate housing, poverty,
 and the costs of producing housing. This formula shall be used for all
 formula allocations and reallocations provided for in this subtitle. The
 data to be used for allocation of funds within a fiscal year shall be
 those that are available to the Secretary 90 days prior to the beginning
 of that fiscal year.
 (2) MINIMUM STATE ALLOCATION- If the formula, when applied to funds
 approved under this section in appropriations Acts for a fiscal year,
 would allocate less than $3,000,000 to any State, the allocation for such
 State shall be $3,000,000, and the increase shall be deducted pro rata
 from the allocations of other States.
 (3) MINIMUM LOCAL ALLOCATION- The Secretary shall allocate funds available
 for formula allocation to units of general local government so that, when
 all such funds are allocated by the formula, only those jurisdictions that
 are allocated an amount of $1,500,000 or greater shall receive an allocation.
 (4) MAXIMUM ALLOCATIONS- No State shall be allocated an amount greater than
 15 percent of the total allocated under subsection (a)(1) among States,
 and no unit of general local government shall be allocated an amount
 greater than 15 percent of the total allocated under subsection (a)(1)
 among units of general local government.
 (c) INCENTIVE ALLOCATION- The Secretary shall make an incentive allocation
 among participating jurisdictions for funds made available under subsection
 (a)(2). A jurisdiction shall be eligible for an incentive allocation under
 this paragraph only if the jurisdiction demonstrates to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary that the jurisdiction is engaged, or has made good faith
 efforts to engage, in cooperative efforts between the State and appropriate
 participating jurisdictions within the State to develop, coordinate,
 and implement housing strategies under this title. The Secretary shall by
 regulation establish selection criteria for such incentive allocations,
 which criteria shall take into account--
 (1) the applicant's demonstrated commitment to expand the supply of
 affordable housing through actions that--
 (A) provide matching resources in excess of funds required under section
 320; and
 (B) stimulate a high degree of investment and participation in development
 by the private sector, including nonprofit organizations;
 (2) the degree to which the applicant is pursuing policies that--
 (A) make existing housing more affordable;
 (B) preserve the affordability of privately-owned housing that is vulnerable
 to conversion, demolition, disinvestment, or abandonment;
 (C) increase the supply of housing that is affordable to very low-income,
 low-income, and moderate-income persons, particularly in areas that are
 accessible to expanding job opportunities; and
 (D) improve housing opportunities for disadvantaged minorities; and
 (3) the degree to which the applicant needs an allocation under this
 section to carry out an approved housing affordability strategy that,
 in the determination of the Secretary, will--
 (A) serve as a national model,
 (B) demonstrate promising new methods for expanding the supply of affordable
 housing,
 (C) ease a severe regional shortage in one or more categories of affordable
 housing, or
 (D) respond to particularly difficult housing problems.
The total amount allocated to a jurisdiction under this subsection in any
fiscal year shall not exceed the jurisdiction's allocation under subsection
(b) in that fiscal year.
 (d) REALLOCATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make any reallocations under this
 subtitle periodically throughout each fiscal year so as to ensure that all
 funds to be reallocated are made available to eligible jurisdictions as soon
 as possible, consistent with orderly program administration. Jurisdictions
 eligible for such reallocations shall include participating jurisdictions
 and jurisdictions meeting the requirements of paragraphs (2), (3), and
 (4) of section 316.
 (2) COMMITMENTS- The Secretary shall establish procedures according to
 which participating jurisdictions may make commitments to invest funds made
 available under this section. Such procedures shall provide for appropriate
 stages of commitment of funds to a project from initial reservation through
 binding commitment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
 funds that the Secretary determines are needed to fulfill binding commitments
 shall not be available for reallocation.
 (3) LIMITATION- Unless otherwise specified in this subtitle, any reallocation
 of funds from a State shall be made only among all participating States,
 and any reallocation of funds from units of general local government shall
 be made only among all participating units of general local government.
SEC. 318. HOUSING INVESTMENT TRUST FUNDS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The HOME Corporation shall establish for each
 participating jurisdiction a housing investment trust fund, which shall
 be an account for use solely to invest in affordable housing within the
 participating jurisdiction's boundaries in accordance with the provisions
 of this subtitle.
 (b) LINE OF CREDIT- The HOME Corporation shall establish a line of credit
 in the housing investment trust fund of each participating jurisdiction,
 which line of credit shall include--
 (1) funds allocated or reallocated to the participating jurisdiction under
 section 317, and
 (2) any payment or repayment made pursuant to section 319.
 (c) REDUCTIONS- A participating jurisdiction's line of credit shall be
 reduced by--
 (1) funds drawn from the housing investment trust fund by the participating
 jurisdiction,
 (2) funds expiring under subsection (g), and
 (3) any penalties assessed by the Secretary under section 324.
 (d) CERTIFICATION- A participating jurisdiction may draw funds from its
 housing investment trust fund, but not to exceed the remaining line of
 credit, only after providing certification, in a form satisfactory to the
 Secretary, that the funds shall be used pursuant to the participating
 jurisdiction's approved housing strategy and in compliance with all
 requirements of this title. When such certification is received, such
 funds shall be immediately disbursed in accordance with the form of the
 assistance determined by the participating jurisdiction.
 (e) INVESTMENT WITHIN 15 DAYS- The participating jurisdiction shall, not
 later than 15 days after funds are drawn from the jurisdiction's housing
 investment trust fund, invest such funds, together with any interest earned
 thereon, in the affordable housing for which the funds were withdrawn.
 (f) NO INTEREST OR FEES- The HOME Corporation shall not charge any interest
 or levy any other fee with regard to funds in a housing investment trust
 fund.
 (g) EXPIRATION OF RIGHT TO DRAW FUNDS- If any funds becoming available to
 a participating jurisdiction under this title are not placed under binding
 commitment to affordable housing within 24 months after the last day of
 the month in which such funds are deposited in the jurisdiction's housing
 investment trust fund, the jurisdiction's right to draw such funds from
 the housing investment trust fund shall expire. The HOME Corporation shall
 reduce the line of credit in the participating jurisdiction's housing
 investment trust fund by the expiring amount and shall reallocate the
 funds by formula in accordance with section 317(d).
 (h) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION- The HOME Corporation shall keep each
 participating jurisdiction informed of the status of its housing investment
 trust fund, including the status of amounts under various stages of
 commitment.
SEC. 319. REPAYMENT OF INVESTMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any repayment of funds drawn from a jurisdiction's housing
 investment trust fund, and any payment of interest or other return on
 the investment of such funds, shall be deposited in such jurisdiction's
 housing investment trust fund, except that, if the jurisdiction is not a
 participating jurisdiction when such payment or repayment is made, the
 amount of such payment or repayment shall be reallocated in accordance
 with section 317(d).
 (b) ASSURANCE OF REPAYMENT- Each participating jurisdiction shall assure
 that funds invested in affordable housing under this subtitle are repayable
 when the housing no longer qualifies as affordable housing. Any repayment
 under the previous sentence shall be for deposit in the housing investment
 trust fund of the jurisdiction making the investment; except that if such
 jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction when such repayment is
 made, the amount of such repayment shall be reallocated in accordance with
 section 317(d).
 (c) AVAILABILITY- Any funds deposited in a housing investment trust fund
 in accordance with this section shall be immediately available to the
 participating jurisdiction for investment subject to the provisions of
 this subtitle that apply to funds that are allocated under section 317.
SEC. 320. MATCHING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) CONTRIBUTION- Each participating jurisdiction shall make contributions
 to affordable housing assisted under this subtitle that total, throughout
 a fiscal year, not less than 25 percent of the total funds drawn from the
 jurisdiction's housing investment trust fund in that fiscal year.
 (b) RECOGNITION- A contribution shall be recognized for purposes of the
 previous sentence only if it--
 (1) is made with respect to housing that qualifies as affordable housing
 under section 315, or
 (2) is made with respect to any portion of a project not less than 50
 percent of the units which qualify as affordable housing under section 315.
 (c) FORM- Such contributions may be in the form of--
 (1) cash contributions from non-Federal resources, which may not include
 funds from a grant made under section 106(b) or section 106(d) of the
 Housing and Community Development Act of 1974;
 (2) expenditures from non-Federal resources for administration up to 7
 percent of funds provided for investment under this title;
 (3) the value of fees that are normally and customarily imposed but are
 waived or deferred in a manner that achieves affordability of housing
 assisted under this title;
 (4) the value of land or other real property as appraised according to
 procedures acceptable to the Secretary; or
 (5) such in-kind contributions as the Secretary may approve.
 (d) REDUCTION OF REQUIREMENT- If a jurisdiction demonstrates to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary that a reduction of the matching requirement
 specified in subsection (a) is necessary to permit the jurisdiction to
 carry out the purpose of this title, the Secretary may reduce the matching
 requirement during a period not to exceed 3 years after the jurisdiction
 is first designated as a participating jurisdiction. Such reduction shall
 be not more than 75 percent in the first year, not more than 50 percent
 in the second year, and not more than 25 percent in the third year.
SEC. 321. PRIVATE-PUBLIC PARTNERSHIP.
 Each participating jurisdiction shall make all reasonable efforts,
 consistent with the purposes of this title, to maximize participation
 by the private sector, including nonprofit organizations and for-profit
 entities, in the implementation of the jurisdiction's housing strategy,
 including participation in the financing, development, rehabilitation
 and management of affordable housing. Nothing in the previous sentence
 shall preclude public housing authorities from fully participating in the
 implementation of a jurisdiction's housing strategy.
SEC. 322. DISTRIBUTION OF ASSISTANCE.
 (a) LOCAL- Each participating jurisdiction shall, insofar as is feasible,
 distribute assistance under this subtitle geographically within its
 boundaries and among different categories of housing need, according to
 the priorities of housing need identified in the jurisdiction's approved
 housing strategy.
 (b) STATE- Participating States shall be responsible for distributing
 assistance throughout the State according to the State's assessment of
 the geographical distribution of the housing need within the State, as
 identified in the State's approved housing strategy. To the extent the
 need is within the boundaries of a participating unit of general local
 government, the State and the unit of general local government shall
 coordinate activities to address that need.
SEC. 323. SET-ASIDE FOR NONPROFIT COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each participating jurisdiction, for a period of 18 months
 after funds under this subtitle are made available to the jurisdiction,
 shall reserve not less than 10 percent of such funds for investment only
 in housing to be developed, sponsored, or owned by nonprofit community
 organizations. Each participating jurisdiction shall make reasonable efforts
 to identify nonprofit community organizations that are capable of carrying
 out elements of the jurisdiction's housing strategy and to encourage such
 nonprofit community organizations to do so. A participating jurisdiction is
 authorized to enter into contracts with nonprofit community organizations
 to carry out this section.
 (b) RECAPTURE AND REUSE- If any reserved funds remain uninvested for a
 period of 18 months and the jurisdiction demonstrates to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary that the jurisdiction has complied with subsection (a)
 but such funds cannot be used effectively within the jurisdiction by
 qualified nonprofit community organizations, then the jurisdiction shall,
 for a period not to exceed 12 months, have the right to invest not more than
 50 percent of such funds without regard to the requirements of subsection
 (a), and the Secretary shall make the remainder of such funds available
 by incentive allocation among nonprofit community organizations.
 (c) RECAPTURE AND DEDUCTION- If any reserved funds remain uninvested
 for a period of 18 months and the jurisdiction has not demonstrated to
 the satisfaction of the Secretary that the jurisdiction has complied with
 subsection (a), the HOME Corporation shall deduct such funds from the line
 of credit in the participating jurisdiction's housing investment trust
 fund and make such funds available by incentive allocation among nonprofit
 community organizations giving preference to approvable applications from
 qualified nonprofit community organizations for affordable housing within
 the boundaries of the jurisdiction.
 (d) INCENTIVE ALLOCATION CRITERIA- Insofar as practicable, incentive
 allocations under this section shall be made according to the selection
 criteria established under section 317(c).
SEC. 324. PENALTIES FOR MISUSE OF FUNDS.
 If the Secretary finds after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing
 that a participating jurisdiction has failed to comply substantially with
 any provision of this subtitle and until the Secretary is satisfied that
 there is no longer any such failure to comply, the HOME Corporation shall
 reduce the line of credit in the jurisdiction's housing investment trust
 fund by the amount of any expenditures that were not in accordance with
 the requirements of this subtitle, and the Secretary may--
 (1) direct the HOME Corporation to prevent withdrawals from the
 jurisdiction's housing investment trust fund for activities affected by
 such failure to comply;
 (2) restrict the jurisdiction's activities under this title to activities
 that conform to one or more model programs made available under section
 313; or
 (3) remove the jurisdiction from participation in allocations or
 reallocations of funds made available under this subtitle.
SEC. 325. LIMITATION ON JURISDICTIONS UNDER COURT ORDER.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, any participating
 jurisdiction that has been or is found by a Federal, State, or local court
 in violation of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing
 Act, or any other Federal, State, or local law promoting fair housing or
 prohibiting discrimination shall only be permitted to use funds provided
 under this subtitle to carry out housing remedies ordered by such court
 until the Secretary is satisfied that there is no longer any such violation
 and all such housing remedies have been carried out.
Subtitle B--Mortgage Credit Enhancement
SEC. 331. AUTHORITY.
 The HOME Corporation is authorized, upon such terms and conditions as
 the Secretary may prescribe, to guarantee and to make commitments to
 guarantee obligations that (1) are issued by State or local housing
 finance agencies, corporations owned or chartered by the United States,
 and financial institutions approved by the HOME Corporation, and (2)
 are backed by pools or trusts of mortgages on affordable housing, as
 defined under section 315, or by participations in mortgages on affordable
 housing. The aggregate amount of guarantees under this section shall not
 exceed limitations contained in appropriation Acts.
SEC. 332. AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT.
 The HOME Corporation may enter into contracts, cooperative agreements,
 commitments, or other transactions with any corporation owned or chartered
 by, or agency of, the United States to achieve the purposes of this subtitle,
 on such terms as the HOME Corporation may deem appropriate. Notwithstanding
 any other provision of law, such agency or corporation is authorized to
 carry out such activities.
SEC. 333. TERMS.
 Obligations guaranteed under this subtitle shall have such maturities
 and bear such rate or rates of interest as may be determined by the HOME
 Corporation. Such obligations may be in the form of bonds, debentures, notes,
 evidences of debt or loans. The full faith and credit of the United States is
 pledged to the payment of all guarantees made under this subtitle. Any such
 guarantee shall be conclusive evidence of the eligibility of the obligations
 for such guarantee, and the validity of any such guarantee so made shall
 be incontestable in the hands of a holder of the guaranteed obligations.
SEC. 334. REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The operations of the HOME Corporation under this subtitle
 shall be confined insofar as practicable to credit enhancement of residential
 mortgages which are deemed by the HOME Corporation to be of such quality,
 type, and class as to meet generally the purchase standards imposed by
 private institutional mortgage investors or government-sponsored mortgage
 finance agencies. The HOME Corporation is authorized to establish standards
 and requirements for the State and local housing finance agencies and
 financial institutions with which it may conduct business and, for such
 purpose, issue approvals of such agencies or institutions, which may be
 withdrawn or modified at its discretion.
 (b) SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS- The HOME Corporation may specify requirements
 concerning, among other things--
 (1) minimum net worth or capital;
 (2) supervisory mechanisms;
 (3) warranty compensation mechanisms;
 (4) prior approval of facilities;
 (5) prior underwriting or origination and servicing experience with respect
 to different types of mortgages;
 (6) mortgage purchase volume limits; and
 (7) such other requirements as the HOME Corporation determines to be
 necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this title.
 (c) NONDISCRIMINATION- The Corporation shall not be required to make
 programs available to any particular type of agency or institution to
 an extent greater than the HOME Corporation elects to make such programs
 available to other types of approved agencies or institutions.
SEC. 335. REDUCED RISK OF LOSS.
 The HOME Corporation shall protect the interest of, and minimize the
 risk of loss to, the HOME Corporation in connection with any guarantee
 issued under this subtitle. Such arrangements may include requirements
 for insurance or guarantees on the obligations to be guaranteed or on the
 mortgages or property backing such obligations.
SEC. 336. REQUIREMENTS REQUIRED TO RELATE TO PURPOSE OF SUBTITLE.
 The HOME Corporation shall, insofar as is practicable without incurring
 undue business or financial risk, make reasonable efforts to encourage
 participation in its programs by various participating jurisdictions and
 by each type of approved agency and institution.
SEC. 337. FEES.
 The HOME Corporation shall establish and charge a fee for guarantees under
 this subtitle. The amount of such fee shall be the amount determined by the
 HOME Corporation to be sufficient to compensate the HOME Corporation for
 any risk of loss and for administrative costs incurred in the guarantee
 program. The HOME Corporation may impose charges or fees, which may be
 regarded as elements of pricing, for different classes of agencies or
 institutions with which it conducts business, and in connection therewith
 the HOME Corporation is authorized to classify such agencies or institutions
 according to type, size, location, assets, or, without limitation on the
 generality of the foregoing, on such other basis or bases of differentiation
 as the HOME Corporation may consider necessary or appropriate to effectuate
 the purposes or provisions of this title.
SEC. 338. SUBROGATION.
 Upon the payment of any guarantee under this subtitle, the HOME Corporation
 shall be subrogated to the rights of the holder of the obligation regarding
 which the guarantee payment was made.
Subtitle C--Other Support for State and Local Housing Strategies
SEC. 351. AUTHORITY.
 The HOME Corporation shall, insofar as is feasible through contract with
 eligible organizations, develop the capacity of State and local agencies,
 nonprofit organizations and for-profit corporations, working in partnership,
 to identify and meet needs for an increased supply of decent, affordable
 housing.
SEC. 352. PRIORITIES FOR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT.
 To carry out this purpose, the HOME Corporation shall provide assistance
 under this subtitle to--
 (1) facilitate the exchange of information that would help participating
 jurisdictions carry out the purposes of this title, including information
 on program design, housing finance, land use controls, and building
 construction techniques;
 (2) improve the ability of States and units of general local government
 to design and implement comprehensive housing affordability strategies,
 particularly those States and units of general local government that are
 relatively inexperienced in the development of affordable housing;
 (3) increase the ability of nonprofit community organizations to maintain,
 rehabilitate or construct housing for low-income and moderate-income
 families, particularly in areas with substantial need for such housing
 and inadequate resources to produce such housing;
 (4) encourage private lenders and for-profit developers of low-income
 housing to participate in public-private partnerships to achieve the
 purposes of this title;
 (5) increase the investment of private capital in housing for very low-income
 families, particularly by encouraging the establishment of benevolent loan
 funds through which private financial institutions will accept deposits
 at below-market interest rates and make those funds available at favorable
 rates to developers of low-income housing and to low-income home buyers; and
 (6) support locally initiated efforts to establish privately owned, local
 community development banks to finance affordable housing.
SEC. 353. ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS.
 The HOME Corporation shall carry out this subtitle insofar as is practicable
 through contract with--
 (1) a participating jurisdiction or agency thereof;
 (2) a public purpose organization established pursuant to State or local
 legislation and responsible to the chief elected official of a participating
 jurisdiction;
 (3) an agency or authority established by two or more participating
 jurisdictions to carry out activities consistent with the purposes of
 this title;
 (4) a national or regional nonprofit organization that has a membership
 comprised predominantly of entities or officials of entities that qualify
 under paragraph (1), (2), or (3); or
 (5) a nonprofit organization that--
 (A) customarily provides in more than one State services related to
 the provision of decent housing that is affordable to low-income and
 moderate-income persons; and
 (B) has a demonstrated ability to provide technical assistance and training
 for local developers of affordable housing.
Contracts under this section shall be for not more than 3 years and shall
provide not more than 20 percent of the operating budget of the contracting
organization in any one year. Within any fiscal year, contracts with any one
organization may not be entered into for a total of more than 20 percent of
the funds appropriated under this subtitle in that fiscal year.
SEC. 354. RESEARCH IN HOUSING AFFORDABILITY.
 The HOME Corporation is authorized to cooperate with the Assistant Secretary
 for Policy Development and Research in identifying and supporting, through
 contracts with eligible organizations and otherwise, such research and
 publishing such reports as will assist in the achievement of the purposes
 of this title. Activities authorized by the previous sentence may include
 an ongoing analysis of the impact of public policies at the Federal,
 State, and local levels, both individually and in the aggregate, on the
 incentives to expand and maintain the supply of affordable housing in
 the United States, particularly in areas with severe problems of housing
 affordability. For purposes of this section, agencies of the United States,
 government-sponsored mortgage finance agencies, and qualified research
 organizations shall be included as eligible organizations in addition to
 eligible organizations specified under section 353.
Subtitle D--General Authority of the HOME Corporation
SEC. 361. GENERAL POWERS.
 The HOME Corporation shall have the power--
 (1) to adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal, which shall be judicially
 noticed;
 (2) subject to such limitations as may be provided expressly in this title,
 to adopt, amend or modify, repeal, and enforce such bylaws, rules, and
 regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
 or provisions of this subtitle;
 (3) to enter into and perform contracts, leases, cooperative agreements,
 commitments, or other transactions, on such terms as it may deem appropriate,
 with any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or with any State,
 territory, commonwealth, or possession of the United States, or any political
 subdivision thereof, or with any person, firm, association, or corporation;
 (4) to execute, in accordance with its bylaws, all instruments necessary
 or appropriate in the exercise of any of its powers;
 (5) with the consent of any Government corporation or Federal Reserve
 bank, or of any board, commission, independent establishment, or executive
 department of the Government, to use information, services, facilities,
 and personnel thereof, including any field service thereof, in carrying
 out the provisions of this title, and to pay for such use;
 (6) to sue and be sued, complain and defend, in its corporate name,
 in any State, Federal or other court of competent jurisdiction, but no
 attachment, injunction or other similar process, mesne or final order,
 shall be issued against the property of the HOME Corporation or against
 the HOME Corporation with respect to its property;
 (7) to conduct its business without regard to any qualification or similar
 statute in any State, territory, commonwealth, or possession of the United
 States, or any political subdivision thereof;
 (8) to lease, purchase, or otherwise acquire, own, hold, improve, use,
 or otherwise deal in and with any property, real, personal, or mixed,
 or any interest therein, wherever situated;
 (9) to hold, rent, maintain, modernize, renovate, improve, use, and operate
 its property;
 (10) to sell, for cash or credit, lease, or otherwise dispose of its
 property and assets, at such time and in such manner as and to the extent
 that it may deem necessary or appropriate;
 (11) to accept gifts or donations of services, of property, real, personal,
 or mixed, tangible, or intangible, in aid of any of its purposes;
 (12) to settle, adjust, and compromise, and with or without consideration or
 benefit to the HOME Corporation, to release or waive in whole or in part,
 in advance or otherwise, any claim, demand, or right of, by, or against
 the HOME Corporation;
 (13) to determine its expenditures and the manner in which the same shall
 be incurred, allowed, and paid;
 (14) to indemnify officers, employees, and agents of the HOME Corporation for
 liabilities and expenses incurred in connection with their corporate duties;
 (15) to exercise any priority of the Government of the United States in
 collecting debts from bankrupt, insolvent, or decedents' estates;
 (16) if it deems it appropriate, to conduct any of its business through
 a subsidiary, trust, partnership or other legal arrangement;
 (17) to prescribe such standards as may be necessary to carry out this
 title; and
 (18) to do all things as are necessary or incidental to the proper management
 of its affairs and the proper conduct of its business.
SEC. 362. OFFICES.
 It shall maintain its principal office in the District of Columbia or the
 metropolitan area thereof and shall be deemed, for purposes of jurisdiction
 and venue in civil actions, to be a District of Columbia corporation. Offices
 may be established by the HOME Corporation in such other place or places
 as it may deem necessary or appropriate in the conduct of its business.
SEC. 363. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
 (a) OFFICERS- The Secretary shall appoint qualified persons to the offices
 of vice president, and such other offices of the HOME Corporation as the
 bylaws indicate. Persons appointed under the preceding sentence shall perform
 such executive functions, powers, and duties as may be prescribed by the
 bylaws or by the Secretary, and such persons shall be executive officers
 of the HOME Corporation and shall discharge all such executive functions,
 powers, and duties.
 (b) STAFF- The Secretary shall have the power to select and appoint or
 employ such attorneys, employees, and agents of the HOME Corporation,
 to vest them with such powers and duties, and to fix and to cause the
 HOME Corporation to pay compensation to them for their services, as the
 Secretary may determine. Attorneys, employees, and agents who are full-time
 employees of the HOME Corporation shall be subject to the civil service
 and classification laws. Nothing in this title or any other law shall be
 construed to limit the ability of the HOME Corporation to employ and provide
 for compensation of attorneys or agents for the HOME Corporation which
 compensation is not subject to the civil service and classification laws.
SEC. 364. EXEMPTION FROM CERTAIN TAXES.
 The HOME Corporation, including its franchise, capital, reserves, surplus,
 mortgages or other security holdings, and income shall be exempt from all
 taxation now or hereafter imposed by the United States, by any territory,
 dependency, or possession thereof, or by any State, county, municipality,
 or local taxing authority, except that any real property of the HOME
 Corporation shall be subject to State, territorial, county, municipal,
 or local taxation to the same extent according to its value as other real
 property is taxed.
SEC. 365. FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS TO ACT AS FISCAL AGENTS.
 The Federal Reserve banks are authorized and directed to act as a depositary
 or custodian, or as a fiscal or other agent for the HOME Corporation, for
 its own account or as fiduciary, and such banks shall be reimbursed for such
 services in such manner as may be agreed upon; and the HOME Corporation
 may itself act in such capacities, for its own account or as fiduciary,
 and for the account of others.
SEC. 366. INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
 Funds of the HOME Corporation in excess of current needs shall be kept
 in cash on hand or on deposit, or invested in obligations of the United
 States or guaranteed thereby.
SEC. 367. SEC EXEMPTION.
 All obligations, securities, participations, or other instruments guaranteed
 by the HOME Corporation shall be lawful investments, and may be accepted
 as security for all fiduciary, trust, and public funds, the investment or
 deposit of which shall be under the authority and control of the United
 States or any officer or officers thereof. All obligations, securities,
 participations, or other instruments issued or guaranteed pursuant to this
 title shall, to the same extent as securities which are direct obligations of
 or obligations guaranteed as to principal or interest by the United States,
 be deemed to be exempt securities within the meaning of laws administered
 by the Securities and Exchange Commission; but all such issuances by the
 HOME Corporation shall be made only on such terms as the Secretary shall
 generally, and from time to time, prescribe.
SEC. 368. IMMUNITIES AND PRIORITIES.
 The HOME Corporation shall be entitled to all immunities and priorities
 to which it would be entitled if it were the United States or if it were
 an unincorporated agency of the United States.
SEC. 369. INCOME AND REVENUES.
 In order to carry out the purpose of this title, all revenues and income
 transferred to or earned by the HOME Corporation, from whatever source
 derived, shall be held by the HOME Corporation and shall be available to
 carry out the purpose of this title.
SEC. 370. PRESUMPTION OF COMPLIANCE.
 Each contract executed by an officer of officers of the HOME Corporation
 shall be conclusively presumed to be entered in compliance with the
 requirements of this title.
SEC. 371. EXCLUSIVE USE OF NAME.
 No individual, association, partnership, or corporation, except the
 HOME Corporation shall hereafter use the term `Government National HOME
 Corporation,' or any combination of such words, as the name or a part thereof
 under which any individual or organization shall do business. Violations of
 the foregoing sentence may be enjoined by any court of general jurisdiction
 in a suit brought by the HOME Corporation. In any such suit, the HOME
 Corporation may recover any actual damages flowing from such violation,
 and, in addition, shall be entitled to punitive damages (regardless of
 the existence or nonexistence of actual damages) of not to exceed $1,000
 for each day during which such violation is committed or repeated.
SEC. 372. GOVERNMENT CORPORATION CONTROL ACT.
 The HOME Corporation shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
 chapter 91 of title 31, United States Code, except as otherwise provided
 in this title.
Subtitle E--General Provisions
SEC. 381. NONDISCRIMINATION.
 No person in the United States shall on the ground of race, color, national
 origin, or sex be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of,
 or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in
 whole or in part with funds made available under this title. Any prohibition
 against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination Act
 of 1975 or with respect to an otherwise qualified handicapped individual
 as provided in section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 shall also
 apply to any such program or activity.
SEC. 382. AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
 The financial transactions of recipients of such funds may, insofar as
 they relate to funds provided under this title, be audited by the General
 Accounting Office under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed
 by the Comptroller General of the United States. The representatives of
 the General Accounting Office shall have access to all books, accounts,
 records, reports, files, and other papers, things, or property belonging
 to or in use by such recipients pertaining to such financial transactions
 and necessary to facilitate the audit.
SEC. 383. PERFORMANCE REPORTS BY PARTICIPATING JURISDICTIONS.
 (a) REPORTS TO THE SECRETARY- Each participating jurisdiction shall submit to
 the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary shall prescribe, a performance
 and evaluation report on the use of funds made available under this title,
 together with the jurisdiction's assessment of the relationship of such
 usage to the jurisdiction's approved comprehensive housing affordability
 strategy. The report shall include information on the number and types
 of households served, including the income levels of those served. The
 report shall be made available to the public so that citizens, public
 agencies and other interested parties have an opportunity to comment on
 the report prior to its submission. The report shall include a summary of
 any comments received from interested parties. The report shall be included
 in the jurisdiction's performance report under section 105(d) of this Act.
 (b) UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall develop and establish uniform
 recordkeeping, performance reporting, and auditing requirements for use
 by participating jurisdictions.
 (c) REPORT TO THE CONGRESS- Not later than 120 days after the end of each
 fiscal year, the Secretary shall make an annual report to the Congress that
 summarizes and assesses the results of reports provided under this section.
SEC. 384. CITIZEN PARTICIPATION.
 The Secretary shall ensure that each participating jurisdiction, and each
 jurisdiction seeking to become a participating jurisdiction, provides for
 appropriate citizen participation in the design and implementation of the
 jurisdiction's housing strategy. Such jurisdiction shall (1) furnish citizens
 with information on activities that will be carried out under this title,
 (2) provide for public hearings that obtain the views of citizens on housing
 needs and the jurisdiction's housing strategy for meeting those needs,
 and (3) provide the public with reasonable access to records regarding
 the past use of funds made available under this title.
SEC. 385. LABOR.
 Any contract for the construction of affordable housing with 12 or
 more units assisted with funds made available under this subtitle shall
 contain a provision requiring that not less than the wages prevailing
 in the locality, as predetermined by the Secretary of Labor pursuant
 to the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a--276a-5), shall be paid to all
 laborers and mechanics employed in the development of affordable housing
 involved, and participating jurisdictions shall require certification
 as to compliance with the provisions of this section prior to making any
 payment under such contract. The Secretary may waive the application of
 this subsection in cases or classes of cases where laborers or mechanics,
 not otherwise employed at any time in the construction of such housing,
 voluntarily donate their services without full compensation for the purposes
 of lowering the costs of construction and the Secretary determines that any
 amounts saved thereby are fully credited to the corporation, cooperative,
 or public body or agency undertaking the construction.
SEC. 386. INTERSTATE AGREEMENTS.
 The consent of the Congress is hereby given to any two or more States to
 enter into agreements or compacts, not in conflict with any law of the
 United States, for cooperative efforts and mutual assistance in support
 of activities authorized under this subtitle as they pertain to interstate
 areas and to localities within such States, and to establish such agencies,
 joint or otherwise, as they may deem desirable for making such agreements
 and compacts effective.
SEC. 387. ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order to assure that the policies of the National
 Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and other provisions of law which
 further the purposes of such Act (as specified in regulations issued
 by the Secretary) are most effectively implemented in connection with
 the expenditure of funds under this title, and to assure to the public
 undiminished protection of the environment, the Secretary, in lieu of
 the environmental protection procedures otherwise applicable, may under
 regulations provide for the release of funds for particular projects
 to participating jurisdictions under this title who assume all of the
 responsibilities for environmental review, decisionmaking, and action
 pursuant to such Act, and such other provisions of law as the regulations
 of the Secretary specify, that would apply to the Secretary were he to
 undertake such projects as Federal projects. The Secretary shall issue
 regulations to carry out this section only after consultation with the
 Council on Environmental Quality.
 (b) PROCEDURE- The Secretary shall approve the release of funds subject to
 the procedures authorized by this section only if, at least 15 days prior
 to such approval and prior to any commitment of funds to such projects the
 participating jurisdiction has submitted to the Secretary a request for
 such release accompanied by a certification which meets the requirements
 of subsection (c). The Secretary's approval of any such certification shall
 be deemed to satisfy his responsibilities under the National Environmental
 Policy Act of 1969 and such other provisions of law as the regulations
 of the Secretary specify insofar as those responsibilities relate to the
 releases of funds for projects to be carried out pursuant thereto which
 are covered by such certification.
 (c) CERTIFICATION- A certification under the procedures authorized by this
 section shall--
 (1) be in a form acceptable to the Secretary,
 (2) be executed by the chief executive officer or other officer of the
 recipient of assistance under this title qualified under regulations of
 the Secretary,
 (3) specify that the recipient of assistance under this title has fully
 carried out its responsibilities as described under subsection (a), and
 (4) specify that the certifying officer (A) consents to assume the status
 of a responsible Federal official under the National Environmental Policy
 Act of 1969 and each provision of law specified in regulations issued by the
 Secretary insofar as the provisions of such Act or other such provision of
 law apply pursuant to subsection (a), and (B) is authorized and consents
 on behalf of the participating jurisdiction and himself to accept the
 jurisdiction of the Federal courts for the purpose of enforcement of his
 responsibilities as such an official.
 (d) ASSISTANCE TO A STATE- In the case of assistance to States, the State
 shall perform those actions of the Secretary described in subsection (b) and
 the performance of such actions shall be deemed to satisfy the Secretary's
 responsibilities referred to in the second sentence of such subsection.
TITLE IV--AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING
Subtitle A--Preservation of Affordable Rental Housing
SEC. 401. OFFICE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING PRESERVATION.
 Section 4 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(e) There shall be in the Department an Office of Affordable Housing
 Preservation which shall have such responsibilities as may be prescribed
 by the Secretary for the purpose of maintaining privately owned housing
 that is affordable to very low-income and low-income families (as those
 terms are defined in section 3(b)(2) of the United States Housing Act
 of 1937), particularly housing that was produced for such purpose with
 Federal assistance.'.
SEC. 402. COOPERATION WITH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
 The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall provide technical
 assistance to, and otherwise work with, participating jurisdictions to
 enhance the implementation of provisions of law to--
 (1) avoid the loss of federally assisted, low-income housing due to default
 or the termination of low-income affordability restrictions, and
 (2) ensure that rental housing that is owned by the Department or has
 a mortgage held by the Secretary remains livable and affordable to very
 low-income and low-income families.
SEC. 403. MEDIATION TO ASSIST LOW-INCOME AFFORDABILITY.
 The Secretary is authorized to contract with nonprofit organizations that
 have demonstrated expertise in housing law and finance to help reconcile
 the interests of tenants, owners, and the public in efforts to maintain
 privately owned, federally assisted housing as housing affordable to very
 low-income and low-income families. Such contracts shall be entered into if
 the Secretary determines that such assistance (1) is desirable to achieve
 constructive negotiations among owners, tenants, and other interested
 parties, and (2) cannot be financed from other sources.
Subtitle B--Low-Income Rental Assistance
SEC. 421. PURPOSE.
 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to provide Federal rental assistance to very low-income families in
 one form that combines the best features of the section 8 certificate and
 voucher programs;
 (2) to provide for orderly renewal of expiring rental assistance;
 (3) to maintain rental assistance needed to preserve the low-income
 affordability of federally assisted housing and to replace public housing
 that is demolished or disposed of; and
 (4) to increase the number of very low-income families who can afford to
 live in decent housing.
SEC. 422. REVISED SECTION 8 PROGRAM.
 Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 is amended to read
 as follows:
`SEC. 8. RENTAL CREDIT ASSISTANCE.
 `(a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary is authorized, in accordance with the
 provisions of this section, to make housing assistance payments to enable
 very low-income families to live in decent housing while making affordable
 contributions toward rent. Such housing assistance payments shall be made
 with respect to housing (1) that has one or more project-based rental
 credits, or (2) that is occupied by a family holding a portable rental
 credit.
 `(b) AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT-
 `(1) ANNUAL CONTRIBUTIONS CONTRACTS-
 `(A) The Secretary is authorized to enter into annual contributions contracts
 with contracting agencies for payments under rental credit contracts
 entered into during the term of such annual contributions contracts and
 for other expenses pursuant to this section, in amounts not to exceed
 amounts distributed to such agencies under subsection (c).
 `(B) The term of an annual contributions contract shall be for 60 months,
 except as provided in subsections (f) and (g).
 `(C) The Secretary shall obligate the authority approved under this section
 in appropriations Acts for each fiscal year by entering into a separate
 annual contributions contract with each contracting agency for such fiscal
 year unless otherwise specified in this section.
 `(2) RENTAL CREDIT CONTRACTS-
 `(A) A contracting agency is authorized to enter into a rental credit
 contract with an owner of housing to make housing assistance payments
 to the owner on behalf of an eligible family. The amount obligated by a
 rental credit contract shall not exceed the amount remaining unobligated
 under the applicable annual contributions contract. Except as otherwise
 specified, the term of a rental credit contract shall be for such period
 of time, not to exceed 60 months, as the contracting agency determines to
 be appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(B) In the case of a project-based rental credit, a contracting agency
 is authorized to make a commitment to an owner to extend the term of
 the underlying rental credit contract for such period or periods as
 the contracting agency determines is appropriate to achieve long-term
 affordability of the housing if the owner makes a binding commitment to have
 such contract extensions accepted by the owner and the owner's successors in
 interest. The contracting agency shall make the commitment contingent upon
 the future availability of rental credits as provided in appropriations Acts.
 `(3) CONTRACTING AGENCIES- A contracting agency shall be a public housing
 agency, except that, to serve areas where no public housing agency has been
 organized or where a participating jurisdiction determines that a public
 housing agency is unable to implement the provisions of this section, the
 jurisdiction may, with the approval of the Secretary, designate a public
 agency other than a public housing agency to be the contracting agency. A
 participating jurisdiction shall be a State or unit of general local
 government designated by the Secretary to be a participating jurisdiction
 under title III of the National Affordable Housing Act.
 `(4) SPECIAL AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY- The Secretary is authorized--
 `(A) to perform the functions assigned to participating jurisdictions
 by this section in those areas not located within the boundaries of a
 participating jurisdiction,
 `(B) to perform the functions assigned to a contracting agency by this
 section for areas not served by a contracting agency, and
 `(C) to enter into a rental credit contract with an owner and otherwise
 act as a contracting agency under this section when the Secretary uses
 rental credits to preserve the affordable housing stock under subsection
 (c)(2) or otherwise determines that such arrangements are appropriate to
 carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(c) ALLOCATION AMONG USES- The Secretary shall allocate rental credits
 among the following uses in amounts specified in appropriations Acts:
 `(1) INCREMENTAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall allocate rental credits as
 provided in subsection (e) to extend rental assistance to very low-income
 families who are eligible for but not receiving such assistance.
 `(2) PRESERVATION OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING STOCK- The Secretary shall
 allocate rental credits as provided in subsection (f) to preserve the
 low-income affordability of federally assisted housing or replace public
 housing that is disposed of or demolished in accordance with section 18.
 `(3) RENEWAL OF EXPIRING CONTRACTS- The Secretary shall allocate
 rental credits (A) to contracting agencies to ensure that each annual
 contributions contract entered into under this section since enactment of
 the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 is renewed with an annual
 contributions contract; and (B) to owners of assisted housing to ensure
 that each project-based rental assistance contract entered into under this
 section since enactment of such Act is renewed with a sufficient number
 of project-based rental credits. The Secretary shall provide such rental
 credits as may be necessary to assist tenants involuntarily displaced as
 the result of any owner's decision not to renew a project-based rental
 assistance contract.
 `(d) PROGRAM PROVISIONS-
 `(1) MODE OF ASSISTANCE-
 `(A) Except as specified in subparagraph (B), rental credits shall be
 portable, enabling a very low-income family holding a rental credit to
 rent housing that is selected by the family and meets the requirements of
 this section.
 `(B) A contracting agency may provide project-based rental credits with
 respect to an existing or newly constructed structure in accordance with this
 section. Project-based rental credits may be used (i) to renew an expiring
 rental assistance contract that was attached to the same structure, (ii)
 to carry out preservation activities in accordance with subsection (f),
 or (iii) to provide assistance pursuant to subsection (e)(3). An owner
 shall be permitted, where appropriate, to pledge, or offer as security
 for any loan or obligation, a project-based rental credit provided that
 such security is in connection with a project constructed or rehabilitated
 pursuant to authority granted in this section and terms of the financing or
 any refinancing have been approved by a contracting agency. The Secretary
 may establish such special terms and conditions for project-based rental
 credits as may be appropriate.
 `(2) FAIR MARKET RENTS-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish fair market rents
 periodically but not less than annually for existing rental dwelling units
 of various sizes and types in the market area suitable for occupancy for
 persons assisted under this section. Proposed fair market rentals for an
 area shall be published in the Federal Register with reasonable time for
 public comment, and shall become effective upon the date of publication in
 final form in the Federal Register. Each fair market rental in effect under
 this subsection shall be adjusted to be effective on October 1 of each
 year to reflect changes, based on the most recent available data trended
 so the rentals will be current for the year to which they apply, of rents
 for existing rental dwelling units of various sizes and types in the market
 area suitable for occupancy by persons assisted under this section.
 `(B) FAIR MARKET RENT REFINEMENT- The Secretary may approve an alternative
 schedule with more than one fair market rent for an area if a participating
 jurisdiction or jurisdictions whose boundaries encompass all or part of the
 area demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary that such alternative
 fair market rent schedule (A) accurately reflects rent variations among
 submarkets within the area, and (B) will improve housing opportunities for
 disadvantaged minorities and families with special needs, will provide
 very low-income families with better access to employment and education
 opportunities, or will otherwise further the objective of national housing
 policy as affirmed by Congress.
 `(3) TENANT RENT CONTRIBUTIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A family shall pay as rent for a dwelling unit assisted
 under this Act the highest of the following amounts, rounded to the
 nearest dollar: (i) 30 percent of the family's adjusted monthly income;
 (ii) 10 percent of the family's monthly income; or (iii) if the family is
 receiving payments for welfare assistance from a public agency and a part
 of such payments, adjusted in accordance with the family's actual housing
 costs, is specifically designated by such agency to meet the family's
 housing costs, the portion of such payments which is so designated.
 `(B) HIGHER CONTRIBUTION- A family may pay a higher percentage of income
 than that specified in subparagraph (A) if (i) the family requests to live
 in a unit the rent for which exceeds the permissible maximum monthly rent
 contained in paragraph (4)(A), and (ii) the relevant contracting agency
 approves such request after determining that the rent for the unit is
 reasonable. In no event shall contracting agencies approve such requests for
 more than 10 percent of their annual rental credit allocations. Contracting
 agencies that approve such requests for more than 5 percent of their
 annual allocations shall submit a report to the Secretary at the end of
 the fiscal year. The report shall describe the contracting agency's reasons
 for making the exceptions, including any evidence that the exceptions were
 made necessary by the inadequacy of the fair market rents established for
 the area.
 `(4) TERMS OF RENTAL CREDIT CONTRACTS-
 `(A) INITIAL CONTRACT RENTS- A rental credit contract entered into pursuant
 to this section shall establish the maximum monthly rent (including
 utilities and all maintenance and management charges) which the owner is
 entitled to receive for each dwelling unit with respect to which housing
 assistance payments are to be made. The maximum monthly rent shall not
 exceed by more than 10 percent the fair market rental established by the
 Secretary in accordance with paragraph (2)(A). The maximum monthly rent
 may exceed the fair market rental established by the Secretary (i) by
 more than 10 but not more than 20 percent where the Secretary determines
 that special circumstances warrant such higher maximum rent or that such
 higher rent is necessary to the implementation of a housing strategy as
 defined in section 105 of the National Affordable Housing Act, or (ii) by
 such higher amount where the contracting agency approves a tenant request
 in accordance with paragraph (3)(B).
 `(B) RENT REASONABLENESS LIMITATION- The maximum monthly rent for units
 assisted under this section shall be reasonable in comparison with rents
 charged for comparable units in the private unassisted market. If units
 assisted under this section are exempt from local rent control while they
 are so assisted or otherwise, the maximum monthly rent for such units
 shall be reasonable in comparison with rents charged for other units in
 the market area that are exempt from local rent control.
 `(C) ADJUSTMENTS-
 `(i) The rental credit contract shall provide for adjustment, not less
 frequently than annually, in the maximum monthly rents for units covered
 by the contract. Such adjustment shall reflect changes in the fair market
 rentals established in the housing area for similar types and sizes
 of dwelling units or, if the Secretary determines, on the basis of a
 reasonable formula.
 `(ii) The rental credit contract shall provide for the Secretary to
 make additional adjustments in the maximum monthly rent for units under
 contract to the extent the Secretary determines such adjustments are
 necessary to reflect increases in the actual and necessary expenses of
 owning and maintaining the units which have resulted from substantial
 general increases in real property taxes, utility rates, or similar costs
 which are not adequately compensated for by the adjustment in the maximum
 monthly rent authorized by subparagraph (A).
 `(iii) Adjustments in the maximum rents under clauses (i) and (ii) shall
 not result in material differences between the rents charged for assisted
 units and unassisted units of similar quality and age in the same market
 area, as determined by the Secretary.
 `(D) AMOUNT OF ASSISTANCE PAYMENT- The amount of the monthly assistance
 payment with respect to any dwelling unit shall be the difference between the
 maximum monthly rent which the contract provides that the owner is to receive
 for the unit and the rent the family is required to pay under paragraph
 (3). Reviews of family income shall be made no less frequently than annually.
 `(E) LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR UNOCCUPIED UNITS- The rental
 credit contract shall provide that housing assistance payments may be
 made only with respect to a dwelling unit under lease for occupancy by a
 family determined to be a very low-income family at the time it initially
 occupied such dwelling unit, except that such payments may be made with
 respect to unoccupied units for a period not exceeding 60 days (i) in the
 event that a family vacates a dwelling unit before the expiration date of
 the lease for occupancy, and (ii) where a good faith effort is being made
 to fill the unoccupied unit.
 `(F) TENANT PROTECTIONS- Each rental credit contract shall provide (with
 respect to any unit) that--
 `(i)(I) the lease between the tenant and the owner shall be for at least
 one year or the term of such contract, whichever is shorter, and shall
 contain other terms and conditions specified by the Secretary; and
 `(II) the owner shall not terminate the tenancy except for serious or
 repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease, for violation
 of applicable Federal, State, or local law, or for other good cause;
 `(ii) maintenance and replacement (including redecoration) shall be
 in accordance with the standard practice for the building concerned as
 established by the owner and agreed to by the agency in advance of tenant
 occupancy; and
 `(iii) the agency and the owner shall carry out such other appropriate
 terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed to by them.
 `(G) NOTIFICATION-
 `(i) An owner shall provide written notice to a tenant holding a portable
 rental credit of the owner's intention to terminate the rental credit
 contract because of a desire to rent the dwelling unit at a higher monthly
 rent than provided by the contract. Such notice shall be made not less
 than 90 days prior to the date upon which the owner intends to terminate
 the contract for such reason.
 `(ii) If an owner provides notice of proposed termination under clause (i)
 and the rent the owner receives is lower than the level permitted under
 paragraph (4)(A), the Secretary may offer to increase the rent to such level
 in exchange for the owner's agreement to rescind the proposed termination.
 `(5) TIMELY INCREASES- In order to comply with other provisions of this
 section, the Secretary shall increase housing assistance payments on a timely
 basis to cover increases in maximum monthly rents or decreases in family
 incomes. The Secretary shall carry out his requirements by taking whatever
 steps are necessary, including the making of rental credit contracts in
 amounts in excess of the amounts required at the time of the initial renting
 of dwelling units, the reservation of annual contributions authority for the
 purpose of amending rental credit contracts, or the allocation of a portion
 of new authorizations for the purpose of amending rental credit contracts.
 `(6) TENANT SELECTION-
 `(A) PREFERENCE- In selecting families to be assisted, preference shall be
 given to families which, at the time they are seeking assistance, occupy
 substandard housing, are paying more than 50 percent of family income for
 rent or are involuntarily displaced.
 `(B) OTHER CRITERIA- A public housing agency may provide an exception to
 the preference established in subparagraph (A) in order to (i) assist very
 low-income families who either reside in transitional housing assisted
 under title IV of the McKinney Homeless Assistance Act, or participate in
 a program designed to provide public assistance recipients with greater
 access to employment and educational opportunities, or (ii) achieve other
 objectives of national housing policy as affirmed by Congress. Not more
 than 25 percent of the families who initially receive assistance in any
 1-year period may be families who do not qualify for any preference in
 paragraph (A).
 `(7) Income eligibility-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide assistance under this section
 only to very low-income families, except that the Secretary shall provide
 assistance under this section to low-income families who reside in a
 project or dwelling unit that--
 `(i) has a rental assistance contract that was entered into prior to the
 enactment of this Act and is due to expire;
 `(ii) is subject to the provisions of section 203 of the Housing and
 Community Development Amendments of 1978; or
 `(iii) is subject to the provisions of subtitle B of the Emergency Low-Income
 Housing Preservation Act of 1987 or any subsequent legislation to avoid
 the loss of federally assisted housing due to the termination of low-income
 affordability restrictions.
 `(B) SPECIAL RULES FOR RENTAL PRESERVATION PROGRAMS- In the case of
 low-income families living in rental projects rehabilitated under section 17
 of this Act or section 533 of the Housing Act of 1949 before rehabilitation--
 `(i) portable rental credits under this section shall be made for families
 who are required to move out of their units because of the physical
 rehabilitation activities or because of overcrowding;
 `(ii) at the discretion of each public housing agency or other agency
 administering the allocation of assistance, portable rental credits under
 this section may be made for families who would have to pay more than 30
 percent of their adjusted income for rent after rehabilitation whether
 they choose to remain in, or to move from, the project; and
 `(iii) the Secretary shall allocate assistance for portable rental credits
 under this section to ensure that sufficient resources are available
 to address the physical or economic displacement, or potential economic
 displacement, of existing tenants pursuant to clauses (i) and (ii).
 `(e) ALLOCATION OF INCREMENTAL ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) FORMULA ALLOCATION AMONG PARTICIPATING JURISDICTIONS- Not later than 30
 days after amounts are approved in an appropriations Act under section 5,
 the Secretary shall notify participating jurisdictions of their allocation
 of rental credits made available under subsection (c)(1). Such allocation
 shall be made according to a formula, to be established in regulation,
 that reflects each jurisdiction's share of the Nation's need for rental
 assistance as indicated by--
 `(A) the need to meet very low-income occupancy requirements under section
 315(a) of the National Affordable Housing Act, and
 `(B) objective measures of poverty, the unserved need for rental assistance
 among very low-income families, and the availability of decent housing
 renting at or below the existing fair market rent.
The formula allocation to a State, insofar as is feasible, shall not take
into account data that apply to any participating units of general local
government within that State. The data to be used for allocation within a
fiscal year shall be those that are available to the Secretary 90 days prior
to the beginning of that fiscal year.
 `(2) DISTRIBUTION BY PARTICIPATING JURISDICTIONS- Not later than 30
 days after a participating jurisdiction is informed of its allocation
 under subsection (e)(1), each participating jurisdiction shall inform
 the Secretary of the allocation that has been made by the jurisdiction
 so that the Secretary may enter into annual contributions contracts with
 contracting agencies serving the jurisdiction in amounts not to exceed
 the total allocated to the participating jurisdiction. Each participating
 jurisdiction shall make its decision in accordance with the need for
 rental assistance as identified in the jurisdiction's housing strategy
 approved under section 105 of the National Affordable Housing Act. The
 annual contributions contract shall be in an amount that equals the number
 of rental credits that the contracting agency has been allocated by the
 participating jurisdiction multiplied by the 2-bedroom fair market rent
 established for that jurisdiction.
 `(3) A participating jurisdiction shall have the discretion to provide
 project-based rental credits with respect to an existing or newly constructed
 structure (including a single room occupancy facility) if the structure
 is rehabilitated or constructed (A) without Federal assistance, or (B)
 with amounts made available to the jurisdiction under title III of the
 National Affordable Housing Act. A participating jurisdiction may use
 not more than 15 percent of its formula allocation of rental credits to
 exercise the discretion provided in this paragraph.
 `(f) PRESERVATION ACTIVITIES-
 `(1) PRESERVATION OF FEDERALLY ASSISTED HOUSING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall provide project-based rental credits to
 owners or prospective owners of federally assisted housing to preserve the
 low-income affordability of such housing. Such credits shall (i) carry terms
 of not less than 60 months or such longer period specified under related
 provisions of law. The Secretary is authorized to increase the amount of
 assistance provided under this subsection above the amount of assistance
 otherwise permitted by subsection (d)(4)(A) if the Secretary determines
 that such increase is necessary to achieve the purposes of this subsection.
 `(B) ALLOCATION- The Secretary shall allocate rental credits made available
 under subsection (c)(2) among the following uses:
 `(i) LOAN MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE- The Secretary is authorized to provide
 project-based rental credits to owners of federally insured or federally
 assisted multifamily housing projects encountering serious financial
 problems. In allocating loan management assistance under this subsection,
 the Secretary may give priority to any project only on the basis that
 the project has serious financial problems that are likely to result in
 a claim on the insurance fund in the near future.
 `(ii) PROPERTY DISPOSITION- The Secretary is authorized to provide
 project-based rental credits to achieve the purposes of section 203(d)
 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978.
 `(iii) EXTENSION OF LOW-INCOME AFFORDABILITY RESTRICTIONS- The Secretary
 is authorized to provide project-based rental credits to achieve the
 purposes of subtitle B of the Emergency Low-Income Housing Preservation
 Act of 1987 or any subsequent legislation designed to avoid the loss of
 federally assisted low-income housing due to the termination of low-income
 affordability restrictions.
 `(2) PUBLIC HOUSING REPLACEMENT- The Secretary may enter into annual
 contributions contracts with contracting agencies for the purpose of
 replacing public housing demolished or disposed of in accordance with
 section 18 of this Act.
 `(g) EXPIRING CONTRACTS- Not later than 30 days after the beginning of each
 fiscal year, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a plan for
 reducing, to the extent feasible, year to year fluctuations in the levels of
 budget authority that will be required over the subsequent 5 year period to
 renew expiring rental assistance contracts entered into under this section
 since enactment of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. To
 the extent necessary to carry out such plan, the Secretary is authorized to
 enter into annual contributions contracts with terms of less than 60 months.
 `(h) SPECIAL SET-ASIDE FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall set aside a pool of not less than 3,000
 rental credits for the purpose of improving the access of very low-income
 handicapped persons to independent living arrangements and employment
 opportunities. The Secretary shall fund such a pool from amounts approved
 in appropriations Acts for incremental rental assistance under subsection
 (c)(1).
 `(2) INCENTIVE ALLOCATION- Rental credits set aside under this subsection
 shall be distributed to contracting agencies under an incentive allocation
 system. Applications for assistance under this subsection shall be submitted
 by an applicant agency in such form and in accordance with such procedures
 as the Secretary shall establish. Applications shall contain--
 `(A) evidence of effective cooperation between the State or locality's
 housing and health or mental health agencies;
 `(B) a description of how such agencies will provide--
 `(i) inspection and monitoring for housing quality;
 `(ii) supportive services tailored to the needs and characteristics of
 handicapped individuals who receive rental credits;
 `(iii) assistance to such recipients in their search for housing; and
 `(iv) information for landlords who rent to (or inquire about renting to)
 handicapped persons; and
 `(C) such other information or certifications as the Secretary determines
 to be necessary to achieve the purposes of this subsection.
 `(3) SPECIAL FAIR MARKET RULES- The Secretary shall increase the amount
 of assistance provided under this paragraph above the amount otherwise
 permitted by subsection (d)(4) if the Secretary determines such increase
 necessary to satisfy the special design and service needs of handicapped
 persons receiving rental credits.
 `(i) SPECIAL TYPES OF HOUSING-
 `(1) SRO FACILITIES- (A) In making assistance available under this section,
 a contracting agency may provide assistance with respect to residential
 properties in which some or all of the dwelling units do not contain
 bathroom or kitchen facilities, if--
 `(i) the property is located in an area in which there is a significant
 demand for such units, as determined by the agency;
 `(ii) the unit of general local government in which the property is located
 and the contracting agency certify to the Secretary that the property
 complies with local health and safety standards.
The Secretary may waive in appropriate cases, the limitation and preference
described in the second and third sentences of section 3(b)(3) of the United
States Housing Act of 1937 with respect to the assistance made available
under this subsection.
 `(B) The Secretary may provide the assistance with respect to residential
 properties in which some or all of the dwelling units do not contain bathroom
 or kitchen facilities if the unit of general local government and the local
 contracting agency approve of such units being utilized for such purpose
 and the requirements of subparagraphs (1)(A) and (1)(B) are satisfied.
 `(2) MANUFACTURED HOUSING- (A) The Secretary may enter into rental credit
 contracts under this subsection to assist very low-income families by making
 housing assistance payments on behalf of any such family which utilizes a
 manufactured home as its principal place of residence. Such payments may
 be made with respect to the rental of the real property on which there is
 located a manufactured home which is owned by any such family or with respect
 to the rental by such family of a manufactured home and the real property
 on which it is located. In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary may--
 `(i) enter into annual contributions contracts with public housing agencies
 pursuant to which such agencies may enter into rental credit contracts
 with the owners of such real property, or
 `(ii) enter into rental credit contracts directly with the owners of such
 real property.
 `(B)(i) A rental credit contract entered into pursuant to this paragraph
 shall establish the maximum monthly rent (including maintenance and
 management charges) which the owner is entitled to receive for the space on
 which a manufactured home is located and with respect to which assistance
 payments are to be made. The maximum monthly rent shall not exceed by more
 than 10 per centum the fair market rental established by the Secretary
 periodically (but not less than annually) with respect to the market area
 for the rental of real property suitable for occupancy by families assisted
 under this paragraph.
 `(ii) The amount of any monthly assistance payment with respect to any
 family which rents real property which is assisted under this paragraph,
 and on which is located a manufactured home which is owned by such family
 shall be the difference between the rent the family is required to pay
 under subsection (d)(3)(A) and the sum of--
 `(I) the monthly payment made by such family to amortize the cost of
 purchasing the manufactured home;
 `(II) the monthly utility payments made by such family, subject to reasonable
 limitations prescribed by the Secretary; and
 `(III) the maximum monthly rent permitted with respect to the real
 property which is rented by such family for the purpose of locating its
 manufactured home;
except that in no case may such assistance exceed the total amount of such
maximum monthly rent.
 `(C)(i) Rental credit contracts entered into pursuant to this paragraph
 shall establish the maximum monthly rent permitted with respect to the
 manufactured home and the real property on which it is located and with
 respect to which assistance payments are to be made. The maximum monthly
 rent shall not exceed by more than 10 per centum the fair market rental
 established by the Secretary periodically (but not less than annually)
 with respect to the market area for the rental of a manufactured home
 and the real property on which it is located suitable for occupancy by
 families assisted under this paragraph, except that the maximum monthly
 rent may exceed the fair market rental by more than 10 but not more than
 20 per centum where the Secretary determines that special circumstances
 warrant such higher maximum rent.
 `(ii) The amount of any monthly assistance payment with respect to any
 family which rents a manufactured home and the real property on which it is
 located and which is assisted under this paragraph shall be the difference
 between the rent the family is required to pay under subsection (d)(3)(A)
 and the sum of--
 `(I) the monthly utility payments made by such family, subject to reasonable
 limitations prescribed by the Secretary; and
 `(II) the maximum monthly rent permitted with respect to the manufactured
 home and real property on which it is located.
 `(D) The provisions of subsection (d)(4)(C) of this section shall apply
 to the adjustments of maximum monthly rents under the subsection.
 `(E) Each contract entered into under the subsection shall be for a term
 of not less than one month and not more than 180 months, except that in any
 case in which the manufactured home park is substantially rehabilitated or
 newly constructed, such term may not be less than 240 months, nor more than
 the maximum term for a manufactured home loan permitted under section 2(b)
 of the National Housing Act.
 `(F) The Secretary may carry out this subsection without regard to whether
 the manufactured home park is existing, substantially rehabilitated,
 or newly constructed.
 `(G) In the case of any substantially rehabilitated or newly constructed
 manufactured home park containing spaces with respect to which assistance is
 made under this subsection, the principal amount of the mortgage attributable
 to the rental spaces within the park may not exceed an amount established by
 the Secretary which is equal to or less than the limitation for manufactured
 home parks described in section 207(c)(3) of the National Housing Act,
 and the Secretary may increase such limitation in high cost areas in the
 manner described in such section.
 `(H) The Secretary may prescribe other terms and conditions which are
 necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this subsection
 and which are consistent with the purposes of this subsection.
 `(3) SHARED HOUSING- In making assistance available under this section,
 a contracting agency may assist elderly families (as defined in section
 3(b)(3)) who elect to live in a shared housing arrangement in which they
 benefit as a result of sharing the facilities of a dwelling with others
 in a manner that effectively and efficiently meets their housing needs
 and thereby reduces their costs of housing. The Secretary shall issue
 minimum habitability standards for the purpose of assuring decent, safe,
 and sanitary housing for such families while taking into account the
 special circumstances of shared housing.
 `(j) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION-
 `(1) ADMINISTRATIVE FEE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a fee for the costs incurred
 in administering the rental credit program under this section. The amount
 of the fee for each month for which a dwelling unit is covered by a rental
 credit contract shall be 8.2 percent of the fair market rental established
 under subsection (c)(4) for a 2-bedroom existing rental dwelling unit
 in the market area of the contracting agency. The Secretary may increase
 the fee if necessary to reflect the higher costs of administering small
 programs and programs operating over large geographic areas.
 `(B) OTHER COSTS- The Secretary shall also establish reasonable fees
 (as determined by the Secretary) for--
 `(i) the costs of preliminary expenses (not to exceed $275) that the
 contracting agency documents it has incurred in connection with new
 allocations of assistance under subsection (g);
 `(ii) the costs incurred in assisting families who experience difficulty
 (as determined by the Secretary) in obtaining appropriate housing under
 the programs; and
 `(iii) extraordinary costs approved by the Secretary.
 `(C) ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary may establish or increase a fee in accordance
 with this subsection only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided
 in appropriation Acts.
 `(2) INSPECTION- The Secretary shall require the contracting agency (A) to
 inspect each unit before any housing assistance payment is made to determine
 that it meets standards for decent, safe, and sanitary housing established
 by the Secretary for the purpose of this section, and (B) to make subsequent
 inspections not less frequently than annually during the contract term. No
 housing assistance payment may be made for a dwelling unit that fails to
 meet such quality standards, unless any such failure is promptly corrected
 by the owner and the correction verified by the public housing agency.
 `(3) MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, with the approval of the Secretary, the contracting agency
 administering a rental credit contract under this section with respect
 to existing dwelling units may exercise all management and maintenance
 responsibilities with respect to those units pursuant to a contract between
 such agency and the owner of such units.
 `(4) INCOME VERIFICATION- The Secretary shall establish procedures to
 assure that income data provided to public housing agencies and owners
 by families applying for or receiving assistance under this section is
 complete and accurate. In establishing such procedures, the Secretary
 shall regularly and periodically select a random sample of families from
 which to obtain information for the purpose of income verification. Such
 information may include, but is not limited to, data concerning unemployment
 compensation and Federal income taxation and data relating to benefits
 made available under the Social Security Act, the Food Stamp Act of 1977,
 or title 38, United States Code. Any such information received pursuant to
 this subsection shall remain confidential and shall be used only for the
 purpose of verifying incomes in order to determine eligibility of families
 for benefits (and the amount of such benefits, if any) under this section.
 `(5) NONDISCRIMINATION AGAINST PUBLIC HOUSING RESIDENTS- In selecting
 families for the provision of assistance under this section, a contracting
 agency or an owner of federally assisted housing receiving project-based
 rental credits may not exclude or penalize a family solely because the
 family resides in a public housing project.
 `(6) NONDISCRIMINATION AGAINST HOLDERS OF RENTAL CREDITS- No owner who
 has entered into a rental credit contract under this section on behalf of
 any tenant in a multifamily housing project, with respect to any available
 dwelling unit in any multifamily housing project of such owner that rents
 for an amount not greater than the fair market rent for a comparable unit,
 as determined by the Secretary under this section, shall discriminate against
 any prospective tenant on account of the status of such prospective tenant
 as a holder of such rental credit. For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `multifamily housing project' means a residential building containing more
 than 4 dwelling units.
 `(7) APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS OF ACT- Sections 5(e) and 6, and any
 other provisions of this Act which are inconsistent with the provisions
 of this section shall not apply to rental credit contracts entered into
 under this section.
 `(8) PORTABILITY-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any family provided a portable rental credit under
 this section may rent an eligible dwelling unit if the dwelling unit to
 which the family moves is within the same, or a contiguous, metropolitan
 statistical area as the metropolitan statistical area within which the
 area of jurisdiction of the contracting agency approving such assistance
 is located.
 `(B) CONTRACTING AGENCY RESPONSIBILITY- The contracting agency having
 authority with respect to the dwelling unit to which a family moves under
 this subsection shall have the responsibility of carrying out the provisions
 of this subsection with respect to the family. If no contracting agency
 has authority with respect to the dwelling unit to which a family moves
 under this subsection, the contracting agency approving the assistance
 shall have such responsibility.
 `(C) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In providing assistance under subsection
 (e)(1) for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall give consideration to any
 reduction in the number of resident families incurred by a contracting
 agency in the preceding fiscal year as a result of the provisions of
 this subsection.
 `(D) EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITY- The provisions of this subsection shall not
 be construed to restrict the Secretary's authority under any other provision
 of law to provide for the portability of assistance under this section.
 `(k) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `handicapped' has the same meaning given the term in section
 521 of the National Affordable Housing Act.
 `(2) The term `housing assistance payments' means the payment made by
 a contracting agency to the owner of a unit under lease by an eligible
 family, as provided by the rental credit contract.
 `(3) The term `owner' means any private person or entity, including a
 cooperative, or a public housing agency, having the legal right to lease
 or sublease dwelling units as described in this section.
 `(4) The term `project-based rental credit' means a contractual obligation
 with respect to an existing or newly constructed structure under which the
 Secretary or a contracting agency is obligated to provide housing assistance
 payments with respect to one unit within such structure provided that the
 unit is occupied by a person or family that meets the income eligibility
 requirements of this section and the owner or prospective owner of such
 structure is obligated to comply with the requirements of this section as
 determined by the Secretary.
 `(5) The terms `rent' or `rental' mean, with respect to members of a
 cooperative, the charges under the occupancy agreements between such
 members and the cooperative.'.
SEC. 423. AUTHORIZATIONS.
 (a) AGGREGATE BUDGET AUTHORITY- Section 5(c)(6) of the United States Housing
 Act of 1937 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence:
 `The aggregate amount of budget authority that may be obligated for
 contracts for annual contributions under section 8, for other assistance
 under section 8 and for amendments to existing contracts is increased (to
 the extent approved in appropriations Acts) by $3,658,322,000 on October 1,
 1989, and by $3,836,424,000 on October 1, 1990.
 (b) UTILIZATION OF BUDGET AUTHORITY- Section 5(c)(7) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937 is amended to read as follows:
 `(7)(A) Using the additional budget authority provided under paragraph (6)
 and the balances of budget authority that become available during fiscal
 year 1990, the Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriations
 Acts, reserve authority to enter into obligations aggregating--
 `(i) for assistance under section 8(c)(1), not more than $3,155,500,000; and
 `(ii) for assistance under section 8(c)(2)--
 `(I) not more than $320,083,000 for property disposition activities,
 `(II) not more than $151,426,000 for loan management activities, and
 `(III) not more than $31,313,000 for public housing replacement activities.
 `(B) Using the additional budget authority provided under paragraph (6)
 and the balances of budget authority that become available during fiscal
 year 1991, the Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriations
 Acts, reserve authority to enter into obligations aggregating--
 `(i) for assistance under section 8(c)(1), not more than $3,309,100,000; and
 `(ii) for assistance under section 8(c)(2)--
 `(I) not more than $335,668,000 for property disposition activities,
 `(II) not more than $158,797,000 for loan management activities, and
 `(III) not more than $32,859,000 for public housing replacement activities.'.
SEC. 424. TRANSITIONAL RULE.
 Notwithstanding section 8(e)(1) of the United States Housing Act of 1937,
 during the period not to exceed 1 year following the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary is authorized to allocate rental credits made available
 under section 8(c)(1) of such Act in accordance with regulations issued
 pursuant to section 213(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of
 1974 to the extent determined by the Secretary to be necessary to provide
 for orderly transition to the provisions of section 8(e)(1) of such Act.
SEC. 425. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
 Any rental assistance contract entered into under section 8 of the United
 States Housing Act prior to the enactment of this Act shall continue to be
 governed by such section and the rules and regulations issued under such
 section 8 as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 426. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) SUNSET- (1) Section 203(a)(1) of the Housing and Community Development
 Act of 1987 is amended by striking `subtitles B and D' and inserting
 `subtitle B'.
 (2) Section 203(a)(2) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987
 is amended by striking `or D'.
 (b) LOW-INCOME TERM- The United States Housing Act of 1937 is amended
 by striking `lower income families' each place it appears and inserting
 `low-income families'.
 (c) ALLOCATION- Section 213(d)(1) of the Housing and Community Development
 Act of 1974 is amended by inserting `8,' before `9' in the first sentence.
TITLE V--HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
Subtitle A--Assistant Secretary for Supportive Housing
SEC. 501. ESTABLISHMENT OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR SUPPORTIVE HOUSING.
 Section 4(a) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act is
 amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(a)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(2) There shall be in the Department an Assistant Secretary for Supportive
 Housing, who shall have such duties and powers as may be prescribed by the
 Secretary, and who shall administer, under the supervision and direction
 of the Secretary, those programs of the Department that exclusively serve
 elderly, handicapped, or homeless persons or other persons with special
 needs that require supportive services related to their housing.'.
Subtitle B--Supportive Housing for the Elderly
SEC. 511. SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 is amended to read
 as follows:
`SEC. 202. SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
 `(a) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to enable elderly persons to
 live with dignity and independence by expanding the supply of supportive
 housing that--
 `(1) is designed to accommodate the special needs of elderly persons; and
 `(2) provides a range of services that are tailored to the needs of elderly
 persons occupying such housing.
 `(b) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary is authorized to provide assistance
 to private nonprofit organizations to expand the supply of supportive
 housing for the elderly. Such assistance shall be provided as (1) capital
 advances in accordance with subsection (c)(1), and (2) contracts for
 project rental assistance in accordance with subsection (c)(2). Such
 assistance may be used to finance the construction, reconstruction, or
 moderate or substantial rehabilitation of a structure or a portion of a
 structure to be used as supportive housing for the elderly in accordance
 with this section. Assistance may also cover the cost of real property
 acquisition, site improvement, conversion, demolition, relocation, and
 other expenses that the Secretary determines are necessary to expand the
 supply of supportive housing for the elderly.
 `(c) Forms of Assistance-
 `(1) CAPITAL ADVANCES- A capital advance provided under this section
 shall bear no interest and its repayment shall not be required so long
 as the housing remains available for very low-income elderly persons in
 accordance with this section. Such advance shall be in an amount calculated
 in accordance with the development cost limitation established in subsection
 (h).
 `(2) PROJECT RENTAL ASSISTANCE- Contracts for project rental assistance
 shall obligate the Secretary to make monthly payments to cover any part of
 the costs attributed to units occupied (or, as approved by the Secretary,
 held for occupancy) by very low-income elderly persons that is not met
 from project income. The annual contract amount for any project shall
 not exceed the sum of the initial annual project rentals for all units so
 occupied and any initial utility allowances for such units, as approved by
 the Secretary. Any contract amounts not used by a project in any year shall
 remain available to the project until the expiration of the contract. The
 Secretary may adjust the annual contract amount if the sum of the project
 income and the amount of assistance payments available under this paragraph
 are inadequate to provide for reasonable project costs.
 `(3) TENANT RENT CONTRIBUTION- A very low-income person shall pay as rent
 for a dwelling unit assisted under this section the highest of the following
 amounts, rounded to the nearest dollar: (A) 30 percent of the person's
 adjusted monthly income, (B) 10 percent of the person's monthly income, or
 (C) if the person is receiving payments for welfare assistance from a public
 agency and a part of such payments, adjusted in accordance with the person's
 actual housing costs, is specifically designated by such agency to meet the
 person's housing costs, the portion of such payments which is so designated.
 `(d) Term of Commitment-
 `(1) USE LIMITATIONS- All units in a project assisted under this section
 shall be made available for occupancy by very low-income elderly persons
 for not less than 40 years.
 `(2) CONTRACT TERMS- The initial term of a contract entered into under
 subsection (c)(2) shall be 240 months. The Secretary shall, to the extent
 approved in appropriation Acts, extend any expiring contract for a term of
 not less than 60 months. In order to facilitate the orderly extension of
 expiring contracts, the Secretary is authorized to make commitments to extend
 expiring contracts not less than 6 months prior to the date of expiration.
 `(e) APPLICATIONS- Funds made available under this section shall be
 allocated by the Secretary among approvable applications submitted by
 private nonprofit organizations. Applications for assistance under this
 section shall be submitted by an applicant in such form and in accordance
 with such procedures as the Secretary shall establish. Such applications
 shall contain--
 `(1) a description of the proposed housing;
 `(2) a description of the assistance the applicant seeks under this section;
 `(3) a description of (A) the category or categories of elderly persons
 the housing is intended to serve; (B) the supportive services, if any,
 to be provided to the persons occupying such housing; (C) the manner in
 which such services will be provided to such persons, including, in the
 case of frail elderly persons, evidence of such residential supervision as
 the Secretary determines is necessary to facilitate the adequate provision
 of such services; and (D) the public or private sources of assistance that
 can reasonably be expected to fund or provide such services;
 `(4) a certification from the appropriate State or local agency (as
 determined by the Secretary) that the provision of services identified in
 paragraph (3) is well designed to serve the special needs of the category
 or categories of elderly persons the housing is intended to serve;
 `(5) a certification from the public official responsible for submitting
 a housing strategy for the jurisdiction to be served in accordance with
 section 105 of the National Affordable Housing Act that the proposed
 project is consistent with the approved housing strategy.
 `(6) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines
 to be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this section.
 `(f) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary shall establish selection criteria
 for assistance under this section, which shall include--
 `(1) the ability of the applicant to develop and operate the proposed
 housing;
 `(2) the need for supportive housing for the elderly in the area to
 be served;
 `(3) the extent to which the proposed size and unit mix of the housing
 will enable the applicant to manage and operate the project efficiently
 and ensure that the provision of supportive services will be accomplished
 in an economical fashion;
 `(4) the extent to which the proposed design of the housing will meet the
 special physical needs of elderly persons;
 `(5) the extent to which the applicant has demonstrated that the supportive
 services identified in subsection (e)(3) will be provided on a consistent,
 long-term basis;
 `(6) the extent to which the proposed design of the housing will accommodate
 the provision of supportive services that are expected to be needed,
 either initially or over the useful life of the housing, by the category
 or categories of elderly persons the housing is intended to serve; and
 `(7) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to
 ensure that funds made available under this section are used effectively.
 `(g) PROVISIONS OF SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In carrying out the provisions of this section, the
 Secretary shall ensure that housing assisted under this section provides
 a range of services tailored to the needs of the category or categories
 of elderly persons occupying such housing. Such services may include (A)
 meal service adequate to meet nutritional need; (B) housekeeping aid;
 (C) personal assistance; (D) transportation services; (E) health-related
 services; and (F) such other services as the Secretary deems essential
 for maintaining independent living.
 `(2) APPLICATION OF PROJECT RETROFIT REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall
 apply the requirements governing Project Retrofit under section 512 of
 the National Affordable Housing Act to housing assisted under this section
 that is intended to serve frail elderly persons.
 `(3) LOCAL COORDINATION OF SERVICES- The Secretary shall ensure that owners
 have the capacity to--
 `(A) assess on an ongoing basis the service needs of residents;
 `(B) coordinate the provision of supportive services and tailor such
 services to the individual needs of residents; and
 `(C) seek on a continuous basis new sources of assistance to ensure the
 long-term provision of supportive services.
Any cost associated with this subsection shall be an eligible cost under
subsection (c)(2).
 `(h) Development Cost Limitations-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall periodically establish development
 cost limitations by market area for various types and sizes of supportive
 housing for the elderly by publishing a notice of the cost limitations in
 the Federal Register. The cost limitations shall reflect (A) the cost of
 construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of supportive housing for
 the elderly that meets applicable State and local housing and building
 codes; (B) the cost of movables necessary to the basic operation of the
 housing, as determined by the Secretary; (C) the cost of special design
 features necessary to make the housing accessible to elderly persons;
 (D) the cost of special design features necessary to make individual
 dwelling units meet the physical needs of elderly persons; (E) the cost
 of congregate space necessary to accommodate the provision of supportive
 services to elderly persons; and (F) the cost of land, including necessary
 site improvement. In establishing development cost limitations for a
 given market area under this subsection, the Secretary shall use data
 that reflect currently prevailing costs of construction, reconstruction,
 or rehabilitation, and land acquisition in the area.
 `(2) ANNUAL ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary shall adjust the cost limitation
 not less than once annually to reflect changes in the general level of
 construction costs.
 `(3) INCENTIVES FOR SAVINGS- The Secretary shall use the development cost
 limitations established under paragraph (1) to calculate the amount of
 financing to be made available to individual owners. Owners which incur
 actual development costs that are less than the amount of financing shall
 be entitled to retain 50 percent of the savings in a special project
 account. The account may be used (A) to supplement services provided to
 residents of the housing or funds set aside for replacement reserves, or
 (B) for such other purposes as determined by the Secretary.
 `(4) DESIGN FLEXIBILITY- The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable,
 give owners the flexibility to design projects appropriate to their location
 and proposed tenant population within broadly defined parameters.
 `(5) USE OF FUNDS FROM OTHER SOURCES- A owner shall be permitted voluntarily
 to provide funds from non-Federal sources for amenities and other features
 of appropriate design and construction suitable for supportive housing
 for the elderly if the cost of such amenities is (A) not financed with
 the advance, and (B) is not taken into account in determining the amount
 of Federal assistance or of the rent contribution of tenants.
 `(i) Miscellaneous Provisions-
 `(1) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall make available appropriate
 technical assistance to assure that applicants having limited resources,
 particularly minority applicants, are able to participate more fully in
 the program carried out under this section.
 `(2) CIVIL RIGHTS COMPLIANCE- Each owner shall certify, to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary, that assistance made available under this section will
 be conducted and administered in conformity with title VI of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act, and other Federal, State, and
 local laws prohibiting discrimination and promoting equal opportunity.
 `(3) OWNER DEPOSIT- The Secretary may require an owner to deposit an amount
 not to exceed $10,000 in a special escrow account to assure the owner's
 commitment to the project.
 `(4) NOTICE OF APPEAL- The Secretary shall notify an owner not less than 30
 days prior to canceling any reservation of assistance provided under this
 section. During the 30-day period following the receipt of a notice under
 the preceding sentence, an owner may appeal the proposed cancellation of
 loan authority. Such appeal, including review by the Secretary, shall be
 completed not later than 45 days after the appeal is filed.
 `(5) LABOR STANDARDS- The Secretary shall take such action as may
 be necessary to insure that all laborers and mechanics employed by
 contractors and subcontractors in the construction of housing assisted
 under this section and designed for dwelling use by 12 or more elderly
 persons shall be paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing
 in the locality involved for the corresponding classes of laborers and
 mechanics employed on construction of a similar character, as determined
 by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with the Act of March 3, 1931
 (the Davis-Bacon Act); but the Secretary may waive the application of
 this paragraph in cases or classes of cases where laborers or mechanics,
 not otherwise employed at any time in the construction of such housing,
 voluntarily donate their services without full compensation for the purposes
 of lowering the costs of construction and the Secretary determines that any
 amounts saved thereby are fully credited to the corporation, cooperative,
 or public body or agency undertaking the construction.
 `(j) DEFINITIONS-
 `(1) The term `elderly person' means a household composed of one or more
 persons at least one of whom is 62 years of age or more at the time of
 initial occupancy.
 `(2) The term `frail elderly' means those elderly persons whose level of
 functional disability places them at heightened risk of institutionalization
 in the absence of supportive services.
 `(3) The term `owner' means a private nonprofit organization that receives
 assistance under this section to develop and operate a project for supportive
 housing for the elderly.
 `(4) The term `private nonprofit organization' means any incorporated
 private institution or foundation--
 `(A) no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
 member, founder, contributor, or individual;
 `(B) which has a governing board (i) the membership of which is selected in
 a manner to assure that there is significant representation of the views of
 the community in which such project is located, and (ii) which is responsible
 for the operation of the housing project assisted under this section; and
 `(C) which is approved by the Secretary as to financial responsibility.
 `(5) The term `State' includes the several States, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the possessions of the United States.
 `(6) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development.
 `(7) The term `supportive housing for the elderly' means housing that is
 designed (A) to meet the special physical needs of elderly persons and
 (B) to accommodate the provision of supportive services that are expected
 to be needed, either initially or over the useful life of the housing, by
 the category or categories of elderly persons that the housing is intended
 to serve.
 `(8) The term `very low-income' has the same meaning as given the term
 `very low-income families' under section 3(b)(2) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937.
 `(k) Authorizations-
 `(1) CAPITAL ADVANCES- There are authorized to be appropriated for
 the purpose of funding capital advances in accordance with subsection
 (c)(1) $648,048,000 for fiscal year 1990 and $676,740,000 for fiscal
 year 1991. Amounts so appropriated, the repayments from such advances,
 and the proceeds from notes or obligations issued under this section prior
 to the enactment of the National Affordable Housing Act shall constitute
 a revolving fund to be used by the Secretary in carrying out this section.
 `(2) PROJECT RENTAL ASSISTANCE- For the purpose of funding contracts
 for project rental assistance in accordance with subsection (c)(2) the
 Secretary may, to the extent approved in an appropriations Act, reserve
 authority to enter into obligations aggregating $481,608,000 for fiscal
 year 1990 and $523,008,000 for fiscal year 1991.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 213(a) of the Housing and Community
 Development Act of 1974 is amended by striking `section 202 of the Housing
 Act of 1959'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY-
 (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of, and
 amendments made by, this section shall not apply with respect to projects
 with loans or loan reservations made under section 202 of the Housing Act
 of 1959 before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Any loan made under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 pursuant
 to a reservation of funds issued on or before the date of enactment of
 this Act shall continue to be subject to the provisions of such section
 as they were in effect when such reservation was issued.
 (3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary shall upon the request
 of a project sponsor apply the provisions of, and amendments made by,
 this section to any project if needed to facilitate the development of
 such project in a timely manner.
SEC. 512. PROJECT RETROFIT.
 (a) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to enable frail elderly persons
 residing in federally assisted housing to live with dignity and independence,
 avoiding unnecessary institutionalization by--
 (1) retrofitting individual dwelling units and renovating public and
 common areas in such housing to meet the special physical needs of eligible
 residents;
 (2) creating and rehabilitating common areas in or adjacent to such housing
 to accommodate supportive services that enhance independent living; and
 (3) providing transitional funding for those qualifying supportive services
 that cannot otherwise be funded.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE- The Secretary is authorized to
 provide assistance to adapt federally assisted housing for the elderly
 so that such housing better accommodates the physical requirements and
 service needs of eligible residents. Assistance under this section shall
 be made available only to owners that demonstrate, to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary, that the assistance is necessary for the provision of
 qualifying supportive services that will receive long-term support from
 sources other than this Act.
 (c) Eligible Activities-
 (1) RETROFIT AND RENOVATION- Assistance under this section may be provided
 with respect to eligible housing for the elderly for--
 (A) retrofitting of individual dwelling units to meet the special physical
 needs of current or future residents who are or are expected to be eligible
 residents, which retrofitting may include--
 (i) widening of doors to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs
 into and within units in the project;
 (ii) placement of light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
 other environmental controls in accessible locations;
 (iii) installation of grab bars in bathrooms or the placement of
 reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars;
 (iv) redesign of usable kitchens and bathrooms to permit a person in a
 wheelchair to maneuver about the space; and
 (v) such other features of adaptive design that the Secretary finds are
 appropriate to meet the special needs of such residents;
 (B) renovation, conversion, or combination of vacant dwelling units to
 create common areas to accommodate congregate dining, health clinics,
 or other service facilities;
 (C) renovation of existing common areas to accommodate congregate dining,
 health clinics, or other service facilities;
 (D) such renovation as is necessary to ensure that public and common areas
 are readily accessible to and usable by eligible residents; and
 (E) construction or renovation of facilities to create conveniently
 located common areas to accommodate congregate dining, health clinics,
 or other service facilities.
 (2) TRANSITIONAL SUPPORT FOR SERVICES- Assistance under this section may
 also be provided with respect to eligible housing for the elderly for--
 (A) the transitional provision of qualifying supportive services if the
 owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that--
 (i) the qualifying services are necessary to help eligible residents live
 independently and avoid unnecessary institutionalization;
 (ii) the owner has made diligent efforts to use or obtain other available
 resources to fund the designated services; and
 (iii) long-term funding for the qualifying services will be available from
 other sources; or
 (B) the renewal of contracts entered into under the Congregate Housing
 Services Act of 1978.
Assistance under this paragraph shall be phased out over a period not to
exceed 3 years.
 (d) APPLICATION- The funds made available under this section shall be
 allocated by the Secretary among approvable applications submitted by
 project sponsors. Applications for assistance under this section shall
 be submitted in such form and in accordance with such procedures as the
 Secretary shall establish. Applications for assistance shall contain--
 (1) a description of qualifying supportive services that can reasonably be
 expected to be made available to eligible residents over a 5-year period
 (or such longer period that the Secretary determines to be appropriate if
 assistance is provided for activities under subsection (c)(1) that involve
 substantial rehabilitation);
 (2) a firm commitment from one or more sources of assistance ensuring that
 some or all of the qualifying supportive services identified under paragraph
 (1) will be provided for not less than 1 year following the completion of
 activities assisted under subsection (c)(1);
 (3) a description of public or private sources of assistance that are likely
 to fund or provide qualifying supportive services for the entire period
 specified under paragraph (1), including evidence of any intention to provide
 assistance expressed by State and local governments, private foundations,
 and other organizations (including for-profit and nonprofit organizations);
 (4) a certification from the appropriate State or local agency (as
 determined by the Secretary) that (A) the provision of the qualifying
 supportive services identified under paragraph (1) will enable eligible
 residents to live independently and avoid unnecessary institutionalization,
 and (B) there is a reasonable likelihood that such services will be funded
 or provided for the entire period specified under paragraph (1);
 (5) evidence that the owner has established a professional assessment
 committee in accordance with subsection (f);
 (6) a description of assistance that the project sponsor seeks under
 this section;
 (7) a description of any fees that would be established pursuant to
 subsection (f)(3); and
 (8) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines
 to be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this section.
 (e) PROGRAM SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary shall establish selection
 criteria for assistance under this section which shall include--
 (1) the ability of the owner or a designated service provider to provide
 the qualifying supportive services identified pursuant to subsection (d)(1);
 (2) the need for such services in the housing;
 (3) the extent to which the envisioned renovation and conversion activities
 are necessary to accommodate the provision of such services;
 (4) the extent to which the owner has demonstrated that such services will
 be provided for the period identified pursuant to subsection (d)(1);
 (5) the extent to which the owner has had a good record of maintaining
 and operating housing for the elderly; and
 (6) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to
 ensure that funds made available under this section are used effectively.
 (g) Provision of Services-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROFESSIONAL ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE- (A) Each owner shall
 establish a professional assessment committee composed of at least three
 persons, each of whom is a qualified medical professional or other person
 professionally competent to appraise the functional abilities of residents
 of eligible housing for the elderly in relation to the performance of the
 normal activities of daily living.
 (B) The professional assessment committee shall identify residents eligible
 to receive qualifying supportive services and designate the services
 appropriate for each eligible resident. Residents shall be accorded
 fair treatment and due process and a right of appeal in determinations of
 eligibility. Personal and medical records made available for determinations
 of eligibility shall remain confidential.
 (2) PARTICIPATION BY OTHER RESIDENTS- Residents other than eligible residents
 may participate in a supportive service program assisted under this section
 if the owner determines that the participation of such residents will not
 adversely affect the cost-effectiveness or operation of the program.
 (3) FEES- An owner may charge fees for meals and other qualifying supportive
 services. Such fees shall be reasonable, may not exceed the cost of providing
 the service, and shall be calculated on a sliding scale related to income
 which permits the provision of services to eligible residents who cannot
 afford meal and service fees. Fees for services provided to residents who
 are not eligible residents shall be reasonable and may not exceed the cost
 of providing the service.
 (4) RESIDENT ELIGIBILITY- The Secretary shall establish the standards and
 guidelines governing the eligibility of residents for qualifying supportive
 services under this section after consultation with the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services and with appropriate organizations representing the
 elderly, as determined by the Secretary.
 (5) LOCAL COORDINATION OF SERVICES- The Secretary shall ensure that owners
 have the capacity to--
 (A) assess adequately the physical and service needs of eligible residents;
 (B) coordinate the provision of qualifying supportive services and tailor
 such services to the needs of eligible residents; and
 (C) seek on a continuous basis new sources of assistance to ensure the
 long-term provision of qualifying supportive services;
The Secretary may carry out this paragraph by using amounts appropriated
under subsection (k) and by permitting owners to use existing sources of
funds including but not limited to excess project reserves.
 (g) Reports-
 (1) OWNERS' REPORTS- Each owner shall submit to the Secretary, in such
 form and at such time as the Secretary shall prescribe, an annual report
 evaluating the use of funds made available under this section.
 (2) ANNUAL REPORT TO THE CONGRESS- The Secretary shall submit to the
 Congress, not later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year, an
 annual report evaluating the effectiveness of activities assisted under
 this section in such fiscal year. Such report shall summarize the reports
 submitted under paragraph (1).
 (h) RESERVE FUND- The Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent of the
 amounts made available in each fiscal year to supplement grants awarded
 to owners under this section when, in the determination of the Secretary,
 such supplemental adjustments are required to maintain adequate levels of
 services to eligible residents.
 (i) Miscellaneous Provisions-
 (1) PARTICIPATION OF RESIDENTS- Each owner shall, to the maximum extent
 practicable, employ residents of eligible housing for the elderly who are
 not eligible residents, to provide services assisted under this section
 or from other sources. Such persons shall be paid at a rate not less than
 the highest of--
 (A) the minimum wage which would be applicable to the employee under the
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, if section 6(a)(1) of such act applied
 to the resident and if he or she were not exempt under section 13 thereof;
 (B) the State or local minimum wage for the most nearly comparable covered
 employment; or
 (C) the prevailing rates of pay for persons employed in similar public
 occupations by the same employer.
 (2) DISREGARD OF SERVICE AS INCOME- No service provided to a resident of
 eligible housing for the elderly under this section, except for wages
 paid under paragraph (1) of this section, may be treated as income for
 the purpose of any other program or provision of State or Federal law.
 (3) RESIDENCE- Persons receiving services assisted under this section
 shall be deemed to be residents of their own households, and not to be
 residents of a public institution, for the purpose of any other program
 or provision of State or Federal law.
 (j) DEFINITIONS- For the purpose of this section--
 (1) the term `elderly person' means a person who is 62 years of age or over;
 (2) the term `eligible housing for the elderly' means housing that is
 occupied by elderly persons and their families and is--
 (A) public housing assisted under the Housing Act of 1937;
 (B) assisted under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959;
 (C) insured, assisted, or held by the Secretary under section 236 of the
 National Housing Act;
 (D) insured or held under section 221(d)(3) of the National Housing Act
 and assisted under section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act
 of 1965 or section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937;
 (E) insured or held by the Secretary and subject to a loan or mortgage
 bearing interest at a rate determined under the proviso to section 221(d)(5)
 of the National Housing Act; or
 (F) assisted under section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949;
 (3) the term `eligible resident' means a person residing in eligible
 housing for the elderly who qualifies under the definition of frail elderly,
 handicapped (regardless of whether the person is elderly) or temporarily
 disabled;
 (4) the term `frail elderly' means those elderly persons whose level of
 functional disability places them at heightened risk of institutionalization
 in the absence of supportive services;
 (5) the term `handicapped person' means a person having an impairment which
 (A) is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration, and (B)
 substantially impedes the person's ability to live independently unless
 the person receives supportive services; such impairment may include a
 functional disability or frailty which is a normal consequence of the
 human aging process;
 (6) the term `owner' means a public housing agency that operates public
 housing, a nonprofit entity that owns and operates all other types of
 eligible housing under paragraph (2), or a for-profit entity that owns
 and operates all other types of eligible housing and agrees to operate
 such housing as low income housing through the term of the original mortgage;
 (7) the term `public housing' has the meaning given the term in section
 3(b)(1) of the United States Housing Act of 1937;
 (8) the term `public housing agency' has the meaning given the term in
 section 3(b)(6) of the United States Housing Act of 1937;
 (9) the term `qualifying supportive services' shall mean those services
 that the Secretary deems essential to enable eligible residents to live
 independently and avoid unnecessary institutionalization. Such services may
 include but not be limited to; (A) meal service adequate to meet nutritional
 need; (B) housekeeping aid; (C) personal assistance (which may include, but
 is not limited to, aid given to eligible residents in grooming, dressing,
 and other activities which maintain personal appearance and hygiene); (D)
 transportation services; and (E) health-related services; the owner may
 provide the qualifying services directly to eligible residents or may,
 by contract or lease, provide such services through other appropriate
 agencies or providers;
 (10) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development; and
 (11) the term `temporarily disabled' means an impairment which (A) is
 expected to be of no more than 6 months' duration, and (B) substantially
 impedes a person's ability to live independently unless the person receives
 qualifying supportive services.
 (k) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out
 this subtitle $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $52,150,000 for fiscal
 year 1991. Any amount appropriated under this section shall remain available
 until expended.
 (l) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 9(a)(3)(B) of the United States Housing
 Act of 1937 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (iii);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(v) if a public housing agency renovates, converts, or combines one or
 more dwelling units in a public housing project to create a common area
 to accommodate the provision of supportive services in accordance with
 section 512 of the National Affordable Housing Act, the payments received
 under this section shall not be reduced because of the resulting reduction
 in the number of dwelling units.'.
Subtitle C--Supportive Housing for the Handicapped
SEC. 521. SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
 (a) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to enable handicapped persons
 to live with dignity and independence by expanding the supply of supportive
 housing that--
 (1) is designed to accommodate the special needs of such persons; and
 (2) provides a range of services that meets the special health, mental
 health, and other needs of such persons.
 (b) GENERAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary is authorized to provide assistance
 to private, nonprofit organizations to expand the supply of supportive
 housing for the handicapped. Such assistance shall be provided as--
 (1) capital advances in accordance with subsection (d)(1), and
 (2) contracts for project rental assistance in accordance with subsection
 (d)(2).
Such assistance may be used to finance the acquisition, acquisition and
moderate rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction, or moderate or
substantial rehabilitation of housing to be used as supportive housing for
the handicapped and may include real property acquisition, site improvement,
conversion, demolition, relocation, and other expenses that the Secretary
determines are necessary to expand the supply of supportive housing for
the handicapped.
 (c) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary shall take such actions as may be
 necessary to ensure that--
 (1) assistance made available under this section will be used to meet the
 special needs of handicapped families by providing a variety of housing
 options, ranging from group homes to independent living facilities; and
 (2) supportive housing for the handicapped assisted under this section
 shall--
 (A) provide persons occupying units in such housing with an assured range
 of services,
 (B) provide such persons with opportunities for optimal independent living
 and participation in normal daily activities, and
 (C) facilitate access by such persons to the community at large and to
 suitable employment opportunities within such community.
 (d) Forms of Assistance-
 (1) CAPITAL ADVANCES- A capital advance provided under this section
 shall bear no interest and its repayment shall not be required so long as
 the housing remains available for very low-income handicapped persons in
 accordance with this section. Such advance shall be in an amount calculated
 in accordance with the development cost limitation established in subsection
 (h).
 (2) PROJECT RENTAL ASSISTANCE- Contracts for project rental assistance
 shall obligate the Secretary to make monthly payments to cover any part of
 the costs attributed to units occupied (or, as approved by the Secretary,
 held for occupancy) by very low-income handicapped persons that is not
 met from project income. The annual contract amount for any project shall
 not exceed the sum of the initial annual project rentals for all units
 and any initial utility allowances for such units, as approved by the
 Secretary. Any contract amounts not used by a project in any year shall
 remain available to the project until the expiration of the contract. The
 Secretary may adjust the annual contract amount if the sum of the project
 income and the amount of assistance payments available under this paragraph
 are inadequate to provide for reasonable project costs. In the case of an
 intermediate care facility which is the residence of persons assisted under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act, project income under this paragraph
 shall include the same amount as if such persons were being assisted under
 title XVI of the Social Security Act.
 (3) TENANT RENT CONTRIBUTION- A very low-income person shall pay as rent
 for a dwelling unit assisted under this section the higher of the following
 amounts, rounded to the nearest dollar: (A) 30 percent of the person's
 adjusted monthly income, (B) 10 percent of the person's monthly income
 or (C) if the person is receiving payments for welfare assistance from a
 public agency and a part of such payments, adjusted in accordance with the
 person's actual housing costs, is specifically designated by such agency
 to meet the person's housing costs, the portion of such payments which
 is so designated; except that the gross income of a person occupying an
 intermediate care facility assisted under title XIX of the Social Security
 Act shall be the same amount as if the person were being assisted under
 title XVI of the Social Security Act.
 (e) Term of Commitment-
 (1) USE LIMITATIONS- All units in a project assisted under this section
 shall be made available for occupancy by very low-income handicapped
 persons for not less than 40 years.
 (2) CONTRACT TERMS- The initial term of a contract entered into under
 subsection (d)(2) shall be 240 months. The Secretary shall, to the extent
 approved in appropriation Acts, extend any expiring contract for a term of
 not less than 60 months. In order to facilitate the orderly extension of
 expiring contracts, the Secretary is authorized to make commitments to extend
 expiring contracts not less than 6 months prior to the date of expiration.
 (f) APPLICATIONS- Funds made available under this section shall be allocated
 by the Secretary among approvable applications submitted by private
 nonprofit organizations. Applications for assistance under this section
 shall be submitted in such form and in accordance with such procedures as
 the Secretary shall establish. Such applications shall contain--
 (1) a description of the proposed housing;
 (2) a description of the assistance the applicant seeks under this section;
 (3) a supportive service plan that describes--
 (A) the category or categories of handicapped persons the housing is
 intended to serve;
 (B) the range of supportive services to be provided to the persons occupying
 such housing;
 (C) the manner in which such services will be provided to such persons,
 including evidence of such residential supervision as the Secretary
 determines is necessary to facilitate the adequate provision of such
 services; and
 (D) the extent of State and local funds available to assist in the provision
 of such services;
 (4) a certification from the appropriate State or local agency (as determined
 by the Secretary) that the provision of the services identified in paragraph
 (3) are well designed to serve the special needs of handicapped persons;
 (5) reasonable assurances that the applicant will own or have control of
 an acceptable site for the proposed housing not later than 6 months after
 notification of an award for assistance;
 (6) a certification from the public official responsible for submitting
 a housing strategy for the jurisdiction to be served in accordance with
 section 105 of the National Affordable Housing Act that the proposed
 project is consistent with the approved housing strategy; and
 (7) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines
 to be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this section.
 (g) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary shall establish selection criteria
 for assistance under this section, which shall include--
 (1) the ability of the applicant to develop and operate the proposed housing;
 (2) the need for housing for handicapped families in the area to be served;
 (3) the extent to which the proposed design of the housing will meet the
 special physical needs of handicapped persons;
 (4) the extent to which the applicant has demonstrated that supportive
 services identified in subsection (f)(3) will be provided on a consistent,
 long-term basis;
 (5) the extent to which the proposed design of the housing will accommodate
 the provision of such services;
 (6) the extent to which the applicant has control of the site of the
 proposed housing; and
 (7) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to
 ensure that funds made available under this section are used effectively.
 (h) DEVELOPMENT COST LIMITATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall periodically establish development
 cost limitations by market area for various types and sizes of supportive
 housing for the handicapped by publishing a notice of the cost limitations
 in the Federal Register. The cost limitations shall reflect--
 (A) the cost of construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation of supportive
 housing for the handicapped that meets applicable State and local housing
 and building codes;
 (B) the cost of movables necessary to the basic operation of the housing,
 as determined by the Secretary;
 (C) the cost of special design features necessary to make the housing
 accessible to handicapped persons;
 (D) the cost of special design features necessary to make individual
 dwelling units meet the special needs of handicapped persons;
 (E) the cost of congregate space necessary to accommodate the provision
 of supportive services to handicapped persons; and
 (F) the cost of land, including necessary site improvement.
In establishing development cost limitations for a given market area,
the Secretary shall use data that reflect currently prevailing costs of
construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation, and land acquisition in
the area.
 (2) ANNUAL ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary shall adjust the cost limitation
 not less than once annually to reflect changes in the general level of
 construction costs.
 (3) INCENTIVES FOR SAVINGS- The Secretary shall use the development cost
 limitations established under paragraph (1) to calculate the amount of
 financing to be made available to individual owners. Owners which incur
 actual development costs that are less than the amount of financing shall
 be entitled to retain 50 percent of the savings in a special project
 account. The account may be used (A) to supplement services provided to
 residents of the housing or funds set-aside for replacement reserves, or
 (B) for such other purposes as determined by the Secretary.
 (4) FUNDS FROM OTHER SOURCES- An owner shall be permitted voluntarily to
 provide funds from non-Federal sources for amenities and other features
 of appropriate design and construction suitable for supportive housing for
 handicapped persons if the cost of such amenities is (A) not financed with
 the advance, and (B) is not taken into account in determining the amount
 of Federal assistance or of the rent contribution of tenants.
 (i) Miscellaneous Provisions-
 (1) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall make available appropriate
 technical assistance to assure that applicants having limited resources,
 particularly minority applicants, are able to participate more fully in
 the program carried out under this section.
 (2) CIVIL RIGHTS COMPLIANCE- Each owner shall certify, to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary, that assistance made available under this section will
 be conducted and administered in conformity with title VI of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act and other Federal, State, and
 local laws prohibiting discrimination and promoting equal opportunity; and
 (3) SITE CONTROL- An applicant may obtain ownership or control of a suitable
 site different from the site specified in the initial application. If an
 applicant fails to obtain ownership or control of the site within 1 year
 after notification of an award for assistance, the assistance shall be
 recaptured and reallocated.
 (4) OWNER DEPOSIT- The Secretary may require an owner to deposit an amount
 not to exceed $10,000 in a special escrow account to assure the owner's
 commitment to the project.
 (5) NOTICE OF APPEAL- The Secretary shall notify an owner not less than 30
 days prior to canceling any reservation of assistance provided under this
 section. During the 30-day period following the receipt of a notice under
 the preceding sentence, an owner may appeal the proposed cancellation. Such
 appeal, including review by the Secretary, shall be completed not later
 than 45 days after the appeal is filed.
 (6) LABOR STANDARDS- The Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary
 to insure that all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors and
 subcontractors in the construction of housing assisted under this section
 and designed for dwelling use by 12 or more handicapped families shall
 be paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing in the locality
 involved for the corresponding classes of laborers and mechanics employed
 on construction of a similar character, as determined by the Secretary of
 Labor in accordance with the Act of March 3, 1931 (the Davis-Bacon Act);
 but the Secretary may waive the application of this paragraph in cases
 or classes of cases where laborers or mechanics, not otherwise employed
 at any time in the construction of such housing, voluntarily donate their
 services without full compensation for the purposes of lowering the costs of
 construction and the Secretary determines that any amounts saved thereby
 are fully credited to the corporation, cooperative, or public body or
 agency undertaking the construction.
 (j) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section--
 (1) The term `group home' means a single family residential structure
 designed or adapted for occupancy by not more than 8 handicapped persons. The
 Secretary may waive the project size limitation contained in the previous
 sentence if the applicant demonstrates that local market conditions dictate
 the development of a larger project. Not more than 1 home may be located
 on any one site and no such home may be located on a site contiguous to
 another site containing such a home.
 (2) The term `handicapped persons' means a household composed of one or more
 persons at least one of whom is handicapped. A person shall be considered
 handicapped if such person is determined, pursuant to regulations issued by
 the Secretary to have a physical, mental, or emotional impairment which
 (A) is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration, (B)
 substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and (C)
 is of such a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable
 housing conditions. A person shall also be considered handicapped if
 such person has a developmental disability as defined in section 102(7)
 of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act
 (42 U.S.C. 6001-7). The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as
 may be necessary to prevent abuses in determining, under the definitions
 contained in this paragraph, the eligibility of families and persons for
 admission to and occupancy of housing constructed with assistance under
 this section. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this paragraph,
 the term `handicapped persons' includes two or more handicapped persons
 living together, one or more such persons living with another person who is
 determined (under regulations prescribed by the Secretary) to be important
 to their care or well-being, and the surviving member or members of any
 household described in the first sentence of this paragraph who were
 living, in a unit assisted under this section, with the deceased member
 of the household at the time of his or her death.
 (3) The term `supportive housing for the handicapped' means housing that
 is designed--
 (A) to meet the special needs of handicapped families, and
 (B) to accommodate the provision of supportive services that are expected
 to be needed by the category or categories of handicapped persons that
 the housing is intended to serve.
 (4) The term `independent living facility' means a project designed for
 occupancy by not more than 20 handicapped persons in separate dwelling
 units where each dwelling unit includes a kitchen and a bath.
 (5) The term `owner' means a private nonprofit organization that receives
 assistance under this section to develop and operate a project for supportive
 housing for the handicapped persons.
 (6) The term `private nonprofit organization' means any incorporated
 private institution or foundation--
 (A) no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
 member, founder, contributor, or individual;
 (B) which has a governing board (i) the membership of which is selected in
 a manner to assure that there is significant representation of the views of
 the community in which such project is located, and (ii) which is responsible
 for the operation of the housing project assisted under this section; and
 (C) which is approved by the Secretary as to financial responsibility.
 (7) The term `State' includes the several States, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the possessions of the United States.
 (8) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development.
 (9) The term `very low-income' has the same meaning as given the term
 `very low-income families' under section 3(b)(2) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937.
 (k) Authorizations-
 (1) CAPITAL ADVANCES- There are authorized to be appropriated for
 the purpose of funding capital advances in accordance with subsection
 (d)(1) $240,105,000 for fiscal year 1990 and $250,735,000 for fiscal year
 1991. Amounts so appropriated, the repayments from such advances, and the
 proceeds from notes or obligations issued under this section prior to the
 enactment of this Act shall constitute a revolving fund to be used by the
 Secretary in carrying out this section.
 (2) PROJECT RENTAL ASSISTANCE- For the purpose of funding contracts
 for project rental assistance in accordance with subsection (d)(2), the
 Secretary may, to the extent approved in an appropriations Act, reserve
 authority to enter into obligations aggregating $328,705,000 for fiscal
 year 1990 and $351,355,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 (l) EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY-
 (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of, and
 amendments made by, this section shall not apply with respect to projects
 with loans or loan reservations made under section 202 of the Housing Act
 of 1959 before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Any loan made under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 pursuant
 to a reservation of funds issued on or before the date of enactment of
 this Act shall continue to be subject to the provisions of such section
 as they were in effect when such reservation was issued.
 (3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary shall, upon the request
 of an owner, apply the provisions of, and amendments made by, this section
 to any project if needed to facilitate the development of such project in
 a timely manner.
Subtitle D--Supportive Housing for the Homeless
SEC. 531. AMENDMENT TO MCKINNEY ACT.
 Title IV of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended to
 read as follows:
`TITLE IV--HOUSING ASSISTANCE
`Subtitle A--General Provisions
`SEC. 401. PURPOSE.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The purpose of this title is to expand the Federal
 commitment to alleviate homelessness in this Nation by providing States
 and localities with the resources to--
 `(1) help very low-income persons and families avoid becoming homeless;
 `(2) meet the emergency shelter needs of homeless persons and families;
 `(3) provide transitional housing to facilitate the movement of homeless
 persons and families to independent living;
 `(4) provide specialized permanent housing for homeless persons who require
 a supportive living environment; and
 `(5) provide supportive services to help homeless persons and families
 lead independent and dignified lives.
`SEC. 402. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this title--
 `(1) The term `assistance' means noninterest bearing advances to assist
 the acquisition, lease, renovation, substantial rehabilitation, operation,
 or conversion of facilities to assist the homeless, grants for moderate
 rehabilitation, grants for other purposes, and other assistance made
 eligible under section 405 and subtitle B.
 `(2) The term `emergency activities' means (A) activities that help very
 low-income families and persons avoid becoming homeless in accordance with
 section 411, and (B) supportive services that are provided in an emergency
 shelter developed in accordance with section 412.
 `(3) The term `grantee' means a State or unit of general local government
 receiving grants from the Secretary under section 403(a).
 `(4) The term `handicapped' means a person who is handicapped within the
 meaning of section 521 of the National Affordable Housing Act.
 `(5) The term `handicapped homeless person' means a handicapped person
 who is a homeless person within the meaning of section 103, is at risk
 of becoming a homeless person, or has been a resident of transitional
 housing carried out pursuant to this Act or the provisions made effective
 by section 101(g) of Public Law 99-500 or Public Law 99-591.
 `(6) The term `locality' means the geographical area within the jurisdiction
 of a local government.
 `(7) The term `operating costs' means expenses incurred by a project
 sponsor operating any housing assisted under this title with respect to--
 `(A) the administration, maintenance, repair, and security of such
 housing; and
 `(B) utilities, fuels, furnishings, and equipment for such housing.
 `(8) The term `operating costs' includes expenses incurred by a project
 sponsor operating transitional housing under this title with respect to--
 `(A) the conducting of the assessment required by section 413(c)(1)(B); and
 `(B) the provision of supportive services to the residents of such housing.
 `(9) The term `outpatient health services' means outpatient health care,
 outpatient mental health services, outpatient substance abuse services,
 and case management services.
 `(10) The term `private nonprofit organization' means a secular or religious
 organization--
 `(A) no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
 member, founder, contributor, or individual;
 `(B) that has a voluntary board;
 `(C) that has an accounting system or has designated a fiscal agent in
 accordance with requirements established by the Secretary; and
 `(D) that does not discriminate in the provision of assistance.
 `(11) the term `project' means a structure or a portion of a structure that
 is acquired or rehabilitated with assistance provided under this title
 or with respect to which the Secretary provides technical assistance or
 annual payments for operating costs.
 `(12) The term `project sponsor' means any governmental or private nonprofit
 organization that receives assistance from a grantee under section 403(a),
 is approved by the grantee as to financial responsibility, and is directly
 responsible for the administration of assistance provided under this
 title. Each project sponsor shall act as the fiscal agent of the Secretary
 with respect to assistance provided to such project sponsor under this title.
 `(13) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development.
 `(14) The term `State' means a State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any agency or
 instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and
 designated by the chief executive to act on behalf of the jurisdiction
 with regard to provisions of this Act.
 `(15)(A) The term `supportive services' means assistance designed by a
 project sponsor that--
 `(i) addresses the special needs of persons, such as deinstitutionalized
 homeless persons, homeless families with children, and homeless persons
 with mental disabilities and other handicapped homeless persons, intended
 to be served by a project; and
 `(ii) assists in accomplishing the purposes of the different types of
 housing for the homeless made eligible under this subtitle.
 `(B) The term includes--
 `(i) food services, child care, substance abuse treatment, assistance
 in obtaining permanent housing, outpatient health services, employment
 counseling, nutritional counseling, security arrangements for the protection
 of residents of facilities to assist the homeless, and such other services
 essential for maintaining or moving towards independent living as the
 Secretary determines to be appropriate; and
 `(ii) assistance to homeless persons in obtaining other Federal, State,
 and local assistance available for such individuals, including public
 assistance benefits, mental health benefits, employment counseling, and
 medical assistance.
 `(C) Such term does not include the provision of major medical equipment.
 `(D) All or part of the supportive services may be provided directly
 by the project sponsor or by arrangements with other public or private
 service providers.
 `(16) The term `unit of general local government' means any city, town,
 township, county, parish, village, or other general purpose subdivision of a
 State; Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, and American
 Samoa, or a general purpose political subdivision thereof; a consortium of
 such political subdivisions recognized by the Secretary in accordance with
 section 404(b)(1)(B) of this Act; and the Trust Territory of the Pacific
 Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
`SEC. 403. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
 `(a) GRANTS FOR HOMELESS HOUSING ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall, to
 the extent of amounts approved in appropriations Acts under section 408,
 make grants to States and units of general local government in order to
 carry out activities designed to meet the emergency, transitional, and
 permanent housing needs of the homeless, and help very low-income families
 and persons avoid becoming homeless. A jurisdiction shall be eligible to
 receive a grant only if it has obtained an approved housing strategy (or an
 approved abbreviated housing strategy) in accordance with section 105 of
 the National Affordable Housing Act. A grantee shall carry out activities
 authorized under this subsection through contracts with project sponsors,
 except that a grantee that is a State shall obtain the approval of the
 unit of general local government for the locality in which a project is
 to be located prior to entering into such contracts.
 `(b) ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES-
 `(1) FORMULA GRANTS- (A) 80 percent of the amounts approved in such
 appropriations Acts shall be allocated in accordance with a formula
 established under section 404. Of the amounts made available under the
 previous sentence, the Secretary shall allocate 70 percent among units of
 general local government and 30 percent among States.
 `(B) A grantee may use grants allocated under this subparagraph for approved
 activities established by the Secretary. Approved activities shall include--
 `(i) the provision of assistance to help very low-income persons and
 families avoid becoming homeless in accordance with section 411;
 `(ii) the development of emergency shelters for the homeless in accordance
 with section 412;
 `(iii) the development of transitional housing to facilitate the transition
 of homeless individuals to independent living in accordance with section 413;
 `(iv) the development of permanent housing for handicapped homeless persons
 in accordance with section 414;
 `(v) the provision of supplemental assistance to emergency shelters and
 transitional housing in accordance with section 415; and
 `(vi) such other activities that the Secretary develops in cooperation
 with grantees in accordance with section 416.
The Secretary shall establish standards and guidelines for approved
activities. The Secretary shall permit grantees to refine and adapt such
standards and guidelines for individual projects, where such refinements
and adaptations are made necessary by local circumstances.
 `(C) A grantee may use not more than 20 percent of the grants allocated
 in accordance with this paragraph for emergency activities as defined
 in section 402(2). The Secretary may approve a higher limitation if the
 grantee demonstrates that other approved activities under this subparagraph
 are already being carried out in the jurisdiction with other resources.
 `(2) DISCRETIONARY ALLOCATIONS- 20 percent of the amounts approved in such
 appropriations Acts shall be allocated among appropriate applications in
 accordance with section 405 to provide comprehensive assistance for programs
 that the Secretary determines to contain particularly innovative or exemplary
 methods of meeting the immediate and long-term needs of the homeless.
 `(c) SRO RENOVATION- The Secretary shall, to the extent of amounts approved
 in appropriations Acts under section 422, provide rental assistance
 to public housing agencies for the renovation of single room occupancy
 dwellings in accordance with subtitle C.
`SEC. 404. ALLOCATION FORMULA.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF FORMULA- The Secretary shall issue regulations
 establishing an allocation formula that reflects each jurisdiction's share of
 the Nation's need for housing assistance for the homeless as identified by--
 `(1) objective measures of incidence of homelessness;
 `(2) the relation between the supply of affordable housing for very
 low-income persons and the number of such persons in the jurisdiction;
 `(3) poverty; and
 `(4) housing overcrowding.
The data to be used for allocation of funds within a fiscal year shall be
those that are available to the Secretary 90 days prior to the beginning of
that fiscal year.
 `(b) ALLOCATION RULES-
 `(1) MINIMUM LOCAL ALLOCATION- The Secretary shall allocate amounts available
 for formula allocation to units of general local government so that, when all
 such amounts are allocated by the formula, only those jurisdictions that are
 allocated an amount of $200,000 or greater shall receive an allocation. A
 jurisdiction receiving a formula allocation shall be eligible to receive
 grants if its formula allocation is $250,000 or greater, or if--
 `(A) the Secretary finds that--
 `(i) the jurisdiction is the city with the greatest population in a
 metropolitan area and has demonstrated a capacity to carry out provisions
 of this section, and
 `(ii) the State has authorized the Secretary to transfer to the jurisdiction
 a portion of the State's allocation that is equal to or greater than the
 difference between the jurisdiction's formula allocation and $250,000; or
 `(B) geographically contiguous local governments have formed a consortium
 that, in the determination of the Secretary--
 `(i) has sufficient authority and administrative capability to act on behalf
 of its member jurisdictions in carrying out the provisions of this section,
 `(ii) will, according to a written certification by the State, direct
 its activities to the alleviation of the State's most severe problems of
 homelessness, and
 `(iii) is comprised only of jurisdictions that have received a formula
 allocation for the fiscal year.
Such a consortium shall be deemed to be a unit of general local government
for purposes of this section. If a jurisdiction has met the requirements
of subparagraph (A), the jurisdiction's formula allocation for a fiscal
year shall subsequently be deemed to equal the sum of the jurisdiction's
allocation under this subsection and the amount the State has agreed to
transfer to the jurisdiction. The formula allocation for a consortium that
has met the requirements, under this subparagraph shall equal the total of
the allocations of its member jurisdictions.
 `(2) GRANTEE STATUS- Once a State or unit of general local government becomes
 a grantee, it shall remain eligible to receive grants for subsequent fiscal
 years, except as provided in paragraph (3).
 `(3) REVOCATION- The Secretary may revoke a jurisdiction's status
 as a grantee if (A) the Secretary finds, after reasonable notice and
 opportunity for hearing, that the jurisdiction is unwilling or unable
 to carry out the provisions of this subtitle, or (B) the jurisdiction's
 formula allocation falls below $250,000 for 3 consecutive years, below
 $225,000 for 2 consecutive years or below $200,000 in any 1 year.
 `(d) INITIAL ALLOCATION OF ASSISTANCE- Not later than 30 days after funds
 to carry out this section are provided in an appropriations Act (or,
 during the first year after enactment of this Act, not later than 30 days
 after regulations to implement this section are promulgated or due), the
 Secretary shall allocate funds in accordance with subsections (a) and (b)
 and promptly notify each jurisdiction receiving a formula allocation of
 its allocation amount. If a local jurisdiction is not eligible to receive
 grants because its allocation amount is too low, the Secretary shall inform
 the jurisdiction in writing how the jurisdiction may become eligible to
 receive grants.
 `(e) DISTRIBUTION OF ASSISTANCE BY A STATE- Each State shall distribute
 its allocation of assistance under this subsection in accordance with
 the need for homeless assistance as identified in the State's housing
 strategy approved under section 105 of the National Affordable Housing
 Act and shall coordinate its efforts where assistance is distributed to
 a unit of general local government that is a grantee.
`SEC. 405. DISCRETIONARY ALLOCATION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The amounts made available under section 403(b)(2) shall
 be allocated by the Secretary among approvable applications submitted by
 project sponsors to provide comprehensive assistance for programs that
 the Secretary determines to contain particularly innovative or exemplary
 methods of meeting the immediate and long-term needs of the homeless. A
 grantee shall not be permitted to submit an application if the Secretary
 finds that the grantee is in noncompliance with sections 406 and 407.
 `(b) ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES- Assistance provided under this section may be
 used for the following activities:
 `(1) the purchase, lease, rehabilitation, renovation, operation, or
 conversion of facilities to assist the homeless;
 `(2) the transitional provision of supportive services designed to meet
 the needs of special categories of homeless persons, including families
 with children, deinstitutionalized homeless individuals and other homeless
 individuals with mental disabilities, the elderly, and veterans. Assistance
 provided under this paragraph shall be phased out over a period not to
 exceed 3 years.
 `(c) APPLICATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Applications for assistance under this section shall be
 submitted by an applicant in such form and in accordance with such procedures
 as the Secretary shall establish. Such applications shall contain--
 `(A) a description of the proposed project;
 `(B) a description of the size and characteristics of the population that
 would occupy the housing;
 `(C) a description of the public and private resources that are expected
 to be made available in connection with the project;
 `(D) assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that any property purchased,
 leased, rehabilitated, renovated, or converted with assistance under this
 subsection will be operated for not less than 10 years for the purpose
 specified in the application; and
 `(E) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines
 is necessary to achieve the purposes of this section.
 `(d) SELECTION CRITERIA- The Secretary shall establish selection criteria
 for assistance under this section, which shall take into account--
 `(1) the ability of the applicant or the project sponsor to develop and
 operate the proposed project;
 `(2) the innovative quality and exemplary value of the proposal in providing
 homeless assistance;
 `(3) the need for such assistance in the area to be served;
 `(4) the extent to which the amount of assistance to be provided under
 this section will be matched with more than an equal amount of funds from
 other sources;
 `(5) the extent to which the project would provide assistance to homeless
 people who are most difficult to serve;
 `(6) the length of time that the applicant or project sponsor will commit
 to provide assistance to the homeless;
 `(7) the extent to which the applicant or project sponsor has control of
 the site of the proposed project; and
 `(8) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to
 ensure that funds made available under this section are used effectively.
 `(e) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- The total amount allocated to a grantee
 under this section in any fiscal year shall not exceed the grantee's
 formula allocation under section 404 in that fiscal year.
`SEC. 406. RESPONSIBILITIES OF GRANTEES AND PROJECT SPONSORS.
 `(a) MATCHING REQUIREMENTS- Each grantee shall be required to supplement
 the grants provided under this title with an equal amount of funds from
 non-Federal sources. Each grantee shall certify to the Secretary its
 compliance with this subsection, describing the sources and amounts of
 such supplemental funds. Supplemental funds may include the value of
 any donated material or building, the value of any lease on a building,
 any salary paid to staff to carry out the program of a project sponsor,
 and the value of the time and services contributed by volunteers to carry
 out the program of a project sponsor at a rate determined by the Secretary.
 `(b) HOUSING QUALITY- Each grantee shall assure that housing assisted under
 this subtitle shall be decent, safe, and sanitary and, when appropriate,
 meet all applicable State and local housing and building codes and licensing
 requirements in the jurisdiction in which the housing is located.
 `(c) CONSISTENCY WITH HOUSING STRATEGY- Each grantee shall certify, to
 the satisfaction of the Secretary, that activities undertaken by project
 sponsors with assistance from the grantee are consistent with the housing
 strategy submitted by the grantee in accordance with section 105 of the
 National Affordable Housing Act.
 `(d) ASSISTANCE TO HOMELESS PERSONS- Each grantee shall assure that homeless
 individuals will be assisted in obtaining--
 `(1) appropriate supportive services, including permanent housing, medical
 and mental health treatment, counseling, supervision, and other services
 essential for achieving independent living; and
 `(2) other Federal, State, local, and private assistance available for
 homeless persons.
 `(e) LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS- Each grantee shall certify, to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary, that neither assistance received under this
 title nor any State or local government funds used to supplement such
 assistance will be used to replace other public funds previously used,
 or designated for use, to assist the homeless.
 `(f) CIVIL RIGHTS COMPLIANCE- Each grantee shall certify, to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary, that the grant will be conducted and administered in
 conformity with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Public Law
 88-352), and the Fair Housing Act and the grantee will affirmatively
 further fair housing.
 `(g) REPORTS-
 `(1) Each grantee shall submit to the Secretary, in such form and at
 such time as the Secretary shall prescribe, a performance and evaluation
 report on the use of amounts made available under this subtitle, together
 with the grantee's assessment of the relationship of such usage to the
 grantee's approved housing strategy. The report shall include information
 on the number of homeless individuals served and the reasons for their
 homelessness. The report shall be made available to the public so that
 citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties have an opportunity
 to comment on the report prior to its submission. The report shall include
 a summary of any comments received from interested parties.
 `(2) The Secretary shall consult with national associations of States, local
 governments, and other housing interests to develop uniform recordkeeping,
 performance reporting, and auditing requirements. After considering the
 results of such consultations, the Secretary shall establish uniform
 recordkeeping, performance reporting, and auditing requirements for
 assistance made available under this title.
 `(h) SITE CONTROL- Each grantee or project sponsor shall furnish reasonable
 assurances that it will own or have control of a site for the proposed
 project not later than 6 months after notification of an award for grant
 assistance. A suitable site different from the site specified in the
 application satisfies the requirement of this subsection. If ownership or
 control of a site is not obtained within 1 year after notification of an
 award for grant assistance, the grant shall be recaptured and reallocated.
 `(i) PREVENTION OF UNDUE BENEFITS- The Secretary may prescribe such terms
 and conditions as he deems necessary to prevent project sponsors from unduly
 benefiting from the sale or other disposition of projects constructed,
 rehabilitated, or acquired with assistance under this title other than
 a sale or other disposition resulting in the use of the project for the
 direct benefit of very low-income persons.
 `(j) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary may establish such other program
 requirements as the Secretary determines are necessary for grantees to
 administer activities authorized under this title in an efficient manner.
`SEC. 407. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
 `(a) LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- A grantee may not use more than
 5 percent of the assistance received under this title for administrative
 purposes.
 `(b) INCOME ELIGIBILITY- A homeless person shall be eligible for assistance
 under any program provided by this title, or by the amendments made by
 this title, only if the person has income not exceeding 50 percent of the
 median income for the area, as adjusted in accordance with section 3(b)(2)
 of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
 `(c) FLOOD ELEVATION REQUIREMENTS- Flood protection standards applicable
 to housing acquired, rehabilitated, or assisted under any provision of
 this title shall be no more restrictive than the standards applicable to
 any other program administered by the Secretary.
 `(d) APPLICABILITY OF SECTION 104(g) OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
 ACT OF 1974- The provisions of, and regulations and procedures applicable
 under, section 104(g) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
 shall apply to assistance and projects under this title.
 `(e) RECAPTURE AND REALLOCATION OF FUNDS-
 `(1) FORMULA REALLOCATIONS- If a State or unit of general local government
 receiving a formula allocation under section 404 fails to obtain approval
 of its housing strategy in accordance with section 105 of the National
 Affordable Housing Act, the Secretary shall reallocate any funds reserved
 for the jurisdiction as follows:
 `(A) If a State fails to obtain approval of its housing strategy, the
 Secretary shall make the State's formula allocation available in accordance
 with section 405.
 `(B) If a unit of general local government eligible for a grant under
 section 404 fails to obtain approval of its housing strategy, the Secretary
 shall promptly reallocate the locality's formula allocation to the State
 in which the locality is located if the State has obtained approval of
 its housing strategy. The State shall give priority to funding projects
 that assist the homeless population within the locality.
 `(C) If a unit of general local government eligible for a grant under
 section 404 fails to obtain approval of its housing strategy, and is located
 within a State that also fails to obtain approval of its housing strategy,
 the Secretary shall make the locality's formula allocation available in
 accordance with section 405.
 `(2) NONCOMPLIANCE- The Secretary may recapture assistance made available to
 a grantee if the Secretary determines that the grantee is in noncompliance
 with program requirements and shall reallocate such assistance in accordance
 with section 405.
 `(3) OTHER REALLOCATIONS- If, following the receipt of applications for the
 final funding round under section 405 for any fiscal year, any amount set
 aside for assistance pursuant to section 405 will not be required to fund
 the approvable applications submitted for such assistance, the Secretary
 shall reallocate such amount for use under subtitle C.
 `(f) GAO AUDITS- Insofar as they relate to funds provided under this
 section, the financial transactions of grantees and project sponsors may be
 audited by the General Accounting Office under such rules and regulations
 as may be prescribed by the Comptroller General of the United States. The
 representatives of the General Accounting Office shall have access to all
 books, accounts, records, reports, files, and other papers, things, or
 property belonging to, or in use by, such grantees and project sponsors
 pertaining to the financial transactions and necessary to facilitate
 the audit.
`SEC. 408. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $241,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991, and $251,363,000 for fiscal year 1992. Any amount
 appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.
`SEC. 409. REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
 `The Secretary shall submit annually to the Congress a report summarizing
 the activities carried out under this title and setting forth the findings,
 conclusions, and recommendations of the Secretary as a result of the
 activities. The report shall summarize and assess the results of performance
 reports provided in accordance with subsection 406(g). The report shall
 be submitted not later than 3 months after the end of each fiscal year.
`Subtitle B--Approved Activities
`SEC. 411. HOMELESSNESS PREVENTION.
 `(a) DEFINITION- Assistance to help very low-income persons and families
 avoid becoming homeless may include activities other than those that the
 Secretary has found to be inconsistent with the purposes of this Act.
 `(b) LIMITATION ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE- A grantee may provide financial
 assistance to persons and families who have received eviction notices or
 notices of termination of utility services if--
 `(1) the inability of the family to make the required payments is due to
 a sudden reduction in income;
 `(2) the assistance is necessary to avoid the eviction or termination
 of services;
 `(3) there is a reasonable prospect that the family will be able to resume
 payments within a reasonable period of time; and
 `(4) the assistance will not supplant funding for preexisting homelessness
 prevention activities from other sources.
`SEC. 412. EMERGENCY SHELTER.
 `(a) DEFINITION- A project shall be considered emergency shelter if it
 involves--
 `(1) the renovation, major rehabilitation, or conversion of buildings to
 be used as emergency shelters;
 `(2) the provision of supportive services if such services do not supplant
 any services provided by the local government during any part of the
 immediately preceding 12-month period; and
 `(3) maintenance, operation (other than staff), insurance, utilities,
 and furnishings.
 `(b) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS- A grantee may approve assistance for a project
 under this subsection only if the project sponsor has agreed that it will--
 `(1) in the case of assistance involving major rehabilitation or conversion
 of a building, maintain the building as a shelter for homeless individuals
 and families for not less than a 10-year period;
 `(2) in the case of assistance involving rehabilitation (other than major
 rehabilitation or conversion of a building), maintain the building as a
 shelter for homeless individuals and families for not less than a 3-year
 period; or
 `(3) in the case of assistance involving only activities described in
 paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a), provide services or shelter
 to homeless individuals and families at the original site or structure
 or other sites or structures serving the same general population for the
 period during which such assistance is provided.
`SEC. 413. TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FOR THE HOMELESS.
 `(a) DEFINITION- A project shall be considered `transitional housing'
 if it is designed to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals to
 independent living within 24 months (or such longer period as the Secretary
 determines is necessary to facilitate the transition of homeless individuals
 to independent living). Transitional housing includes housing primarily
 designed to serve deinstitutionalized homeless individuals and other homeless
 individuals with mental disabilities, and homeless families with children.
 `(b) TYPES OF ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A grantee may provide the following assistance to a
 project sponsor of transitional housing:
 `(A) An advance not to exceed cost of acquisition, substantial
 rehabilitation, or acquisition and rehabilitation of an existing structure
 for use as transitional housing. The repayment of any outstanding debt
 owed on a loan made to purchase an existing structure shall be considered
 to be a cost of acquisition eligible for an advance under this paragraph
 if the structure was not used as transitional housing prior to the receipt
 of assistance.
 `(B) A grant for moderate rehabilitation of an existing structure for use
 as transitional housing.
 `(C) Annual payments for operating costs of transitional housing (including
 transitional housing that is newly constructed with assistance provided
 from sources other than this Act) not to exceed 75 percent of the annual
 operating costs of such housing.
 `(D) Technical assistance in--
 `(i) establishing transitional housing in an existing structure;
 `(ii) operating transitional housing in existing structures and in structures
 that are newly constructed with assistance provided from sources other
 than this Act; and
 `(iii) providing supportive services to the residents of transitional
 housing (including transitional housing that is newly constructed with
 assistance provided from sources other than this Act).
 `(E) A grant for establishing and operating an employment assistance
 program for the residents of transitional housing, which shall include--
 `(i) employment of residents in the operation and maintenance of the
 housing; and
 `(ii) the payment of the transportation costs of residents to places
 of employment.
A project sponsor may receive assistance under both subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 `(c) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) REQUIRED AGREEMENTS- A grantee may approve assistance for a project
 under this section only if the project sponsor has agreed--
 `(A) to operate the proposed project as transitional housing for not less
 than 10 years;
 `(B) to conduct an ongoing assessment of the supportive services required
 by the residents of the project;
 `(C) to provide such residential supervision as the Secretary determines
 is necessary to facilitate the adequate provision of supportive services
 to the residents of the project;
 `(D) to comply with such other terms and conditions as the Secretary or
 grantee may establish for purposes of carrying out this program in an
 effective and efficient manner.
 `(2) OCCUPANT RENT- Each homeless individual residing in a facility assisted
 under this subtitle shall pay as rent an amount determined in accordance
 with the provisions of section 3(a) of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
`SEC. 414. PERMANENT HOUSING FOR HANDICAPPED HOMELESS PERSONS.
 `(a) DEFINITION- A project shall be considered `permanent housing for
 handicapped homeless persons' if it provides community-based long-term
 housing and supportive services for not more than 8 handicapped homeless
 persons. The Secretary may waive the limitation contained in the preceding
 sentence if the grantee demonstrates that local market conditions dictate
 the development of a larger project.
 `(b) PROJECT DESIGN AND SITING- Each project assisted under this subtitle
 shall be either a home designed solely for housing handicapped persons or
 dwelling units in a multifamily housing project, condominium project, or
 cooperative project. Not more than 1 home may be located on any 1 site and
 no such home may be located on a site contiguous to another site containing
 such a home.
 `(c) TYPES OF ASSISTANCE- A grantee may provide the following assistance
 to a project sponsor of permanent housing for handicapped homeless persons:
 `(1) An advance not to exceed the cost of acquisition, substantial
 rehabilitation, or acquisition and rehabilitation of an existing structure
 for use as permanent housing for the handicapped homeless. The repayment of
 any outstanding debt owed on a loan made to purchase an existing structure
 shall be considered to be a cost of acquisition eligible for an advance
 under this paragraph if the structure was not used as permanent housing
 for the handicapped homeless prior to the receipt of assistance.
 `(2) A grant for moderate rehabilitation of an existing structure for use
 as permanent housing for the handicapped homeless.
 `(3) Annual payments for operating costs for permanent housing for
 handicapped homeless persons (including permanent housing for handicapped
 homeless persons that is newly constructed with assistance provided from
 sources other than this Act), not to exceed 50 percent of the annual
 operating costs of such housing for the first year of operation, and not
 to exceed 25 percent of such costs for the second year of operation.
 `(4) Technical assistance in--
 `(A) establishing permanent housing for the handicapped homeless in an
 existing structure;
 `(B) operating permanent housing for the handicapped homeless in existing
 structures and in structures that are newly constructed with assistance
 provided from sources other than this Act; and
 `(C) providing supportive services to the residents of permanent housing
 for the handicapped homeless (including permanent housing for handicapped
 homeless persons that is newly constructed with assistance provided from
 sources other than this Act).
 `(d) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) REQUIRED AGREEMENTS- A grantee may approve assistance for any project
 under this section only if the project sponsor has agreed--
 `(A) to operate the proposed project as permanent housing for the handicapped
 homeless for not less than 10 years;
 `(B) to conduct an ongoing assessment of the supportive services required
 by the residents of the project;
 `(C) to provide such residential supervision as the Secretary determines
 is necessary to facilitate the adequate provision of supportive services
 to the residents of the project; and
 `(D) to comply with such other terms and conditions as the Secretary or
 grantee may establish for purposes of carrying out this program in an
 effective and efficient manner.
 `(2) STATE PARTICIPATION- Each grantee providing assistance to a project
 under this section shall transmit to the Secretary a letter of participation
 from the State assuring that the State will promptly transmit assistance
 to the project sponsor and will facilitate the provision of necessary
 supportive services to the residents of the project;
 `(3) OCCUPANT RENT- Each homeless individual residing in a facility assisted
 under this subtitle shall pay as rent an amount determined in accordance
 with the provisions of section 3(a) of the United States Housing Act of 1937.
`SEC. 415. SUPPLEMENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR FACILITIES TO ASSIST THE HOMELESS.
 `(a) DEFINITION- Assistance may be considered supplemental assistance
 for projects assisted under sections 412 and 413 if it covers costs that
 are required--
 `(1) to meet the special needs of homeless families with children, elderly
 homeless individuals, or handicapped homeless persons residing in such
 projects;
 `(2) to facilitate the transfer and utilization of public buildings to
 assist homeless individuals and families; or
 `(3) to provide supportive services for the homeless residing in such
 projects.
 `(b) REQUIRED AGREEMENTS- A grantee may approve assistance for any project
 under this section only if the project sponsor has certified that--
 `(1) the project sponsor has made reasonable efforts to utilize all available
 local resources and resources available under the other provisions of this
 title; and
 `(2) that other resources are not sufficient or are not available to carry
 out the purpose for which the assistance is being sought.
 `(c) OUTPATIENT HEALTH SERVICES- Not more than $10,000 of any grant or
 advance under this subtitle may be used for outpatient health services
 (excluding the cost of any rehabilitation or conversion of a structure to
 accommodate the provision of such services).
 `(d) COORDINATION WITH SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- The Secretary
 of Housing and Urban Development and the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall jointly establish guidelines for determining under this
 section the appropriateness of proposed outpatient health services. Such
 guidelines shall include such provisions as are necessary to enable the
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to meet the time limits under
 this subtitle for the final selection of applications for assistance.
`SEC. 416. DEVELOPMENT OF ADDITIONAL APPROVED ACTIVITIES.
 `The Secretary, in cooperation with grantees and other appropriate parties,
 shall develop additional approved activities to carry out the purposes of
 this title.
`Subtitle C--Section 8 Single Room Occupancy
`SEC. 421. SECTION 8 ASSISTANCE FOR SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY PROVISIONS.
 `(a) USE OF FUNDS- The amounts made available under this subtitle shall be
 used only in connection with the moderate rehabilitation of housing described
 in section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 for occupancy by
 homeless individuals, except that such amounts may be used in connection
 with the moderate rehabilitation of efficiency units if the building owner
 agrees to pay the additional cost of rehabilitating and operating such units.
 `(b) ALLOCATION- The amounts made available under this subtitle shall be
 allocated by the Secretary among approvable applications to the applicant
 public housing agencies that best demonstrate a need for the assistance
 under this section and the ability to undertake and carry out a program to
 be assisted under this subtitle. To be considered for assistance under this
 section, an applicant shall submit to the Secretary a proposal containing--
 `(1) a description of the size and characteristics of the population
 within the applicant's jurisdiction that would occupy single room occupancy
 dwellings;
 `(2) a listing of additional commitments from public and private sources
 that the applicant might be able to provide in connection with the program;
 `(3) an inventory of suitable housing stock to be rehabilitated with such
 assistance; and
 `(4) a description of the interest that has been expressed by builders,
 developers, and others (including profit and nonprofit organizations)
 in participating in the program.
No single city or urban county shall be eligible to receive more than 10
percent of the assistance made available under this subtitle.
 `(c) FIRE AND SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS- Each rental credit contract entered
 into with the authority provided under this subtitle shall require the
 installation of a sprinkler system that protects all major spaces, hard
 wired smoke detectors, and such other fire and safety improvements as may
 be required by State or local law. For purposes of this subsection, the
 term `major spaces' means hallways, large common areas, and other areas
 specified in local fire, building, or safety codes.
 `(d) COST LIMITATION-
 `(1) The total cost of rehabilitation that may be compensated for in a
 rental credit contract entered into with the authority provided under this
 subtitle shall not exceed $14,000 per unit, plus the expenditures required
 by subsection (d).
 `(2) The Secretary shall increase the limitation contained in paragraph
 (1) by an amount the Secretary determines is reasonable and necessary to
 accommodate special local conditions, including--
 `(A) high construction costs; or
 `(B) stringent fire or building codes.
 `(3) The Secretary shall increase the limitation in paragraph (1) on October
 1 of each year by an amount necessary to take into account increases in
 construction costs during the previous 12-month period.
 `(e) CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS- Each contract for annual contributions entered
 into with a public housing agency to obligate the authority made available
 under this subtitle shall--
 `(1) commit the Secretary to make such authority available to the public
 housing agency for an aggregate period of 10 years, and require that any
 amendments increasing such authority shall be available for the remainder
 of such 10-year period;
 `(2) provide the Secretary with the option to renew the contract for an
 additional period of 10 years, subject to the availability of appropriations;
 and
 `(3) provide that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, first
 priority for occupancy of housing rehabilitated under this subtitle shall
 be given to homeless individuals.
`SEC. 422. INCREASE IN BUDGET AUTHORITY.
 `The budget authority available under section 5(c) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937 for assistance under section 8(e)(2) of such Act is
 authorized to be increased by $50,000,000 on or after October 1, 1989,
 and by $52,452,000 on or after October 1, 1990.'.
SEC. 532. DEFINITION OF `HOMELESS PERSON'.
 Section 103(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act is amended
 by adding after `homeless individual' the following: `or homeless person'.
SEC. 533. TRANSITIONAL RULE.
 Notwithstanding section 404(a) of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless
 Assistance Act (as amended by section 531, during the period not to exceed
 1 year following the enactment of this Act, the Secretary is authorized to
 allocate homeless assistance made available under such Act in accordance
 with regulations in effect on January 1, 1989, to the extent determined
 by the Secretary to be necessary to provide for orderly transition to the
 regulations issued under such section.
SEC. 534. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.
 That part of the table of contents of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless
 Assistance Act that relates to title IV of such Act is amended to read
 as follows:
`TITLE IV--HOUSING ASSISTANCE
`Subtitle A--General Provisions
`Sec. 401. Purpose.
`Sec. 402. Definitions.
`Sec. 403. General authority.
`Sec. 404. Allocation formula.
`Sec. 405. Discretionary allocation.
`Sec. 406. Responsibilities of grantees and project sponsors.
`Sec. 407. Administrative provisions.
`Sec. 408. Authorization of appropriations.
`Sec. 409. Reports to Congress.
`Subtitle B--Approved Activities.
`Sec. 411. Homelessness prevention.
`Sec. 412. Emergency shelter.
`Sec. 413. Transitional housing for the homeless.
`Sec. 414. Permanent housing for handicapped homeless persons.
`Sec. 415. Supplemental assistance for facilities to assist the homeless.
`Sec. 416. Development of additional approved activities.
`Subtitle C--Section 8 Single Room Occupancy
`Sec. 421. Section 8 single room occupancy provisions.
`Sec. 422. Increase in budget authority.'.
TITLE VI--PUBLIC AND INDIAN HOUSING
SEC. 601. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this title is--
 (1) to modernize the Nation's stock of low-income public and Indian housing
 and provide operating assistance needed for such housing to be a suitable
 living environment;
 (2) to develop future public housing in small projects and with an
 appropriate income mix so as to permit such housing to be incorporated
 with local communities and to require lower levels of long-term operating
 assistance;
 (3) to make adequate provisions for one-for-one replacement of any public
 housing dwelling units that are demolished, sold to tenants or otherwise
 disposed of;
 (4) to establish Project Independence to help families with children living
 in public housing gain better access to jobs and educational opportunities;
 (5) to establish the National Commission on Severely Distressed Public
 Housing to provide a national action plan to eliminate unfit living
 conditions in the most troubled public housing projects by the year 2000.
Subtitle A--Public Housing Development
SEC. 611. DEVELOPMENT AND RECONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC HOUSING.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- Section 5(a)(2) of the United States Housing Act
 of 1937, is amended by striking `public housing projects' in the first
 sentence and inserting the following: `(A) new public housing developed
 or reconstructed in accordance with subsection (j), or (B) replacement
 public housing developed in accordance with subsection (k).'
 (b) DEVELOPMENT- Section 5(j) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 is
 amended to read as follows:
 `(j)(1) The Secretary shall use contributions made available under subsection
 (a)(2)(A) to develop public housing.
 `(2) Notwithstanding section 16, public housing developed under this
 subsection shall serve very low-income families except that a public
 housing agency may make available up to 25 percent of the dwelling units
 in any project for occupancy by low-income families.
 `(3) Public housing developed under this subsection shall be designed to
 accommodate, through the development of adequate common space, any special
 service needs of the categories of tenants (including families with children,
 elderly persons, persons with functional or other disabilities) reasonably
 expected to reside in such projects.
 `(4) Except for public housing that is intended to serve elderly persons,
 public housing projects developed under this subsection shall not--
 `(A) contain more than 100 dwelling units; or
 `(B) be designed as a high-rise elevator project.
The Secretary may waive one or more of the limitations specified in this
paragraph if the Secretary determines the waiver is justified by local
conditions.
 `(5) The Secretary shall reserve funds for the development of public
 housing under this subsection only if--
 `(A) the Secretary determines that such funds are required to complete
 the development of dwelling units for which amounts have been obligated
 under this section;
 `(B) the public housing agency certifies to the Secretary that not less
 than 85 percent of the public housing dwelling units of the public housing
 agency--
 `(i) are maintained in substantial compliance with the housing quality
 standards established by the Secretary under section 8;
 `(ii) will be so maintained upon completion of modernization for which
 funding has been awarded; or
 `(iii) will be so maintained upon completion of modernization for which
 applications are pending that have been submitted in good faith under
 section 14 (or a comparable State or local government program) and that
 there is a reasonable expectation, as determined by the Secretary in writing,
 that the applications would be approved;
 `(C) the public housing agency certifies that such development--
 `(i) will replace dwelling units that are lost through redesign of units; or
 `(ii) is required to comply with court orders or directions of the Secretary;
 `(D) the public housing agency certifies that it has demands for family
 housing not satisfied by the rental assistance programs established in
 section 8; or
 `(E) the Secretary makes such reservation under paragraph (6).
 `(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not more than 20 percent
 of the funds appropriated for development of public housing may also be
 committed by the Secretary for the substantial redesign, reconstruction,
 or redevelopment of existing public housing projects or units, which work
 shall be carried out pursuant to the rules and regulations applicable to
 the development of public housing.'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 6 of the United States Housing Act of
 1937, is amended by striking subsection (j) and redesignating subsections
 (k) through (m) as (j) through (l).
SEC. 612. REPLACEMENT HOUSING.
 (a) Section 5 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (k) and (l) as subsections (l) and (m)
 respectively; and
 (2) by inserting the following after subsection (j):
 `(k) The Secretary shall use contributions made available under subsection
 (a)(2)(B) to develop new public housing to replace public housing lost
 through disposition or demolition in accordance with section 18 or sale to
 tenants in accordance with section 21. Public housing developed under this
 subsection shall comply with the requirements specified under paragraphs
 (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (j).'.
 (b)(1) Section 18(c)(2) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 is amended
 by adding at the end the following: `As part of each annual budget request
 for the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary shall
 transmit to the Congress a report--
 `(A) outlining the commitments the Secretary entered into during the
 preceding year to fund plans approved under subsection (b)(3); and
 `(B) specifying, by fiscal year, the budget authority required to carry
 out the commitments specified in paragraph (A).'.
 (2) Section 18(c)(3) of the United States Housing Act is repealed.
 (c) Section 21(a)(3) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as subparagraphs (C) and
 (D), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph:
 `(B) As part of each annual budget request for the Department of Housing and
 Urban Development, the Secretary shall transmit to the Congress a report--
 `(i) outlining the commitments the Secretary entered into during the
 preceding year to fund plans submitted in accordance with subparagraph
 (A)(iv); and
 `(ii) specifying, by fiscal year, the budget authority required to carry
 out the commitments specified in clause (i).'.
Subtitle B--Authorizations
SEC. 621. AUTHORIZATION OF OPERATING SUBSIDIES.
 Section 9(c) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(c) There are authorized to be appropriated for purposes of providing
 annual contributions under this section $1,800,000,000 for fiscal year
 1990 and $1,877,400,000 for fiscal year 1991.'.
SEC. 622. AUTHORIZATION OF PUBLIC HOUSING DEVELOPMENT, INDIAN HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AND THE COMPREHENSIVE IMPROVEMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 5(c)(6) of the United States Housing Act of 1937
 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `The aggregate
 amount of budget authority that may be obligated for grants for public
 housing and for comprehensive improvement assistance is increased (to the
 extent approved in appropriations Acts) by $2,353,950,000 on October 1,
 1989, and by $2,457,740,000 on October 1, 1990'.
 (b) ANNUAL PROGRAM AUTHORIZATIONS- Section 5(c)(7) of the United States
 Housing Act of 1937, is amended to read as follows:
 `(7)(A) Using the additional budget authority provided under paragraph (6)
 and the balances of budget authority that become available during fiscal
 year 1990, the Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriations
 Acts, reserve authority to enter into obligations aggregating--
 `(i) for public housing grants under subsection (a)(2), not more than
 $453,950,000 of which amount not more than $94,125,000 shall be available
 for Indian housing;
 `(ii) for comprehensive improvement assistance grants under section 14,
 not more than $1,900,000,000.
 `(B) Using the additional budget authority provided under paragraph (6)
 and the balances of budget authority that become available during fiscal
 year 1991, the Secretary shall, to the extent approved in appropriations
 Acts, reserve authority to enter into obligations aggregating--
 `(i) for public housing grants under subsection (a)(2), not more than
 $476,040,000 of which amount not more than $98,705,000 shall be made
 available for Indian housing;
 `(ii) for comprehensive improvement assistance grants under section 14,
 not more than $1,981,700,000.'.
Subtitle C--Project Independence
SEC. 631. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this subtitle is to provide families with children living
 in public housing with better access to educational and employment
 opportunities by--
 (1) developing facilities for training and support services in or near
 public housing;
 (2) mobilizing public and private resources to expand and improve the
 delivery of such services; and
 (3) providing transitional funding for essential training and support
 services that cannot otherwise be funded.
SEC. 632. PROJECT INDEPENDENCE.
 Section 14 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (j) through (m) as (k) through (n); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (i) the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) The Secretary shall make available and contract to make available
 assistance needed to adapt public housing to help families with children
 gain better access to educational and job opportunities. Assistance under
 this subsection shall be made available only to public housing agencies that
 demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that such assistance
 is necessary to accommodate the provision of supportive services that
 will receive support from sources other than this Act. Facilities to be
 assisted under this subsection shall be in or near the premises of public
 housing. Such assistance shall be made without regard to the requirements of
 subsections (c) through (h). Of the total amount of assistance approved in
 appropriations Acts under section 5(c), there shall be set aside to carry
 out this subsection $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $25,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1991.
 `(2)(A) Assistance provided under this subsection may be used for--
 `(i) the renovation, conversion, or combination of vacant dwelling units
 in a public housing project to create common areas to accommodate the
 provision of supportive services;
 `(ii) the renovation of existing common areas in a public housing project
 to accommodate the provision of supportive services;
 `(iii) the renovation of facilities located near the premises of one or
 more public housing projects to accommodate the provision of supportive
 services; and
 `(iv) the transitional provision of qualifying supportive services if the
 public housing agency demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that--
 `(I) the qualifying services are appropriate to improve the access of
 eligible residents to employment and educational opportunities;
 `(II) the public housing agency has made diligent efforts to use or obtain
 other available resources to fund the designated services; and
 `(III) long-term funding for the qualifying services will be available
 from other sources.
 `(B) Assistance provided to carry out activities specified in subparagraph
 (A)(iv) shall be phased out over a period not to exceed 3 years.
 `(3) Assistance under this subsection shall be allocated by the Secretary
 among approvable applications submitted by public housing agencies.
 `(4) Applications for assistance under this subsection shall be submitted
 in such form and in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary shall
 establish. Applications for assistance shall contain--
 `(A) a description of the qualifying supportive services that can reasonably
 be expected to be made available to eligible residents over a 5-year period
 (or such longer period that the Secretary determines to be appropriate if
 assistance is provided for activities under paragraph (2)(A) that involve
 substantial rehabilitation);
 `(B) a firm commitment of assistance from one or more sources ensuring
 that qualifying supportive services will be provided for not less than 1
 year following the completion of activities assisted under paragraph (2)(A);
 `(C) a description of public or private sources of assistance that can
 reasonably be expected to fund or provide qualifying supportive services for
 the entire period specified under subparagraph (A), including evidence of
 any intention to provide assistance expressed by State and local governments,
 private foundations, and other organizations (including profit and nonprofit
 organizations);
 `(D) a certification from the appropriate State or local agency (as
 determined by the Secretary) that (i) the provision of the qualifying
 supportive services identified under in subparagraph (A) are well designed to
 provide eligible residents with better access to educational and employment
 opportunities, and (ii) there is a reasonable likelihood that such services
 will be funded or provided for the entire period specified under subparagraph
 (A);
 `(E) a description of assistance that the public housing agency seeks
 under this subsection; and
 `(F) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines
 to be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this subsection.
 `(5) The Secretary shall establish selection criteria for assistance under
 this subsection which shall take into account--
 `(A) the ability of the public housing agency or a designated service
 provider to provide the qualifying supportive services identified under
 paragraph (4)(A);
 `(B) the need for such services in the public housing project;
 `(C) the extent to which the envisioned renovation, conversion and
 combination activities are appropriate to accommodate the provision of
 such services;
 `(D) the extent to which the public housing agency has demonstrated that such
 services will be provided for the period identified under paragraph (4)(A);
 `(E) the extent to which the public housing agency has had a good record
 of maintaining and operating public housing; and
 `(F) such other factors that the Secretary determines to be appropriate to
 ensure that funds made available under this subsection are used effectively.
 `(6) The Secretary shall ensure that public housing agencies have the
 capacity to--
 `(A) assess adequately the training and service needs of eligible residents;
 `(B) coordinate the provision of services and tailor such services to the
 needs of eligible residents; and
 `(C) seek on a continuous basis new sources of assistance to ensure
 long-term funding for qualifying supportive services;
The Secretary may carry out this paragraph by using amounts set aside under
paragraph (1) and by permitting public housing agencies to use existing
sources of funds.
 `(7)(A) Each public housing agency shall submit to the Secretary, in such
 form and at such time as the Secretary shall prescribe, an annual progress
 report evaluating the use of funds made available under this subsection.
 `(B) The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not later than 120
 days after the end of each fiscal year, an annual report evaluating the
 effectiveness of activities assisted under this subsection in such fiscal
 year. Such report shall summarize the progress reports submitted pursuant
 to subparagraph (A).
 `(8) The Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent of the amounts
 available in each fiscal year under this subsection to supplement grants
 awarded to public housing agencies under this subsection when, in the
 determination of the Secretary, such supplemental adjustments are required
 to maintain adequate levels of services to eligible residents.
 `(9)(A) Each public housing agency shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
 employ public housing residents to provide the services assisted under
 this subsection or from other sources. Such persons shall be paid at a
 rate not less than the highest of--
 `(i) the minimum wage which would be applicable to the employee under the
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, if section 6(a)(1) of such Act applied
 to the resident and if he or she were not exempt under section 13 thereof;
 `(ii) the State or local minimum wage for the most nearly comparable
 covered employment; or
 `(iii) the prevailing rates of pay for persons employed in similar public
 occupations by the same employer.
 `(B) No service provided to a public housing resident under this subsection,
 except for wages paid under subparagraph (A) of this section, may be
 treated as income for the purpose of any other program or provision of
 State or Federal law.
 `(10) For purpose of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `eligible resident' means a person residing in public
 housing who--
 `(i) is a single parent head of household with 1 or more children under
 the age of 10; and
 `(ii) is economically disadvantaged within the meaning of sections 4(8)
 (A) and (B) of the Job Training Partnership Act;
 `(B) the term `qualifying supportive services' shall mean new or
 significantly expanded services that the Secretary deems essential to
 provide families living with children in public housing with better access
 to educational and employment opportunities. Such services may include
 but not be limited to--
 `(i) child care;
 `(ii) employment training and counseling;
 `(iii) literacy training;
 `(iv) computer skills training; and
 `(v) assistance in the attainment of certificates of high school equivalency.
The public housing agency may provide such services directly to eligible
residents or may, by contract or lease, provide such services through other
appropriate agencies or providers.'.
SEC. 633. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 (a) NO REDUCTION OF OPERATING SUBSIDY- Section 9(a)(3)(B)(v) of the United
 States Housing Act of 1937 (as added by section 512(m) of this Act) is
 amended by inserting `section 14(j) of this Act or' before `section 512'.
 (b) BENEFITS EXCLUDED FROM INCOME- Section 3(a) of the United States Housing
 Act of 1937, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) The earnings of and benefits to any public housing resident resulting
 from participation in a program providing employment training and supportive
 services in accordance with the Family Support Act of 1988, section 14(j)
 of this Act or any comparable Federal, State or local law shall not be
 considered as income for the purposes of determining a limitation on the
 amount of rent paid by the resident during--
 `(A) the period that the resident participates in such program; and
 `(B) the period, not to exceed 18 months, that--
 `(i) begins with the commencement of employment of the resident in the
 first job acquired by the person after completion of such program that is
 not funded by assistance under this Act; and
 `(ii) ends on--
 `(I) the date the resident ceases to continue employment without good
 cause as the Secretary shall determine; or
 `(II) the expiration of the 18-month period following the commencement of
 the period described in clause (i), whichever event occurs first.'.
Subtitle D--National Commission on Severely Distressed Public Housing
SEC. 641. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this subtitle is to establish a National Commission on
 Severely Distressed Public Housing--
 (1) to identify those public housing projects in the Nation that are in
 a severe state of distress;
 (2) to assess the most promising strategies to improve the condition of
 severely distressed public housing projects that have been implemented
 by public housing authorities, other Government agencies at the Federal,
 State, and local level, public housing tenants, and the private sector;
 (3) to develop a national action plan to eliminate by the year 2000 unfit
 living conditions in public housing projects determined by the Commission
 to be severely distressed.
SEC. 642. ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
 There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on
 Severely Distressed Public Housing (hereinafter in this subtitle referred
 to as the `Commission').
SEC. 643. MEMBERSHIP OF COMMISSION.
 (a) APPOINTMENT- (1) The Commission shall be composed of 18 members,
 appointed not later than 60 days after the enactment of this Act. The
 members shall be as follows:
 (A) 6 members to be appointed by the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development;
 (B) 6 members appointed by the Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of
 the Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Affairs of the Committee on Banking,
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate; and
 (C) 6 members appointed by the Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of
 the Subcommittee on Housing and Community Development of the Committee on
 Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The Secretary and the congressional leaders referred to in paragraph
 (1) shall each appoint as member of the Commission--
 (A) 2 individuals who are elected public officials at the Federal, State,
 or local level;
 (B) 2 individuals who are local public housing officials or representatives
 of public housing authorities with experience in eliminating unfit living
 conditions in severely distressed public housing projects;
 (C) 1 individual who is a tenant or a representative of tenants or a tenant
 organization; and
 (D) 1 individual who is a leader of business or labor or is a distinguished
 academic in the field of housing and urban development.
 (c) CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among
 members of the Commission.
 (d) QUORUM- A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute
 a quorum for the transaction of business.
 (e) VOTING- Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to 1 vote,
 which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the Commission.
 (f) VACANCIES- Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers,
 but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
 (g) PROHIBITION ON ADDITIONAL PAY- Members of the Commission shall serve
 without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence,
 and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties
 as members of the Commission.
SEC. 644. FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
 (a) IDENTIFICATION OF SEVERELY DISTRESSED PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECTS- The
 Commission shall identify those public housing projects that are in a
 severe state of distress, giving special attention to projects that--
 (1) contain more than 500 dwelling units,
 (2) have vacancy rates higher than 15 percent,
 (3) are occupied predominately by families with children,
 (4) contain high-rise elevator structures, and
 (5) meet such other criteria that the Commission determines to be evidence
 of unfit living conditions.
 (b) EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES- The Commission shall assess the
 most promising strategies to eliminate unfit living conditions in severely
 distressed public housing projects that have been implemented by public
 housing authorities, other Government agencies at the Federal, State,
 and local level, public housing tenants, and the private sector. Such
 strategies may include but shall not be limited to--
 (1) supplementary management measures;
 (2) the provision of supportive services to project residents, and, if
 necessary, the redesign of projects to accommodate such services;
 (3) the redesign of projects to reduce density and otherwise eliminate
 harmful design elements;
 (4) the conversion of projects to mixed-income housing developments; and
 (5) the total or partial demolition or disposition of projects. Evaluation
 of such strategies shall consider efforts to provide for replacement
 of public housing dwelling units that were demolished, disposed of or
 otherwise removed from use by low-income persons.
 (c) DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL ACTION PLAN- The Commission shall establish a
 national action plan to eliminate by the year 2000 unfit living conditions in
 public housing projects identified in subsection (a). The action plan shall--
 (1) specify objectives that the Department of Housing and Urban Development
 could achieve in cooperation with public housing authorities, public
 housing tenants, and other interested parties;
 (2) provide a schedule by which such objectives could be achieved;
 (3) recommend any legislative or administrative action that is necessary
 to achieve such objectives;
 (4) make recommendations regarding any necessary replacement of public
 housing; and
 (5) calculate, in accordance with the schedule established above, any
 impact on Federal expenditures necessary to achieve such objectives.
 (d) FINAL REPORT- Not later than 10 months after the Commission is
 established pursuant to section 643(a), the Commission shall submit to
 the Secretary and to the Congress a final report which shall contain the
 information, evaluations, and recommendations specified above.
SEC. 645. POWERS OF COMMISSION.
 (a) HEARINGS- The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this
 subtitle, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places as
 the Commission may find advisable.
 (b) RULES AND REGULATIONS- The Commission may adopt such rules and
 regulations as may be necessary to establish its procedures and to govern
 the manner of its operations, organization and personnel.
 (c) Assistance From Federal Agencies-
 (1) The Commission may secure directly from any department, agency,
 or instrumentality of the United States such data and information as the
 Commission may require for the purpose of this subtitle, including but not
 limited to comprehensive plans submitted by public housing authorities in
 accordance with section 14 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and
 applications submitted by public housing authorities requesting funds for the
 major reconstruction of public housing projects in accordance with section
 5 of such Act. Upon request of the Commission, any such department, agency,
 or instrumentality shall furnish such data or information. The Commission
 may acquire data or information directly from public housing authorities
 to the same extent the Secretary could acquire such data or information.
 (2) The General Services Administration shall provide to the Commission,
 on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the
 Commission may request.
 (3) Upon the request of the chairperson of the Commission, the Secretary
 of Housing and Urban Development shall, to the extent possible and subject
 to the discretion of the Secretary, detail any of the personnel of the
 Department of Housing and Urban Development, on a nonreimbursable basis,
 to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this subtitle.
 (d) MAILS- The Commission may use the United States mails in the same
 manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
 (e) CONTRACTING- The Commission may, to such extent and in such amounts as
 are provided in appropriations Acts, enter into contracts with private firms,
 institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or
 surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under
 this subtitle.
 (f) STAFF- (1) The Commission shall appoint an executive director of the
 Commission who shall be compensated at a rate fixed by the Commission, but
 which shall not exceed the rate established for level V of the Executive
 Schedule under title 5, United States Code.
 (2) In addition to the executive director, the Commission may appoint and
 fix the compensation of such personnel as it deems advisable, in accordance
 with the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments
 to the competitive service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter
 III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General
 Schedule pay rates.
 (g) ADVISORY COMMITTEE- The Commission shall be considered an advisory
 committee within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5
 U.S.C. App.).
SEC. 646. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 Of the total amount approved in appropriations Acts under section 9(c)
 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, there shall be set aside to
 carry out this subtitle $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $1,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991.
TITLE VII--RURAL HOUSING
SEC. 701. PURPOSE.
 The purposes of this title are--
 (1) to reaffirm the National commitment to expand homeownership and produce
 affordable rental housing for low-income persons in rural areas;
 (2) to promote the full utilization of the section 502 program by very
 low-income people through the use of partially deferred mortgages; and
 (3) to improve the quality of affordable housing in communities that have
 extremely high concentrations of poverty and substandard housing and that
 have been underserved by rural housing programs by directing Farmers Home
 Administration assistance toward designated underserved areas.
SEC. 702. PROGRAM AUTHORIZATIONS.
 (a) INSURANCE AND GUARANTEE AUTHORITY- Section 513(a)(1) of the Housing
 Act of 1949 is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) The Secretary may, to the extent approved in appropriation Acts,
 insure and guarantee loans under this title in aggregate amounts not to
 exceed $1,921,151,000 during fiscal year 1990 and $2,004,203,000 during
 fiscal year 1991, as follows:
 `(A) For insured or guaranteed loans under section 502 on behalf of borrowers
 receiving assistance under section 521(a)(1) or receiving guaranteed loans
 pursuant to section 304 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987,
 $1,318,650,000 for fiscal year 1990 and $1,375,650,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(B) For loans under section 504, $11,790,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $12,300,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(C) For insured loans under section 514, $11,950,000 for fiscal year 1990
 and $12,470,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(D) For insured loans under section 515, $577,650,000 for fiscal year
 1990 and $602,620,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(E) For loans under section 523(b)(1)(B), $521,000 for fiscal year 1990
 and $543,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(F) For site loans under section 524, $590,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $620,000 for fiscal year 1991.'.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- Section 513(b) of the Housing Act of
 1949 is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) There are authorized to be appropriated, to remain available until
 expended, the following amounts:
 `(1) For grants under section 504, $13,013,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $13,575,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(2) For purposes of section 509(c), $521,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $543,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(3) Such sums as may be necessary to meet payments on notes or other
 obligations issued by the Secretary under section 511 equal to--
 `(A) the aggregate of the contributions made by the Secretary in the form
 of credits on principal due on loans made pursuant to section 503; and
 `(B) the interest due on a similar sum represented by notes or other
 obligations issued by the Secretary.
 `(4) For financial assistance under section 516, $9,903,000 for fiscal
 year 1990 and $10,331,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(5) For grants under section 523(f), $8,328,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $8,688,000 for fiscal year 1991.
 `(6) For grants under section 533, $19,925,000 for fiscal year 1990 and
 $20,786,000 for fiscal year 1991.'.
 (c) RENTAL ASSISTANCE PAYMENT CONTRACTS- Section 513(c)(1) of the Housing
 Act of 1949 is amended to read as follows:
 `(c)(1) The Secretary, to the extent approved in appropriation Acts, may
 enter into rental assistance payment contracts under section 521(a)(2)(A)
 aggregating $286,600,000 for fiscal year 1990 and $298,990,000 for fiscal
 year 1991.'.
 (d) RENTAL HOUSING LOAN AUTHORITY- Section 515(b)(4) of the Housing Act of
 1949 is amended by striking `September 30, 1989' and inserting `September
 30, 1991'.
 (e) MUTUAL AND SELF-HELP HOUSING GRANT AND LOAN AUTHORITY- Section 523(f)
 of the Housing Act of 1949 is amended by striking `September 30, 1989'
 and inserting `September 30, 1991'.
SEC. 703. SECTION 502 DEFERRED REPAYMENT.
 Section 502 of the Housing Act of 1949 is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following:
 `(f) AUTHORITY FOR DEFERRED REPAYMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may allow a borrower to defer repayment of
 not more than 20 percent of the principal on a loan made or insured under
 this section if the Secretary determines that--
 `(A) the borrower resides in a State in which an average of 10 percent
 or more of the set-asides established in section 502(d) have not been
 obligated since November 30, 1983;
 `(B) the deferral is necessary to enable the borrower to afford payment
 on the loan; and
 `(C) the borrower can reasonably be expected fully to amortize the deferred
 principal over the remaining life of the loan.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT ADJUSTMENTS- When the Secretary finds that a borrower
 deferring repayments under this subsection is able to make an increased
 mortgage payment in accordance with the schedules and repayment plans
 prescribed by the Secretary under section 502(b)(2), the Secretary shall
 first apply any increase in the monthly mortgage payment to repayment of
 deferred principal and interest on that principal and then, when the deferral
 is eliminated, to an increase in the interest rate payable on the loan.
 `(3) INTEREST ON DEFERRED PRINCIPAL- Interest on the deferred principal
 shall remain at 1 percent until the deferral has been repaid in full.'.
SEC. 704. HOUSING IN UNDERSERVED AREAS.
 Section 509 of the Housing Act of 1949 is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following:
 `(e) HOUSING IN UNDERSERVED AREAS-
 `(1) DESIGNATION OF UNDERSERVED AREA- The Secretary shall designate as
 targeted underserved areas 30 counties and communities in fiscal year 1990,
 and 50 counties and communities in fiscal year 1991 that have severe, unmet
 housing needs as determined by the Secretary. A county or community shall
 be eligible for designation if, during the 10-year period preceding the
 year in which the designation is made, it has received an average annual
 amount of assistance under this title that is substantially lower than
 the average annual amount of such assistance received during that 10-year
 period by other counties and communities in the State that are eligible
 for such assistance calculated on a per capita basis, and has--
 `(A) 20 percent or more of its population at or below the poverty level; and
 `(B) 10 percent or more of its population in substandard housing.
As used in this paragraph, the term `poverty level' has the same meaning as
in section 102(a)(9) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.
 `(2) OUTREACH PROGRAM- The Secretary shall publicize the availability
 to targeted underserved areas of grants and loans under this title and
 promote, to the maximum extent feasible, efforts to apply for those grants
 and loans for housing in targeted underserved areas.
 `(3) SET-ASIDE FOR TARGETED UNDERSERVED AREAS- The Secretary shall set aside
 and reserve for assistance in targeted underserved areas an amount equal to
 1 percent in 1990 and 2 percent in fiscal 1991 of the aggregate amount of
 lending authority under sections 502, 504, 514, 515, and 524. During each
 such fiscal year, the Secretary shall set aside an amount of section 521
 rental assistance that is appropriate to provide assistance with respect
 to the lending authority under sections 514 and 515 that is set aside
 for such fiscal year. Any assistance set aside for targeted underserved
 areas that has not been expended by September 1 of a fiscal year shall be
 reallocated to other counties and communities that meet the requirements
 of targeted underserved areas set forth in paragraph (1).
 `(4) LIST OF UNDERSERVED AREAS- The Secretary shall publish the current
 list of targeted underserved areas in the Federal Register.
 `(5) Project preparation advances-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In order to promote the development of affordable housing
 in targeted underserved areas, the Secretary is authorized to provide
 advances in an amount not to exceed 80 percent of any reasonable and
 customary costs that are--
 `(i) incurred in the preparation of a preapplication for a loan under
 sections 502, 504, 514, 515, and 524 for housing to be located in a targeted
 underserved area; and
 `(ii) customarily included in the amount financed under such a loan.
 `(B) REPAYMENT- Repayment shall be made from the proceeds of a loan made
 under this title. In the event that the loan is not approved, repayment of
 the advance shall begin not later than 36 months after the date on which
 the advance is made, and the repayment shall be on terms similar to the
 terms on approved loans.
 `(C) GUIDELINES- The Secretary shall establish guidelines for the project
 preparation advance application process. The application shall include a
 budget for the costs of the loan preapplication and documentation that the
 funds to cover preapplication costs not advanced by the Secretary or the
 equivalent of those funds in the form of a loan or a donation of funds or
 services are available to the project preparation advance applicant.
 `(D) APPROVAL- The Secretary shall approve a properly submitted application
 or issue a written statement indicating the reasons for disapproval not
 later than 60 days after the receipt of the application.
 `(E) PREFERENCE- In carrying out any program under this title, the Secretary
 shall give a preference to an application for assistance that has been
 developed with project preparation advances under this paragraph, and to
 an application submitted by or on behalf of a sponsor that resides in the
 county or community to be served by the proposed housing.
 `(F) ELIGIBILITY- For the purpose of this paragraph, an eligible applicant
 may be a nonprofit organization or corporation, a State, a unit of
 general local government, or an agency of a State or unit of general
 local government.'.
SEC. 705. TRANSFER OF SECTION 502 INVENTORY FOR USE UNDER SECTION 515.
 Section 510(e)(3) of the Housing Act of 1949 is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' between `private nonprofit organizations' and `public
 bodies' and inserting a comma; and
 (2) by inserting `, or for profit entities, which have good records of
 providing low-income housing under section 515' after `public bodies'.
TITLE VIII--AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE
SEC. 801. LOW-INCOME HOUSING CREDIT.
 Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 out subsection (r).
TITLE IX--REPEALS AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
SEC. 901. AMENDMENT TO TITLE I OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACT
OF 1974.
 (a) Section 104(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
 is amended to read as follows: `Any grant made under section 106(b)
 shall be made only if the unit of general local government certifies that
 it is following a current housing affordability strategy which has been
 approved by the Secretary in accordance with section 105 of the National
 Affordable Housing Act or a housing assistance plan which was approved
 by the Secretary not later than 180 days after enactment of the National
 Affordable Housing Act.'.
SEC. 902. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS RELATING TO INVESTMENTS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO SECTION 5136 OF THE REVISED STATUTES- Paragraph Seven of
 section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended by striking
 `or' after `Federal National Mortgage Association' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `, the Government National HOME Corporation, or'.
 (b) AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK ACT-
 (1) INVESTMENTS BY BANKS- Section 11(h) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1431(h)) is amended by inserting `or the Government National
 HOME Corporation' after `Federal National Mortgage Association' the first
 place it appears.
 (2) INVESTMENT OF RESERVES- Section 16(a) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1436(a)) is amended by inserting `the Government National HOME
 Corporation,' after `the Federal National Mortgage Association'.
 (c) HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT- Section 5(c)(1)(F) of the Home Owners' Loan Act
 of 1933 (12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(1)(F)) is amended by inserting `, the Government
 National HOME Corporation' after `Federal National Mortgage Association,'.
 (d) GOVERNMENT CORPORATION CONTROL ACT- Section 9101(3) of title 31,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(N) the Government National HOME Corporation.'.
SEC. 903. COMPENSATION OF HOME CORPORATION OFFICIALS.
 (a) PRESIDENT- Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by
 adding at the end the following:
 `President, Government National HOME Corporation, Department of Housing
 and Urban Development.'.
 (b) VICE PRESIDENT- Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `Vice President, Government National HOME Corporation, Department of
 Housing and Urban Development.'.