HR 2629 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2629
To amend part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for
payment for physicians' services under the medicare program with reference
to a resource-based relative value scale.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 14, 1989
Mr. WAXMAN introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide for
payment for physicians' services under the medicare program with reference
to a resource-based relative value scale.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Medicare Physician Payment Reform Amendments
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. APPLICATION OF RESOURCE-BASED RELATIVE VALUE SCALE TO PHYSICIANS'
SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended
 by adding at the end the following new section:
`RESOURCE-BASED RELATIVE VALUE SCALE FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES
 `SEC. 1847. (a) APPLICATION DURING 1990 AFTER APRIL 1-
 `(1) TO ADJUSTMENT OF PREVAILING CHARGES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For physicians' services specified under paragraph (2)
 which are furnished under this part during 1990 on or after April 1, 1990,
 the Secretary shall provide for an adjustment in the prevailing charge
 otherwise applied. Such adjustment shall be equal to an increase or decrease
 of 1/5 of the amount by which the applicable reference fee schedule amount
 (as determined under paragraph (3)(A)) with respect to each such service is
 greater or less, respectively, than the prevailing charge otherwise applied
 with respect to the service. The prevailing charge for such a service, as
 so adjusted, shall be treated, for purposes of this part for all subsequent
 periods, as the prevailing charge determined under this part for 1990.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In the case of the class of physicians' services consisting
 of evaluation and management services (as defined in clause (ii)), the
 Secretary shall provide for the application of subparagraph (A) in such
 a manner as will result in a percentage increase (or decrease) equal
 to the weighted average of such an increase (or decrease, respectively)
 that the Secretary estimates would have occurred if subparagraph (A) had
 applied to individual evaluation and management services (rather than to
 the class of such services).
 `(ii) EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES- In clause (i), the term `evaluation
 and management services' means primary care (as defined in section
 1842(i)(2)) and also includes hospital medical services and consultations.
 `(2) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES COVERED- This subsection shall only apply
 to those physicians' services that are specified in Appendix A to the
 report of the Committee on Energy and Commerce to accompany H.R. 2629
 (`Medicare Physician Payment Reform Amendments of 1989'), 101st Congress,
 which specification is based on available data and the recommendations of
 the Physician Payment Review Commission.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF REFERENCE FEE SCHEDULE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall apply a reference fee schedule covering
 each of the physicians' services to which this subsection applies. The
 applicable reference fee schedule amounts specified in such schedule with
 respect to a physicians' service furnished in a fee schedule area shall
 represent the product of--
 `(i) the relative value for the service (specified under paragraph (4)),
 `(ii) the national standard conversion factor (specified under paragraph
 (5)), and
 `(iii) the geographic adjustment factor (specified under paragraph (6)(A))
 for the service for the fee schedule area.
 `(B) FEE SCHEDULE AREA DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `fee schedule
 area' means a locality used for purposes of computing payment amounts for
 physicians' services under section 1842(b).
 `(4) DETERMINATION OF RELATIVE-VALUE-
 `(A) APPLICATION OF RELATIVE VALUE SCALE- In applying this subsection,
 the Secretary shall use as the relative value for a physicians' service
 the sum of the relative values of the components for practice expenses and
 for physician work specified in Appendix A to the report of the Committee
 on Energy and Commerce to accompany H.R. 2629 (`Medicare Physician Payment
 Reform Amendments of 1989'), 101st Congress for such service, which values
 are based on the relative resources used with respect to such expenses
 and such work.
 `(B) DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS- In this subsection:
 `(i) PRACTICE EXPENSES- The component relating to practice expenses is based
 on the relative expenses of items (such as office rent, wages of personnel,
 etc.) comprising practice expenses (as defined in subsection (k)(2)).
 `(ii) PHYSICIAN WORK- The component relating to physician work is based
 on the relative resources (reflecting such factors as relative time and
 effort) relating to physician work.
 `(5) NATIONAL STANDARD CONVERSION FACTOR- The Secretary shall, by not later
 than February 1, 1990, establish (and report to Congress concerning)
 the national standard conversion factor to be used under paragraph
 (3)(A)(ii). Such factor shall be established in a manner so that the
 aggregate payments for physicians' services furnished under this part
 on or after April 1, 1990, and before January 1, 1991, will be the same
 as the aggregate of payments for such services if this subsection had
 not applied. In establishing such a factor, the Secretary shall provide
 for appropriate adjustments to take into account, in the precise manner
 specified in Appendix B of the report of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
 to accompany H.R. 2629 (`Medicare Physician Payment Reform Amendments of
 1989'), 101st Congress, changes in physician behavior due to the impact
 of this subsection, including changes in the volume and distribution of
 physicians' services furnished.
 `(6) GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT FACTORS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (3)(A)(iii), for each physicians'
 service for each fee schedule area there shall be a geographic adjustment
 factor equal to the sum of the geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor
 (specified in subparagraph (B)) and the geographic physician work adjustment
 factor (specified in subparagraph (C)) for the service and the area.
 `(B) GEOGRAPHIC COST-OF-PRACTICE ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (A), the `geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) the ratio of the relative value of the practice expense component for
 the service (specified in the Appendix A referred to in paragraph (4)(A)) to
 the total relative value for the service (as specified in such Appendix), and
 `(ii) the geographic cost-of-practice index value for the area, based on the
 relative costs of a mix of goods and services comprising practice expenses
 in that fee schedule area for a typical physicians' service compared to the
 national average of such costs for the service, as specified in Appendix C
 of the report of the Committee on Energy and Commerce to accompany H.R. 2629
 (`Medicare Physician Payment Reform Amendments of 1989').
 `(C) GEOGRAPHIC PHYSICIAN WORK ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (A), the `geographic physician work adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) 1, minus the ratio described in subparagraph (B)(i) for the service, and
 `(ii) the geographic physician work index value for the area, based on the
 relative value of physicians' work effort in that fee schedule area compared
 to the national average relative value of such work effort, as specified
 in Appendix C of the report of the Committee on Energy and Commerce to
 accompany H.R. 2629 (`Medicare Physician Payment Reform Amendments of 1989').
 `(b) APPLICATION IN 1991-
 `(1) TO FURTHER ADJUSTMENT OF PREVAILING CHARGES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For all physicians' services which are furnished under
 this part during 1991, the Secretary shall provide for an adjustment in
 the prevailing charge otherwise applied. Such adjustment shall be equal
 to an increase or decrease of 1/4 of the amount by which the applicable
 reference fee schedule amount (as determined under paragraph (2)(A))
 with respect to each service is greater or less, respectively, than the
 prevailing charge otherwise applied with respect to the service. The
 prevailing charge, as so adjusted, for such a service shall be treated,
 for purposes of this part for all subsequent periods, as the prevailing
 charge determined under this part for 1991 for the service.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES- Subparagraph (B)
 of subsection (a)(1) shall apply to subparagraph (A) of this paragraph in
 the same manner as it applies to subsection (a)(1)(A).
 `(C) COMPUTATION OF PREVAILING CHARGE LEVELS WITHOUT REGARD TO CUSTOMARY
 CHARGE LEVELS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this part (other
 than subparagraph (A)), the prevailing charge levels for physicians'
 services furnished during 1991 shall be the prevailing charge levels for
 such services furnished in 1990 increased by the percentage increase in
 the MEI applicable to 1991, and shall not be recomputed to reflect any
 change in the customary charges of physicians during any previous period.
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF REFERENCE FEE SCHEDULE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish, by October 1, 1990,
 a reference fee schedule covering each physicians' service. Except as
 provided in subparagraph (B), the applicable reference fee schedule amounts
 specified in such schedule with respect to a physicians' service furnished
 in a fee schedule area shall represent the product of--
 `(i) the relative value for the service (determined under paragraph (3)),
 `(ii) the national standard conversion factor (determined under paragraph
 (4)), and
 `(iii) the geographic adjustment factor (determined under paragraph (5)(B))
 for the service for the fee schedule area.
 `(B) ANESTHESIA SERVICES- In establishing a reference fee schedule for
 anesthesia services for which a relative value guide has been established
 under section 4048(b) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987,
 instead of the factors described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph
 (A), the Secretary shall use, to the extent practicable, such relative
 value guide, with appropriate adjustment of the conversion factor, in a
 manner to assure that the reference fee schedule amounts for anesthesia
 services in fee schedule areas are consistent with the reference fee schedule
 amounts for other services determined by the Secretary to be of comparable
 value in those areas. In applying the previous sentence, the Secretary
 shall adjust the reference fee schedule amounts by geographic adjustment
 factors in the same manner as such adjustment is made under subparagraph
 (A)(iii). The Secretary may provide for an overall percentage adjustment
 for anesthesia services under paragraph (1)(A) in a manner similar to
 the overall percentage adjustment provided for evaluation and management
 services under paragraph (1)(B).
 `(C) FEE SCHEDULE AREA DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `fee schedule
 area' means a locality used for purposes of computing payment amounts for
 physicians' services under section 1842(b).
 `(3) DETERMINATION OF RELATIVE VALUES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL-
 `(i) GENERAL RULE- The Secretary shall determine, using the best
 available information and taking into account the recommendations of the
 Physician Payment Review Commission, a relative value for each physicians'
 service. Each such relative value shall be the sum of the relative values of
 the components of each physicians' service, which values are based on the
 relative resources utilized with respect to each component in furnishing
 particular physicians' services.
 `(ii) NO VARIATION FOR SPECIALISTS- With respect to the computation of
 the relative value for each component for a service, the Secretary may
 not vary the relative values, for the same physicians' service, based on
 whether the physician furnishing the service is a specialist or based on
 the type of specialty of the physician.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN SERVICES-
 `(i) RADIOLOGY SERVICES- In establishing the relative value for radiology
 services (including radiologist services, as defined in section 1834(b)(6)),
 the Secretary shall base the relative value on the relative value scale
 developed under section 1834(b)(1)(A), with appropriate modifications
 of the relative value to assure that the relative value established for
 radiology services which are similar or related to other physicians'
 services are consistent with the relative value established for those
 similar or related services.
 `(ii) EXTRAPOLATION FOR OTHER SERVICES- In the case of physicians'
 services for which specific data are not available, the Secretary may
 extrapolate relative values based on related services for which data are
 available and shall specifically take into account recommendations of the
 Physician Payment Review Commission and the results of consultations with
 organizations representing physicians who provide such services.
 `(C) COMPONENTS- In this subsection, each of the following is a separate
 `component' with respect to a physicians' service:
 `(i) PRACTICE EXPENSES- A component relating to relative practice expenses,
 based on general categories of expenses (such as office rent, wages of
 personnel, etc.) comprising practice expenses.
 `(ii) PHYSICIAN WORK- A component relating to relative physician work
 (reflecting such factors as relative time and effort).
With respect to the computation of the relative values for the component
for practice expenses described in clause (i), the Secretary shall base such
computation on the best, readily available data, such as data from surveys
covering such expenses.
 `(4) NATIONAL STANDARD CONVERSION FACTOR- The Secretary shall, by not
 later than October 1, 1990, establish (and report to Congress concerning)
 the national standard conversion factor to be used under paragraph
 (2)(A)(ii). Such factor shall be established in a manner so that the
 aggregate payments for physicians' services under this part during 1991 will
 be the same as the aggregate of payments for such services if this subsection
 had not applied. In establishing such a factor, the Secretary shall take
 into account the recommendations of the Physician Payment Review Commission
 and the percentage increase in the MEI (as defined in section 1842(i)(3))
 and shall provide for appropriate adjustments to take into account changes
 in physician behavior due to the impact of this subsection, including
 changes in the volume and distribution of physicians' services furnished.
 `(5) GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT FACTORS-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC INDICES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall establish--
 `(I) an index which reflects the relative costs of the mix of goods and
 services comprising practice expenses in the different fee schedule areas
 compared to the national average of such costs, and
 `(II) an index which reflects the relative value of physicians' work effort
 in the different fee schedule areas compared to the national average of
 such work effort.
 `(ii) CLASS-SPECIFIC GEOGRAPHIC COST-OF-PRACTICE INDICES- The Secretary may
 establish more than one index under clause (i)(I) in the case of classes
 of physicians' services, if, because of differences in the mix of goods
 and services comprising practice expenses for the different classes of
 services, the application of a single index to different classes of such
 services would be substantially inequitable.
 `(B) COMPUTATION OF GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of paragraph
 (2)(A)(iii), for all physicians' services for each fee schedule area the
 Secretary shall establish a geographic adjustment factor equal to the
 sum of the geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor (specified in
 subparagraph (C)) and the geographic physician work adjustment factor
 (specified in subparagraph (D)) for the service and the area.
 `(C) GEOGRAPHIC COST-OF-PRACTICE ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (B), the `geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) the ratio of the relative value of the practice expense component for
 the service (as determined under paragraph (3)(A)) to the total relative
 value for the service (as determined under such paragraph), and
 `(ii) the geographic cost-of-practice index value for the area for the
 service, based on the index established under subparagraph (A)(i)(I) or
 (A)(ii) (as the case may be).
 `(D) GEOGRAPHIC PHYSICIAN WORK ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (B), the `geographic physician work adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) 1, minus the ratio described in subparagraph (C)(i) for the service, and
 `(ii) the geographic physician work index value for the area, based on
 the index established under subparagraph (A)(i)(II).
 `(6) REQUIRING TRANSITIONAL CODING OF BILLS SUBMITTED- In order to provide
 for the collection of data required to implement subsection (c)(1)(C),
 the Secretary may require, for bills submitted for physicians' services
 furnished during 1991, that the bills indicate the fee schedule area
 (described in subsection (c)(3)(C)(i)) and the classification and coding
 (described in subsection (c)(2)) with respect to the services.
 `(c) APPLICATION IN 1992-
 `(1) PAYMENT ON BASIS OF FEE SCHEDULE AMOUNT, SUBJECT TO ADJUSTMENT WITH
 RESPECT TO PREVAILING CHARGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, instead
 of payment under this part being based on an applicable percent (specified
 under section 1833 (a) or (b)) of the reasonable charges for the services,
 for physicians' services furnished in 1992 payment shall be based on such
 applicable percent of the lesser of--
 `(i) the actual charge for the services, or
 `(ii) the fee schedule amount (determined under paragraph (3)(A)) for the
 service, as adjusted under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) ADJUSTMENT WITH RESPECT TO PREVAILING CHARGE- For purposes of
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the adjustment of a fee schedule amount under this
 subparagraph for a service shall be an increase or decrease by 1/2 of the
 amount by which the prevailing charge level (specified in subparagraph
 (C)) for the service is greater or less, respectively, than such fee
 schedule amount.
 `(C) PREVAILING CHARGE LEVEL-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- In applying subparagraph (B), the prevailing charge
 level for a service shall be the prevailing charge level for that service
 furnished in 1991 (taking into account any affect of subsection (b)(1)(C))
 increased by the percentage increase in the MEI applicable to 1992.
 `(ii) ESTABLISHMENT OF PREVAILING CHARGE LEVEL WHERE RECLASSIFICATION OF
 SERVICE- In the case of a physicians' service which is reclassified or
 recoded under paragraph (2) or otherwise and for which specific service a
 prevailing charge level was not established for 1991, the Secretary shall
 provide for the construction of such proxy prevailing charge level for
 1991 as may be appropriate.
 `(iii) ESTABLISHMENT OF PREVAILING CHARGE LEVEL FOR NEW FEE SCHEDULE AREAS-
 If the fee schedule area in 1992 for a service is different from the fee
 schedule area in 1991 for that service, the Secretary shall provide for
 the computation of the prevailing charge level for the service for the new
 fee schedule area based on the weighted average of the prevailing charge
 levels that would otherwise have applied in the portions of the old fee
 schedule areas included in the new fee schedule area.
 `(D) COMPUTATION OF PREVAILING AND CUSTOMARY CHARGES-
 `(i) NO RECOMPUTATION OF CUSTOMARY CHARGES- The Secretary shall not
 require carriers to recompute customary charges for physicians' services,
 for purposes of payment with respect to such services furnished during or
 after 1992.
 `(ii) PREVAILING CHARGES- The Secretary shall not require carriers to
 recompute prevailing charges for physicians' services, for purposes of
 payment with respect to such services furnished after 1992.
 `(2) UNIFORM CLASSIFICATION AND CODING OF SERVICES, GLOBAL SURGICAL CODES,
 AND CODING OF EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES BY TIME- The Secretary
 shall make such changes in classification and coding of physicians'
 services furnished during or after 1992 as may be required--
 `(A) to provide for uniform classification and coding of the same physicians'
 services in all fee schedule areas;
 `(B) to classify and code, with a surgical procedure, related pre-operative
 and post-operative physicians' services; and
 `(C) to differentiate, in the classification and coding of evaluation and
 management services, the time used in providing different evaluation and
 management services.
 `(3) FEE SCHEDULE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection and succeeding subsections
 for a year, the Secretary shall establish, by not later than October 1
 before the year, a fee schedule covering each physicians' services. Except as
 provided in subparagraph (B), the applicable fee schedule amounts specified
 in such schedule with respect to a physicians' service furnished in a fee
 schedule area shall represent the product of--
 `(i) the relative value for the service (specified under paragraph (4)),
 `(ii) the national standard conversion factor (specified in paragraph
 (5)), and
 `(iii) the geographic adjustment factor for the service for the fee schedule
 area (specified in paragraph (6)(B)).
 `(B) ANESTHESIA SERVICES- In establishing a reference fee schedule for
 anesthesia services for which a relative value guide has been established
 under section 4048(b) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987,
 instead of the factors described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph
 (A), the Secretary shall use, to the extent practicable, such relative
 value guide, with appropriate adjustment of the conversion factor, in a
 manner to assure that the reference fee schedule amounts for anesthesia
 services in fee schedule areas are consistent with the reference fee
 schedule amounts for other services determined by the Secretary to be of
 comparable value in those areas. In applying the previous sentence, the
 Secretary shall adjust the reference fee schedule amounts by geographic
 adjustment factors in the same manner as such adjustment is made under
 subparagraph (A)(iii). In applying the previous sentence, the Secretary
 may provide for an overall percentage adjustment under paragraph (1)(A) a
 manner similar to the overall percentage adjustment provided for evaluation
 and management services under paragraph (1)(B).
 `(C) FEE SCHEDULE AREAS DEFINED-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, a `fee schedule area'
 shall be comprised of either--
 `(I) each State (in its entirety), or
 `(II) each metropolitan statistical area (or New England County Metropolitan
 area or comparable area recognized by the Secretary) and each portion of each
 State which is outside a metropolitan statistical area (or comparable area).
 `(ii) RECOMMENDATIONS TO CONGRESS- The Secretary shall report to Congress,
 by not later than July 1, 1991, on the Secretary's recommendation on whether
 fee schedule areas under this subsection should be the areas described in
 subclause (I) or subsection (II) of clause (i).
 `(4) RELATIVE VALUES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this paragraph, the Secretary shall
 determine relative values for each physicians' service in the same manner
 as such determination is made under subsection (b)(3).
 `(B) COMPONENTS- In this subsection, each of the following is a separate
 `component' with respect to a physicians' service:
 `(i) GENERAL PRACTICE EXPENSES- A component relating to relative practice
 expenses (as defined in subsection (k)(2) (which excludes malpractice
 expenses)), based on general categories of expenses (such as office rent,
 wages of personnel, etc.) comprising practice expenses.
 `(ii) MALPRACTICE EXPENSES- A component relating to relative malpractice
 expenses, based on the risk category of the class of services furnished
 (or the specialty of physicians providing the services).
 `(iii) PHYSICIAN WORK- A component relating to relative physician work
 (reflecting such factors as relative time and effort).
 `(5) NATIONAL STANDARD CONVERSION FACTOR- The Secretary shall, by not
 later than October 1, 1991, establish (and report to Congress concerning)
 the national standard conversion factor to be used under paragraph
 (3)(A)(ii). Such factor shall be established in a manner so that the
 aggregate payments for physicians' services under this part during 1992 will
 be the same as the aggregate of payments for such services if this section
 had not applied. In establishing such a factor, the Secretary shall take
 into account the recommendations of the Physician Payment Review Commission
 and the percentage increase in the MEI (as defined in section 1842(i)(3))
 and shall provide for appropriate adjustments to take into account changes
 in physician behavior due to the impact of this section, including changes
 in the volume and distribution of physicians' services furnished.
 `(6) GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT FACTORS-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC INDICES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall establish--
 `(I) an index which reflects the relative costs of the mix of goods and
 services comprising practice expenses (other than malpractice expenses)
 in the different fee schedule areas compared to the national average of
 such costs,
 `(II) an index which reflects the relative costs of malpractice expenses
 in the different fee schedule areas compared to the national average of
 such costs, and
 `(III) an index which reflects the relative value of physicians' work effort
 in the different fee schedule areas compared to the national average of
 such work effort.
 `(ii) CLASS-SPECIFIC GEOGRAPHIC COST-OF-PRACTICE INDICES- The Secretary may
 establish more than one index under clause (i)(I) in the case of classes
 of physicians' services, if, because of differences in the mix of goods
 and services comprising practice expenses for the different classes of
 services, the application of a single index under such clause to different
 classes of such services would be substantially inequitable.
 `(B) COMPUTATION OF GEOGRAPHIC ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of paragraph
 (2)(A)(iii), for all physicians' services for each fee schedule area the
 Secretary shall establish a geographic adjustment factor equal to the
 sum of the geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor (specified in
 subparagraph (C)), the geographic malpractice adjustment factor (specified
 in subparagraph (D)), and the geographic physician work adjustment factor
 (specified in subparagraph (E)) for the service and the area.
 `(C) GEOGRAPHIC COST-OF-PRACTICE ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (B), the `geographic cost-of-practice adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) the ratio of the relative value of the practice expense component for
 the service (as determined under paragraph (3)(A)) to the total relative
 value for the service (as determined under such paragraph), and
 `(ii) the geographic cost-of-practice index value for the area for the
 service, based on the index established under subparagraph (A)(i)(I) or
 (A)(ii) (as the case may be).
 `(D) GEOGRAPHIC MALPRACTICE ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of subparagraph
 (B), the `geographic malpractice adjustment factor', for a service for a
 fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) the ratio of the relative value of the malpractice expense component
 for the service (as determined under paragraph (3)(A)) to the total relative
 value for the service (as determined under such paragraph), and
 `(ii) the geographic malpractice index value for the area, based on the
 index established under subparagraph (A)(i)(II).
 `(E) GEOGRAPHIC PHYSICIAN WORK ADJUSTMENT FACTOR- For purposes of
 subparagraph (B), the `geographic physician work adjustment factor',
 for a service for a fee schedule area, is the product of--
 `(i) 1, minus the sum of the ratios described in subparagraphs (C)(i) and
 (D)(i) for the service, and
 `(ii) the geographic physician work index value for the area, based on
 the index established under subparagraph (A)(i)(III).
 `(d) APPLICATION IN 1993 AND SUCCEEDING YEARS- The provisions of subsection
 (c) shall apply to physicians' services furnished during 1993 and succeeding
 years in the same manner as they apply to physicians' services furnished
 during 1992, except as follows:
 `(1) PAYMENT ON BASIS OF FEE SCHEDULE AMOUNT- In applying (by reference)
 subsection (c)(1)(A), there shall be no adjustment made under subparagraph
 (B) thereof (relating to an adjustment with respect to prevailing charge).
 `(2) ADJUSTMENTS IN RELATIVE VALUES AND GEOGRAPHIC INDEX FACTORS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, taking into account recommendations made
 by the Physician Payment Review Commission, may provide--
 `(i) from time to time for the establishment of relative values for
 physicians' services for which such values have not previously been
 established, and
 `(ii) subject to subparagraph (B), annually for such adjustments in the
 relative values and in the geographic adjustment factors used for purposes
 of this subsection,
as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 `(B) BUDGET NEUTRALITY IN ANNUAL ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary may not make
 adjustments under subparagraph (A)(ii) which are intended or designed
 to result in an overall increase or decrease in the aggregate amount of
 payments to be made under this part for physicians' services.
 `(3) NATIONAL STANDARD CONVERSION FACTOR- Instead of applying subsection
 (c)(5) (by reference), the Secretary shall, by not later than October 1
 before the year involved, establish (and report to Congress concerning) the
 national standard conversion factor to be used for the year involved. Such
 factor for a year shall be the conversion factor established for the previous
 year adjusted by the projected percentage change, between the midpoint of the
 previous year and the midpoint of the year involved, in an appropriate index
 (established by the Secretary) that reflects the value of the resources
 (including practice expenses, malpractice expenses, and physician work
 effort) used in furnishing physicians' services. In establishing such index,
 the Secretary shall take into account the recommendations of the Physician
 Payment Review Commission.
 `(e) [reserved]
 `(f) [reserved]
 `(g) [reserved]
 `(h) [reserved]
 `(i) [reserved]
 `(j) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS-
 `(1) EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION- In order to implement
 subsections (a) and (b) on a timely basis, the Secretary may provide for
 publication of regulations on an interim, final basis and chapter 35 of
 title 44, United States Code, and Executive Order 12291 shall not apply
 to information and regulations required for purposes of carrying out
 such subsection.
 `(2) RESTRICTION ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW- There shall be no
 administrative or judicial review under section 1869 or otherwise of--
 `(A) the percentage adjustments for evaluation and management services
 under subsection (a)(1)(B)(i);
 `(B) the relative values established for physicians' services under this
 section, including the relative value of components of services;
 `(C) the national standard conversion factors established under this section;
 `(D) the geographic indices and adjustment factors established under this
 section; and
 `(E) the selection of fee schedule areas under subsection (c)(3)(B).
 `(k) DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 `(1) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES DEFINED- The term `physicians' services' includes
 items and services described in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 1861(s)
 (other than clinical diagnostic laboratory tests) furnished in connection
 with other physicians' services.
 `(2) PRACTICE EXPENSES DEFINED-
 `(A) 1990 AND 1991- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term
 `practice expenses' includes all expenses for furnishing physicians'
 services, including malpractice expenses, but excluding physician
 compensation and other physician fringe benefits.
 `(B) 1992 AND THEREAFTER- For purposes of subsections other than subsections
 (a) and (b), the term `practice expenses' does not include malpractice
 expenses.'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON EXTRA BILLING FOR 1991 AND THEREAFTER- Section 1842(j)(1)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(j)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) in clause (i), by striking `(B)(i) During any period (on or after January
 1, 1987, and before the date specified in clause (ii))' and inserting `(B)
 During any period (on or after January 1, 1987)',
 (B) in the second sentence of clause (i), by striking `maximum allowable
 actual charge determined' and inserting `actual charge permitted', and
 (C) by striking clause (ii); and
 (2) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows:
 `(C)(i) For a particular physicians' service furnished by a nonparticipating
 physician to individuals enrolled under this part during a year, for purposes
 of subparagraph (B), the actual charge may not exceed 120 percent of the
 reference payment amount described in clause (ii) for the year.
 `(ii) For purposes of clause (i), the reference payment amount for--
 `(I) 1991, is the prevailing charge level for the services for the year
 increased or decreased by 1/4 of the amount by which the applicable
 reference fee schedule amount (determined under section 1847(b)(2)(A))
 with respect to the services is greater or less, respectively, than such
 prevailing charge level;
 `(II) 1992, is the fee schedule amount (determined under section
 1847(c)(2)(A)) with respect to the services increased or decreased by 1/2
 of the amount by which the prevailing charge level otherwise applied with
 respect to the services is greater or less, respectively, than such fee
 schedule amount; or
 `(III) 1993 and any succeeding year, is the fee schedule amount (determined
 pursuant to section 1847(d)) with respect to the services.'.
 (c) ROLE OF PHYSICIAN PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION- Section 1845(b)(3)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-1(b)(3)) is amended by striking all that
 follows `Secretary' and inserting the following: `respecting the payment
 methodology established under section 1847, specifically including (A)
 the relative values established under such section, and any adjustments
 to such values, (B) the national conversion factors to be applied, and
 (C) the geographic adjustment factors.'.
 (d) MISCELLANEOUS CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) DELAY IN GROUPING OF CODES FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- Section 9331(d)(2)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 is amended by striking
 `January 1, 1990' and inserting `January 1, 1993'.
 (2) CHANGING REFERENCES TO MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE ACTUAL CHARGES- Section
 1842(b)(3)(G) of the Social Security Act is amended by striking `maximum
 allowable actual charges (established under subsection (j)(1)(C))' and
 inserting `limiting charge established under subsection (j)(1)(C)'.
 (3) DIFFERENTIAL FOR PARTICIPATING PHYSICIANS- Effective for physicians'
 services furnished on or after January 1, 1992, the first sentence of
 section 1842(b)(4)(C)(iv) of the Social Security Act is amended by striking
 `prevailing charge levels' and all that follows through the end and inserting
 `fee schedule amount (or, for 1992, adjusted fee schedule amount) provided
 for under section 1847.'.
 (4) PAYMENT FOR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS- Section 1842(b)(12)(A)(ii)(II) of the
 Social Security Act is amended by inserting `(or, for services furnished on
 or after January 1, 1992, the adjusted fee schedule amount or fee schedule
 amount specified in subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii) or (d)(1) of section 1847,
 as the case may be)' after `prevailing charge rate for such services'.
 (5) PAYMENT FOR CERTIFIED REGISTERED NURSE ANESTHETISTS- Section
 1833(a)(1)(H) of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting `(or, for
 services furnished on or after January 1, 1992, the adjusted fee schedule
 amount or fee schedule amount specified in subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii) or
 (d)(1) of section 1847, as the case may be)' after `prevailing charge that
 would be recognized'.
 (6) PAYMENT FOR RADIOLOGIST SERVICES- Section 1833(a)(1)(J) of the Social
 Security Act is amended by inserting `subject to section 1847,' after
 `1834(b)(6)),'.
 (7) PAYMENT FOR NURSE MIDWIVES- Section 1833(a)(1)(K) of the Social
 Security Act is amended by inserting `, or, for services furnished on or
 after January 1, 1992, 65 percent of the adjusted fee schedule amount
 or fee schedule amount specified in subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii) or (d)(1)
 of section 1847, as the case may be, for the same service performed by a
 physician' after `for the same service performed by a physician'.
 (8) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH END STAGE RENAL DISEASE-
 Section 1881(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting
 `or, for services furnished on or after January 1, 1992, on the basis
 described in section 1847' after `comparable services'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section,
 the amendments made by this section shall apply to physicians' services
 furnished on or after April 1, 1990.
 (2) The amendments made by subsection (b) (relating to limitation on extra
 billing) shall apply to physicians' services furnished after December
 31, 1990.
 (3) The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to reports beginning
 with the report for 1990.