HR 1361 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1361
To amend title 18, United States Code, with respect to firearms.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 9, 1989
Mr. RUSSO introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend title 18, United States Code, with respect to firearms.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Federal Firearms Act of 1985'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DEFINITIONS AMENDMENTS- Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by inserting the following new paragraphs immediately after
 paragraph (3):
 `(4) Except as otherwise provided, the term `handgun' means any firearm
 which has a short stock and which is designed to be fired by the use of
 a single hand.
 `(5) the term `pistol' means a handgun having a chamber or chambers as an
 integral part of, or permanently aligned with, the bore or bores.
 `(6) The term `revolver' means a handgun having a breechloading chambered
 cylinder so arranged that the cocking of the hammer or movement of the
 trigger rotates the cylinder and brings the successive cartridges in line
 with the barrel for firing.
 `(7)(A) The term `concealable handgun' means--
 `(i) a revolver having--
 `(I) a frame which measures less than five and three-fourths inches in
 length measured from the end of the frame nearest the muzzle, parallel to
 the line of the bore, to the rearmost portion of the frame,
 `(II) a barrel which measures less than four inches in length, or
 `(III) an overall length (assembled frame and barrel) of less than nine
 inches; or
 `(ii) a pistol having an overall length of less than eight and one-half
 inches measured on a line parallel to the barrel from the muzzle of the
 barrel to the rearmost portion of the frame.
 `(B)(i) In the case of a single action revolver, the frame measurement
 for the purposes of this paragraph includes the backstrap and trigger
 guard component.
 `(ii) In the case of a revolver, the barrel for the purposes of this
 definition constitutes that portion of the revolver from which the bullet
 is expelled after leaving the cylinder.
 `(iii) As used in this paragraph and in section 922(o) of this chapter,
 the term `frame' does not include handgrips.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Such section 921(a), as amended by subsection
 (a) of this section, is further amended by redesignating paragraphs (4)
 through (20) as paragraphs (8) through (24), respectively.
 (2) Section 845(a)(5) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by striking out `(a)(16)' and inserting `(a)' in lieu thereof; and
 (B) by striking out `(a)(4)' and inserting `(a)' in lieu thereof.
SEC. 3. SECTION 922 AMENDMENTS.
 Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the
 end the following new subsections:
 `(n) It shall be unlawful for any person to modify a handgun if as a
 result of such modification the handgun no longer meets the requirements
 set forth in subsection (o)(1) of this section.
 `(o)(1) Except as provided in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for any
 person licensed under section 923 of this chapter knowingly to manufacture,
 sell, deliver, or otherwise transfer or knowingly to receive any concealable
 handgun, or manufacture, sell, deliver, or otherwise transfer any handgun
 which does not meet the following requirements:
 `(A) In the case of a revolver, the handgun has--
 `(i) a safety device which, either by automatic operation in the case
 of a double action firing mechanism or by manual operation or automatic
 operation in the case of a single action firing mechanism, causes the
 hammer or transfer bar to retract to a point where the firing pin does
 not rest upon the primer of the cartridge, and which, once activated, is
 capable of withstanding the impact of weight equal to the weight of the
 revolver dropped a total of five times from a height of thirty-six inches
 above the rear of the hammer spur onto the rear of the hammer spur with the
 revolver in a position such that the line of the barrel is perpendicular
 to the place of the horizon; or a safety device equal to or superior to
 those listed above in this clause (i); and
 `(ii) a frame made of steel or high tensile strength alloy, having an
 ultimate tensile strength of at least fifty-five thousand pounds per
 square inch.
 `(B) In the case of a pistol, the handgun has--
 `(i) a positive manually operated safety device, or a safety device equal
 to or superior to the manually operated safety device; and
 `(ii) a frame made of steel or high tensile strength alloy, having an
 ultimate tensile strength of at least fifty-five thousand pounds per
 square inch.
 `(2) This subsection shall not apply to the sale, delivery, or other
 transfer of any handgun manufactured prior to the effective date of this
 subsection if such handgun is (A) intended for use in testing or analysis
 by any research organization designated by the Secretary; (B) intended
 for use by the United States, a State or any department or agency, or
 political subdivision of either the United States or a State; or (C)
 a curio or relic, as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
 `(3) It shall not be unlawful under paragraph (1) of this subsection to
 manufacture, sell, deliver, or otherwise transfer a concealable handgun
 which does not meet the qualifications set forth in paragraph (1) of this
 subsection to or for a governmental entity listed in subsection (a)(2)(B)
 of this section, or to or for the use in official duty of any officer,
 employee, agent, or watchman who, under section 1715 of this title,
 is eligible to receive through the mails pistols, revolvers, and other
 firearms capable of being concealed on the person.'.
SEC. 4. SECTION 925 AMENDMENTS.
 Section 925 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by striking out `determined by the Secretary of the
 Treasury to be generally recognized as particularly suitable for sporting
 purposes and' and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `which is not
 a concealable handgun or a handgun which fails to meet the requirements
 set forth in section 922(o)(1), and which the Secretary determines is';
 (2) in subsection (a)(4)(A), by striking out `determined by the Secretary
 to be generally suitable for sporting purposes' and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following: `which is not a concealable handgun or a handgun
 which fails to meet the requirements set forth in section 922(o)(1)'; and
 (3) in subsection (d)(3), by striking out `generally recognized as
 particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes' and
 inserting in lieu thereof the following: `not a concealable handgun or a
 handgun which does not meet the requirements set forth in section 922(o)(1)'.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect ninety days
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.