Calendar No. 979
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3194
A BILL
Entitled the `Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer
Recovery Act of 1990'.
October 12 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Placed on the calendar
S 3194 PCS
Calendar No. 979
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 S. 3194
Entitled the `Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer
Recovery Act of 1990'.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 12 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Mr. BIDEN, from the Committee on the Judiciary, reported the following bill
which was read twice and placed on the calendar
A BILL
Entitled the `Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud Prosecution and Taxpayer
Recovery Act of 1990'.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
TABLE OF CONTENTS--
SUBSTITUTE SAVINGS AND LOAN FRAUD BILL LANGUAGE
Sec. 1. Short Title.
TITLE I--BANK FRAUD AND EMBEZZLEMENT PENALTIES
Sec. 101. Concealment of assets from an appropriate Federal banking agency.
Sec. 102. Prohibition on control of or participation in depository institution
by certain convicted persons.
Sec. 103. Crime of obstructing an examiner.
Sec. 104. Increasing bank fraud and embezzlement penalties.
Sec. 105. Statute of limitations for RICO offenses involving financial
institutions.
Sec. 106. Money laundering involving bank crimes.
Sec. 107. Increased penalties in major bank crime cases.
Sec. 108. Restoration of property for victims of bank crimes.
Sec. 109. Enhancement of ability to order restitution in certain fraud cases.
Sec. 110. Financial crime kingpin statute.
Sec. 111. Authority for United States magistrates.
Sec. 112. Civil actions under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act.
TITLE II--PROTECTING ASSETS FROM WRONGFUL DISPOSITION
Sec. 201. Injunctive relief; prejudgment attachments.
Sec. 202. Nondischarge of debts in Federal bankruptcy involving obligations
arising from a breach of fiduciary duty; disallowing use of bankruptcy to
evade commitments to maintain the capital of a federally insured depository
institution or to evade civil or criminal liability.
Sec. 203. Fraudulent conveyances avoidable by conservators, receivers,
and liquidating agents.
Sec. 204. Regulation of golden parachutes and other benefits which are
subject to misuse.
Sec. 205. Amendments relating to civil forfeiture.
Sec. 206. Civil and criminal forfeiture for fraud in sale of assets by the
Resolution Trust Corporation, FDIC, or NCUA.
Sec. 207. Prohibition on acquisitions from conservators and receivers of
depository institutions by convicted felons.
Sec. 208. Priority of certain claims.
Sec. 209. Expedited procedures for certain claims.
TITLE III--IMPROVED PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING BANKING-RELATED CASES
Sec. 301. Wiretap authority for bank fraud and related offenses: technical
amendments to wiretap law.
Sec. 302. Foreign investigations by federal banking agencies and investigations
on behalf of foreign banking authorities.
Sec. 303. Extension of statute of limitations for civil penalties.
Sec. 304. Clarification of subpoena authority for FDIC, RTC, and NCUA acting
as conservator, receiver or liquidating agent.
TITLE IV--STRUCTURAL REFORMS TO IMPROVE THE FEDERAL RESPONSE TO CRIMES
AFFECTING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Sec. 401. Establishment of financial institutions crime unit and office of
special counsel for financial institutions crime unit.
Sec. 402. Appointment responsibilities and compensation of the special counsel.
Sec. 403. Assignment of personnel.
Sec. 404. Financial Institutions fraud task forces.
Sec. 405. Interagency coordination.
Sec. 406. RTC enforcement division.
TITLE V--REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 501. Reporting requirements.
Sec. 502. Report on court business impact of savings and loan crisis.
Sec. 511. Disclosure of civil enforcement actions.
TITLE VI--NATIONAL COMMISSION ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTION REFORM, RECOVERY,
AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 601. Establishment.
Sec. 602. Duties of the Commission.
Sec. 603. Membership.
Sec. 604. Powers of Commission; hearings and sessions.
Sec. 605. Staff of Commission; experts and consultants.
Sec. 606. Report.
Sec. 607. Termination.
Sec. 608. Authorization of appropriations.
TITLE VII--AUTHORIZATIONS
Sec. 701. Additional funding for investigators and prosecutors for bank
crime cases.
TITLE VIII--PRIVATE ACTIONS AGAINST PERSONS COMMITTING BANK FRAUD CRIMES
Sec. 801. Short title.
Sec. 802. Filing of confidential declarations by private persons.
Sec. 803. Contents of declarations.
Sec. 804. Confidentiality of declarations.
Sec. 805. Ineligibility to file valid declarations.
Sec. 806. Rights of declarants: participation in actions, awards.
Sec. 807. Rights of declarants: notifications; government accountability.
Sec. 808. Unreviewed declarations: request to pursue action as private
contractor.
Sec. 809. Nonreviewability of action by the Attorney General.
Sec. 810. Financial institution information award fund.
Sec. 811. Sources of payments to declarants.
Sec. 812. Government accountability: public reports on processing of
declarations.
Sec. 813. Protection for declarants.
Sec. 814. Promulgation of regulations.
Sec. 815. Filing of confidential declarations by private persons identifying
specific assets.
Sec. 816. Contents of declarations.
Sec. 817. Confidentiality of declarations.
Sec. 818. Ineligibility to file valid declarations.
Sec. 819. Rights of declarants: participation in actions, awards.
Sec. 820. Rights of declarants: notifications; government accountability.
Sec. 821. Unreviewed declarations: request to pursue actions as private
contractor.
Sec. 822. Nonreviewability of action by the Attorney General.
Sec. 823. Protection for declarants.
Sec. 824. Promulgation of regulations.
Sec. 825. Reward for information leading to recoveries or civil penalties.
Sec. 826. Reward for information leading to possible prosecution.
Sec. 827. Authority to enter into contracts for private counsel.
Sec. 828. Referral by regulatory agencies.
Sec. 829. Contract decisions nonreviewable.
Sec. 830. Representation.
Sec. 831. Contract provisions.
Sec. 832. Counterclaims.
Sec. 833. Contingent fees.
Sec. 834. Awards of costs and fees to prevailing plaintiff.
Sec. 835. Promulgation of regulations.
TITLE IX--TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS
Sec. 901. Title 18 of the United States Code.
Sec. 902. Right to Financial Privacy Act.
Sec. 903. Technical amendment to FOIC Act.
Sec. 904. Section 656 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 905. Section 1005 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 906. Section 215 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 907. Section 1014 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 908. Section 1341 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 909. Section 1343 of title 18, United States Code.
Sec. 910. Section 1344 of title 18, United States Code.
TITLE X--OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION AMENDMENTS
Sec. 1001. Cease-and-desist orders.
Sec. 1002. Technical amendments to the Home Owners' Loan Act the and Bank
Conservation Act.
XI--CLARIFYING APPLICATION OF U.S. BANKING OFFENSES TO FOREIGN BANKS OPERATING
IN THE UNITED STATES
Sec. 1101. Financial institution defined.
Sec. 1102. Offer of loan or gratuity to bank examiners.
Sec. 1103. Acceptance of loan or gratuity by bank examiner.
Sec. 1104. Custodians, generally, misusing public funds.
Sec. 1105. Theft by bank examiner.
Sec. 1106. Theft, embezzlement, or misapplication by bank officer or employee.
Sec. 1107. Certification of checks.
Sec. 1108. Bank entries, reports and transactions.
Sec. 1109. Loan and credit applications generally; renewals and discounts;
crop insurance.
Sec. 1110. Fraud and related activity in connection with computers.
Sec. 1111. Disclosure of information from a bank examination report.
Sec. 1112. Bank robbery and incidental crimes.
TITLE I--BANK FRAUD AND EMBEZZLEMENT PENALTIES
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Comprehensive Thrift and Bank Fraud
 Prosecution and Taxpayer Recovery Act of 1990'.
SEC. 101. CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS FROM AN APPROPRIATE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by
 adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 1032. CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS FROM CONSERVATOR, RECEIVER, TRUSTEE,
OR LIQUIDATING AGENT OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
 `Whoever--
 `(1) knowingly conceals or endeavors to conceal an asset or property from
 an appropriate Federal banking agency (as defined in section 3(q) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(q)), or the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, whether such agency or corporation is acting as an agency, in
 a corporate capacity, or as a conservator, receiver, trustee or liquidating
 agent of a financial institution;
 `(2) knowingly impedes or endeavors to impede the functions of such agency
 or Corporation, whether such agency or corporation is acting as an agency,
 in a corporate capacity, or as a conservator, receiver, trustee or
 liquidating agent of a financial institution; or
 `(3) knowingly, with intent to conceal, impede, deceive, or defraud,
 places or endeavors to place an asset or property beyond the reach of such
 agency or Corporation, whether such agency or corporation is acting as an
 agency, in a corporate capacity, or as a conservator, receiver, trustee
 or liquidating agent of a financial institution,
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 47 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 1031 the following new item:
`1032. Concealment of assets from conservator, receiver, trustee, or
liquidating agent of financial institution.'.
SEC. 102. PROHIBITION ON CONTROL OF OR PARTICIPATION IN DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION
BY CERTAIN CONVICTED PERSONS.
 (a) FDIC INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- Section 19(a) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) PROHIBITION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except with the prior written consent of the Corporation--
 `(A) any person who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving
 dishonesty or a breach of trust, or has agreed to enter into a pretrial
 diversion or similar program in connection with a prosecution for such
 offense, may not--
 `(i) become, or continue as, an institution-affiliated party with respect
 to any insured depository institution;
 `(ii) own or control, directly or indirectly, any insured depository
 institution; or
 `(iii) otherwise participate, directly or indirectly, in the conduct of
 the affairs of any insured depository institution; and
 `(B) any insured depository institution may not permit any person referred
 to in subparagraph (A) to engage in any conduct or continue any relationship
 prohibited under such subparagraph.'.
 (b) NCUA INSURED CREDIT UNIONS- Section 205(d) of the Federal Credit Union
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1785(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) PROHIBITION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except with the prior written consent of the Board--
 `(A) any person who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving
 dishonesty or a breach of trust, or has agreed to enter into a pretrial
 diversion or similar program in connection with a prosecution for such
 offense, may not--
 `(i) become, or continue as, an institution-affiliated party with respect
 to any insured credit union; or
 `(ii) otherwise participate, directly or indirectly, in the conduct of
 the affairs of any insured credit union; and
 `(B) any insured credit union may not permit any person referred to in
 subparagraph (A) to engage in any conduct or continue any relationship
 prohibited under such subparagraph.'.
SEC. 103. CRIME OF OBSTRUCTING AN EXAMINER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 73 of title 18, United States Code (relating to
 obstruction of justice) is amended by inserting after section 1516 the
 following new section:
`SEC. 1517. OBSTRUCTING EXAMINATION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
 `Whoever, with intent to conceal a material fact or deceive or defraud any
 person, knowingly withholds, conceals, destroys, or falsifies any documentary
 material relating to a financial institution, or otherwise obstructs or
 endeavors to obstruct, any examination of a financial institution by an
 agency of the United States with jurisdiction to conduct an examination of
 such financial institution or the functions and duties of the Resolution
 Trust Corporation shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more
 than 5 years, or both.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 73 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 1516 the following new item:
`1517. Obstructing examination of financial institution.'.
SEC. 104. INCREASING BANK FRAUD AND EMBEZZLEMENT PENALTIES.
 (a) RECEIPT OF COMMISSIONS OR GIFTS FOR PROCURING LOANS- Section 215(a) of
 title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20' and inserting `30'.
 (b) THEFT, EMBEZZLEMENT, OR MISAPPLICATION BY BANK OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE-
 Section 656 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20'
 and inserting `30'.
 (c) LENDING, CREDIT, AND INSURANCE INSTITUTIONS- Section 657 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by striking `20' and inserting `30'.
 (d) BANK ENTRIES, REPORTS, AND TRANSACTIONS- Section 1005 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by striking `20' and inserting `30'.
 (e) FEDERAL CREDIT INSTITUTION ENTRIES, REPORTS, AND TRANSACTIONS- Section
 1006 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20' and
 inserting `30'.
 (f) FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION TRANSACTIONS- Section 1007 of
 title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20' and inserting `30'.
 (g) FALSE STATEMENTS IN LOAN, CREDIT, AND CROP INSURANCE APPLICATIONS-
 Section 1014 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20'
 and inserting `30'.
 (h) FRAUDS AND SWINDLES AFFECTING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS- The last sentence
 of section 1341 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking
 `20' and inserting `30'.
 (i) WIRE FRAUDS AFFECTING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS- The last sentence of
 section 1343 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking `20'
 and inserting `30'.
 (j) BANK FRAUD- Section 1344 of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by striking `20' and inserting `30'.
SEC. 105. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR RICO OFFENSES INVOLVING FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 3293 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (2) by inserting `or' at the end of paragraph (2); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) section 1963, to the extent that the racketeering activity involves
 a violation of section 1344;'.
 (b) SCOPE OF APPLICATION- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply
 to any offense committed before the date of the enactment of this section,
 if the statute of limitations applicable to that offense had not run as
 of such date.
SEC. 106. MONEY LAUNDERING INVOLVING BANK CRIMES.
 Section 1956(c)(7)(D) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `section 1005 (relating to fraudulent bank entries),
 section 1006 (relating to fraudulent Federal credit institutions entries),
 section 1007 (relating to Federal Deposit Insurance transactions), section
 1014 (relating to fraudulent loan or credit applications), section 1032
 (relating to concealment of assets),' after `section 875 (relating to
 interstate communications),'; and
 (2) by inserting `section 1341 (relating to mail fraud) or section 1343
 (relating to wire fraud) affecting an insured depository institution,'
 after `section 1203 (relating to hostage taking)'.
SEC. 107. INCREASED PENALTIES IN MAJOR BANK CRIME CASES.
 (a) INCREASED PENALTIES- Pursuant to section 994 of title 28, United
 States Code, and section 21 of the Sentencing Act of 1987, the United
 States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate guidelines, or amend existing
 guidelines, to provide that a defendant convicted of violating section 215,
 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, or 1344 of title 18, United States Code,
 or section 1341 or 1343 affecting a financial institution (as defined in
 section 20 of title 18, United States Code), shall be assigned not less
 than offense level 24 under chapter 2 of the sentencing guidelines if the
 defendant derives more than $1,000,000 in gross receipts from the offense.
 (b) AMENDMENTS TO SENTENCING GUIDELINES- If the sentencing guidelines
 are amended after the effective date of this section, the Sentencing
 Commission shall implement the instruction set forth in subsection (a)
 so as to achieve a comparable result.
SEC. 108. RESTORATION OF PROPERTY FOR VICTIMS OF BANK CRIMES.
 Section 981(e) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking out `or' at the end of paragraph (4);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting a
 semicolon; and
 (3) by adding after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph:
 `(6) in the case of property referred to in subsection (a)(1)(C), restore
 forfeited property to any victim of an offense described in subsection
 (a)(1)(C); or'.
SEC. 109. ENHANCEMENT OF ABILITY TO ORDER RESTITUTION IN CERTAIN FRAUD CASES.
 Section 3663(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(a)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) For the purposes of restitution, a victim of an offense means (i) with
 respect to an offense that involves as an element a scheme, a conspiracy,
 or a pattern of criminal activity, any person directly harmed by the
 defendant's criminal conduct in the course of the scheme, conspiracy,
 or pattern, or (ii) any victim of a banking law violation (as defined
 in section 3322 of this title) irrespective of whether the defendant was
 convicted of an offense involving that victim or of an offense involving
 the property of the victim for which restitution is to be ordered.
 `(3) The court may also order restitution in any criminal case to the
 extent provided in a plea agreement.'.
SEC. 110. FINANCIAL CRIME KINGPIN STATUTE.
 (a) CONTINUING FINANCIAL CRIME ENTERPRISES- Chapter 11 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`Sec. 226. Continuing financial crimes enterprise
 `(a) Any person who engages in a continuing financial crime enterprise
 shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than 10 years
 and which may be up to life imprisonment, to a fine not to exceed the
 greater of that authorized in accordance with the provisions of title 18,
 or $10,000,000 if the defendant is an individual, or $20,000,000 if the
 defendant is other than an individual.
 `(b) For purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person is engaged
 in a continuing financial crime enterprise if--
 `(1) the person violates section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014,
 or 1344 of this title; and
 `(2) the violation is a part of a continuing series of violations under
 section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, or 1344 of this title--
 `(A) that are undertaken by the person in concert with 3 or more persons
 with respect to whom the person occupies a position of organizer, supervisor,
 or other position of management,
 `(B) from which the person has received $5,000,000 in gross receipts during
 any 24-month period.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 11 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new item:
`226. Continuing Financial Crime Enterprise.'.
SEC. 111. AUTHORITY FOR UNITED STATES MAGISTRATES.
 Subsection 636(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3) by striking `and' at the end thereof;
 (2) in paragraph (4) by striking the period at the end thereof and inserting
 `; and'
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(5) the power to accept a guilty plea to a felony upon the consent of
 the defendant for the following offenses in title 18, United States Code:
 section 215, 656, 657, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014 or 1344, or section 1341 or
 1343 affecting an insured depository institution.'.
SEC. 112. CIVIL ACTIONS UNDER THE RACKETEER INFLUENCED AND CORRUPT
ORGANIZATIONS ACT.
 Section 1964(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding `, or
 the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the chairman of
 the Resolution Trust Corporation or their designees in the case of violations
 affecting insured depository institutions,' after `The Attorney General'.
TITLE II--PROTECTING ASSETS FROM WRONGFUL DISPOSITION
SEC. 201. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; PREJUDGMENT ATTACHMENTS.
 (a) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF-
 (1) FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION- Section 11 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821), as amended by section 4255, is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(q) Injunctive Relief-
 `(1) In an action brought by the Corporation, in its receivership,
 conservatorship, or corporate capacity (including as an assignee of the
 conservator, receiver or insured depository institution and any other
 conservator appointed by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
 or the Office of Thrift Supervision) injunctive relief (including a
 prejudgment attachment) may be granted in conformity with the principles
 that govern the granting of such relief from threatened loss or damage in
 other cases, including the possibility that any judgment for money damages
 might be defeated through the removal, withdrawal, transfer, disposition,
 secretion or dissipation of assets. No showing of special or irreparable
 injury shall be required to be made in such action.
 `(2) Upon a showing of immediate danger of significant loss or damage,
 a prejudgment attachment, temporary restraining order or a preliminary
 injunction may be issued in any action described in paragraph (1) before a
 final determination on the merits of the Corporation or other conservator
 demonstrates that--
 `(A) the defendant is--
 `(i) an institution-affiliated party who is obligated to the institution
 or otherwise may be required to provide restitution to the institution; or
 `(ii) a debtor of the institution; and
 `(B) prima facie evidence exists showing that there is a possibility the
 assets of the defendant will be removed, withdrawn, transferred, disposed,
 secreted, dissipated or otherwise placed beyond the jurisdiction of the
 court, the appropriate Federal banking agency, or the Corporation or other
 conservator before any recovery in favor of the institution may be completed
 unless a trustee is appointed.
 `(3) Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply with
 respect to any proceeding under this subsection unless, in the case of
 any proceeding in a State Court, the Court determines that rules of civil
 procedure available under the laws of such state provide substantially
 similar protections to such party's right to due process as Rule 65.'.
 (2) NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION BOARD- Section 207 of the Federal
 Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1787) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subsection:
 `(q) Injunctive Relief-
 `(1) In an action brought by the Board, in its receivership, conservatorship,
 or corporate capacity (including as an assignee of the conservator,
 receiver or insured credit union) injunctive relief (including a prejudgment
 attachment) may be granted in conformity with the principles that govern
 the granting of such relief from threatened loss or damage in other cases,
 including the possibility that any judgment for money damages might be
 defeated through the removal, withdrawal, transfer, disposition, secretion
 or dissipation of assets. No showing of special or irreparable injury
 shall be required to be made in such action.
 `(2) Upon a showing of immediate danger of significant loss or damage,
 a prejudgment attachment, temporary restraining order or a preliminary
 injunction may be issued in any action described in paragraph (1) before
 a final determination on the merits if the Board demonstrates that--
 `(A) the defendant is--
 `(i) an institution-affiliated party who is obligated to the institution
 or otherwise may be required to provide restitution to the institution; or
 `(ii) a debtor of the institution; and
 `(B) prima facie evidence exists showing that there is a possibility the
 assets of the defendant will be removed, withdrawn, transferred, disposed,
 secreted, dissipated or otherwise placed beyond the jurisdiction of the
 court or the Board before any recovery in favor of the institution may
 be completed unless a trustee is appointed.
 `(3) Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply with
 respect to any proceeding under this subsection unless, in the case of
 any proceeding in a State Court, the Court determines that rules of civil
 procedure available under the laws of such state provide substantially
 similar protections to such party's right to due process as Rule 65.'.
 (3) RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION- Section 21A(b) of the Federal Home Loan
 Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441a(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraph:
 `(q) Injunctive Relief-
 `(1) In an action brought by the Corporation, in its receivership,
 conservatorship, or corporate capacity (including as an assignee of the
 conservator, receiver or insured depository institution) injunctive relief
 (including a prejudgment attachment) may be granted in conformity with the
 principles that govern the granting of such relief from threatened loss
 or damage in other cases, including the possibility that any judgment for
 money damages might be defeated through the removal, withdrawal, transfer,
 disposition, secretion or dissipation of assets. No showing of special or
 irreparable injury shall be required to be made in such action.
 `(2) Upon a showing of immediate danger of significant loss or damage,
 a prejudgment attachment, temporary restraining order or a preliminary
 injunction may be issued in any action described in paragraph (1) before
 a final determination on the merits if the Corporation demonstrates that--
 `(A) the defendant is--
 `(i) an institution-affiliated party who is obligated to the institution
 or otherwise may be required to provide restitution to the institution; or
 `(ii) a debtor of the institution; and
 `(B) prima facie evidence exists showing that there is a possibility the
 assets of the defendant will be removed, withdrawn, transferred, disposed,
 secreted, dissipated or otherwise placed beyond the jurisdiction of the
 court or the Corporation before any recovery in favor of the institution
 may be completed unless a trustee is appointed.
 `(3) Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply with
 respect to any proceeding under this subsection unless, in the case of
 any proceeding in a State Court, the Court determines that rules of civil
 procedure available under the laws of such state provide substantially
 similar protections to such party's right to due process as Rule 65.'.
 (b) Prejudgment Attachments-
 (1) APPROPRIATE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES- Section 8(i) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(i)) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4)(A) In any action brought by an appropriate Federal banking agency
 (excluding the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation when acting as
 conservator or receiver or in its corporate capacity as assignee of the
 conservator, receiver or insured depository institution) pursuant to this
 section, or in actions brought in aid of, or to enforce an order in, any
 administrative or other civil action for money damages, restitution, or
 injunctive relief brought by such agency, the court may, upon application
 of the agency, issue exparte a restraining order that--
 `(i) prohibits any person subject to the proceeding from withdrawing,
 transferring, removing, dissipating, or disposing of any funds, assets or
 other property; and
 `(ii) appoints a temporary receiver to administer the restraining order.
 `(B) A permanent or temporary injunction or restraining order shall be
 granted without bond upon a prima facie showing that money damages,
 restitution, or injunctive relief, as sought by such agency, is
 appropriate.'.
 (2) ATTORNEY GENERAL- Section 1345 of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the following:
 `Whenever it shall appear that any person is engaged or is about to engage
 in any act that constitutes or will constitute a violation of this chapter,
 or a banking law violation as defined in section 3322(d) of this title,
 or of section 287, or section 371 (insofar as the violations involves a
 conspiracy to defraud the United States or any agency thereof, or section
 1001, or section 2314 of this title, or is engaged or intends to engage
 in any alienaton or disposition of any property obtained from any such
 violation, the Attorney General may initiate a civil proceeding in a
 district court of the United States to enjoin the violation or alienation
 or disposition of property or assets of equivalent value. In any such case,
 the Attorney General may petition for a restraining order to prohibit any
 person from withdrawing, transferring, removing, dissipating, or disposing
 of any such funds, assets or other property and to appoint a temporary
 receiver to administer the restraining order. In a case involving a banking
 law violation, as defined in section 3322(d) of this title, the petition
 may be ex parte. In such actions, the United States district courts may
 grant permanent injunctions and such other and further equitable relief as
 they deem appropriate. A permanent or temporary injunction or restraining
 order shall be granted without bond.'.
SEC. 203. NONDISCHARGE OF DEBTS IN FEDERAL BANKRUPTCY INVOLVING OBLIGATIONS
ARISING FROM A BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY; DISALLOWING USE OF BANKRUPTCY TO
EVADE COMMITMENTS TO MAINTAIN THE CAPITAL OF A FEDERALLY INSURED DEPOSITORY
INSTITUTION OR TO EVADE CIVIL OR CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
 (a) BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTIES- Section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1821) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(p) BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTIES- A finding of a Federal court, State court,
 or appropriate Federal banking agency that an institution-related party
 of an insured depository institution has breached any fiduciary duty to
 that institution shall, once such finding has become final, constitute
 a defalcation while acting in a fiduciary capacity within the meaning
 of sections 523(a)(4) and 523(a)(13) of title 11, United States Code. The
 liability arising from such breach shall constitute a debt not dischargeable
 in a case under title 11 of the United States Code.'.
 (b) DISALLOWING USE OF BANKRUPTCY TO EVADE COMMITMENTS TO MAINTAIN THE
 CAPITAL OF A FEDERALLY INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION OR TO EVADE CIVIL
 OR CRIMINAL LIABILITY-
 (1) EXCEPTION TO DISCHARGE UNDER CHAPTER 11- Section 1129(a) of title
 11, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(14) The plan provides that the debtor will maintain any commitment to a
 Federal Depository institutions regulatory agency to maintain the capital of
 an insured depository institution and will continue to be obligated for any
 debt to such agency resulting from any failure to fulfill such commitment.'.
 (2) EXCEPTION TO DISCHARGE IN GENERAL- Section 523 of title 11, United
 States Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a) by--
 (i) striking `or' at the end of paragraph (9);
 (ii) striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting instead
 a semicolon; and
 (iii) adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(11) for any commitment to maintain the capital of an insured depository
 institution (as defined in section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 (Act), entered into by the debtor and the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Office of the Comptroller
 of the Currency, or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
 or their predecessors or successors;
 `(12) for restitution that the debtor has been ordered to pay by any court
 of the United States, or of any State, in any criminal proceeding arising
 from any act that caused loss to any depository institution or insured
 credit union; or
 `(13) for any damages, penalty, fine, forfeiture, restitution, reimbursement,
 indemnification, or guarantee against loss, provided in any judgment,
 order, or consent order or decree entered in any court of the United States
 or of any State, issued by the appropriate Federal financial institutions
 regulatory agency, or contained in any settlement agreement entered into by
 the debtor, arising from any act of fraud or defalcation while acting in
 a fiduciary capacity committed with respect to any depository institution
 or insured credit union.'; and
 (B) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(e) Any institution-related party of a depository institution or insured
 credit union shall be considered to be acting in a fiduciary capacity with
 respect to the purposes of subsection (a) (4) or (13).
 `(f) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii) of this section, reliance
 by a creditor shall not be required to establish an exception to discharge
 under subsection (a)(2) (A) or (B) of this section if the creditor is the
 appropriate Federal financial institutions regulatory agency that is a
 successor to a depository institution or insured credit union.
 `(g)(1) Notwithstanding any other law, a complaint objecting to the
 discharge of any debt owed to--
 `(A) a depository institution or insured credit union that is closed, is
 in receivership or conservatorship, or is sold to (or has its assets and
 liabilities assumed by) another depository institution or insured credit
 union in a transaction assisted by the appropriated Federal financial
 institutions regulatory agency; or
 `(B) the appropriate Federal financial institutions regulatory agency,
 may be filed on or before the date specified in paragraph (2).
 `(2) The date for filing of a complaint referred to in paragraph (1)
 is the date that is the later of--
 `(A) 120 days after the date of the debtor's first meeting of creditors,
 as provided under section 341 of this title;
 `(B) 120 days after the date of the appointment of a conservator or receiver
 by the appropriate Federal financial institutions regulatory agency for
 the depository institution or insured credit union with respect to which
 the debt arises; or
 `(C) 120 days after the date of the transfer of a loan to the appropriate
 Federal financial institutions regulatory agency pursuant to a repurchase
 agreement, repurchase provision or right of put back contained in an
 agreement with acquiring institution and the Federal financial institutions
 regulatory agency.'
 `(3) This subsection shall not extend the period of limitations
 prescribed by section 11(d)(14) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1821(d)(14)).'.
 (3) PLANS UNDER CHAPTER 13- Section 1328(a)(2) of title 11, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) of a kind specified in--
 `(A) section 523(a)(5) of this title; or
 `(B) section 523(a) (2), (4), (6), (7), (12) or (13) of this title, including
 debts owed to the appropriate Federal financial institutions regulatory
 agency (as defined in section 8(e)(7)(D), of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(e)(7)(D)), and in addition includes the Resolution
 Trust Corporation, and includes such an agency or corporation whether it
 is acting in its corporate capacity or in its capacity as a conservator
 or receiver of an insured depository institution (as defined in section
 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(2)) or
 insured credit union (as defined in section 101(7) of the Federal Credit
 Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752(7))).'
 (4) EXEMPTION OF PROPERTY- Section 522(C)(1) of title 11, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) a debt of a kind specified in--
 `(A) section 523(a) (1), (5), (12), or (13) of this title; or
 `(B) section 523(a) (2), (4), or (6) of this title owed to an appropriate
 Federal financial institutions regulatory agency (as defined in section
 8(e)(7)(D) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(e)(7)(D)),
 and in addition includes the Resolution Trust Corporation, and includes such
 an agency or corporation whether it is acting in its corporate capacity
 or in its capacity as a conservator or receiver of an insured depository
 institution (as defined in section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(2)) or insured credit union (as defined in section
 101(7) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752(7))); or'.
 (5) ASSUMPTION OF COMMITMENTS AS EXECUTORY CONTRACTS- Section 365 of
 title 11, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following:
 `(o) In a case under chapter 11 of this title, the trustee shall be
 deemed to have assumed, and shall immediately cure any deficit under, any
 commitment by the debtor to a Federal depository institutions regulatory
 agency, its predecessors or successors, to maintain the capital of an
 insured depository institution, and any claim for a subsequent breach of
 the obligations thereunder shall be entitled to priority under section 507.'.
 (6) DEFINITIONS- Section 101 of title 11, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (32) through (53) as paragraphs (36)
 through (61), respectively;
 (B) by inserting before paragraph (36), as so redesignated, the following:
 `(33) `institution-related party'--
 `(A) with respect to an insured depository institution (as defined in section
 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act), has the meaning given it in
 section 3(u) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(u)),
 except as to an independent contractor without regard to whether an
 independent contractor acted knowingly or recklessly); and
 `(B) with respect to an insured credit union, has the meaning given it in
 section 206(r) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786(r));
 `(34) `insured credit union' has the meaning given it in section 101(7)
 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752(7));
 `(35) `insured depository institution'--
 `(A) has the meaning given it in section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(2)); and
 `(B) includes an insured credit union (except in the case of paragraphs
 (3) and (33)(A) of this subsection);';
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (31) as paragraphs (4) through
 (32), respectively; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 `(3) `Federal depository institutions regulatory agency' means--
 `(A) with respect to an insured depository institution (as defined in
 section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(2))
 for which no conservator or receiver has been appointed, the appropriate
 Federal banking agency (as defined in section 3(q) of such Act (12
 U.S.C. 1813(q))); and
 `(B) with respect to an insured credit union (including an insured credit
 union for which the National Credit Union Administration has been appointed
 conservator or liquidating agent), the National Credit Union Administration;
 `(C) with respect to any insured depository institution for which the
 Resolution Trust Corporation has been appointed conservator or receiver,
 the Resolution Trust Corporation; and
 `(D) with respect to any insured depository institution for which the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has been appointed conservator or
 reciver, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;'.
SEC. 203. FRAUDULENT CONVEYANCES AVOIDABLE BY CONSERVATORS, RECEIVERS,
AND LIQUIDATING AGENTS.
 (a) FDIC INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- Section 11(d) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(d)) is amended by inserting after
 paragraph (18) (as added by section 202(a) of this title) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(19) FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Corporation, as conservator or receiver for any insured
 depository institution, and any other conservator appointed by the Office
 of the Comptroller of the Currency or the Office of Thrift Supervision,
 may avoid a transfer of any interest of an institution-affiliated party,
 or any person the Corporation or other conservator determines is a debtor of
 the institution, in property, or any obligation incurred by such party or
 person, that was made within 5 years of the date on which the conservator
 or receiver was appointed, if such party or person voluntarily made
 such transfer or incurred such liability with the intent to hinder, delay,
 or defraud the insured depository institution, the Corporation or other
 conservator, or any other appropriate Federal banking agency.'.
 `(B) RIGHT OF RECOVERY- To the extent a transfer is avoided under
 subparagraph (A), the Corporation or other conservator may recover, for the
 benefit of the insured depository institution, the property transferred,
 or, if a court so orders, the value of such property (at the time of such
 transfer) from--
 `(i) the initial transferee of such transfer or the institution-affiliated
 party or person for whose benefit such transfer was made; or
 `(ii) any immediate or mediate transferee of any such initial transferee.
 `(C) RIGHTS OF TRANSFEREE OR OBLIGEE- The Corporation or other conservator
 may not recover under subparagraph (B) from--
 `(i) any transferee that takes for value, including satisfaction or securing
 of a present or antecedent debt, in good faith; or
 `(ii) any immediate or mediate good faith transferee of such transferee.
 `(D) RIGHTS UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH- The rights of the Corporation or other
 conservator under this paragraph shall be superior to any rights of a
 trustee or any other party (other than any party which is a Federal agency)
 under title 11, United States Code.'.
 (b) NCUA INSURED CREDIT UNIONS- Section 207(b) of the Federal Credit Union
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1787(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(16) FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Board, as conservator or liquidating agent for
 any insured credit union, may avoid a transfer of any interest of an
 institution-affiliated party, or any person who the Board determines is a
 debtor of the institution, in property, or any obligation incurred by such
 party or person, that was made within 5 years of the date on which the Board
 becomes conservator or liquidating agent if such party or person voluntarily
 or involuntarily made such transfer or incurred such liability with the
 intent to hinder, delay, or defraud the insured credit union or the Board.
 `(B) RIGHT OF RECOVERY- To the extent a transfer is avoided under
 subparagraph (A), the Board may recover, for the benefit of the insured
 credit union, the property transferred, or, if a court so orders, the
 value of such property (at the time of such transfer) from--
 `(i) the initial transferee of such transfer or the institution-affiliated
 party or person for whose benefit such transfer was made; or
 `(ii) any immediate or mediate transferee of any such initial transferee.
 `(C) RIGHTS OF TRANSFEREE OR OBLIGEE- The Board may not recover under
 subparagraph (B) from--
 `(i) any transferee that takes for value, including satisfaction or securing
 of a present or antecedent debt, in good faith; or
 `(ii) any immediate or mediate good faith transferee of such transferee.
 `(D) RIGHTS UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH- The rights of the Board under this
 paragraph shall be superior to any rights of a trustee or any other party
 (other than any party which is a Federal agency) under title 11, United
 States Code.'.
SEC. 204. REGULATION OF GOLDEN PARACHUTES AND OTHER BENEFITS WHICH ARE
SUBJECT TO MISUSE.
 (a) FDIC INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- Section 18 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is amended by inserting after subsection
 (j) the following new subsection:
 `(k) Regulation of Certain Forms of Benefits to Institution-Affiliated
 Parties-
 `(1) GOLDEN PARACHUTES- Except as provided in paragraph (5), any insured
 depository institution or depository institution holding company which does
 not meet the minimum capital requirements (as determined by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency) applicable with respect to such institution or
 holding company may not make any golden parachute payment or enter into
 any contract or other agreement to make any golden parachute payment.
 `(2) COVERED BENEFITS- Except as provided in paragraph (5), no insured
 depository institution or depository institution holding company may make
 any covered benefit payment or enter into any contract or other agreement
 to make any covered benefit payment.
 `(3) CERTAIN PAYMENTS IN ANTICIPATION OF INSOLVENCY PROHIBITED- No insured
 depository institution or depository institution holding company may prepay
 the salary or any liability or legal expense of any institution-affiliated
 party in contemplation of the insolvency of such institution or holding
 company, or any insured depository institution subsidiary of such holding
 company, or after the commission of an act of insolvency, if such payment
 is made with a view to, or has the result of--
 `(A) preventing the proper application of the assets of the institution
 or holding company to creditors; or
 `(B) preferring 1 creditor over another.
 `(4) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) GOLDEN PARACHUTE PAYMENT- The term `golden parachute payment' means
 any payment in the nature of compensation to (or for the benefit of)
 any institution-affiliated party by any insured depository institution or
 depository institution holding company pursuant to an obligation of such
 institution or holding company (to make such payment) which is received
 on or after the date on which--
 `(i) the insured depository institution or depository institution holding
 company is insolvent;
 `(ii) any conservator or receiver is appointed for such institution; or
 `(iii) with respect to an insured depository institution or depository
 institution holding company which does not meet the minimum capital
 requirements applicable with respect to such institution or holding
 company, the date such institution or holding company first fails to meet
 such requirement.
 `(B) COVERED BENEFIT PAYMENT- The term `covered benefit payment' means any
 payment by any insured depository institution or depository institution
 holding company to or for the benefit of any person who is or was an
 institution-affiliated party to pay or reimburse such person for any
 liability or legal expense with respect to any administrative proceeding
 or civil action instituted by the appropriate Federal banking agency--
 `(i) in which the action, inaction, or the violation of any law, regulation,
 or order by, the institution-affiliated party is at issue; and
 `(ii) which results in a final order under which the institution-affiliated
 party--
 `(I) is assessed a civil money penalty;
 `(II) is removed or prohibited from participating in conduct of the affairs
 of the insured depository institution or depository institution holding
 company; or
 `(III) is required to take any affirmative action described in section
 8(b)(6) with respect to such institution.
 `(C) LIABILITY OR LEGAL EXPENSE- The term `liability or legal expense'
 means--
 `(i) any legal or other professional expense incurred in connection with
 any claim, proceeding, or action;
 `(ii) the amount of, and any cost incurred in connection with, any settlement
 of any claim, proceeding, or action; and
 `(iii) the amount of, and any cost incurred in connection with, any judgment
 or penalty imposed with respect to any claim, proceeding, or action.
 `(D) PAYMENT- The term `payment' includes--
 `(i) any direct or indirect transfer of any funds or any asset; and
 `(ii) any segregation of any funds or assets for the purpose of making,
 or pursuant to an agreement to make, any payment after the date on which
 such funds or assets are segregated.
 `(5) AGENCY APPROVAL FOR CERTAIN GOLDEN PARACHUTE AND COVERED BENEFIT
 PAYMENTS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any insured
 depository institution or depository institution holding company referred
 to in paragraph (1) or (2) may take any action described in such paragraph
 if the appropriate Federal banking agency provides written approval of
 such action by the institution or holding company.
 `(B) CORPORATION APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR FALTERING INSTITUTIONS- Any insured
 depository institution which--
 `(i) has a composite rating by the appropriate Federal banking agency of
 4 or 5 under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System;
 `(ii) is subject to a proceeding initiated by the Corporation to terminate
 or suspend deposit insurance for such institution;
 `(iii) has substantially insufficient capital to meet the minimum capital
 requirements (as defined and determined by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency) applicable with respect to such institution; or
 `(iv) is in danger of default,
may take any action described in paragraph (1) or (2) only if the Corporation
provides written approval for the institution to take such action (in addition
to the approval of the appropriate Federal banking agency under subparagraph
(A) of this paragraph).
 `(6) CERTAIN INSURANCE COVERAGE NOT TREATED AS COVERED BENEFIT PAYMENT-
 No provision of this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting any
 insured depository institution or depository institution holding company
 from purchasing any directors' or officers' liability insurance policy or
 fidelity bond, except that such insurance policy or bond may not cover any
 legal or liability expense of the institution or holding company which is
 a covered benefit payment.'.
 (b) NCUA INSURED CREDIT UNIONS DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- Section 206 of the
 Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsection:
 `(t) Regulation of Certain Forms of Benefits to Institution-Affiliated
 Parties-
 `(1) GOLDEN PARACHUTES- Except as provided in paragraph (5), any insured
 credit union which does not meet the minimum capital requirements (as
 determined by the Board) applicable with respect to such credit union may
 not make any golden parachute payment or enter into any contract or other
 agreement to make any golden parachute payment.
 `(2) COVERED BENEFITS- Except as provided in paragraph (5), no insured credit
 union may make any covered benefit payment or enter into any contract or
 other agreement to make any covered benefit payment.
 `(3) CERTAIN PAYMENTS IN ANTICIPATION OF INSOLVENCY PROHIBITED- No insured
 credit union may prepay the salary or any liability or legal expense of
 any institution-affiliated party in contemplation of the insolvency of
 such credit union, or after the commission of an act of insolvency, if
 such payment is made with a view to, or has the result of--
 `(A) preventing the proper application of the assets of the credit union
 to creditors; or
 `(B) preferring 1 creditor over another.
 `(4) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) GOLDEN PARACHUTE PAYMENT- The term `golden parachute payment' means
 any payment in the nature of compensation to (or for the benefit of) any
 institution-affiliated party by any insured credit union pursuant to an
 obligation of such credit union (to make such payment) which--
 `(i) is contingent on the termination (for any reason) of such party's
 affiliation with the credit union; and
 `(ii) is received on or after the date on which--
 `(I) the insured credit union is insolvent;
 `(II) any conservator or liquidating agent is appointed for such
 institution; or
 `(III) with respect to an insured credit union which does not meet the
 minimum capital requirements applicable with respect to such credit union,
 the date such credit union first fails to meet such requirement.
 `(B) COVERED BENEFIT PAYMENT- The term `covered benefit payment' means any
 payment by any insured credit union to or for the benefit of any person who
 is or was an institution-affiliated party to pay or reimburse such person
 for any liability or legal expense with respect to any administrative
 proceeding or civil action instituted by the Board--
 `(i) in which the action, inaction, or the violation of any law, regulation,
 or order by, the institution-affiliated party is at issue; and
 `(ii) which results in a final order under which the institution-affiliated
 party--
 `(I) is assessed a civil money penalty;
 `(II) is removed or prohibited from participating in conduct of the affairs
 of the insured credit union; or
 `(III) is required to take any affirmative action described in section
 206(e)(3) with respect to such credit union.
 `(C) LIABILITY OR LEGAL EXPENSE- The term `liability or legal expense'
 means--
 `(i) any legal or other professional expense incurred in connection with
 any claim, proceeding, or action;
 `(ii) the amount of, and any cost incurred in connection with, any settlement
 of any claim, proceeding, or action; and
 `(iii) the amount of, and any cost incurred in connection with, any judgment
 or penalty imposed with respect to any claim, proceeding, or action.
 `(D) PAYMENT- The term `payment' includes--
 `(i) any direct or indirect transfer of any funds or any asset; and
 `(ii) any segregation of any funds or assets for the purpose of making,
 or pursuant to an agreement to make, any payment after the date on which
 such funds or assets are segregated.
 `(5) BOARD APPROVAL FOR CERTAIN GOLDEN PARACHUTE AND COVERED BENEFIT
 PAYMENTS- Any insured credit union referred to in paragraph (1) or (2)
 may take any action described in such paragraph if the Board provides
 written approval of such action by the credit union.
 `(6) CERTAIN INSURANCE COVERAGE NOT TREATED AS COVERED BENEFIT PAYMENT-
 No provision of this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting any
 insured credit union from purchasing any directors `or officers' liability
 insurance policy or fidelity bond, except that such insurance policy or bond
 may not cover any legal or liability expense of the credit union which is a
 covered benefit payment. (c) The Corporation may, by regulation or order,
 reduce or limit the rumuneration to be paid by an insured institution,
 either directly or indirectly, to any institution-affiliated party, if such
 remuneration, including all nonsalary components thereof, would not be in
 the best interests of the institution, its depositors or the Corporation's
 insurance funds, and would be received when the institution (A) is insolvent,
 or (B) has been placed in receivership or conservatorship, or (C) is a
 troubled institution as determined by the Corporation by regulation.'.
SEC. 205. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO CIVIL FORFEITURE.
 Section 981 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(C)--
 (A) by inserting `1032,' after `1014,'; and
 (B) by inserting `or a violation of section 1341 or 1343 of such title
 affecting a financial institution' before the period;
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B),
 respectively; and
 (B) by striking all that appears before subparagraph (A) (as so redesignated
 by subparagraph (A) of this paragraph) and inserting the following:
 `(b)(1) Any property--
 `(A) subject to forfeiture to the United States under subparagraph (A) or
 (B) of subsection (a)(1) of this section--
 `(i) may be seized by the Attorney General; or
 `(ii) in the case of property involved in a violation of section 5313(a)
 or 5324 of title 31, United States Code, or section 1956 or 1957 of this
 title investigated by the Secretary of the Treasury or the United States
 Postal Service, may be seized by the Secretary of the Treasury or the
 Postal Service; and
 `(B) subject to forfeiture to the United States under subparagraph (C) of
 subsection (a)(1) of this section may be seized by the Attorney General,
 the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Postal Service.
 `(2) Property shall be seized under paragraph (1) of this subsection upon
 process issued pursuant to the Supplemental Rules for certain Admiralty
 and Maritime Claims by any district court of the United States having
 jurisdiction over the property, except that seizure without such process
 may be made when--';
 (3) in subsection (e)(3), by striking `(if the affected financial institution
 is in receivership or liquidation)'; and
 (4) in subsection (e)(4), by striking `(if the affected financial institution
 is not in receivership or liquidation)'.
SEC. 206. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL FORFEITURE FOR FRAUD IN THE SALE OF ASSETS BY
THE RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION, FDIC, OR NCUA.
 (a) CIVIL FORFEITURE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 981(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is
 amended by adding the following new subparagraphs:
 `(D) Any property, real or personal, which represents or is traceable to
 the gross receipts obtained, directly or indirectly, from a violation of--
 `(i) section 666(a)(1) (relating to Federal program fraud);
 `(ii) section 1001 (relating to fraud and false statements;
 `(iii) section 1031 (relating to major fraud against the United States);
 `(iv) section 1032 (relating to concealment of assets from conservator or
 receiver of insured financial institution);
 `(v) section 1341 (relating to mail fraud); or
 `(vi) section 1343 (relating to wire fraud),
if such violation relates to the sale of assets acquired or held by the
Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as
conservator or receiver for a financial institution, or any other conservator
for a financial institution appointed by the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency or the Office of Thrift Supervision or the National Credit
Union Administration, as conservator or liquidating agent for a financial
institution.
 `(E) With respect to an offense listed in subsection (a)(1)(D) committed for
 the purpose of executing or attempting to execute any scheme or artifice to
 defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent
 statements, pretenses, representations or promises, the gross receipts of
 such an offense shall include all property, real or personal, tangible or
 intangible, which thereby is obtained, directly or indirectly.'.
 (2) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 981(e) of title 18, United
 States Code, is amended by inserting after paragraph (6) (as added by
 section 108(3) of this Act) the following new paragraph:
 `(7) In the case of property referred to in subsection (a)(1)(D), to the
 Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
 or any other Federal financial institution regulatory agency (as defined
 in section 8(e)(7)(D) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act).'.
 (b) CRIMINAL FORFEITURE- Section 982(a) of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) The court, in imposing a sentence on a person convicted of an offense
 under--
 `(A) section 666(a)(1) (relating to Federal program fraud);
 `(B) section 1001 (relating to fraud and false statements);
 `(C) section 1031 (relating to major fraud against the United States);
 `(D) section 1032 (relating to concealment of assets from conservator,
 receiver, or liquidating agent of insured financial institution);
 `(E) section 1341 (relating to mail fraud); or
 `(F) section 1343 (relating to wire fraud),
involving the sale of assets acquired or held by the Resolution Trust
Corporation, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as conservator or
receiver for a financial institution or any other conservator for a financial
institution appointed by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency or the
Office of Thrift Supervision, or the National Credit Union Administration,
as conservator or liquidating agent for a financial institution, shall order
that the person forfeit to the United States any property, real or personal,
which represents or is traceable to the gross receipts obtained, directly
or indirectly, as a result of such violation.
 `(4) With respect to an offense listed in subsection (a)(3) committed for
 the purpose of executing or attempting to execute any scheme or artifice to
 defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent
 statements, pretenses, representations, or promises, the gross receipts
 of such an offense shall include any property, real or personal, tangible
 or intangible, which is obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of
 such offense.'.
SEC. 207. PROHIBITION ON ACQUISITIONS FROM CONSERVATORS AND RECEIVERS OF
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS BY CONVICTED FELONS.
 (a) FDIC INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS- Section 11 of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(p) CERTAIN CONVICTED DEBTORS PROHIBITED FROM PURCHASING ASSETS- Any
 individual who--
 `(1) has been convicted of an offense under section 215, 656, 657, 1005,
 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014, 1032, 1341, 1343, or 1344 of title 18, United
 States Code, affecting any insured depository institution for which any
 conservator or receiver has been appointed; and
 `(2) is in default on any loan or other extension of credit from such insured
 depository institution which, if not paid, will cause substantial loss to
 the institution, the Corporation, or the Resolution Trust Corporation,
may not purchase any asset of such institution from the conservator or
receiver (other than with respect to the repayment in full of such loan or
other extension of credit).'.
 (b) NCUA INSURED CREDIT UNIONS- Section 207 of the Federal Credit Union
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1787) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(q) CERTAIN CONVICTED DEBTORS PROHIBITED FROM PURCHASING ASSETS- Any
 individual who--
 `(1) has been convicted of an offense under section 215, 657, 1006, 1014,
 1032, 1341, 1343, or 1344 of title 18, United States Code, affecting
 any insured credit union for which the Board is appointed conservator or
 liquidating agent; and
 `(2) is in default on any loan or other extension of credit from such
 insured credit union which, if not paid, will cause substantial loss to
 the credit union or the Board,
may not purchase any asset of such credit union from the conservator or
liquidating agent (other than with respect to the repayment in full of such
loan or other extension of credit).'.
 (c) Section 21A(b)(12) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12
 U.S.C. 1441a(b)(12)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(G) CERTAIN SALES PROHIBITED- The Corporation shall prescribe regulations
 to prohibit the sale of assets of a failed institution by the Corporation
 to any person who--
 `(i)(I) defaulted on an obligation or obligations in excess of $1,000,000 to
 such failed institution or was a member of a partnership or an officer or
 director of a corporation which defaulted on an obligation or obligations
 in excess of $1,000,000 to such failed institution, (II) has been found to
 have knowingly or recklessly engaged in fraudulent activity in connection
 with the obligation or obligations to such failed institution, and (III)
 proposes to purchase the asset or assets in question in whole or in part
 through the use of the proceeds of a loan or advance of credit from the
 Corporation or from an insured institution subject to the jurisdiction of
 the Corporation pursuant to paragraph (3)(A),
 `(ii) was an officer or director of such failed institution or of any
 affiliate thereof who participated in a material way in transactions that
 resulted in a substantial loss to such failed institution,
 `(iii) has been removed from, or prohibited from participating in the
 affairs of, such failed institution pursuant to any final enforcement
 action by any appropriate Federal banking agency, or
 `(iv) demonstrated a pattern or practice of defalcation regarding obligations
 to such failed institution.
 For the purpose of this subparagraph--
 (i) the term `default' means a failure to comply with the terms of a
 loan or other obligation to such an extent that the property securing the
 obligation is foreclosed upon; and
 (ii) the term `affiliate' has the same meaning as in section 2(k) of the
 Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.'.
SEC. 208. PRIORITY OF CERTAIN CLAIMS.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- Section 11 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821), as amended by section 4155, is
 further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(a) PRIORITY OF CERTAIN CLAIMS- In any proceeding related to any claim
 acquired under section 11 or 13 of this Act against an insured depository
 institution's director, officer, employee, agent, attorney, accountant,
 appraiser, or any other party employed by or providing services to an
 insured depository institution, any suit, claim, or cause of action brought
 by the Corporation shall have priority over any other such suit, claim,
 or cause of action asserted by depositors, creditors, or shareholders of
 the insured depository institution, except for claims of Federal agencies
 or the United States, unless the Corporation is notified in writing of
 the commencement of such other suit, claim, or cause of action. However,
 the Corporation shall have priority if--
 `(1) 180 days after receiving written notice the Corporation files with
 the court a statement that the Corporation intends to file suit and is
 diligently pursuing its claims; and
 `(2) within a year after receiving written notice files suit. If the
 Corporation requests an extension of time to file such suit, the court
 shall extend the period for the Corporation to commence its proceeding
 unless it finds that the harm to the person pursuing a claim from such
 extension outweighs the harm to the Government from denying such extension.
In making such determination the court shall consider the diligence with
which the Corporation is investigating its claim.
The effect of this provision shall be to afford the Corporation priority to
the extent the assets involved would be available to the Corporation.'.
 (b) APPLICABILITY- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not apply to
 suits, claims, or causes of action of depositors, creditors, or shareholders
 commenced before the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 209. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS.
 (a) EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS- Section 11 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821), as amended by section 4259, is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(s) Expedited Procedures for Certain Claims-
 `(1) TIME FOR FILING NOTICE OF APPEAL- The notice of appeal of any
 order, whether interlocutory or final, entered in any case brought by the
 Corporation against an insured depository institution's director, officer,
 employee, agent, attorney, accountant, or appraiser or any other person
 employed by or providing services to an insured depository institution shall
 be filed not later than 10 days after the date of entry of the order. The
 hearing of the appeal shall be conducted not later than 60 days after the
 date of filing of the notice of appeal. The appeal shall be decided not
 later than 90 days after the date of the notice of appeal.
 `(2) SCHEDULING- Consistent with section 1657 of title 28, United States
 Code, a court of the United States shall expedite the consideration
 of any case brought by the Corporation against an insured depository
 institution's director, officer, employee, agent, attorney, accountant,
 or appraiser or any other person employed by or providing services to an
 insured depository institution. As far as practicable the court shall give
 such a case priority on its docket.
 `(3) JUDICIAL DISCRETION- The court may modify the schedule and limitations
 stated in paragraphs (1) and (2) in a particular case, based on a specific
 finding that the ends of justice that would be served by making such a
 modification would outweigh the best interest of the public in having the
 case resolved expeditiously.'.
 (b) TIME FOR FILING NOTICE OF APPEAL- The notice of appeal of any order,
 whether interlocutory or final, entered in any case brought by the
 Corporation against an insured depository institution's director, officer,
 employee, agent, attorney, accountant, or appraiser or any other person
 employed by or providing services to an insured depository institution shal
 be filed not later than 30 days after the date of entry of the order. The
 hearing on the petition shall be conducted not later than 120 days after
 the date of filing of the petition. The appeal shall be decided not later
 than 180 days after the date of the notice of appeal.
TITLE III--IMPROVED PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING BANKING-RELATED CASES
SEC. 301. WIRETAP AUTHORITY FOR BANK FRAUD AND RELATED OFFENSES; TECHNICAL
AMENDMENTS TO WIRETAP LAW.
 Section 2516 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (1)(C)--
 (A) by inserting `section 215 (relating to bribery of bank officials),'
 before `section 224';
 (B) by inserting `section 1014 (relating to false statements to financial
 institutions),' before `sections 1503';
 (C) by inserting `section 1032 (relating to concealment of assets)' before
 `section 1084 (transmission of wagering information)';
 (D) by striking `section 1343 (fraud by wire, radio, or television),' and
 inserting `section 1343 (fraud by use of facility of interstate commerce),
 section 1344 (relating to bank fraud),'; and
 (E) by striking `the section in chapter 65 relating to destruction of any
 energy facility,'; and
 (2) by redesignating the first paragraph (m), as paragraph (o);
 (3) by striking `and' at the end of the second subsection (m);
 (4) by striking the period at the end of subsection (n) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (5) in paragraph (j), striking `any violation of section 1679(c)(2)
 (relating to destruction of a natural gas pipeline) or subsection (i)
 or (n) of section 1742 (relating to aircraft piracy) of title 49, of the
 United States Code' and inserting `any violation of section 11(c)(2) of
 the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 (relating to destruction of
 a natural gas pipeline) (49 U.S.C. App. 1679a(c)(2)) or section 902 (i)
 or (n) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (relating to aircraft piracy)
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1742 (i) and (n))'.
SEC. 302. FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS BY FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES AND INVESTIGATIONS
ON BEHALF OF FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITIES.
 (a) APPROPRIATE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES, GENERALLY- Section 8 of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(v) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS-
 `(1) REQUESTING ASSISTANCE FROM FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITIES- In conducting
 any investigation, examination, or enforcement action under this Act,
 the appropriate Federal banking agency may--
 `(A) request the assistance of any foreign banking authority; and
 `(B) maintain an office outside the United States.
 `(2) PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any appropriate Federal banking agency may, at the request
 of any foreign banking authority, assist such authority if such authority
 states that the requesting authority is conducting an investigation to
 determine whether any person has violated, is violating, or is about to
 violate any law or regulation relating to banking matters or currency
 transactions administered or enforced by the requesting authority.
 `(B) INVESTIGATION BY FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY- Any appropriate Federal banking
 agency may, in such agency's discretion, investigate and collect information
 and evidence pertinent to a request for assistance under subparagraph
 (A). Any such investigation shall comply with the laws of the United States
 and the policies and procedures of the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(C) FACTORS TO CONSIDER- In deciding whether to provide assistance under
 this paragraph, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall consider--
 `(i) whether the requesting authority has agreed to provide reciprocal
 assistance with respect to banking matters within the jurisdiction of any
 appropriate Federal banking agency; and
 `(ii) whether compliance with the request would prejudice the public
 interest of the United States.
 `(D) TREATMENT OF FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITY- For purposes of any Federal law
 or appropriate Federal banking agency regulation relating to the collection
 or transfer of information by any appropriate Federal banking agency,
 the foreign banking authority shall be treated as another appropriate
 Federal banking agency.
 `(3) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not be construed
 to limit the authority of an appropriate Federal banking agency or any
 other Federal agency to provide or receive assistance or information to
 or from any foreign authority with respect to any matter.'.
 (b) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS BY FDIC AND RTC AS CONSERVATOR OR RECEIVER-
 Section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821) is amended
 by inserting after subsection (p) (as added by section 208(a) of this Act)
 the following new subsection:
 `(q) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS- The Corporation and the Resolution Trust
 Corporation, as conservator or receiver of any insured depository institution
 and for purposes of carrying out any power, authority, or duty with respect
 to an insured depository institution--
 `(1) may request the assistance of any foreign banking authority and
 provide assistance to any foreign banking authority in accordance with
 section 8(v); and
 `(2) may each maintain an office to coordinate foreign investigations or
 investigations on behalf of foreign banking authorities.'.
 (c) NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION, GENERALLY- Section 206 of the
 Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786) is amended by inserting after
 subsection (t) (as added by section 205 of this Act) the following new
 subsection:
 `(u) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS-
 `(1) REQUESTING ASSISTANCE FROM FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITIES- In conducting
 any investigation, examination, or enforcement action under this Act,
 the Board may--
 `(A) request the assistance of any foreign banking authority; and
 `(B) maintain an office outside the United States.
 `(2) PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The Board may, at the request of any foreign banking
 authority, assist such authority if such authority states that the requesting
 authority is conducting an investigation to determine whether any person
 has violated, is violating, or is about to violate any law or regulation
 relating to banking matters or currency transactions administered or
 enforced by the requesting authority.
 `(B) INVESTIGATION BY FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY- The Board may, in the Board's
 discretion, investigate and collect information and evidence pertinent to a
 request for assistance under subparagraph (A). Any such investigation shall
 comply with the laws of the United States and the policies and procedures
 of the Board.
 `(C) FACTORS TO CONSIDER- In deciding whether to provide assistance under
 this paragraph, the Board shall consider--
 `(i) whether the requesting authority has agreed to provide reciprocal
 assistance with respect to banking matters within the jurisdiction of the
 Board or any appropriate Federal banking agency; and
 `(ii) whether compliance with the request would prejudice the public
 interest of the United States.
 `(D) TREATMENT OF FOREIGN BANKING AUTHORITY- For purposes of any Federal law
 or Board regulation relating to the collection or transfer of information
 by the Board or any appropriate Federal banking agency, the foreign banking
 authority shall be treated as another appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(3) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not be construed
 to limit the authority of the Board or any other Federal agency to provide
 or receive assistance or information to or from any foreign authority with
 respect to any matter.'.
 (d) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS BY BOARD AS CONSERVATOR OR LIQUIDATING AGENT-
 Section 207 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1787) is amended
 by inserting after subsection (q) (as added by section 208(b) of this Act)
 the following new subsection:
 `(r) FOREIGN INVESTIGATIONS- The Board, as conservator or liquidating agent
 of any insured credit union and for purposes of carrying out any power,
 authority, or duty with respect to an insured credit union--
 `(1) may request the assistance of any foreign banking authority and
 provide assistance to any foreign banking authority in accordance with
 section 206(u); and
 `(2) may maintain an office to coordinate foreign investigations or
 investigations on behalf of foreign banking authorities.'.
SEC. 303. EXTENSION OF STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR CIVIL PENALTIES.
 (a) Section 951 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
 Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1833a) is amended by adding at the end
 the following:
 `(g) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- A civil action under this section may not be
 commenced later than 10 years after the cause of action accrues.'.
 (b) Section 6531 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 6531)
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `No person shall' and inserting instead `(a) No person
 shall';
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (8) of subsection (a) (as designated
 herein) the following new subsection:
 `(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), no person shall be prosecuted,
 tried, or punished for any of the various offenses arising under the
 internal revenue laws, committed in conjunction with the offenses listed
 in section 3293 of Title 18 of the United States Code, if the offense
 affects a financial institution, unless the indictment is found or the
 information instituted within 10 years next after the commission of the
 offense. This subsection shall apply to an offense committed before the
 effective date of this section, if the statute of limitations applicable
 to that offense under this chapter has not expired as of such date.';
 (3) by striking `The time during which' and inserting instead `(c) The
 time during which'; and
 (4) in subsection (c) (as designated herein), by striking `within the
 period above limited' and inserting instead `within the period limited by
 this section'.
SEC. 304. CLARIFICATION OF SUBPOENA AUTHORITY FOR FDIC, RTC, AND NCUA ACTING
AS CONSERVATOR, RECEIVER OR LIQUIDATING AGENT.
 (a) FDIC AND RTC AUTHORITY- Section 11(d)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(d)(2)) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (I)
 as subparagraph (J) and by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(I) SUBPOENA AUTHORITY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The Corporation may, as conservator, receiver, or exclusive
 manager and for purposes of carrying out any power, authority, or duty
 with respect to an insured depository institution (including determining
 any claim against the institution and determining and realizing upon any
 asset of any person in the course of collecting money due the institution),
 exercise any power established under section 8(n), and the provisions of such
 section shall apply with respect to the exercise of any such power under this
 subparagraph in the same manner as such provisions apply under such section.
 `(ii) AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS- A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum
 may be issued under clause (i) only by, or with the written approval of,
 the Board of Directors or their designees (or, in the case of a subpoena
 or subpoena duces tecum issued by the Resolution Trust Corporation under
 this subparagraph and section 21A(b)(4), only by, or with the written
 approval of, the Board of Directors of such Corporation or their designees).
 `(iii) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- This subsection shall not be construed as
 limiting any rights that the Corporation, in any capacity, might otherwise
 have under section 10(c) of this Act.'.
 (b) NCUA AUTHORITY- Section 207(b)(2) of the Federal Credit Union Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1787(b)(2)) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (I)
 (as so redesignated by section 2122(b) of this title) as subparagraph
 (J) and by inserting after subparagraph (H) (as added by such section)
 the following new subparagraph:
 `(I) SUBPOENA AUTHORITY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The Board may, as conservator or liquidating agent and
 for purposes of carrying out any power, authority, or duty with respect
 to an insured credit union (including determining any claim against the
 credit union and determining and realizing upon any asset of any person in
 the course of collecting money due the credit union), exercise any power
 established under section 206(p), and the provisions of such section shall
 apply with respect to the exercise of any such power under this subparagraph
 in the same manner as such provisions apply under such section.
 `(ii) AUTHORITY OF BOARD- A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum may be issued
 under clause (i) only by, or with the written approval of, the Board or
 their designees.
 `(iii) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION- This subsection shall not be construed as
 limiting any rights that the Board, in any capacity, might otherwise have
 under section 206(p).'.
TITLE IV--STRUCTURAL REFORMS TO IMPROVE THE FEDERAL RESPONSE TO CRIMES
AFFECTING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
SEC. 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS CRIME UNIT AND OFFICE OF
SPECIAL COUNSEL FOR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS CRIME UNIT.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established within the Office of the Deputy
 Attorney General in the Department of Justice a Financial Institutions
 Fraud Unit to be headed by a special counsel (hereinafter referred to as
 the `Special Counsel').
 (b) RESPONSIBILITY- The Financial Institutions Fraud Unit and the Special
 Counsel shall be responsible to and shall report directly to the Deputy
 Attorney General.
 (c) Sunset- The provisions of this section shall cease to apply at the
 end of the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 402. APPOINTMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND COMPENSATION OF THE SPECIAL COUNSEL.
 (a) APPOINTMENT- The Special Counsel shall be appointed by the President,
 by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (b) RESPONSIBILITIES- The Special Counsel shall--
 (1) supervise and coordinate investigations and prosecutions within the
 Department of Justice of fraud and other criminal activity in and against
 the financial services industry;
 (2) ensure that Federal law relating to civil enforcement, asset seizure
 and forfeiture, money laundering, and racketeering are used to the fullest
 extent authorized to recover the proceeds of unlawful activities from persons
 who have committed crimes in and against the financial services industry; and
 (3) ensure that adequate resources are made available for the investigation
 and prosecution of fraud and other criminal activity in and against the
 financial services industry.
 (c) COMPENSATION- The Special Counsel shall be paid at the basic pay
 payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
SEC. 403. ASSIGNMENT OF PERSONNEL.
 There shall be assigned to the Financial Institutions Fraud Unit such
 personnel as the Attorney General deems necessary to provide an appropriate
 level of enforcement activity in the area of fraud and other criminal
 activity in and against the financial services industry.
SEC. 404. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FRAUD TASK FORCES.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Attorney General shall establish such financial
 institutions fraud task forces as the Attorney General deems appropriate
 to ensure that adequate resources are made available to investigate and
 prosecute crimes in or against financial institutions and to recover the
 proceeds of unlawful activities from persons who have committed fraud
 or have engaged in other criminal activity in or against the financial
 services industry.
 (b) SUPERVISION- The Attorney General shall determine how each task force
 shall be supervised and may provide for the supervision of any task force
 by the Special Counsel.
 (c) SENIOR INTERAGENCY GROUP- (1) The Attorney General shall establish a
 senior interagency group to assist in identifying the most significant
 financial institution fraud cases and in allocating investigative and
 prosecutorial resources where they are most needed.
 (2) The senior interagency group shall be chaired by the Assistant Attorney
 General for the Criminal Division and shall include senior officials from--
 (A) the Department of Justice;
 (B) the Department of the Treasury;
 (C) the Office of Thrift Supervision;
 (D) the Resolution Trust Corporation;
 (E) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 (F) the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency;
 (G) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; and
 (H) the National Credit Union Administration.
 (3) This senior interagency group shall enhance interagency coordination
 and assist in accelerating the investigations and prosecution of financial
 institutions fraud.
SEC. 405. INTERAGENCY COORDINATION.
 (a) Notwithstanding any other law--
 (1) the Attorney General may accept, and Federal departments and agencies,
 including the United States Secret Service, the Internal Revenue Service,
 the Resolution Trust Corporation, and the appropriate Federal banking
 agency, may provide, without reimbursement, the services of attorneys,
 law enforcement personnel, and other employees of any other departments or
 agencies of the Federal Government to assist the Department of Justice,
 subject to the supervision of the Attorney General, in the investigation
 and prosecution of fraud or other criminal or unlawful activity in or
 against any federally insured financial institution; and
 (2) any attorney of a department or agency whose services are accepted
 pursuant to paragraph (1) may, subject to the supervision of the Attorney
 General, conduct any kind of legal proceeding, civil or criminal, including
 grant jury proceedings and proceedings before committing magistrates, and
 perform any other investigative or prosecutorial function, which United
 States attorneys are authorized by law to conduct or perform, whether or
 not the attorney is a resident of the district in which the proceeding is
 brought; and
 (3) any law enforcement personnel of the United States Secret Service
 whose services are accepted pursuant to paragraph (1) may, subject to
 the supervision of the Attorney General, conduct or perform any kind of
 investigation, civil or criminal, which the Department of Justice law
 enforcement personnel are authorized by law to conduct or perform.
 (b) This section--
 (1) shall not otherwise alter the authority of any Federal law enforcement
 agency; and
 (2) shall expire coterminously with the authority of the Resolution Trust
 Corporation or six years from the date of enactment of this section,
 whichever date occurs earlier, except that the Attorney General may extend
 the authority conferred herein as he deems appropriate.
SEC. 406. RTC ENFORCEMENT DIVISION.
 Section 21A(b)(12) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441a(b)(12))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(G) The Corporation shall maintain a Fraud and Enforcement Review
 Division to assist and advise the Corporation and other agencies in
 pursuing criminal cases, civil claims, and administrative enforcement
 actions against institution-affiliated parties of insured depository
 institutions under the jurisdiction of the Corporation. The Fraud and
 Enforcement Review Division shall have such duties as the Corporation
 establishes, including the compilation and publication of a report to the
 Committee on Judiciary and the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban
 Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Judiciary
 of the Senate and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
 of the Senate, on the coordinated pursuit of claims by Federal agencies,
 including the Department of Justice, the Comptroller of the Currency, the
 Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Corporation. The report shall
 be published before December 31, 1990 and updated semiannually thereafter.'.
TITLE V--REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 501. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) The Financial Institutions Fraud Unit shall compile
 and collect data concerning--
 (A) the nature and number of financial institutions investigations,
 prosecutions, and enforcement proceedings in progress;
 (B) the nature and number of such matters closed, settled, or litigated
 to conclusion; and
 (C) the results achieved, including fines and penalties levied, prison
 sentences imposed, and damages recovered, in such matters.
 (2) Prior to the conclusion of an investigation or prosecution, data may
 be compiled in an aggregate statistical form.
 (3) The Financial Institutions Fraud Unit shall analyze and report
 semiannually to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
 and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on
 Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs and the Committee on the Judiciary
 of the House of Representatives on the data described in paragraph (1)
 and its own coordination activities with the agencies named in section
 4114(c), and shall provide such data, as appropriate to such committees.
 (b) SPECIFICS OF REPORT- The report required by subsection (a) shall--
 (1) be categorized as to various types of financial institutions;
 (2) disclose data for each Federal judicial district; and
 (3) identify, with respect to the activities of the Financial Institutions
 Fraud Unit--
 (A) the number of institutions in which evidence of significant fraud or
 insider abuse has been detected;
 (B) the Federal administrative enforcement actions brought against offenders;
 (4) any settlements or judgments obtained against offenders;
 (5) the indictments, guilty pleas, or verdicts obtained against offenders;
 and
 (6) the resources allocated in pursuit of such settlements, indictments,
 or verdicts.
 (c) Section 522 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by--
 (1) inserting `(a)' before `The Attorney General'; and
 (2) adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(b) The information provided pursuant to subsection (a)(2) shall include
 records of the number of pending criminal matters, investigations, cases,
 and defendants involving financial institutions which shall specify the
 number of such cases relating to insured depository institutions and shall
 be made available to the Congress not less than monthly during each year.'.
SEC. 502. REPORT ON COURT BUSINESS IMPACT OF SAVINGS AND LOAN CRISIS.
 Section 604(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(24) Lay before Congress, annually, statistical tables that will accurately
 reflect the business imposed on the Federal courts by the savings and
 loan crisis.'.
SEC. 551. DISCLOSURE OF CIVIL ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT- Section 8(u) of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(u)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(u) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF AGENCY ACTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The appropriate Federal banking agency shall publish and
 make available to the public within 30 days of the agency's action--
 `(A) any letter, directive, agreement, settlement, memorandum of
 understanding, business plan, or other written statement issued or accepted
 in lieu of a final order issued under this section or any other law, unless
 the appropriate Federal banking agency, in its discretion, determines that
 publication would be contrary to the public interest;
 `(B) any final order issued with respect to any administrative enforcement
 proceeding initiated by such agency under this section or any other law; and
 `(C) any modification to or termination of any order or agreement made
 public pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(2) HEARINGS- All hearings on the record with respect to any notice of
 charges issued by a Federal banking agency shall be open to the public,
 unless the agency, in its discretion, determines that holding an open
 hearing would be contrary to the public interest.
 `(3) REPORTS TO CONGRESS- A written report shall be made part of a
 determination not to hold a public hearing pursuant to paragraph (2) or
 not to publish a document pursuant to paragraph (1)(A). At the end of each
 calendar quarter, all such reports shall be transmitted to the Committee
 on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and
 the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
 `(4) TRANSCRIPT OF HEARING- A transcript that includes all testimony
 and other evidence shall be prepared for all hearings commenced under
 this section. A transcript of public hearings shall be made available to
 the public. A transcript of nonpublic hearings shall be made available
 to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
 of the Senate.
 `(5) EFFECTIVE DATE- The disclosure required by paragraph (1) shall
 apply with respect to all documents outstanding as of June 26, 1990, or
 issued after June 26, 1990. The publication required by paragraph (4)
 shall apply with respect to the transcripts of all hearings conducted
 after June 26, 1990.
 `(6) DELAY OF PUBLICATION UNDER EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES- If the appropriate
 Federal banking agency makes a determination in writing that the publication
 of a final order pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) would seriously threaten the
 safety and soundness of an insured depository institution, the agency may
 delay the publication of the document for a reasonable time.
 `(7) DOCUMENTS FILED UNDER SEAL IN PUBLIC ENFORCEMENT HEARINGS- The
 appropriate Federal banking agency may file any document or part of a
 document under seal in any administrative enforcement hearing commenced by
 the agency if disclosure of the document would be contrary to the public
 interest. A written report shall be made part of any determination to
 withhold any part of a document from the transcript of the hearing required
 by paragraph (2). The report and the part of the document withheld shall
 be made available to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing,
 and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
 `(8) NOTICES OF CHARGES- Each Federal banking agency shall keep and
 maintain a record, for a period of at least 10 years, of all documents
 described in paragraph (1) and of all notices of charges issued with
 respect to any administrative enforcement proceeding initiated by such
 agency under this section or any other laws. The records shall be made
 available to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
 Affairs of the Senate.'.
 (2) Section 8(h)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1818(h)(1)) is amended by striking `Such hearing shall be private,
 unless the appropriate Federal banking agency, in its discretion, after
 fully considering the views of the party afforded the hearing, determines
 that a public hearing is necessary to protect the public interest.'.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF FEDERAL CREDIT UNION ACT- (1) Section 206(s) of the
 Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786(s)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(s) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF AGENCY ACTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall publish and make available to the public
 within 30 days of the agency's action--
 `(A) any letter, directive, agreement, settlement, memorandum of
 understanding, business plan, or other written statement issued or accepted
 in lieu of a final order issued under this section or any other law,
 unless the Board, in its discretion, determines that publication would be
 contrary to the public interest;
 `(B) any final order issued with respect to any administrative enforcement
 proceeding initiated by the Board under this section or any other law; and
 `(C) any modification to or termination of any orders or agreements made
 public pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(2) HEARINGS- All hearings on the record with respect to any notice of
 charges issued by the Board shall be open to the public, unless the agency,
 in its discretion, determines that holding an open hearing would be contrary
 to the public interest.
 `(3) REPORTS TO CONGRESS- A written report shall be made part of any
 determination not to hold a public hearing pursuant to paragraph (2) or
 not to publish a document pursuant to paragraph (1)(A). At the end of each
 calendar quarter, all such reports shall be transmitted to the Committee
 on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and
 the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
 `(4) TRANSCRIPTS OF HEARINGS- A transcript that includes all testimony
 and other evidence shall be prepared for all hearings commenced under
 this section. A transcript of public hearings shall be made available to
 the public. A transcript of nonpublic hearings shall be made available
 to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
 of the Senate.
 `(5) EFFECTIVE DATE- The disclosure required by paragraph (1) shall
 apply with respect to all documents outstanding as of June 26, 1990, or
 issued after June 26, 1990. The publication required by paragraph (4)
 shall apply with respect to the transcripts of all hearings conducted
 after June 26, 1990.
 `(6) DELAY OF PUBLICATION UNDER EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES- If the Board
 makes a determination in writing that the publication of a document pursuant
 to paragraph (1)(B) would seriously threaten the safety and soundness of
 an insured depository institution, the Board may delay the publication of
 the document or transcript of the hearing for a reasonable time.
 `(7) DOCUMENTS FILED UNDER SEAL IN PUBLIC ENFORCEMENT HEARINGS- The Board
 may file any document or part of a document under seal in any administrative
 enforcement hearing commenced by the Board if disclosure of the document
 would be contrary to the public interest. A written report shall be made
 part of any determination to withhold any part of a document from the
 transcript of the hearing required by paragraph (2). The report and the
 part of the document withheld shall be made available to the Committee
 on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and
 the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
 `(8) NOTICES OF CHARGES- Each Federal banking agency shall keep and
 maintain a record, for a period of at least 10 years, of all documents
 described in paragraph (1) and of all notices of charges initiated with
 respect to any administrative enforcement proceeding initialed by such
 agency under this section or any other laws. The records shall be made
 available to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
 Affairs of the Senate.'.
 (2) Section 206(j)(1) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1786(j)(1))
 is amended by striking `Such hearing shall be private, unless the Board,
 in its discretion, after fully considering the views of the party afforded
 the hearing, determines that a public hearing is necessary to protect the
 public interest.'.
TITLE VI--NATIONAL COMMISSION ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTION REFORM, RECOVERY,
AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 601. ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established the National Commission on the Savings and Loan
 Industry.
SEC. 602. DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
 The Commission shall--
 (1) examine and identify the origin and causes of the problems in the
 savings and loan industry that led to the enactment of the Financial
 Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, including,
 among other things, consideration of the role of--
 (A) State and Federal regulation of savings and loan associations, including
 capital and accounting standards;
 (B) supervision of, and supervisory resources allocated to, savings and loan
 associations by, or under the authority of, State and Federal governments;
 (C) State and Federal statutes concerning savings and loan associations,
 including asset powers legislation;
 (D) macroeconomic changes and regional recessions;
 (E) competitive factors;
 (F) unprecedented fraud and abuse by persons in or connected with savings
 and loan associations; and
 (G) deposit insurance, including changes in the amount insured and in
 technology; and
 (2) recommend, on the basis of such examination, further legislative,
 regulatory, supervisory, and other administrative changes that will--
 (A) prevent the recurrence of the problems identified in the savings and
 loan industry; and
 (B) improve the safety and soundness of depository associations, the
 Federal deposit insurance funds, and other Federal insurance programs.
SEC. 603. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT- The Commission shall be composed of 8 members
 appointed as follows:
 (1) 2 individuals appointed by the President.
 (2) 3 individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
 1 of whom shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the minority leader
 of the House of Representatives.
 (3) 3 individuals appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, 2
 of whom shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the majority leader
 of the Senate and 1 of whom shall be appointed upon the recommendation of
 the minority leader of the Senate.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY- No member, officer, or employee of the executive,
 legislative, or judicial branch of the Federal Government or of any State
 or local government may be a member of the Commission.
 (c) TERMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each member shall be appointed for the life of the
 Commission.
 (2) VACANCY- A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in
 which the original appointment was made.
 (d) Prohibition on Compensation-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the
 Commission shall serve without pay.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member shall receive travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703
 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) QUORUM- Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but
 3 members may hold hearings.
 (f) CHAIRPERSON- The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by
 the Commission from among its members.
 (g) MEETINGS- The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or
 of 5 members of the Commission.
SEC. 604. POWERS OF COMMISSION; HEARINGS AND SESSIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Commission may, for the purposes of carrying out
 this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony,
 and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
 (b) WITNESSES; ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Commission may
 call witnesses and administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing
 before the Commission.
 (2) COORDINATION OF CERTAIN TESTIMONY AND EVIDENCE- (A) In any case where
 the Commission intends to receive evidence or call a witness to provide
 testimony concerning a specific savings and loan association or the role
 of any person in connection therewith, the Commission shall, in writing
 not less than 21 days prior to the taking of such testimony or receiving
 such evidence, provide the Attorney General, the Director of the Office of
 Thrift Supervision, and the head of the Resolution Trust Corporation with--
 (i) the name of the savings and loan association involved;
 (ii) the date and location of the testimony or the receipt of evidence; and
 (iii) as appropriate, the name of the witness and a specific identification
 of the subject matter about which such witness is to testify or provide
 evidence, or the specific nature of the evidence to be received.
 (B) If the Attorney General, the Director of the Office of Thrift
 Supervision, or the head of the Resolution Trust Corporation determines that
 taking such testimony or receiving such evidence would impair, impede, or
 compromise the investigation, prosecution, or adjudication of a criminal,
 civil, or administrative matter or proceeding, he or she shall promptly
 notify the Commission of that determination. The Commission shall take
 that determination into consideration in deciding whether to proceed with
 the taking of testimony or receiving of evidence.
 (c) INTERIM REPORT- Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Commission may submit a report to the Congress concerning
 the ability of the Commission to obtain information and evidence necessary
 to carry out its duties under section 2 and including such recommendations
 concerning additional authority as the Commission deems appropriate.
 (d) MAILS- The Commission may use the United States mails in the same
 manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of
 the United States.
 (e) ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT SERVICES- Upon the request of the Commission,
 the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission,
 on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary
 for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
 (f) POWERS OF MEMBERS AND AGENTS- Any member or agent of the Commission may,
 if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is
 authorized to take pursuant to this section.
SEC. 605. STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
 (a) STAFF- Subject to such regulations as the Commission may prescribe,
 the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as the
 Chairperson considers appropriate.
 (b) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL SERVICE LAWS- The staff of the Commission
 may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States
 Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid
 without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter
 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates,
 except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of
 the annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General Schedule.
 (c) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission,
 the Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section
 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not
 to exceed the annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General
 Schedule.
 (d) STAFF OF FEDERAL AGENCIES- Upon request of the Chairperson, the head
 of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis,
 any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to
 assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
SEC. 606. REPORT.
 (a) REPORT REQUIRED- The Commission shall submit a final report to the
 President and the Congress not later than 6 months after the election of
 the Chairperson under section 3(f).
 (b) CONTENTS- The final report shall, consistent with the duties of the
 Commission set forth in section 2 of this Act, contain a detailed statement
 of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
SEC. 607. TERMINATION.
 The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report required
 by section 6(a) of this Act.
SEC. 608. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $1,000,000 to carry
 out the purposes of this Act.
TITLE VII--AUTHORIZATIONS
SEC. 701. ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR INVESTIGATORS AND PROSECUTORS FOR BANK
CRIME CASES.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS REFORM, RECOVERY, AND ENFORCEMENT ACT
 OF 1989- (1) Section 966(a) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery,
 and Enforcement Act of 1989 (103 Stat. 506) is amended to read as follows:
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney
 General, without fiscal year limitation, $75,000,000 for fiscal year 1990
 and $162,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1991 through 1993, for purposes
 of investigations, prosecutions, and civil proceedings involving financial
 institutions to which the Act and amendments made by this Act apply.'.
 (2) Section 967 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
 Enforcement Act of 1989 (105 Stat. 506) is amended--
 (A) by striking `$10,000,000' and inserting `$25,000,000'; and
 (B) by striking `1992' and inserting `1993'.
 (3) The additional funds authorized to be appropriated under the amendment
 made by this subsection shall be allocated among the Federal judicial
 districts with the highest financial institutions crime case loads for
 the purposes of--
 (A) providing additional United States magistrates;
 (B) renovating court facilities;
 (C) providing additional law clerks and clerical support staff; and
 (D) providing additional deputy clerks.
 (b) ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE- There is
 authorized to be appropriated to the Internal Revenue Service, Department
 of the Treasury, $16,000,000 for fiscal year 1991 for investigation of
 violations of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and related statutes
 involving insured depository institutions.
TITLE VIII--PRIVATE ACTIONS AGAINST PERSONS COMMITTING BANK FRAUD CRIMES
SEC. 801. SHORT TITLE.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Financial Institutions Anti-Fraud
 Enforcement Act of 1990'.
CHAPTER 1--DECLARATIONS PROVIDING NEW CLAIMS TO THE UNITED STATES
SEC. 802. FILING OF CONFIDENTIAL DECLARATIONS BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any person may file a declaration of--
 (1) a violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, section 215, 287, 656,
 657, 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, 1341, 1343, or 1344 of title 18, United
 States Code;
 (2) a violation giving rise to an action for civil penalties under section
 951 of the Financial Institution Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act; or
 (3) facts giving rise to any other civil right of action on the part of
 the United States for damages or penalties arising from fraud,
affecting a depository institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or any other agency or entity of the United States.
 (b) PLACE OF FILING- A declaration under subsection (a) shall be filed with
 the Attorney General of the United States or with an agent designated by
 the Attorney General for receiving declarations under this section.
 (c) EXTENSION OF STATUTES OF LIMITATION- The statutes of limitations upon
 all current, unexpired civil causes of action referred to in subsection
 (a) are extended for 5 years.
SEC. 803. CONTENTS OF DECLARATIONS.
 A declaration filed pursuant to section 4411 shall--
 (1) set forth the name and address of the declarant and the basis for the
 declarant's knowledge of the facts alleged;
 (2) allege under oath or affirmation specific facts, relating to a
 particular transaction or transactions, which constitute a prima facie
 case of a criminal violation of one of the sections of title 18, United
 States Code, or any civil cause of action, referred to in section 4411(a);
 (3) contain at least 1 new factual element necessary to establish a prima
 facie case that was unknown to the Government at the time of filing; and
 (4) set forth all facts supporting the allegation of a criminal violation
 or civil cause of action known to the declarant, along with the names of
 material witnesses and the nature and location of documentary evidence
 known to the declarant.
SEC. 804. CONFIDENTIALITY OF DECLARATIONS.
 (a) PERIOD OF CONFIDENTIALITY- A declarant and the declarant's agents shall
 not disclose the existence or filing of a declaration filed pursuant to
 section 4411 until:
 (1) the declarant receives notice that the Attorney General has concluded
 that an action should not be pursued under section 4416(b);
 (2) the declarant receives notice of an award pursuant to section 4416(c); or
 (3) the declarant is granted a contract to pursue an action under section
 4415(b) or 4417.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF CONFIDENTIALITY TO PREVENT PREJUDICE- (1) Notwithstanding
 any other law, the contents of a declaration shall not be disclosed by
 the declarant if the disclosure would prejudice or compromise in any way
 the completion of any government investigation or any criminal or civil
 case that may arise out of, or make use of, information contained in a
 declaration, but information contained in a declaration may be disclosed
 as required by duly issued and authorized legal process.
 (2) The Attorney General may in a circumstance described in paragraph (1)
 notify a declarant that continued confidentiality is required under this
 subsection notwithstanding paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a).
 (c) LOSS OF RIGHTS- A declarant who discloses, except as provided by this
 subtitle, the existence or filing of a declaration or the contents thereof
 to anyone other than a duly authorized Federal or State investigator or the
 declarant's attorney shall immediately lose all rights under this chapter.
SEC. 805. INELIGIBILITY TO FILE VALID DECLARATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A declaration filed pursuant to section 4411 and in
 accordance with sections 4412 and 4413 is valid unless--
 (1) the declaration is filed by a current or former officer or employee of
 a Federal or State government agency or instrumentality who discovered or
 gathered the information in the declaration, in whole or in part, while
 acting within the course of the declarant's government employment;
 (2) the declaration is filed by a person who knowingly participated in
 the violation of any of the sections of title 18, United States Code,
 referred to in section 4411, or any other fraudulent conduct with respect
 to which the declaration is made; or
 (3) the declaration includes allegations or transactions that have been
 disclosed to a member of the public in a criminal, civil, or administrative
 proceeding, in a congressional, administrative, or GAO report, hearing,
 audit or investigation, by any other government source, or by the news
 media, unless the person providing the declaration is the original source
 of the information.
 (b) DEFINITION- For the purposes of subsection (a)(3), the term `original
 source' means a person who has direct and independent knowledge of the
 information contained in the declaration and who voluntarily provided the
 information to the government prior to the disclosure.
 (c) NOTICE OF INVALIDITY- If the Attorney General determines at any time
 that a declaration is invalid under this section, that a declaration fails
 to meet the requirements of section 4412, or that a declaration has been
 disclosed in violation of section 4413, the Attorney General shall notify the
 person who filed the declaration in writing that the declaration is invalid,
 and the declarant shall not enjoy any of the rights of the declarant listed
 in section 4415 or 4416.
SEC. 806. RIGHTS OF DECLARANTS: PARTICIPATION IN ACTIONS, AWARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A person who has filed a declaration that meets the
 requirements of sections 4411 through 4414 shall have the rights stated
 in this section.
 (b) CIVIL ACTION- If the Attorney General determines that a cause of action
 based on the declaration should be referred to private counsel pursuant
 to chapter 4, after consultation with the Attorney General the declarant
 shall have the right to select counsel to prosecute the action, and the
 declarant and the declarant's counsel shall act in accordance with chapter 4.
 (c) CRIMINAL CONVICTION- (1) When an agency or entity of the United States
 obtains a criminal conviction and the Attorney General determines that the
 conviction was based in whole or in part on the information contained in
 a valid declaration filed under section 4411, the declarant shall have
 the right to receive not less than $10,000 and not more than $250,000,
 any such award to be paid from the Financial Institution Information Award
 Fund established under section 4419.
 (2) In determining the size of any award under paragraph (1), the Attorney
 General may, in the Attorney General's discretion, consider any appropriate
 factor, including--
 (A) the seriousness of the offense for which the conviction was obtained;
 (B) the extent to which the facts alleged in the declaration contributed
 to the conviction;
 (C) the number of offenders apprehended pursuant to information provided
 by the declarant;
 (D) whether or not the offender was previously under investigation by any
 law enforcement agency when the declaration was filed;
 (E) the extent to which the declarant cooperated in the development of
 the Government's case and its presentation at trial;
 (F) the sentences and fines imposed on the offender and other offenders
 in related cases;
 (G) the extent to which other sources of private information were relied
 upon; and
 (H) the hardship to the declarant and any expenses the declarant incurred
 in preparing the declaration.
 (d) SHARE OF FUNDS AND ASSETS- (1) When an agency or entity of the United
 States acquires funds or assets pursuant to the execution of a civil,
 criminal, or administrative judgment or order and the Attorney General
 determines that the judgment or order was based in whole or in part on
 the information contained in a valid declaration filed under section 4411,
 the declarant shall have the right to share in the recovery as follows:
 (A)(i) The declarant shall be entitled to 20 percent to 30 percent of the
 first $1,000,000 recovered, 10 percent to 20 percent of the next $4,000,000
 recovered, and 5 percent to 10 percent of the next $5,000,000 recovered.
 (ii) In calculating an award under clause (i), the Attorney General
 may consider the size of the overall recovery and the usefulness of the
 information provided by the declarant.
 (B) When a declarant has received an award under subsection (c), the
 Attorney General may subtract the amount of that reward from any recovery
 under this subsection.
 (2)(A) When more than 1 declarant has provided information leading to a
 recovery under this subsection, the Attorney General shall first calculate
 the size of the total award under paragraph (1)(A) and then distribute
 that amount according to the contribution made by each declarant.
 (B) In distributing any such award between 2 or more declarants, the
 Attorney General may, in the Attorney General's discretion, consider any
 appropriate factor, including those enumerated in section 4415(c)(2).
 (e) PROHIBITION OF DOUBLE AWARDS- (1) No person shall receive both an
 award under this section and a reward under chapter 3 for providing the
 same or substantially similar information.
 (2) When a person qualifies for both an award under this section and a reward
 under chapter 3 for providing the same or substantially similar information,
 the person may notify the Attorney General in writing of the person's
 election to seek an award under this section or a reward under chapter 3.
SEC. 807. RIGHTS OF DECLARANTS: NOTIFICATIONS; GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A person who has filed a declaration that meets the
 requirements of sections 4411 through 4414 shall have the rights stated
 in this section.
 (b) NOTICE OF DECISION NOT TO PURSUE- If, after review, the Attorney General
 concludes that the information contained in a declaration should not be
 pursued in a civil or criminal proceeding, the Attorney General shall so
 notify the declarant in writing and shall provide a brief statement of
 the reasons that the declaration will not be pursued.
 (c) ENTRY OF JUDGMENT OR ORDER- (1) When an agency or entity of the United
 States obtains a civil, criminal, or administrative judgment or order
 based in whole or in part on a valid declaration filed under section 4411,
 the Attorney General shall notify the declarant in writing of the entry
 of the judgment or order.
 (2) A notice described in paragraph (1) shall contain--
 (A) the Attorney General's determination of the amount of the award due
 the declarant under section 4415 (b) or (c) upon recovery by the agency
 or entity of the United States; and
 (B) a short statement of reasons for the amount of the award.
 (d) NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF INVESTIGATION OR PROCEEDING- If the Attorney
 General has not provided the declarant with notice under subsection (b)
 or a notice of invalidity pursuant to section 4414 within the time period
 set forth in subsection (e), the Attorney General shall notify the declarant
 in writing that--
 (1) there is a pending investigation or proceeding in the course of which
 the declarant's allegations are being addressed; or
 (2) the declarant's allegations have not yet been addressed.
 (e) TIME FOR NOTICES- (1) In the case of a valid declaration filed not
 more than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney
 General shall send notification to a declarant pursuant to subsection (d)
 not later than 3 years after the date of filing of the declaration.
 (2)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), in the case of a valid declaration
 filed more than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Attorney General shall send notification not later than 1 year after the
 date of filing of the declaration.
 (B) If the Attorney General certifies that it is in the interest of the
 United States to give further consideration to the information provided
 in the declaration for an additional 90-day period, the Attorney General
 shall so notify the declarant in writing.
 (f) CONFIDENTIALITY OF NOTICES- All notices provided to a declarant under
 this section shall be kept confidential by the declarant in the same manner,
 and subject to the same penalties, as the declaration under section 4413.
SEC. 808. UNREVIEWED DECLARATIONS; REQUEST TO PURSUE ACTION AS PRIVATE
CONTRACTOR.
 (a) REQUEST FOR CONTRACT- (1) If, pursuant to section 4416(d)(2), the
 Attorney General notifies a declarant that the declarant's allegations have
 not yet been addressed, the declarant may request the Attorney General to
 award a contract pursuant to chapter 4 to pursue the case.
 (2) A declarant's request under paragraph (1) shall be filed with the
 Attorney General not later than 30 days after the date of service of notice
 under section 4416(d)(2), and the Attorney General shall respond to the
 request not later than 30 days after receipt.
 (b) CONTENTS OF RESPONSE- In response to a request under subsection (a)(1),
 the Attorney General shall--
 (1) grant a contract pursuant to chapter 4; or
 (2) proceed with an action.
 (c) GRANT OF CONTRACT- If the Attorney General decides to grant a contract,
 after consultation with the Attorney General the declarant shall have the
 right to select counsel to prosecute an action, and the declarant and the
 declarant's counsel shall act in accordance with chapter 4.
SEC. 809. NONREVIEWABILITY OF ACTION BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
 Notwithstanding any other law, no court shall have jurisdiction over any
 claim based on any action taken by the Attorney General or any refusal to
 take action under this chapter, except for failure to provide notification
 under section 4416.
SEC. 810. FINANCIAL INSTITUTION INFORMATION AWARD FUND.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established in the United States Treasury a
 special fund to be known as the Financial Institution Information Award
 Fund (referred to as the `Fund') which shall be available to the Attorney
 General without fiscal year limitation to pay awards to declarants pursuant
 to section 4415(c) and to pay special rewards pursuant to section 3059A
 of title 18, United States Code.
 (b) DEPOSIT OF NET FINES- (1) There shall be deposited in the Fund all net
 fines that are collected from persons convicted of offenses against the
 United States under sections 215, 287, 656, 657, 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007,
 1014, 1341, 1343, and 1344 of title 18, United States Code, affecting a
 depository institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 or any other agency or entity of the United States.
 (2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `net fines' means fines collected
 less any amounts paid from the fines to eligible declarants under section
 4415(d) or section 4425(c).
 (3) Section 1402(b)(1) of the Victims of Crime Act of 1984 (42 U.S.C.
 10601(b)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (A)(ii);
 (B) by adding `and' at the end of paragraph (B)(iv); and
 (C) by inserting at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) fines collected from persons convicted of offenses against the United
 States under sections 215, 287, 656, 657, 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014,
 1341, 1343, and 1344 of title 18, United States Code, affecting a depository
 institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any
 other agency or entity of the United States;'.
 (4) If the amount deposited in the Fund during a particular fiscal year
 reaches $10,000,000, the excess over that sum shall be deposited in the
 Crime Victims Fund, notwithstanding section 1402(b)(1)(C) of the Victims
 of Crime Act of 1984.
 (c) INVESTMENT OF FUNDS- Amounts in the Fund which are not currently needed
 for the purposes of paying awards to declarants pursuant to section 4415(c)
 and to pay special rewards pursuant to section 3059A of title 18, United
 States Code, shall be kept on deposit or invested in obligations of, or
 guaranteed by, the United States, and all earnings on such investments
 shall be deposited in the Fund.
SEC. 811. SOURCES OF PAYMENTS TO DECLARANTS.
 Notwithstanding any other law, an award under this chapter or chapter 2
 of this subtitle or under section 34 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 may be paid to a declarant, or to an individual providing information,
 from the amounts recovered in satisfaction of an order of restitution,
 a civil judgment, a forfeiture order, or a criminal fine.
SEC. 812. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY: PUBLIC REPORTS ON PROCESSING OF
DECLARATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In addition to the written statements of reasons provided
 individual declarants under section 4416, on the date that is 6 months
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and at the end of each 6-month
 period thereafter during which this chapter is in effect, the Attorney
 General shall compile a public report on the processing of declarations
 under this chapter.
 (b) CONTENTS OF REPORT- The report required by subsection (a) shall state--
 (1) the number of declarations filed within the relevant period;
 (2) the number of declarations found invalid under sections 4412, 4413,
 and 4414;
 (3) the number of valid declarations processed and their present status,
 including whether or not they have been reviewed and if they have been
 reviewed what determination was reached;
 (4) the number and amounts of all awards paid to declarants under this
 chapter; and
 (5) the number of convictions attributable in whole or in part to valid
 declarations filed under this chapter and the number and dollar amounts
 of all monetary recoveries, criminal or civil, attributable in whole or
 in part to valid declarations filed under this chapter.
 (c) CONFIDENTIALITY- Notwithstanding any other law, in compiling the
 report required by subsection (a), the Attorney General may take all steps
 necessary to guard against the disclosure of any information that could
 in any way prejudice a current criminal or civil investigation or proceeding.
SEC. 813. PROTECTION FOR DECLARANTS.
 A declarant under this chapter shall enjoy the protections of section
 3059A(e) of title 18, United States Code.
SEC. 814. PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
 The Attorney General may promulgate any rules, regulations, or guidelines
 that, in the Attorney General's judgment, are necessary and appropriate
 to the effective administration of this chapter.
CHAPTER 2--DECLARATIONS PROVIDING THE UNITED STATES WITH NEW INFORMATION
CONCERNING THE RECOVERY OF ASSETS
SEC. 815. FILING OF CONFIDENTIAL DECLARATIONS BY PRIVATE PERSONS IDENTIFYING
SPECIFIC ASSETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- After the entry of a final judgment in any civil or criminal
 action referred to in section 4411, any person may file a declaration
 identifying specific assets which might be recovered by the United States
 in satisfaction of that judgment.
 (b) PLACE OF FILING- A declaration under subsection (a) shall be filed with
 the Attorney General of the United States or with an agent designated by
 him for receiving declarations under this section.
SEC. 816. CONTENTS OF DECLARATIONS.
 A declaration filed pursuant to section 4431 shall--
 (1) set forth the name and address of the declarant and the basis for the
 declarant's knowledge of the facts alleged;
 (2) allege under oath or affirmation specific facts indicating the nature,
 location, and approximate dollar value of the asset or assets and the
 names of all persons known to the declarant to have possession, custody,
 or control of the asset or assets; and
 (3) allege under oath or affirmation specific facts that establish a
 prima facie case showing that the asset is legally subject to attachment,
 garnishment, sequestration, or other proceeding in satisfaction of the
 judgment referred to in section 4431.
SEC. 817. CONFIDENTIALITY OF DECLARATIONS.
 (a) PERIOD OF CONFIDENTIALITY- A declarant and the declarant's agents shall
 not disclose the existence or filing of a declaration filed pursuant to
 section 4431 until:
 (1) the declarant receives notice that the Attorney General has concluded
 that an action should not be pursued under section 4436(b);
 (2) the declarant receives notice of an award pursuant to section 4436(c); or
 (3) the declarant is granted a contract to pursue an action under section
 4435(b) or 4437.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF CONFIDENTIALITY TO PREVENT PREJUDICE- (1) Notwithstanding
 any other law, the contents of a declaration shall not be disclosed by
 the declarant if the disclosure would prejudice or compromise in any way
 the completion of any government investigation or any criminal or civil
 case that may arise out of, or make use of, information contained in a
 declaration, but information contained in a declaration may be disclosed
 as required by duly issued and authorized legal process.
 (2) The Attorney General may in a circumstance described in paragraph (1)
 notify a declarant that continued confidentiality is required under this
 subsection notwithstanding paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a).
 (c) LOSS OF RIGHTS- A declarant who discloses, except as provided by this
 subtitle, the existence or filing of a declaration or the contents thereof
 to anyone other than a duly authorized Federal or State investigator or the
 declarant's attorney shall immediately lose all rights under this chapter.
SEC. 818. INELIGIBILITY TO FILE VALID DECLARATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A declaration filed pursuant to section 4431 and in
 accordance with sections 4432 and 4433 is valid unless--
 (1) the declaration is filed by a current or former officer or employee of
 a Federal or State government agency or instrumentality who discovered or
 gathered the information in the declaration, in whole or in part, while
 acting within the course of the declarant's government employment;
 (2) the declaration is filed by a person who knowingly participated in
 the violation of any of the sections of title 18, United States Code,
 referred to in section 4411, or any other fraudulent conduct with respect
 to which the declaration is made; or
 (3) the declaration identifies an asset or assets the nature, location,
 or possible recovery of which has been disclosed to a member of the public
 in a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding, in a congressional,
 administrative, or GAO report, hearing, audit or investigation, by any
 other government source, or by the news media, unless the person providing
 the declaration is the original source of the information.
 (b) DEFINITION- For the purposes of subsection (a)(3), the term `original
 source' means a person who has direct and independent knowledge of the
 information contained in the declaration and who voluntarily provided the
 information to the government prior to the disclosure.
 (c) NOTICE OF INVALIDITY- If the Attorney General determines at any time
 that a declaration is invalid under this section, that a declaration fails
 to meet the requirements of section 4432, or that a declaration has been
 disclosed in violation of section 4433, the Attorney General shall notify the
 person who filed the declaration in writing that the declaration is invalid,
 and the declarant shall not enjoy any of the rights of the declarant listed
 in section 4435 or 4436.
SEC. 819. RIGHTS OF DECLARANTS: PARTICIPATION IN ACTIONS, AWARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A person who has filed a declaration that meets the
 requirements of sections 4431 through 4434 shall have the rights stated
 in this section.
 (b) CIVIL ACTION- If the Attorney General determines that a proceeding
 to recover the asset or assets identified in the declaration should be
 referred to private counsel pursuant to chapter 4, after consultation with
 the Attorney General the declarant shall have the right to select counsel
 to prosecute the action, and the declarant and the declarant's counsel
 shall act in accordance with chapter 4.
 (c) SHARE OF ASSETS- When an agency or entity of the United States recovers
 any asset or assets specifically identified in a valid declaration filed
 under section 4431 and the Attorney General determines that the asset or
 assets would not have been recovered if the declaration had not been filed,
 the declarant shall have the right to share in the recovery in the amount
 of 20 percent to 30 percent of the first $1,000,000 recovered, 10 percent
 to 20 percent of the next $4,000,000 recovered, and 5 percent to 10 percent
 of the next $5,000,000 recovered.
 (d) PROHIBITION OF DOUBLE AWARDS- (1) No person shall receive both an
 award under this section and a reward under chapter 3 for providing the
 same or substantially similar information.
 (2) When a person qualifies for both an award under this section and a reward
 under chapter 3 for providing the same or substantially similar information,
 the person may notify the Attorney General in writing of the person's
 election to seek an award under this section or a reward under chapter 3.
SEC. 820. RIGHTS OF DECLARANTS: NOTIFICATIONS; GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A person who has filed a declaration that meets the
 requirements of sections 4431 through 4434 shall have the rights stated
 in this section.
 (b) NOTICE OF DECISION NOT TO PURSUE- If, after review, the Attorney
 General concludes that the information contained in a declaration should
 not be pursued in a proceeding to recover the asset or assets, the Attorney
 General shall so notify the declarant in writing and shall provide a brief
 statement of the reasons that the declaration will not be pursued.
 (c) ENTRY OF JUDGMENT OR ORDER- (1) When an agency or entity of the United
 States obtains a final judgment transferring to the United States title to
 an asset or assets identified in a valid declaration filed under section
 4431, the Attorney General shall notify the declarant in writing of the
 entry of the judgment or order.
 (2) A notice described in paragraph (1) shall contain--
 (A) the Attorney General's determination of the amount of the award due
 the declarant under section 4435(c) upon recovery by the agency or entity
 of the United States; and
 (B) a short statement of reasons for the amount of the award.
 (d) NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF INVESTIGATION OR PROCEEDING- (1) Subject to
 paragraph (2), if the Attorney General has not provided the declarant
 with notice under subsection (b) or a notice of invalidity pursuant to
 section 4434 within 1 year after the date of filing of the declaration,
 the Attorney General shall notify the declarant in writing that--
 (A) there is a pending investigation or proceeding in the course of which
 the declarant's allegations are being addressed; or
 (B) the declarant's allegations have not yet been addressed.
 (2) If the Attorney General certifies that it is in the interest of the
 United States to give further consideration to the information provided
 in the declaration for an additional 90-day period, the Attorney General
 shall so notify the declarant in writing.
 (e) CONFIDENTIALITY OF NOTICES- All notices provided to a declarant under
 this section shall be kept confidential by the declarant in the same manner,
 and subject to the same penalties, as the declaration under section 4433.
SEC. 821. UNREVIEWED DECLARATIONS; REQUEST TO PURSUE ACTION AS PRIVATE
CONTRACTOR.
 (a) REQUEST FOR CONTRACT- (1) If, pursuant to section 4436(d)(1)(B), the
 Attorney General notifies a declarant that the declarant's allegations have
 not yet been addressed, the declarant may request the Attorney General to
 award a contract pursuant to chapter 4 to pursue the case.
 (2) A declarant's request under paragraph (1) shall be filed with the
 Attorney General not later than 30 days after the date of service of notice
 under section 4436(d)(1)(B), and the Attorney General shall respond to
 the request not later than 30 days after receipt.
 (b) CONTENTS OF RESPONSE- In response to a request under subsection (a)(1),
 the Attorney General shall--
 (1) grant a contract pursuant to chapter 4; or
 (2) proceed with an action.
 (c) GRANT OF CONTRACT- If the Attorney General decides to grant a contract,
 after consultation with the Attorney General the declarant shall have the
 right to select counsel to prosecute an action, and the declarant and the
 declarant's counsel shall act in accordance with chapter 4.
SEC. 822. NONREVIEWABILITY OF ACTION BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
 Notwithstanding any other law, no court shall have jurisdiction over any
 claim based on any action taken by the Attorney General or any refusal to
 take action under this chapter, except for failure to provide notification
 under section 4436.
SEC. 823. PROTECTION FOR DECLARANTS.
 A declarant under this chapter shall enjoy the protections of section
 3059A(e) of title 18, United States Code.
SEC. 824. PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
 The Attorney General may promulgate any rules, regulations, or guidelines
 that, in the Attorney General's judgment, are necessary and appropriate
 to the effective administration of this chapter.
CHAPTER 3--REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO RECOVERIES, CIVIL PENALTIES,
OR PROSECUTIONS
SEC. 825. REWARD FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO RECOVERIES OR CIVIL PENALTIES.
 Section 34(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1831k(a))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by striking `, in an amount that exceeds $50,000,'; and
 (b) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) a forfeiture under section 981 or 982 of title 18, United States Code,
 that arises in connection with a depository institution insured by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.'.
SEC. 826. REWARD FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO POSSIBLE PROSECUTION.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE- Chapter 203 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3059 the following
 new section:
`Sec. 3059A. Special rewards for information relating to certain financial
institution offenses
 `(a)(1) In special circumstances and in the Attorney General's sole
 discretion, the Attorney General may make payments to persons who furnish
 information unknown to the Government relating to a possible prosecution
 under section 215, 287, 656, 657, 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1014, 1341,
 1343, or 1344 of this title affecting a depository institution insured by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any other agency or entity of
 the United States, or to a possible prosecution for conspiracy to commit
 such an offense.
 `(2) The amount of a payment under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $50,000
 and shall be paid from the Financial Institution Information Award Fund
 established under section 4419 of the Financial Institutions Anti-Fraud
 Enforcement Act of 1990.
 `(b) A person is not eligible for a payment under subsection (a) if--
 `(1) the person is a current or former officer or employee of a Federal
 or State government agency or instrumentality who furnishes information
 discovered or gathered in the course of his government employment;
 `(2) the furnished information includes allegations or transactions
 that have been disclosed to a member of the public in a criminal, civil,
 or administrative proceeding, in a congressional, administrative, or GAO
 report, hearing, audit or investigation, from any other government source,
 or from the news media unless the person is the original source of the
 information; or
 `(3) the person knowingly participated in the violation of the section
 with respect to which the payment would be made.
 `(c) For the purposes of subsection (b)(2), the term `original source'
 means a person who has direct and independent knowledge of the information on
 which the allegations are based and has voluntarily provided the information
 to the Government prior to the disclosure.
 `(d) Neither the failure of the Attorney General to authorize a payment
 nor the amount authorized shall be subject to judicial review.
 `(e)(1) A person who--
 `(A) is discharged, demoted, suspended, threatened, harassed, or in any
 other manner discriminated against in the terms and conditions of employment
 by an employer because of lawful acts done by the person on behalf of the
 person or others in furtherance of a prosecution under any of the sections
 referred to in subsection (a) (including provision of information relating
 to, investigation for, initiation of, testimony for, or assistance in such
 a prosecution); and
 `(B) was not a knowing participant in the unlawful activity that is the
 subject of such a prosecution,
may, in a civil action, obtain all relief necessary to make the person whole.
 `(2) Relief under paragraph (1) shall include reinstatement with the
 same seniority status that the plaintiff would have had but for the
 discrimination, 2 times the amount of back pay, interest on the back pay,
 and compensation for any special damages sustained as a result of the
 discrimination, including litigation costs and reasonable attorney's fees.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The chapter heading for chapter 203 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 3059 the following new item:
`3059A. Special rewards for information relating to certain financial
institution offenses.'.
CHAPTER 4--USE OF PRIVATE LEGAL RESOURCES
SEC. 827. AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO CONTRACTS FOR PRIVATE COUNSEL.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Attorney General may enter into contracts retaining
 private counsel to furnish legal services, including representation in
 investigation, negotiation, compromise, settlement, litigation, and execution
 of judgments in the case of any civil action referred to in section 4411.
 (b) TERMS AND CONDITIONS- Each contract under subsection (a) shall include
 the provisions described in section 4465 and such other terms and conditions
 as the Attorney General considers necessary and appropriate to protect
 the interests of the United States, including a provision specifying the
 amount of the fee to be paid private counsel under the contract or the
 method for calculating the fee.
 (c) LIMITATION OF FEE- The amount of the fee payable for legal services
 furnished under a contract described in subsection (a) shall not exceed the
 fee that counsel engaged in the private practice of law in the jurisdiction
 wherein the legal services are furnished typically charge clients for
 furnishing the same or comparable legal services.
SEC. 828. REFERRAL BY REGULATORY AGENCIES.
 The head of an appropriate Federal banking agency may, subject to the
 approval of the Attorney General, refer to private counsel retained by
 the Attorney General pursuant to section 4461 civil actions arising from
 suspected and actual violations of the sections of title 18, United States
 Code, or any civil cause of action, referred to in section 4411.
SEC. 829. CONTRACT DECISIONS NONREVIEWABLE.
 Notwithstanding any other law, no court shall have jurisdiction over any
 claim based on the Attorney General's decision to refuse to enter into a
 contract for legal services referred to in section 4461.
SEC. 830. REPRESENTATION.
 Notwithstanding sections 516, 518(b), 519, and 547(2) of title 28, United
 States Code, private counsel retained under section 4461 may represent the
 United States in litigation in connection with legal services furnished
 pursuant to the contract entered into with that counsel, subject to the
 requirements specified in section 4465.
SEC. 831. CONTRACT PROVISIONS.
 A contract made with a private counsel under section 4461 shall include--
 (1) a provision permitting the Attorney General to terminate either the
 contract or the private counsel's representation of the United States in
 particular cases if the Attorney General finds that such action is in the
 best interests of the United States;
 (2) a provision requiring private counsel to transmit monthly to the
 Attorney General a report on the services relating matters handled pursuant
 to the contract during the preceding month and the progress made during
 that period; and
 (3) a provision requiring that the initiation, settlement, dismissal,
 or compromise of a claim be approved by a duly appointed officer of the
 United States.
SEC. 832. COUNTERCLAIMS.
 Any counterclaim filed in any action brought on behalf of the United States
 by private counsel retained under section 4461 may not be asserted unless
 the counterclaim has been served directly on the Attorney General or the
 United States Attorney for the judicial district in which, or embracing
 the place in which, the action is pending. Such service shall be made in
 accordance with the rules of procedure of the court in which the action
 on behalf of the United States is pending.
SEC. 833. CONTINGENT FEES.
 Notwithstanding section 3302(b) of title 31, United States Code, a contract
 under section 4461 may provide that a fee that private counsel charges to
 recover indebtedness or civil fines or penalties owed the United States
 is payable from the amount recovered.
SEC. 834. AWARDS OF COSTS AND FEES TO PREVAILING PLAINTIFF.
 When the United States, through private counsel retained under this chapter,
 prevails in any civil action, the court, in its discretion, may allow the
 United States reasonable attorney's fees as part of the costs.
SEC. 835. PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
 The Attorney General may promulgate any rules, regulations, or guidelines
 that, in the Attorney General's judgment, are necessary and appropriate
 to the effective administration of this chapter.
TITLE IX--TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS
SEC. 901. TITLE 18 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title 18 of the United States Code is amended--
 (1) in section 656--
 (A) by inserting `or a subsidiary of a member bank, national bank, or
 insured bank' after `insured bank';
 (B) by inserting `bank or savings and loan holding company,' before
 `national bank' the first time it appears in the first sentence; and
 (C) by inserting `or company' after `such bank' each time it occurs in
 the first paragraph;
 (2) in section 657--
 (A) by striking `Home Owner's Loan Corporation,' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Home Loan Bank System,
 the Resolution Trust Corporation,'; and
 (B) by striking `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation' and
 inserting `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation';
 (3) in section 1005, by inserting `or company' after `such bank' each time
 it appears in the first paragraph;
 (4) in section 1006--
 (A) by striking `Home Owner's Loan Corporation,' and inserting Office
 of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Home Loan Bank System, the Resolution
 Trust Corporation,'; and
 (B) by striking `Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation' and
 inserting `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation';
 (5) in section 1014, by inserting `Office of Thrift Supervision,' after
 `the Federal Home Loan Bank System,' each time it appears;
 (6) in section 1341, by inserting `, credit,' after `money';
 (7) in section 1343--
 (A) by inserting `, credit,' after `money';
 (B) by striking `transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire,
 radio, or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce,
 any writing, signs, signals, picture, or sounds' and inserting `uses or
 causes to be used any facility of interstate or foreign commerce'; and
 (C) by inserting `or attempting to do so' after `for the purpose of
 executing such scheme or artifice';
 (8) in section 2314, by inserting `or foreign' after `interstate'; and
 (9) in section 3289, by striking `or, in the event of an appeal, within 60
 days of the date the dismissal of the indictment or information becomes
 final,' and inserting such stricken language after `within six calendar
 months of the expiration of the applicable statute of limitations,'.
 (b) HEADING- (1) The heading for section 1343 of title 18, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 1343. Fraud by use of facility of interstate commerce'.
 (2) The table of sections for chapter 63, United States Code, is amended
 by striking the item relating to section 1343 and inserting the following
 new item:
`1343. Fraud by use of facility of interstate commerce.'.
SEC. 902. RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT.
 Section 1101 of the Right to Financial Privacy Act (12 U.S.C. 3401) is
 amended in subsection (6)(B) by striking `section 3(f)(1)' and inserting
 `section 4(f)(1)'.
SEC. 903. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT TO FOIC ACT
 Section 8(b)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act is amended by
 striking the phrase `subsections (c), (d), (h), (i), (k), (l), (m), and
 (n) of this subsection' and inserting in lieu thereof `subsections (c)
 through (s) and subsection (u).'
SEC. 904. SECTION 656 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Revise section 4501(a)(1)(C) to read as follows:
 `(C) by striking `such bank' and inserting `such bank, subsidiary or company'
 each time it appears in the first paragraph;
SEC. 905. SECTION 1005 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Revise section 4501(a)(3) to read as follows:
 `(3) in section 1005--
 `(A) by inserting `or a subsidiary of such member bank, national bank or
 insured bank' after `insured bank' in the first paragraph;
 `(B) by striking `such bank' in the first paragraph and inserting instead
 `such bank, subsidiary or company'; and
 `(C) by striking `such bank' each time it appears in the third paragraph
 and inserting instead `such bank, subsidiary'.
SEC. 906. SECTION 215 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Add to section 4501(a) a new paragraph as follows:
 `(4) in section 215--
 `(A) by inserting `or a subsidiary of such institution' after `financial
 institution' each time it appears; and
 `(B) by inserting `or such subsidiary' after `such institution' each time
 it appears.
SEC. 907. SECTION 1014 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Revise section 4501(a)(5) to read as follows:
 `(5) in section 1014--
 `(A) by inserting `Office of Thrift Supervision,' after `the Federal Home
 Loan Bank System,' each time it appears; and
 `(B) by inserting `or a subsidiary of any institution' after `an insured
 State-chartered credit union, any institution'.
SEC. 908. SECTION 1341 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Revise section 4501(a)(6) to read as follows:
 `(6) in section 1341--
 `(A) by inserting `credit,' after `money'; and
 `(B) by inserting `or a subsidiary of such institution' after `financial
 institution' each time it appears.
SEC. 909. SECTION 1343 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Revise section 4501(a)(7) by adding a new subparagraph (D) as follows:
 `(D) by inserting `or a subsidiary of such institution' after `financial
 institution' each time it appears.
SEC. 910. SECTION 1344 OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE.
 Add section 4501(a) a new paragraph as follows:
 `(7) in section 1344, by inserting `or a subsidiary of such institution'
 after `financial institution' each time it appears.
TITLE X--OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION AMENDMENTS
SEC. 1001. CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDERS.
 (a) CEASE-AND-DESIST AUTHORITY- Section 8(b)(6) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818(B)(6)) is amended by inserting `or remedy'
 after `to take affirmative action to correct'.
 (b) TEMPORARY ORDER- Section 8(c)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1818(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or remedy' after `to take affirmative action to prevent';
 and
 (2) by striking `Such order may include any requirement authorized under
 subsection (b)(6)(B) of this section' and inserting instead `Such order may
 include any requirement authorized under subsection (b)(6) of this section'.
SEC. 1002. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO THE HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT AND THE BANK
CONSERVATION ACT.
 (a) AMENDMENTS TO THE HOME OWNERS' LOAN ACT- Section 5 of the Home Owners'
 Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1464) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)(2)(C)--
 (A) by redesignating clauses (i) through (iv) and (vi) as subclauses (I)
 through (IV) and (VI), respectively;
 (B) by redesignating clauses (v)(I) and (v)(II) as subclauses (V)(B),
 respectively;
 (C) by striking `Notwithstanding any' and inserting instead:
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any'; and
 (D) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 (ii) STANDARD FOR REVIEW- The Director's decision to appoint a conservator
 or receiver pursuant to clause (i) shall be considered and decided by the
 court only on the administrative record and shall be sustained unless the
 court finds such decision was arbitrary and capricious.'; and
(2) in subsection (d)(2)(E)--
 (A) by striking `The Director shall' and inserting in lieu thereof:
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The Director shall'; and
 (B) by adding at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(ii) STANDARD FOR REVIEW- The Director's decision to appoint a conservator
 or receiver pursuant to clause (i) shall be considered and decided by the
 court only on the administrative record and shall be sustained unless the
 court finds such decision was arbitrary and capricious.'; and
 (b) AMENDMENT TO THE BANK CONSERVATION ACT- Section 203(b)(1) of the Bank
 Conservation Act (12 U.S.C. 203(b)(1)) is amended by striking the second
 sentence and inserting instead `The Comptroller's decision to appoint a
 conservator pursuant to this section shall be considered and decided by
 the court only on the administrative record and shall be sustained unless
 the court finds such decision was arbitrary and capricious.';
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall
 be effective with respect to actions pending on, or brought or commenced
 on or after, the effective date of this Act.
TITLE XI--CLARIFYING APPLICATION OF U.S. BANKING OFFENSES TO FOREIGN BANKS
OPERATING IN THE UNITED STATES
SEC. 1101. FINANCIAL INSTITUTION DEFINED.
 Section 20 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new paragraphs--
 `(7) a Federal Reserve Bank or a member bank of the Federal Reserve System;
 `(8) an organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or
 section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Reserve Act; or
 `(9) a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined in section 1(b)
 (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1)
 or 3101(3)).'.
SEC. 1102. OFFER OF LOAN OR GRATUITY TO BANK EXAMINERS.
 Section 212 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting in the first undesignated paragraph `or of a branch or
 agency of a foreign bank as defined in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the
 International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)) or of an
 organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section
 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Act,' after `or the deposits
 of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation';
 (2) by inserting in the first undesignated paragraph `branch or agency,
 organization,' after `who examines or has authority to examine such
 bank,'; and
 (3) by inserting `or branches or agencies or organizations operating under
 section 25 or 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act' after `insured financial
 institutions' in the second undesignated paragraph thereof.
SEC. 1103. ACCEPTANCE OF LOAN OR GRATUITY BY BANK EXAMINER.
 Section 213 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or of a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3103(3)) or of an organization operating under section
 25 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of
 the Federal Reserve Act' after `the deposits of which are insured by the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'; and
 (2) by inserting `branch or agency,' after `accepts a loan or gratuity
 from any bank,'.
SEC. 1104. CUSTODIANS, GENERALLY, MISUSING PUBLIC FUNDS.
 Section 648 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting
 `including a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined in section 1(b)
 (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1)
 or 3101(3))' after `no deposits in any bank,'.
SEC. 1105. THEFT BY BANK EXAMINER.
 Section 655 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or is a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)) or is an organization operating under section 25
 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the
 Federal Reserve Act' after `or which is insured by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation' in the first undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (2) by inserting `branch, agency or organization' after `adjacent to
 the premises of such bank,' in the first undesignated paragraph of the
 section; and
 (3) by inserting `or branches or agencies of foreign banks as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)) or organizations operating under section 25
 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the
 Federal Reserve Act,' after `banks the deposits of which are insured by
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,' in the second undesignated
 paragraph of the section.
SEC. 1106. THEFT, EMBEZZLEMENT, OR MISAPPLICATION BY BANK OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
 Section 656 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' and inserting a comma after `any Federal Reserve bank,
 member bank, national bank';
 (2) by inserting `, organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601
 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Reserve
 Act, or branch or agency of a foreign bank,' after `insured bank' where
 that term first occurs;
 (3) by inserting `insured bank, organization, branch or agency,' after
 `or a receiver of a national bank';
 (4) by inserting `organization, branch or agency,' after `funds or credits
 of such bank;'
 (5) by inserting `organization, branch or agency,' after `custody or care
 of such bank;'
 (6) by striking `and' after `one of the Federal Reserve banks;'; and
 (7) by striking the period after `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'
 and inserting `; and `branch or agency of a foreign bank' means a branch or
 agency as defined in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking
 Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)).'
SEC. 1107. CERTIFICATION OF CHECKS.
 Section 1004 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, any organization operating under section 25
 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section 25(a) (U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Fedeal
 Reserve Act, or any bank or agency of a foreign bank as defined in section
 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (U.S.C. 3101(1)
 or 3101(3)),' after `or member bank of the Federal Reserve System'; and
 (2) by inserting `, organization, branch or agency' after `has been
 regularly deposited in the bank'.
SEC. 1108. BANK ENTRIES, REPORTS AND TRANSACTIONS.
 Section 1005 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' after `national bank' and inserting a comma in the
 first undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (2) by inserting `organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601
 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Reserve
 Act or branch or agency of a foreign bank' after `insured bank' in the
 first undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (3) by inserting `or organization, branch or agency' after `of such bank'
 in the first undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (4) by striking `or' after `statement of such bank' in the third undesignated
 paragraph of the section;
 (5) by inserting `organization, branch or agency' after `of such bank,
 company,' in the third undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (6) by striking `or' after `defraud such bank' in the third undesignated
 paragraph of the section;
 (7) by inserting `organization, branch or agency' after `defraud such bank,
 company,' in the third undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (8) by striking `or' after `to deceive any officer of such bank' in the
 third undesignated paragraph of the section;
 (9) by inserting `organization, branch or agency' after `to deceive any
 officer of such bank, company' in the third paragraph of the section;
 (10) by striking `or' after `appointed to examine the affairs of such bank'
 in the third paragraph of the section;
 (11) by inserting `organization, branch or agency' after `appointed to
 examine the affairs of such bank, company' in the third paragraph of the
 section; and
 (12) by striking the period after `Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation'
 and inserting `; and `branch or agency of a foreign bank' means a branch
 or agency as defined in section 1(b)(1) or 1(b)(3) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)).'
SEC. 1109. LOAN AND CREDIT APPLICATIONS GENERALLY; RENEWALS AND DISCOUNTS;
CROP INSURANCE.
 Section 1014 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the
 `or' after `the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation,' and by inserting
 `any organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or
 section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Reserve Act, or any
 branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined in section 1(b) (1) or (3)
 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)),'
 after `the National Credit Union Administration Board,'.
SEC. 1110. FRAUD AND RELATED ACTIVITY IN CONNECTION WITH COMPUTERS.
 Section 1030 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' after subsection (e)(4)(F);
 (2) by striking the period after subsection (e)(4)(G) and inserting a
 semicolon; and
 (3) by inserting `(H) a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3)); and
 `(I) an organization operating under section 25 (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or
 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the Federal Reserve Act.' after subsection
 (e)(4)(G).
SEC. 1111. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION FROM A BANK EXAMINATION REPORT.
 Section 1906 of title 18, United States Code is amended--
 (1) by striking `or' after `the collateral for loans of any member bank
 of the Federal Reserve System' and inserting `any';
 (2) by inserting `, any organization operating under section 25 (12
 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or section 25(a) (12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.) of the
 Federal Reserve Act, or any branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3))' after `bank insured by the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation';
 (3) by inserting `, or organization or branch or agency' after `such bank'
 each time it appears;
 (4) by inserting `or a Federal branch or agency as defined in section 1(b)(6)
 or 1(b)(5) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(6)
 or 3101(5)),' after `without first having obtained the express permission
 in writing from the Comptroller of the Currency as to a national bank';
 (5) by inserting `an uninsured State branch or agency as defined in
 section 1(b)(12) or 1(b)(11)) of the International Banking Act of 1978
 (12 U.S.C. 3101(12) or 3101(11)), or an organization operating under
 section 25 or section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act,' after `the Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as to a State member bank'; and
 (6) by inserting `including any insured branch of a foreign bank,' after
 `or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as to any other insured bank,'.
SEC. 1112. BANK ROBBERY AND INCIDENTAL CRIMES.
 Section 2113 of title 18, United States Code, is amended in subsection (f)
 by inserting `including a branch or agency of a foreign bank as defined
 in section 1(b) (1) or (3) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3101(1) or 3101(3))' after `or operating under the laws of the
 United States'.
S 3194 PCS----2
S 3194 PCS----3
S 3194 PCS----4
S 3194 PCS----5
S 3194 PCS----6
S 3194 PCS----7
S 3194 PCS----8
S 3194 PCS----9
S 3194 PCS----10
S 3194 PCS----11
S 3194 PCS----12
S 3194 PCS----13
S 3194 PCS----14
S 3194 PCS----15
S 3194 PCS----16
S 3194 PCS----17
S 3194 PCS----18
S 3194 PCS----19
S 3194 PCS----20