[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1954 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

 Calendar No. 498

104th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 S. 1954

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish a uniform and more efficient Federal process for 
 protecting property owners' rights guaranteed by the fifth amendment.

_______________________________________________________________________

 July 17, 1996

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar

 Calendar No. 498
104th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 1954

 To establish a uniform and more efficient Federal process for 
 protecting property owners' rights guaranteed by the fifth amendment.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 16, 1996

 Mr. Hatch (for himself, Mr. Lott, Mr. Heflin, Mr. Abraham, Mr. 
 Ashcroft, Mr. Burns, Mr. Craig, Mr. Faircloth, Mr. Grams, Mr. 
Kempthorne, Mr. Mack, Mr. McConnell, Mr. Bennett, Mr. Bond, Mr. Brown, 
Mr. Grassley, Mr. Nickles, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Thurmond, Mr. 
 Pressler, Mr. Shelby, Mr. Cochran, Mr. Warner, Mr. Thomas, and Mr. 
Murkowski) introduced the following bill; which was read the first time

 July 17, 1996

 Read the second time and placed on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish a uniform and more efficient Federal process for 
 protecting property owners' rights guaranteed by the fifth amendment.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Omnibus Property Rights Act of 
1996''.

 TITLE I--FINDINGS AND PURPOSES

SEC. 101. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the private ownership of property is essential to a 
 free society and is an integral part of the American tradition 
 of liberty and limited government;
 (2) the framers of the United States Constitution, in order 
 to protect private property and liberty, devised a framework of 
 Government designed to diffuse power and limit Government;
 (3) to further ensure the protection of private property, 
 the fifth amendment to the United States Constitution was 
 ratified to prevent the taking of private property by the 
 Federal Government, except for public use and with just 
 compensation;
 (4) the purpose of the takings clause of the fifth 
 amendment of the United States Constitution, as the Supreme 
 Court stated in Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49 
 (1960), is ``to bar Government from forcing some people alone 
 to bear public burdens, which in all fairness and justice, 
 should be borne by the public as a whole'';
 (5) the Federal Government has singled out property holders 
 to shoulder the cost that should be borne by the public, in 
 violation of the just compensation requirement of the takings 
 clause of the fifth amendment of the United States 
 Constitution;
 (6) there is a need both to restrain the Federal Government 
 in its overzealous regulation of the private sector and to 
 protect private property, which is a fundamental right of the 
 American people; and
 (7) the incremental, fact-specific approach that courts now 
 are required to employ in the absence of adequate statutory 
 language to vindicate property rights under the fifth amendment 
 of the United States Constitution has been ineffective and 
 costly and there is a need for Congress to clarify the law and 
 provide an effective remedy.

SEC. 102. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this Act is to encourage, support, and promote the 
private ownership of property by ensuring the constitutional and legal 
protection of private property by the United States Government by--
 (1) the establishment of a new Federal judicial claim 
 through which to vindicate and protect property rights;
 (2) the simplification and clarification of court 
 jurisdiction over property right claims;
 (3) the establishment of an administrative procedure that 
 requires the Federal Government to assess the impact of 
 government action on holders of private property;
 (4) the minimization, to the greatest extent possible, of 
 the taking of private property by the Federal Government and to 
 ensure that just compensation is paid by the Government for any 
 taking; and
 (5) the establishment of administrative compensation 
 procedures involving the enforcement of the Endangered Species 
 Act of 1973 and section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution 
 Control Act.

 TITLE II--PROPERTY RIGHTS LITIGATION RELIEF

SEC. 201. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds that--
 (1) property rights have been abrogated by the application 
 of laws, regulations, and other actions by the Federal 
 Government that adversely affect the value of private property;
 (2) certain provisions of sections 1346 and 1402 and 
 chapter 91 of title 28, United States Code (commonly known as 
 the Tucker Act), that delineate the jurisdiction of courts 
 hearing property rights claims, complicates the ability of a 
 property owner to vindicate a property owner's right to just 
 compensation for a governmental action that has caused a 
 physical or regulatory taking;
 (3) current law--
 (A) forces a property owner to elect between 
 equitable relief in the district court and monetary 
 relief (the value of the property taken) in the United 
 States Court of Federal Claims;
 (B) is used to urge dismissal in the district court 
 on the ground that the plaintiff should seek just 
 compensation in the Court of Federal Claims; and
 (C) is used to urge dismissal in the Court of 
 Federal Claims on the ground that plaintiff should seek 
 equitable relief in district court;
 (4) property owners cannot fully vindicate property rights 
 in one court;
 (5) property owners should be able to fully recover for a 
 taking of their private property in one court;
 (6) certain provisions of section 1346 and 1402 and chapter 
 91 of title 28, United States Code (commonly known as the 
 Tucker Act) should be amended, giving both the district courts 
 of the United States and the Court of Federal Claims 
 jurisdiction to hear all claims relating to property rights; 
 and
 (7) section 1500 of title 28, United States Code, which 
 denies the Court of Federal Claims jurisdiction to entertain a 
 suit which is pending in another court and made by the same 
 plaintiff, should be repealed.

SEC. 202. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this title are to--
 (1) establish a clear, uniform, and efficient judicial 
 process whereby aggrieved property owners can obtain 
 vindication of property rights guaranteed by the fifth 
 amendment to the United States Constitution and this Act;
 (2) amend the Tucker Act, including the repeal of section 
 1500 of title 28, United States Code;
 (3) rectify the constitutional imbalance between the 
 Federal Government and the States; and
 (4) require the Federal Government to compensate property 
 owners for the deprivation of property rights that result from 
 State agencies' enforcement of federally mandated programs.

SEC. 203. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title the term--
 (1) ``agency'' means a department, agency, independent 
 agency, or instrumentality of the United States, including any 
 military department, Government corporation, Government-
 controlled corporation, or other establishment in the executive 
 branch of the United States Government;
 (2) ``agency action'' means any action, inaction, or 
 decision taken by an agency or State agency that at the time of 
 such action, inaction, or decision adversely affects private 
 property rights;
 (3) ``just compensation''--
 (A) means compensation equal to the full extent of 
 a property owner's loss, including the fair market 
 value of the private property taken, whether the taking 
 is by physical occupation or through regulation, 
 exaction, or other means; and
 (B) shall include compounded interest calculated 
 from the date of the taking until the date the United 
 States tenders payment;
 (4) ``owner'' means the owner or possessor of property or 
 rights in property at the time the taking occurs, including 
 when--
 (A) the statute, regulation, rule, order, 
 guideline, policy, or action is passed or promulgated; 
 or
 (B) the permit, license, authorization, or 
 governmental permission is denied or suspended;
 (5) ``private property'' or ``property'' means all 
 interests constituting real property, as defined by Federal or 
 State law, protected under the fifth amendment to the United 
 States Constitution, any applicable Federal or State law, or 
 this Act, and more specifically constituting--
 (A) real property, whether vested or unvested, 
 including--
 (i) estates in fee, life estates, estates 
 for years, or otherwise;
 (ii) inchoate interests in real property 
 such as remainders and future interests;
 (iii) personalty that is affixed to or 
 appurtenant to real property;
 (iv) easements;
 (v) leaseholds;
 (vi) recorded liens; and
 (vii) contracts or other security interests 
 in, or related to, real property;
 (B) the right to use water or the right to receive 
 water, including any recorded liens on such water 
 right; or
 (C) rents, issues, and profits of land, including 
 minerals, timber, fodder, crops, oil and gas, coal, or 
 geothermal energy;
 (6) ``State agency'' means any State department, agency, 
 political subdivision, or instrumentality that--
 (A) carries out or enforces a regulatory program 
 required under Federal law;
 (B) is delegated administrative or substantive 
 responsibility under a Federal regulatory program; or
 (C) receives Federal funds in connection with a 
 regulatory program established by a State,
 if the State enforcement of the regulatory program, or the 
 receipt of Federal funds in connection with a regulatory 
 program established by a State, is directly related to the 
 taking of private property seeking to be vindicated under this 
 Act; and
 (7) ``taking of private property'', ``taking'', or 
 ``take''--
 (A) means any action whereby restricting the 
 ownership, alienability, or use of private property is 
 an object of that action and is taken so as to require 
 compensation under the fifth amendment to the United 
 States Constitution or under this Act, including by 
 physical invasion, regulation, exaction, condition, or 
 other means; and
 (B) shall not include--
 (i) a condemnation action filed by the 
 United States in an applicable court; or
 (ii) an action filed by the United States 
 relating to criminal forfeiture.

SEC. 204. COMPENSATION FOR TAKEN PROPERTY.

 (a) In General.--No agency or State agency, shall take private 
property except for public use and with just compensation to the 
property owner. A property owner shall receive just compensation if--
 (1) as a consequence of an action of any agency, or State 
 agency, private property (whether all or in part) has been 
 physically invaded or otherwise taken without the consent of 
 the owner; and
 (2)(A) such action does not substantially advance the 
 stated governmental interest to be achieved by the legislation 
 or regulation on which the action is based;
 (B) such action exacts or affects the owner's 
 constitutional or otherwise lawful right to use the property or 
 a portion of such property as a condition for the granting of a 
 permit, license, variance, or any other agency action without a 
 rough proportionality between the stated need for the required 
 dedication and the impact of the proposed use of the property;
 (C) such action results in the property owner being 
 deprived, either temporarily or permanently, of all or 
 substantially all economically beneficial or productive use of 
 the property or that part of the property affected by the 
 action without a showing that such deprivation inheres in the 
 title itself;
 (D) such action results in the property owner being 
 deprived, either temporarily or permanently of 50 percent or 
 more of the value of the property or the value of that part of 
 the property affected by the action without a showing that such 
 deprivation inheres in the title itself; or
 (E) under any other circumstance where a taking has 
 occurred within the meaning of the fifth amendment of the 
 United States Constitution.
 (b) No Claim Against State or State Instrumentality.--No action may 
be filed under this section against a State agency for carrying out the 
functions described under section 203(6). Claims arising from the 
action, inaction, or decision of a State agency are properly filed 
against the Federal agency which administers the relevant Federal 
program.
 (c) Burden of Proof.--(1) The Government shall bear the burden of 
proof in any action described under--
 (A) subsection (a)(2)(A), with regard to showing the nexus 
 between the stated governmental purpose of the governmental 
 interest and the impact on the proposed use of private 
 property;
 (B) subsection (a)(2)(B), with regard to showing the 
 proportionality between the exaction or affect and the impact 
 of the proposed use of the property; and
 (C) subsection (a)(2)(C), with regard to showing that such 
 deprivation of value inheres in the title to the property.
 (2) The property owner shall have the burden of proof in any action 
described under subsection (a)(2)(D), with regard to establishing the 
diminution of value of property.
 (d) Compensation and Nuisance Exception to Payment of Just 
Compensation.--(1) No compensation shall be required by this Act if the 
owner's use or proposed use of the property is a nuisance as commonly 
understood and defined by background principles of nuisance and 
property law, as understood within the State in which the property is 
situated. To bar an award of damages under this Act, the United States 
shall have the burden of proof to establish that the use or proposed 
use of the property is a nuisance.
 (2)(A) Subject to paragraph (1), if an agency action directly takes 
property or a portion of property under subsection (a), compensation to 
the owner of the property that is affected by the action shall be 
either the greater of an amount equal to the difference between--
 (i) the fair market value of the property or the affected 
 portion of the property before such property or the affected 
 portion of such property became the object of the agency 
 action; and
 (ii) the fair market value of the property or the affected 
 portion of the property when such property or the affected 
 portion of such property becomes subject to the agency action.
 (B) Where appropriate, the calculation of fair market value shall 
include business losses.
 (e) Transfer of Property Interest.--The United States shall take 
title to the property interest for which the United States pays a claim 
under this Act.
 (f) Source of Compensation.--Awards of compensation referred to in 
this section, whether by judgment, settlement, or administrative 
action, shall be promptly paid by the agency out of currently available 
appropriations supporting the activities giving rise to the claims for 
compensation. If the agency action resulted from a requirement imposed 
by another agency, the agency making the payment or satisfying the 
judgment may seek partial or complete reimbursement from the 
appropriated funds of the other agency. If insufficient funds are 
available to the agency in the fiscal year in which the award becomes 
final, the agency shall either pay the award from appropriations 
available in the next fiscal year or promptly seek additional 
appropriations for such purpose.

SEC. 205. JURISDICTION AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) In General.--A property owner may file a civil action under 
this Act to challenge the validity of any agency action that adversely 
affects the owner's interest in private property in either the United 
States District Court or the United States Court of Federal Claims. 
This section constitutes express waiver of the sovereign immunity of 
the United States. Notwithstanding any other provision of law and 
notwithstanding the issues involved, the relief sought, or the amount 
in controversy, each court shall have concurrent jurisdiction over both 
claims for monetary relief and claims seeking invalidation of any Act 
of Congress or any regulation of an agency as defined under this Act 
affecting private property rights. The plaintiff shall have the 
election of the court in which to file a claim for relief.
 (b) Appeals.--In any appeal resulting from a claim under this 
section, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit 
shall have exclusive jurisdiction of--
 (1) an appeal from a final decision of a district court of 
 the United States, the United States District Court of Guam, 
 the United States District Court of the Virgin Islands, or the 
 District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands, if the 
 jurisdiction of that court was based, in whole or in part, on 
 subsection (a); and
 (2) an appeal from a final decision of the United States 
 Court of Federal Claims if that jurisdiction was based, in 
 whole or in part, on subsection (a).
 (c) Standing.--Persons adversely affected by an agency action taken 
under this Act shall have standing to challenge and seek judicial 
review of that action.
 (d) Amendments to Title 28, United States Code.--(1) Section 
1491(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1) by amending the first sentence to read 
 as follows: ``The United States Court of Federal Claims shall 
 have jurisdiction to render judgment upon any claim against the 
 United States for monetary relief founded either upon the 
 Constitution or any Act of Congress or any regulation of an 
 executive department, or upon any express or implied contract 
 with the United States, in cases not sounding in tort, or for 
 invalidation of any Act of Congress or any regulation of an 
 executive department that adversely affects private property 
 rights in violation of the fifth amendment of the United States 
 Constitution'';
 (B) in paragraph (2) by inserting before the first sentence 
 the following: ``In any case within its jurisdiction, the Court 
 of Federal Claims shall have the power to grant injunctive and 
 declaratory relief when appropriate.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(4) In cases otherwise within its jurisdiction, the Court of 
Federal Claims shall also have supplemental jurisdiction, concurrent 
with the courts designated in section 1346(b) of this title, to render 
judgment upon any related tort claim authorized under section 2674 of 
this title.
 ``(5) In proceedings within the jurisdiction of the Court of 
Federal Claims which constitute judicial review of agency action 
(rather than de novo proceedings), the provisions of section 706 of 
title 5 shall apply.''.
 (2)(A) Section 1500 of title 28, United States Code, is repealed.
 (B) The table of sections for chapter 91 of title 28, United States 
Code, is amended by striking out the item relating to section 1500.

SEC. 206. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 The statute of limitations for actions brought under this title 
shall be 6 years from the date of the taking of private property.

SEC. 207. ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS.

 The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought under 
this title, shall award costs of litigation (including reasonable 
attorney and expert witness fees) to any prevailing plaintiff.

SEC. 208. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this title shall be construed to interfere with the 
authority of any State to create additional property rights.

SEC. 209. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The provisions of this title and amendments made by this title 
shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall 
apply to any agency action that occurs after such date.

 TITLE III--ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

SEC. 301. ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.

 (a) In General.--Either party to a dispute over a taking of private 
property as defined under title II of this Act or litigation commenced 
under such title may elect to resolve the dispute through settlement or 
arbitration. In the administration of this section--
 (1) such alternative dispute resolution may only be 
 effectuated by the consent of all parties;
 (2) arbitration procedures shall be in accordance with the 
 alternative dispute resolution procedures established by the 
 American Arbitration Association; and
 (3) in no event shall arbitration be a condition precedent 
 or an administrative procedure to be exhausted before the 
 filing of a civil action under this Act.
 (b) Compensation as a Result of Arbitration.--The amount of 
arbitration awards shall be paid from the responsible agency's 
currently available appropriations supporting the agency's activities 
giving rise to the claim for compensation. If insufficient funds are 
available to the agency in the fiscal year in which the award becomes 
final, the agency shall either pay the award from appropriations 
available in the next fiscal year or promptly seek additional 
appropriations for such purpose.
 (c) Review of Arbitration.--(1) Appeal from arbitration decisions 
shall be to the United States District Court or the United States Court 
of Federal Claims in the manner prescribed by law for the claim under 
this Act.
 (2) The provisions of title 9, United States Code (relating to 
arbitration), shall apply to enforcement of awards rendered under this 
section.
 (d) Payment of Certain Compensation.--In any appeal under 
subsection (c), the amount of the award of compensation shall be 
promptly paid by the agency from appropriations supporting the 
activities giving rise to the claim for compensation currently 
available at the time of final action on the appeal. If insufficient 
funds are available to the agency in the fiscal year in which the award 
becomes final, the agency shall either pay the award from 
appropriations available in the next fiscal year or promptly seek 
additional appropriations for such purpose.

 TITLE IV--PRIVATE PROPERTY TAKING IMPACT ANALYSIS

SEC. 401. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this title are--
 (1) to protect the health, safety, welfare, and rights of 
 the public; and
 (2) to the extent practicable, avoid takings of private 
 property by assessing the effect of government action on 
 private property rights.

SEC. 402. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title the term--
 (1) ``agency'' means an agency as defined under section 203 
 of this Act, but shall not include the General Accounting 
 Office;
 (2) ``rule'' has the same meaning as such term is defined 
 under section 551(4) of title 5, United States Code;
 (3) ``property or private property'' refers to all property 
 protected by the takings clause of the fifth amendment of the 
 United States Constitution; and
 (4) ``taking of private property'' has the same meaning as 
 such term is defined under section 203 of this Act.

SEC. 403. PRIVATE PROPERTY TAKING IMPACT ANALYSIS.

 (a) In General.--(1) The Congress authorizes and directs that, to 
the fullest extent possible--
 (A) the policies, regulations, and public laws of the 
 United States shall be interpreted and administered in 
 accordance with the policies under this title; and
 (B) subject to paragraph (2), all agencies of the Federal 
 Government shall complete a private property taking impact 
 analysis before issuing or promulgating any policy, regulation, 
 proposed legislation, or related agency action which is likely 
 to result in a taking of private property.
 (2) The provisions of paragraph (1)(B) shall not apply to--
 (A) an action in which the power of eminent domain is 
 formally exercised;
 (B) an action taken--
 (i) with respect to property held in trust by the 
 United States; or
 (ii) in preparation for, or in connection with, 
 treaty negotiations with foreign nations;
 (C) a law enforcement action, including seizure, for a 
 violation of law, of property for forfeiture, or as evidence in 
 a criminal proceeding;
 (D) a study or similar effort or planning activity;
 (E) a communication between an agency and a State or local 
 land-use planning agency concerning a planned or proposed State 
 or local activity that regulates private property, regardless 
 of whether the communication is initiated by an agency or is 
 undertaken in response to an invitation by the State or local 
 authority;
 (F) the placement of a military facility or a military 
 activity involving the use of solely Federal property;
 (G) any military or foreign affairs function (including a 
 procurement function under a military or foreign affairs 
 function), but not including the civil works program of the 
 Army Corps of Engineers; and
 (H) any case in which there is an immediate threat to 
 health or safety that constitutes an emergency requiring 
 immediate response or the issuance of a regulation under 
 section 553(b)(B) of title 5, United States Code, if the taking 
 impact analysis is completed after the emergency action is 
 carried out or the regulation is published.
 (3) A private property taking impact analysis shall be a written 
statement that includes--
 (A) the specific purpose of the policy, regulation, 
 proposal, recommendation, or related agency action;
 (B) an assessment of the likelihood that a taking of 
 private property will occur under such policy, regulation, 
 proposal, recommendation, or related agency action;
 (C) an evaluation of whether such policy, regulation, 
 proposal, recommendation, or related agency action is likely to 
 require compensation to private property owners;
 (D) alternatives to the policy, regulation, proposal, 
 recommendation, or related agency action that would achieve the 
 intended purposes of the agency action and lessen the 
 likelihood that a taking of private property will occur; and
 (E) an estimate of the potential liability of the Federal 
 Government if the Government is required to compensate a 
 private property owner.
 (4) Each agency shall provide an analysis required under this 
section as part of any submission otherwise required to be made to the 
Office of Management and Budget in conjunction with a proposed 
regulation.
 (b) Guidance and Reporting Requirements.--(1) The Attorney General 
of the United States shall provide legal guidance in a timely manner, 
in response to a request by an agency, to assist the agency in 
complying with this section.
 (2) No later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act 
and at the end of each 1-year period thereafter, each agency shall 
submit a report to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
and the Attorney General of the United States identifying each agency 
action that has resulted in the preparation of a taking impact 
analysis, the filing of a taking claim, or an award of compensation 
under the just compensation clause of the fifth amendment of the United 
States Constitution. The Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget and the Attorney General of the United States shall publish in 
the Federal Register, on an annual basis, a compilation of the reports 
of all agencies submitted under this paragraph.
 (c) Public Availability of Analysis.--An agency shall--
 (1) make each private property taking impact analysis 
 available to the public; and
 (2) to the greatest extent practicable, transmit a copy of 
 such analysis to the owner or any other person with a property 
 right or interest in the affected property.
 (d) Presumptions in Proceedings.--For the purpose of any agency 
action or administrative or judicial proceeding, there shall be a 
rebuttable presumption that the costs, values, and estimates in any 
private property takings impact analysis shall be outdated and 
inaccurate, if--
 (1) such analysis was completed 5 years or more before the 
 date of such action or proceeding; and
 (2) such costs, values, or estimates have not been modified 
 within the 5-year period preceding the date of such action or 
 proceeding.

SEC. 404. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this title shall be construed to--
 (1) limit any right or remedy, constitute a condition 
 precedent or a requirement to exhaust administrative remedies, 
 or bar any claim of any person relating to such person's 
 property under any other law, including claims made under this 
 Act, section 1346 or 1402 of title 28, United States Code, or 
 chapter 91 of title 28, United States Code; or
 (2) constitute a conclusive determination of--
 (A) the value of any property for purposes of an 
 appraisal for the acquisition of property, or for the 
 determination of damages; or
 (B) any other material issue.

SEC. 405. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 No action may be filed in a court of the United States to enforce 
the provisions of this title on or after the date occurring 6 years 
after the date of the submission of the applicable private property 
taking impact analysis to the Office of Management and Budget.

 TITLE V--PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS ADMINISTRATIVE BILL OF RIGHTS

SEC. 501. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) a number of Federal environmental programs, 
 specifically programs administered under the Endangered Species 
 Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) and section 404 of the 
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344), have been 
 implemented by employees, agents, and representatives of the 
 Federal Government in a manner that deprives private property 
 owners of the use and control of property;
 (2) as Federal programs are proposed that would limit and 
 restrict the use of private property to provide habitat for 
 plant and animal species, the rights of private property owners 
 must be recognized and respected;
 (3) private property owners are being forced by Federal 
 policy to resort to extensive, lengthy, and expensive 
 litigation to protect certain basic civil rights guaranteed by 
 the United States Constitution;
 (4) many private property owners do not have the financial 
 resources or the extensive commitment of time to proceed in 
 litigation against the Federal Government;
 (5) a clear Federal policy is needed to guide and direct 
 Federal agencies with respect to the implementation of 
 environmental laws that directly impact private property;
 (6) all private property owners should and are required to 
 comply with current nuisance laws and should not use property 
 in a manner that harms their neighbors;
 (7) nuisance laws have traditionally been enacted, 
 implemented, and enforced at the State and local level where 
 such laws are best able to protect the rights of all private 
 property owners and local citizens; and
 (8) traditional pollution control laws are intended to 
 protect the general public's health and physical welfare, and 
 current habitat protection programs are intended to protect the 
 welfare of plant and animal species.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this title are to--
 (1) provide a consistent Federal policy to encourage, 
 support, and promote the private ownership of property; and
 (2) establish an administrative process and remedy to 
 ensure that the constitutional and legal rights of private 
 property owners are protected by the Federal Government and 
 Federal employees, agents, and representatives.

SEC. 502. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this title the term--
 (1) ``the Acts'' means the Endangered Species Act of 1973 
 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) and section 404 of the Federal Water 
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344);
 (2) ``agency head'' means the Secretary or Administrator 
 with jurisdiction or authority to take a final agency action 
 under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et 
 seq.) or section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
 (33 U.S.C. 1344);
 (3) ``non-Federal person'' means a person other than an 
 officer, employee, agent, department, or instrumentality of--
 (A) the Federal Government; or
 (B) a foreign government;
 (4) ``private property owner'' means a non-Federal person 
 (other than an officer, employee, agent, department, or 
 instrumentality of a State, municipality, or political 
 subdivision of a State, acting in an official capacity or a 
 State, municipality, or subdivision of a State) who owns 
 property;
 (5) ``private property'' or ``property'' has the same 
 meaning as such term is defined under section 203(5) of this 
 Act; and
 (6) ``qualified agency action'' means an agency action (as 
 that term is defined in section 551(13) of title 5, United 
 States Code) that is taken--
 (A) under section 404 of the Federal Water 
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1344); or
 (B) under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.).

SEC. 503. PROTECTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY RIGHTS.

 (a) In General.--In implementing and enforcing the Acts, each 
agency head shall--
 (1) comply with applicable State and tribal government 
 laws, including laws relating to private property rights and 
 privacy; and
 (2) administer and implement the Acts in a manner that has 
 the least impact on private property owners' constitutional and 
 other legal rights.
 (b) Final Decisions.--Each agency head shall develop and implement 
rules and regulations for ensuring that the constitutional and other 
legal rights of private property owners are protected when the agency 
head makes, or participates with other agencies in the making of, any 
final decision that restricts the use of private property in 
administering and implementing this Act.

SEC. 504. PROPERTY OWNER CONSENT FOR ENTRY.

 (a) In General.--An agency head may not enter privately owned 
property to collect information regarding the property, unless the 
private property owner has--
 (1) consented in writing to that entry;
 (2) after providing that consent, been provided notice of 
 that entry; and
 (3) been notified that any raw data collected from the 
 property shall be made available at no cost, if requested by 
 the private property owner.
 (b) Nonapplication.--(1) Subsection (a) does not prohibit entry 
onto property for the purpose of obtaining consent or providing notice 
required under subsection (a).
 (2) Subsection (a) shall not apply to an entry on property that 
is--
 (A) necessary because of an imminent threat to health or 
 safety or other emergency; or
 (B) necessary for the enforcement of criminal laws.

SEC. 505. RIGHT TO REVIEW AND DISPUTE DATA COLLECTED FROM PRIVATE 
 PROPERTY.

 An agency head may not use data that is collected on privately 
owned property to implement or enforce the Acts, unless--
 (1) the agency head has provided to the private property 
 owner--
 (A) access to the information;
 (B) a detailed description of the manner in which 
 the information was collected; and
 (C) an opportunity to dispute the accuracy of the 
 information; and
 (2) the agency head has determined that the information is 
 accurate, if the private property owner disputes the accuracy 
 of the information under paragraph (1)(C).

SEC. 506. RIGHT TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OF WETLANDS DECISIONS.

 Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 
1344) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(u) Administrative Appeals.--
 ``(1) The Secretary or Administrator shall, after notice 
 and opportunity for public comment, issue rules to establish 
 procedures to allow private property owners or their authorized 
 representatives an opportunity for an administrative appeal of 
 the following actions under this section:
 ``(A) A determination of regulatory jurisdiction 
 over a particular parcel of property.
 ``(B) The denial of a permit.
 ``(C) The terms and conditions of a permit.
 ``(D) The imposition of an administrative penalty.
 ``(E) The imposition of an order requiring the 
 private property owner to restore or otherwise alter 
 the property.
 ``(2) Rules issued under paragraph (1) shall provide that 
 any administrative appeal of an action described in paragraph 
 (1) shall be heard and decided by an official other than the 
 official who took the action, and shall be conducted at a 
 location which is in the vicinity of the property involved in 
 the action.
 ``(3) An owner of private property may receive 
 compensation, if appropriate, subject to the provisions of 
 section 508 of the Omnibus Property Rights Act of 1996.''.

SEC. 507. RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL UNDER THE ENDANGERED SPECIES 
 ACT OF 1973.

 Section 11 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1540) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Administrative Appeals.--
 ``(1) The Secretary shall, after notice and opportunity for 
 public comment, issue rules to establish procedures to allow 
 private property owners or their authorized representatives an 
 opportunity for an administrative appeal of the following 
 actions:
 ``(A) A determination that a particular parcel of 
 property is critical habitat of a listed species.
 ``(B) The denial of a permit for an incidental 
 take.
 ``(C) The terms and conditions of an incidental 
 take permit.
 ``(D) The finding of jeopardy in any consultation 
 on an agency action affecting a particular parcel of 
 property under section 7(a)(2) or any reasonable and 
 prudent alternative resulting from such finding.
 ``(E) Any incidental `take' statement, and any 
 reasonable and prudent measures included therein, 
 issued in any consultation affecting a particular 
 parcel of property under section 7(a)(2).
 ``(F) The imposition of an administrative penalty.
 ``(G) The imposition of an order prohibiting or 
 substantially limiting the use of the property.
 ``(2) Rules issued under paragraph (1) shall provide that 
 any administrative appeal of an action described in paragraph 
 (1) shall be heard and decided by an official other than the 
 official who took the action, and shall be conducted at a 
 location which is in the vicinity of the parcel of property 
 involved in the action.
 ``(3) An owner of private property may receive 
 compensation, if appropriate, subject to the provisions of 
 section 508 of the Omnibus Property Rights Act of 1996.''.

SEC. 508. COMPENSATION FOR TAKING OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.

 (a) Eligibility.--A private property owner that, as a consequence 
of a final qualified agency action of an agency head, is deprived of 50 
percent or more of the fair market value of the affected portion of the 
property as determined by a qualified appraisal expert, is entitled to 
receive compensation in accordance with the standards set forth in 
section 204 of this Act.
 (b) Time Limitation for Compensation Request.--No later than 90 
days after receipt of a final decision of an agency head that deprives 
a private property owner of fair market value or viable use of property 
for which compensation is required under subsection (a), the private 
property owner may submit in writing a request to the agency head for 
compensation in accordance with subsection (c).
 (c) Offer of Agency Head.--No later than 180 days after the receipt 
of a request for compensation, the agency head shall provide to the 
private property owner, where appropriate under the standards of this 
Act--
 (1) an offer to purchase the affected property of the 
 private property owner at a fair market value assuming no use 
 restrictions under the Acts; and
 (2) an offer to compensate the private property owner for 
 the difference between the fair market value of the property 
 without those restrictions and the fair market value of the 
 property with those restrictions.
 (d) Private Property Owner's Response.--(1) No later than 60 days 
after the date of receipt of the agency head's offers under subsection 
(c) (1) and (2) the private property owner shall accept one of the 
offers or reject both offers.
 (2) If the private property owner rejects both offers, the private 
property owner may submit the matter for arbitration to an arbitrator 
appointed by the agency head from a list of arbitrators submitted to 
the agency head by the American Arbitration Association. The 
arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the real estate 
valuation arbitration rules of that association. For purposes of this 
section, an arbitration is binding on--
 (A) the agency head and a private property owner as to the 
 amount, if any, of compensation owed to the private property 
 owner; and
 (B) whether the private property owner has been deprived of 
 fair market value or viable use of property for which 
 compensation is required under subsection (a).
 (e) Payment.--An agency head shall pay a private property owner any 
compensation required under the terms of an offer of the agency head 
that is accepted by the private property owner in accordance with 
subsection (d), or under a decision of an arbitrator under that 
subsection, out of currently available appropriations supporting the 
activities giving rise to the claim for compensation. The agency head 
shall pay to the extent of available funds any compensation under this 
section no later than 60 days after the date of the acceptance or the 
date of the issuance of the decision, respectively. If insufficient 
funds are available to the agency in the fiscal year in which the award 
becomes final, the agency shall either pay the award from 
appropriations available in the next fiscal year or promptly seek 
additional appropriations for such purpose.
 (f) Type of Payment.--At the election of the property owner, 
payment under this section shall be provided for in accordance with the 
standard set forth in section 204(d)(2) or in the amount equal to the 
fair market value of the property before the date of the final 
qualified agency action with respect to which the property or interest 
is acquired.

SEC. 509. PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER PARTICIPATION IN COOPERATIVE 
 AGREEMENTS.

 Section 6 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1535) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, when the 
Secretary enters into a management agreement under subsection (b) with 
any non-Federal person that establishes restrictions on the use of 
property, the Secretary shall notify all private property owners or 
lessees of the property that is subject to the management agreement and 
shall provide an opportunity for each private property owner or lessee 
to participate in the management agreement.''.

SEC. 510. ELECTION OF REMEDIES.

 Nothing in this title shall be construed to--
 (1) deny any person the right, as a condition precedent or 
 as a requirement to exhaust administrative remedies, to proceed 
 under title II or III of this Act;
 (2) bar any claim of any person relating to such person's 
 property under any other law, including claims made under 
 section 1346 or 1402 of title 28, United States Code, or 
 chapter 91 of title 28, United States Code; or
 (3) constitute a conclusive determination of--
 (A) the value of property for purposes of an 
 appraisal for the acquisition of property, or for the 
 determination of damages; or
 (B) any other material issue.

 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 601. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the 
application of such provision or amendment to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, 
the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions 
of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 602. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO CIVIL RIGHTS LAWS.

 This Act shall not be construed to apply to any Federal law that 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, 
national origin, age, or disability.

SEC. 603. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this 
Act shall take effect on the date of enactment and shall apply to any 
agency action of the United States Government after such date.