S 2360 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2360
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to encourage pollution prevention and
to require additional reporting on the use and release of toxic chemicals.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 17 (legislative day, JANUARY 30), 1992
Mr. DURENBERGER introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to encourage pollution prevention and
to require additional reporting on the use and release of toxic chemicals.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as the `Toxics Release and Pollution
 Prevention Act of 1992'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that:
 (1) The Toxics Release Inventory established by section 313 of the Emergency
 Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) provides
 substantial public benefit. Broad dissemination of information from the
 inventory has increased citizen awareness and understanding of the threat
 to human health and the environment posed by the release of toxic chemicals
 in their communities. The chemical-specific and multi-media characteristics
 of the reports required from each facility and reflected in the aggregated
 data are a significant strength of the inventory. Because the total quantity
 of releases reported has been much larger than expected, the inventory has
 prompted commitments by facility owners and operators and actions by the
 States and by the Federal Government to reduce releases and the associated
 threats in the near term.
 (2) Notwithstanding such benefits, the full potential of the Toxics Release
 Inventory has not been realized. Many toxic chemicals posing substantial
 health and environmental threats as the result of releases are not on
 the list for which reporting is required. Many facilities outside the
 manufacturing sector of the economy have substantial releases of listed
 and other toxic chemicals but are not required to report. Many facilities
 releasing toxic chemicals and now covered by the reporting requirements do
 not comply with the law. Although the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency has authority to expand the Toxics Release Inventory
 by listing other toxic chemicals and requiring additional facilities
 to report, this authority has not been adequately exercised. Congress
 should now strengthen and improve the Toxics Release Inventory by listing
 additional chemicals, by requiring reports from facilities in additional
 industrial categories and by enhancing the enforcement authorities of the
 Federal Government and the States.
 (3) The Congress, Federal agencies and the States have long recognized
 a hierarchy for the management of production byproducts that become
 hazardous and solid wastes. Wherever feasible, the generation of such
 byproducts should be reduced or eliminated at the source. Byproducts that
 are nevertheless generated should be recycled consistent with the protection
 of human health and the environment. Waste that cannot be recycled should
 be treated to reduce volume and toxicity. Waste that is disposed should be
 managed to prevent any threat to human health and the environment now and
 in the future. This hierarchy should now be augmented to recognize toxic
 use reduction as the first priority. In addition to reducing the threat
 to human health and the environment resulting from releases of byproducts
 as hazardous and solid waste, toxic use reduction also protects workers,
 consumers and the communities in which production facilities are located
 from the risks associated with toxic chemicals in commerce.
 (4) Pollution prevention includes toxic use reduction, source reduction
 and in-process recycling that is integral to a production process or
 activity. Opportunities to reduce the toxic chemical threat to human
 health and the environment through pollution prevention are substantial,
 but often unrecognized or unrealized by facility owners and operators. In
 addition to reducing such threats, pollution prevention is typically
 associated with improved production efficiencies that save money and enhance
 competitiveness. The Federal Government and the States should play an active
 role in facilitating pollution prevention. In many cases pollution prevention
 will prove more effective and efficient than traditional pollution control
 measures directed toward the same goals.
 (5) At the present time there is great variability in the capacity
 of individual facility owners and operators to achieve reductions in
 the use, generation and release of toxic chemicals through pollution
 prevention. Federal agencies and the States are not now in a position to
 mandate the use of particular pollution prevention measures or to prescribe
 the attainment of pollution prevention performance standards for particular
 industries. For the near term, pollution prevention initiatives conducted by
 government agencies must be based on pollution prevention plans prepared
 by the owners and operators of industrial facilities and reflecting
 this variability. Pollution prevention plans should contain voluntary
 pledges for pollution prevention for each significant production unit or
 activity at a facility reflecting the hierarchy of toxic use reduction,
 source reduction and in-process recycling. The goals and measures pledged
 in such plans should be available for public review and comment.
 (6) To assure that the public is able to effectively review and comment on
 the goals and measures pledged in pollution prevention plans, the Toxics
 Release Inventory should be expanded to include materials accounting data
 for covered facilities and information on toxic chemical use and byproduct
 generation for significant production units within such facilities. This
 information can be shared with the public through the Toxics Release
 Inventory and in plan summaries and progress reports that do not compromise
 trade secrets entitled to protection under Federal law.
TITLE I--COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW MORE
SHORT TITLE
 SEC. 101. This title may be cited as the `Community Right-to-Know More
 Act of 1992'.
TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY
 SEC. 102. (a) Section 313(a) of the Emergency Planning and Community
 Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(a)) is amended by: (1) inserting
 `or released' after `was manufactured, processed or otherwise used'; (2)
 striking `quantity' and inserting in lieu thereof `quantities'; and (3)
 striking `releases' and inserting in lieu thereof `toxic chemical uses,
 releases and other information'.
 (b) Section 313(b)(1)(A) of the Emergency Planning and Community
 Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)(1)(A)) is amended by: (1)
 inserting `or released' after `that manufactured, processed, or otherwise
 used'; and (2) by striking `quantity' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `quantities'.
 (c) Section 313(b)(1)(C) of the Emergency Planning and Community
 Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)(1)(B)) is amended by:
 (1) adding at the end of clause (ii) the following: `The term `process'
 shall also include the use of any toxic chemical as a fuel to recover heat
 or energy or to combust a toxic chemical for the purposes of treatment or
 disposal or for any other purpose.'; and
 (2) adding at the end thereof the following new clauses:
 `(iii) The term `production unit' means a production line, method, activity,
 or technique, or combination or series thereof, which is integral to
 and necessary for the production of a product including storage of raw
 materials, maintenance, and finished goods handling, and does not include
 any waste management activities or out-of-process recycling.
 `(iv) The term `byproduct' means any toxic chemical other than a product
 (including fugitive emissions, process residues, or other nonproduct
 outputs that result from any manufacturing, extraction, servicing or other
 processing, including pollution control, or use of materials) that enters a
 waste stream or is otherwise released to the environment from a production
 unit prior to recycling, treatment, disposal, handling or release.
 `(v) The term `source reduction' means any practice which--
 `(I) reduces the amount of any hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant
 entering any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment
 (including fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment or disposal; and
 `(II) reduces the threat to public health and the environment associated
 with the release of such substances, pollutants or contaminants.
The term includes equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure
modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of
raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training,
or inventory control. The term does not include any practice which alters
the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics or the volume of a
hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant through a process or activity
which itself is not integral to and necessary for the production of a product
or the providing of a service.'.
 (d) Section 313(b) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)) is amended: (1) by striking `that are in'
 in paragraph (1)(A) and inserting in lieu thereof `that conduct any portion
 of their business in'; and (2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph
 (4) and by adding the following new paragraphs after paragraph (1):
 `(2) Beginning with reports filed for calendar year 1993, the requirements
 of this section shall also apply to owners and operators of facilities
 that have 10 or more full-time employees and--
 `(A) that conduct any portion of their business in Standard Industrial
 Classification Codes 0782 (lawn fertilizing services), 10 through 14
 (mining, mineral and oil and gas extraction), 172 (painting and paper
 hanging), 40 (railroad transportation), 42 (motor freight transportation
 and warehousing), 44 (water transportation), 45 (air transportation),
 46 (pipelines), 49 (electric, gas and sanitary services), 505 (metals
 and minerals (except petroleum) wholesaling), 507 (plumbing and heating
 equipment and supplies wholesaling), 508 (machinery, equipment and supplies
 wholesaling), 516 (chemicals and allied products wholesaling), 517 (petroleum
 and petroleum products wholesaling), 5191 (farm supplies wholesaling), 5198
 (paints, varnishes and supplies wholesaling), 721 (laundry, cleaning and
 garment services), 7342 (exterminating services), 7384 (photo finishing),
 7389 (solvent recovery), 7532 (auto body and paint shops), 7623 (air
 conditioning and refrigeration repair), 806 (hospitals), 807 (medical and
 dental laboratories), 822 (colleges, universities, professional schools,
 and junior colleges), 824 (vocational schools), 8734 (testing laboratories),
 9223 (correctional facilities);
 `(B) that have combustion units (other than units operated principally to
 heat buildings at the facility and fueled with natural gas or petroleum
 products) with a heat input capacity exceeding 25 million Btu per hour
 for any unit or group of units located at the facility; and
 `(C) that are facilities owned or operated by the Federal Government.
 `(3) LISTING OF ADDITIONAL FACILITIES- Not later than 24 months after the
 date of enactment of the Community Right-to-Know More Act of 1992, the
 Administrator shall propose additions to the list of facilities subject to
 this section including on such list facilities in each Standard Industrial
 Classification Code which present a threat of adverse effects to human health
 or the environment as the result of the use or release of toxic chemicals
 from facilities grouped under that Code comparable to the threats presented
 by facilities grouped under Codes listed in paragraphs (1) and (2). The
 Administrator shall promulgate such additions not later than the date 36
 months after the date of enactment of the Community Right-to-Know More Act
 of 1992 and the owner or operator of each facility covered by the additions
 shall begin reporting under this section for the calendar year 1997.'.
 (e) Section 313(b)(4) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)(4)), as redesignated by subsection (d),
 is amended by inserting `or releases' after `that manufactures, processes,
 or otherwise uses'.
 (f) Section 313(b) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(5) PRESIDENTIAL EXEMPTION- The President may exempt any facility of
 any department, agency or instrumentality in the executive branch from
 compliance with the requirements of this section, if the President determines
 it to be in the paramount interest of the United States to do so. Any
 exemption shall be for a period not to exceed one year, but additional
 exemptions maybe granted if the President makes a new determination. The
 President shall report each January to the Congress all exemptions from the
 requirements of this section granted during the preceding year, together
 with the President's reason for granting each such exemption.'.
 (g) Section 313(c) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(c)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) TOXIC CHEMICALS COVERED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The toxic chemicals subject to the requirements of this
 section are:
 `(A) those chemicals on the list in Committee Print Number 99-169 of the
 Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, titled `Toxic Chemicals
 Subject to section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986' (including any revised version of the list as may be made
 pursuant to subsection (d) or (e));
 `(B) all class I and class II substances listed pursuant to title VI of
 the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7671 et seq.);
 `(C) for calendar years beginning with 1993, those chemicals listed by
 the Administrator pursuant to paragraph (2)(A); and
 `(D) for calendar years beginning with 1995, those chemicals listed by
 the Administrator pursuant to paragraph (2)(B).
 `(2) ADDITIONAL LISTING- Not later than September 1, 1992 the Administrator
 shall propose a revision of the list established pursuant to paragraph (1)
 (A) and (B) which would add 250 toxic chemicals to such list. The toxic
 chemicals proposed for addition under this paragraph shall be the 250
 chemicals which, considering the factors outlined in subsection (d), present
 the greatest threat to human health and the environment as the result of use
 at or release from facilities subject to the requirements of this section.
Such list shall be divided into--
 `(A) the 100 toxic chemicals in the group of 250 presenting the greatest
 threat to human health or the environment as the result of release or
 use; and
 `(B) the remaining 150 toxic chemicals included on the list.
The Administrator shall promulgate additions to the list established under
paragraph (1) meeting the requirements of this paragraph not later than 270
days after the date of enactment of the Community Right-to-Know More Act
of 1992.
 `(3) If the Administrator fails to propose the additions required by
 paragraph (2) prior to September 1, 1992, then the list established by
 paragraph (1) (A) and (B) shall be modified by operation of law to include
 each of the following substances--
 `(A) priority pollutants listed under regulations relating to steam electric
 power point source pollutants under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1311 et seq.) (as listed in Appendix A of section 423 of title
 40, Code of Federal Regulations, subject to any subsequent modifications
 of the list);
 `(B) hazardous waste identified and listed under regulations promulgated
 under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) (as listed
 in Appendix A of section 261.33(e), 261.33(f), and Appendix VIII of part
 261 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, subject to any subsequent
 modifications of such lists);
 `(C) any chemical or chemical category listed under section 112(b)(1),
 112(r)(3), 602(a) or 602(b) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7412(b)(1),
 7412(r)(3), 7671(a), and 7671(b));
 `(D) any pesticide (as defined in section 2(u) of the Federal Insecticide,
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136u))--
 `(i) with respect to which the registration has been denied, canceled
 (including voluntary cancellation following the special review process,
 as described in part 154 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations) or is
 under suspension;
 `(ii) that is undergoing special review (as described in clause (i)) or
 is undergoing other administrative review (including for cancellation
 of use pursuant to section 6 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
 and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136d)); or
 `(iii) that is classified as a restricted use pesticide under section
 3(d)(1) of such Act (7 U.S.C. 136a(d)(1)).
 `(E) contaminants identified in section 1412(b)(1) of the Safe Drinking
 Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1) and for which maximum contaminant levels have
 been proposed or promulgated;
 `(F) chemicals identified by the Carcinogen Assessment Group of the
 Environmental Protection Agency, the International Agency for Research on
 Cancer, or the National Toxicology Program as a known or probable human
 carcinogens;
 `(G) extremely hazardous substances listed pursuant to section 302(a)(2)
 of this Act (42 U.S.C.11002(a)(2)); and
 `(H) chemicals listed in 90 California Regulatory Notice Register 990
 (July 1990) as reproductive toxins.'.
 (h) Section 313(d)(2) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(d)(2)) is amended by striking `The number of
 chemicals included on the list described in subsection (c) on the basis
 of the preceding sentence may constitute in the aggregate no more than 25
 percent of the total number of chemicals on the list.'.
 (i) Section 313(d)(3) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(d)(3)) is amended by striking `not sufficient
 evidence to establish any of the criteria described in paragraph (2)' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `sufficient evidence that the effects described
 by the criteria in paragraph (2) are not established'.
 (j) Section 313(f)(1) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(f)(1)) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) The Administrator is authorized to establish additional thresholds
 for reporting under this section based on the amount of any toxic chemical
 or chemicals released to the environment or transferred offsite from any
 facility. Thresholds established under this subparagraph shall reflect
 the relative risk of adverse health or environmental effects which may be
 associated with the release of the toxic chemical or chemicals for which
 a threshold is established and shall be consistent with the goals and
 requirements of this Act. The Administrator shall, not later than 18 months
 after the date of enactment of this subparagraph, report to the Congress with
 respect to the Administrator's implementation of the authority established by
 this subparagraph including in such report release and transfer thresholds
 which the Administrator intends to propose for various toxic chemicals.'.
 (k) Section 313(f)(2) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(f)(2)) is amended by: (1) inserting `uses or'
 before `releases'; and (2) adding at the end thereof the following new
 sentences: `Any release threshold established under authority of this
 subsection shall not supersede the thresholds established by paragraphs
 (1)(A) or (1)(B). Any authorized State may establish threshold amounts
 lower than the amounts in paragraph (1) for facilities in its jurisdiction.'.
 (l) Section 313(g) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(g)) is amended by redesignating paragraph
 (2) as paragraph (4) and by inserting the following new paragraphs after
 paragraph (1):
 `(2) SOURCE REDUCTION- The Administrator shall modify the toxic chemical
 release form for facilities covered by this section to require that the
 following information (in addition to information required by paragraph
 (1)) be reported for each toxic chemical listed pursuant to subsection
 (c) beginning for calendar year 1992--
 `(A) The quantity of the toxic chemical entering any waste stream (or
 otherwise released to the environment) prior to recycling, treatment
 or disposal during the calendar year for which the report is filed
 and the percentage change from the previous year. The quantity reported
 shall not include any amount reported under subparagraph (G). When actual
 measurements of the quantity of a toxic chemical entering the waste streams
 are not readily available, reasonable estimates should be made on the best
 engineering judgment.
 `(B) The amount of the chemical from the facility which is recycled (at
 the facility or elsewhere) during such calendar year, the percentage change
 from the previous year, and the process of recycling used.
 `(C) The source reduction practices used with respect to each toxic chemical
 during such year at the facility. Such practices shall be reported in
 accordance with the following categories, unless the Administrator finds
 other categories more appropriate--
 `(i) equipment, technology, process or procedure modifications;
 `(ii) reformulation or redesign of products;
 `(iii) substitution of raw materials;
 `(iv) improvement in management, training, inventory control, materials
 handling, or other general operational phases of industrial facilities.
 `(D) The amount expected to be reported under subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 for the two calendar years immediately following the calendar year for
 which the report is filed. Such amount shall be expressed as a percentage
 change from the amount reported under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 `(E) A ratio of production in the reporting year to production in the
 previous year. The ratio should be calculated to most closely reflect
 all activities involving the toxic chemical. In specific industrial
 classifications subject to this section, where a feedstock or some variable
 other than production is the primary influence on waste characteristics or
 volumes, the report may provide an index based on that primary variable for
 each toxic chemical. The Administrator is encouraged to develop production
 indexes to accommodate individual industries for use on a voluntary basis.
 `(F) The techniques which were used to identify source reduction
 opportunities. Techniques listed should include, but are not limited to,
 employee recommendations, external and internal audits, participative team
 management, and material balance audits. Each type of source reduction
 listed under subparagraph (C) should be associated with the techniques or
 multiples of techniques used to identify the source reduction technique.
 `(G) The amount of any toxic chemical released into the environment which
 resulted from a catastrophic event, remedial action, or other one-time event,
 and is not associated with production processes during the reporting year.
 `(H) The amount of each toxic chemical from the facility which is treated
 (at the facility or elsewhere) during such calendar year and the percentage
 change from the previous year.
For the first year of reporting under this paragraph, comparison with the
previous year is required only to the extent such information is available.
 `(3) Materials accounting information-
 `(A) Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of the Community
 Right-to-Know More Act of 1992, the Administrator shall modify the uniform
 toxic chemical release form for facilities covered by this section to
 require that the following information (in addition to the information
 required by paragraphs (1) and (2)) be reported beginning with calendar
 year 1994 for each toxic chemical listed pursuant to subsection (c) and
 for each facility subject to the requirements of this section--
 `(i) a compilation of annual input, accumulation, and output quantities
 of each toxic chemical at the facility, including the quantities produced,
 used, generated as byproduct, consumed, recycled onsite but out-of-process,
 or transferred as a product or as a constituent in products (hereinafter
 referred to as `materials accounting');
 `(ii) for each of the production units at the facility which in the
 aggregate account for not less than 90 percent of the toxic chemicals used
 at the facility--
 `(I) the amount of each toxic chemical used per unit of product;
 `(II) the amount of each toxic chemical generated as byproduct per unit
 of product;
 `(III) the amount of each toxic chemical present in the product per unit
 of product;
 `(IV) a description of the production unit, including the production process,
 product, and unit of product; and
 `(V) the amount of product manufactured (or otherwise created) and used,
 expressed as a range.
 `(iii) the three-year goals for pollution prevention at the production
 unit (as established in the most recent pollution prevention plan prepared
 pursuant to subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act) including--
 `(I) goals for the reduction in each amount reported under clauses (ii)(I),
 (ii)(II), and (ii)(III); and
 `(II) goals for the reduction in the amount of each toxic chemical
 manufactured, processed, or otherwise used and generated as byproduct at
 the facility.
 `(B) For any calendar year prior to the calendar year 1997, the Administrator
 may by rule limit the applicability of paragraphs (A)(ii) and (A)(iii) to--
 `(i) the 20 toxic chemicals with the largest reported releases (aggregated
 for all media) for calendar year 1991;
 `(ii) facilities in Standard Industrial Classification Codes 20 through
 39; or
 `(iii) facilities owned or operated by entities other than entities which
 are small business concerns as defined in the Small Business Act.'.
 (m) Section 313(h) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(h)) is amended by inserting `the uses of toxic
 chemicals at covered facilities and' before `release of toxic chemicals
 to the environment'.
 (n) Subsections (k) and (l) of section 313 of the Emergency Planning
 and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(k) and 11023(l)
 are repealed.
INFORMATION GATHERING AND ACCESS
 SEC. 103. Section 325 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11045) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(g) INFORMATION GATHERING AND ACCESS-
 `(1) ACTION AUTHORIZED- Any officer, employee or representative of the
 Administrator is authorized to take action under paragraph (2), (3) or (4)
 (or any combination thereof) at any facility subject to the requirements
 of this Act or other location described in paragraph (3) or (4). Any duly
 designated officer, employee or representative of a State carrying out
 the provisions of this Act is also authorized to take such action.
 `(2) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- Any officer, employee, or representative of the
 Administrator or a State described in paragraph (1) may require any person
 who has or may have information relevant to the identification, nature and
 quantity of materials including hazardous substances, extremely hazardous
 substances, toxic chemicals or other materials covered by this Act which
 may have been used, generated, treated, stored, disposed at or released
 or transferred from a facility subject to the requirements of this Act
 to furnish, upon reasonable request, information or documents pertaining
 to such matter. In addition, upon reasonable notice, such person either
 (A) shall grant any such officer, employee or representative access at
 all reasonable times to such facility or location to inspect and copy all
 documents and records relating to such matters or (B) shall copy and furnish
 to the officer, employee or representative all such documents or records,
 at the option and expense of such person.
 `(3) ENTRY- Any officer, employee or representative described in paragraph
 (1) is authorized to enter at reasonable times--
 `(A) any facility subject to the requirements of this Act; or
 `(B) any other facility, establishment, or other place or property owned
 or operated by a person owning or operating a facility subject to the
 requirements of this Act where entry is needed to determine compliance
 with and enforce this Act.
 `(4) INSPECTION AND SAMPLES-
 `(A) Any officer, employee or representative described in paragraph (1)
 is authorized to inspect and obtain samples from any facility subject
 to the requirements of this Act or other location described in paragraph
 (3). Any such officer, employee or representative is authorized to inspect
 and obtain samples of any containers of toxic chemicals or other materials
 maintained at such facility. Each such inspection shall be completed with
 reasonable promptness.
 `(B) SAMPLES- If the officer, employee or representative obtains samples,
 before leaving the premises such officer, employee or representative shall
 give to the owner or operator of such facility a receipt describing the
 sample obtained and, if requested, a portion of each sample. A copy of the
 results of any analysis made of such samples shall be furnished promptly
 to the owner or operator of the facility.
 `(5) COMPLIANCE ORDERS-
 `(A) ISSUANCE- If consent is not granted regarding any request made by an
 officer, employee or representative under paragraph (2), (3) or (4), the
 Administrator may issue an order directing compliance with the request. The
 order may be issued after such notice and opportunity for consultation as
 is reasonably appropriate under the circumstances.
 `(B) COMPLIANCE- The Administrator may ask the Attorney General to commerce
 a civil action to compel compliance with a request or order referred to
 in subparagraph (A). Where there is a reasonable basis to believe there
 may be a violation of this Act, the court shall take the following actions:
 `(i) In the case of interference with entry or inspection, the court shall
 enjoin such interference or direct compliance with orders to prohibit
 interference with entry or inspection unless under the circumstances of
 the case the demand for entry or inspection is arbitrary and capricious,
 an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 `(ii) In the case of information or document requests or orders, the court
 shall enjoin interference with such information or document requests or
 orders or direct compliance with the requests or orders to provide such
 information or documents unless under the circumstances of the case the
 demand for information or documents is arbitrary and capricious, an abuse
 of discretion, otherwise not in accordance with law.
The court may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each day
of noncompliance against any person who unreasonably fails to comply with
the provisions of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or an order issued pursuant to
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
 `(6) OTHER AUTHORITY- Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the
 Administrator or a State from securing access or obtaining information in
 any other lawful manner.'.
GRANT PROGRAM
 SEC. 104. The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42
 U.S.C. 11001 et seq.) is amended by striking section 327 (42 U.S.C. 11047)
 and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`SEC. 327. GRANT PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- (A) The Administrator shall establish a grant program
 to assist States, local governments, local emergency planning committees
 and State emergency response commissions (as described in section 301)
 in carrying out the provisions of subtitles A, B and C of this Act.
 `(B) The Administrator shall implement the grant program under this
 section in a manner fostering coordination among the various offices of
 the Environmental Protection Agency having responsibility for carrying
 out the provisions of this Act (including the Office of Pesticides and
 Toxic Substances and the Office for Solid Waste and Emergency Response)
 and the Administrator shall assure that the grant program established under
 this section shall be implemented in coordination with State emergency
 response commissions.
 `(2) APPLICATIONS- (A) Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Administrator shall accept applications for grants
 under this section.
 `(B) The Administrator shall make a determination on a grant application
 not later than 45 days after the Administrator receives the application.
 `(b) GRANT REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) DISTRIBUTION- The Administrator shall ensure that States shall make
 available to local governments or local emergency planning committees (as
 described in subsection (a)) an amount equal to 75 percent of the amount
 of the grant to the State under this section for the purposes of assisting
 local governments and local emergency planning committees in carrying out
 the provisions of subtitles A, B, and C.
 `(2) MATCHING- (A) The amount of any grant awarded under this section shall
 not exceed an amount equal to 80 percent of the cost of carrying out the
 activities authorized under the grant program. The Administrator shall
 not require any State to match any grant awarded under this section in an
 amount that exceeds 50 percent of the cost of carrying out the activities
 authorized under the grant program.
 `(B) The remaining percentage of such costs shall be funded from non-Federal
 sources. Such sources may include amounts appropriated by the State for
 State activities or to finance activities of local governments or local
 emergency planning committees carrying out subtitles A, B, and C.
 `(3) CRITERIA- The Administrator shall award grants under this section
 in proportion to State and local needs, as measured by such factors as
 the extent to which chemical substances and mixtures are manufactured,
 processed, used, and disposed of in a State, the extent of potential exposure
 in a State of human beings and the environment to chemical substances and
 mixtures, and the population of the State. The Administrator shall assure
 that State awards to localities or local emergency planning committees
 are in proportion to local needs as measured by factors similar to those
 described in the preceding sentence, including such factors as presence
 of substances, extent of potential exposure and population.
 `(c) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to the
 Administrator for the purpose of carrying out this section $12 million
 for each of the fiscal years 1992 through 1996.'.
DEFINITION OF PERSON
 SEC. 105. Section 329 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11049) is amended by inserting `Federal agency,'
 after `association,'.
REPORTING METHODS
 SEC. 106. (a) The Administrator shall conduct a study of methods for
 encouraging the reporting of information under section 313 of the Emergency
 Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) through
 the use of computer telecommunication and other means. Such study shall
 identify methods to--
 (1) increase the rate at which such information is made available to
 the public,
 (2) improve the accuracy of such information;
 (3) improve public accessibility to such information; and
 (4) enhance the overall efficiency of the information reporting and
 collection process.
 (b) Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Administrator shall submit a report of the findings of the study described
 in subsection (a) and plans for implementing methods to improve reporting
 to the appropriate committees of the Congress.
TECHNOLOGY FOR PROVIDING INFORMATION
 SEC. 107. (a) Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Director of the Office of Technology Assessment (hereinafter in
 this section referred to as the `Director') shall, in consultation with the
 Administrator, conduct and complete a study of all matters relating to the
 provision to the public of toxic release inventory information described
 in section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act
 of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) (hereinafter in this section referred to as
 `toxics release information').
 (b) The study conducted by the Director shall include the following:
 (1) A review of the methods by which toxics release information is made
 available to the public, with a concentrated emphasis on the computer data
 base described in section 313(j) of the Emergency Planning and Community
 Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(j)).
 (2) A review of the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of each method described
 in paragraph (1).
 (3) The development of recommendations for more effective means to
 disseminate toxics release information, and to promote ease of public
 access to such information.
 (4) The development of recommendations for alternatives to basing the
 publicly accessible data base in the T.O.X.N.E.T. system of the National
 Library of Medicine.
 (c) Upon completion of the study described in subsection (a), the Director
 shall submit to the Administrator and to the appropriate committees of
 the Congress a report containing a detailed statement of the findings
 and conclusions of the study, together with such recommendations for such
 regulations and administrative actions as the Director, in consultation
 with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, considers
 appropriate to make improvements in the provision of toxics release
 information to the public.
TITLE II--POLLUTION PREVENTION
SHORT TITLE
 SEC. 201. This title may be cited as the `Pollution Prevention Act of 1992'.
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
 SEC. 202. Section 1003(b) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6902(b))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(b) NATIONAL POLICY- The Congress establishes the following hierarchy for
 the management of hazardous and solid wastes and other materials generated
 as byproducts of industrial and commercial processes. The hierarchy shall
 be implemented under this Act in a manner consistent with the protection
 of human health and the environment. Pollution prevention is the highest
 priority and includes toxic use reduction, source reduction and in-process
 recycling. Wherever feasible, wastes should be eliminated through changes in
 raw materials, production technologies and methods, products, or services
 to reduce the volume and toxicity of such wastes at the source. Wastes
 that are generated should be recycled consistent with the production of
 human health and the environment. Wastes that cannot be recycled should be
 treated to reduce volume and toxicity. Wastes that are disposed should be
 managed to prevent any threat to human health or the environment now and
 in the future.'.
POLLUTION PREVENTION
 SEC. 203. (a) The title of subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is
 amended to read:
`Subtitle E--Pollution Prevention'.
 (b) Sections 5001 through 5006 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act are
 redesignated as sections 6010 through 6015 in part B of subtitle F.
 (c) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding the
 following new section:
`SHORT TITLE
 `SEC. 5001. This subtitle may be cited as the `Pollution Prevention Act'.'.
 (d)(1) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6002 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 as new section 5002.
 (2) Section 5002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by:
 (A) striking `source reduction' wherever it occurs and inserting `pollution
 prevention' in lieu thereof; and
 (B) striking subsection (a)(5).
 (e)(1) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6003 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 as new section 5003.
 (2) Section 5003 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by:
 (A) striking subsections (1) and (2);
 (B) redesignating subsections (3) through (7) as subsections (1) through
 (5), respectively; and
 (C) by adding the following new subsections:
 `(6) The term `pollution prevention' means--
 `(i) toxic use reduction;
 `(ii) source reduction; or
 `(iii) in-process recycling.
 `(7)(A) The term `toxic use reduction' means any change in a practice,
 process, or activity involved in a facility or a production unit at a
 facility that reduces or eliminates the use of any toxic chemical, or
 the amount of any toxic chemical entering any waste stream, or otherwise
 released to the environment (including fugitive emissions and hazardous
 secondary materials), prior to recycling, treatment, disposal, handling,
 or release, without creating or increasing the threat of adverse health
 effects for the public, workers, consumers or the threat of adverse effects
 to the environment. The term includes equipment or technology modifications,
 changes in processes or procedures, reformulation or redesign of products,
 substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance,
 training or inventory control.
 `(B) The term `toxics use reduction' does not include (i) waste management
 activities or any other practice which alters the physical, chemical, or
 biological characteristics, or the volume, of a toxic chemical through a
 process or activity which itself is not integral to and necessary for the
 production of a product or the providing of a service, or (ii) the use of
 byproduct as product.
 `(8) The term `in-process recycling' means a process whereby materials are--
 `(A) returned to the original process or processes from which they were
 generated; and
 `(B) reused in the production process in the following manner--
 `(i) the process, through completion of reclamation, is enclosed by
 being entirely connected with pipes or other comparable enclosed means of
 conveyance; and
 `(ii) the materials are stored in tanks and containers and are used or
 reused within twelve months.
 `(9) The term `recycling' or `recycle' means any use, reuse, or reclamation
 of solid waste or other material for any purpose but does not include:
 `(A) placement of any material that would otherwise be a hazardous waste
 on the land;
 `(B) incineration for energy recovery;
 `(C) speculative accumulation of material that would otherwise be a
 hazardous waste;
 `(D) the treatment of hazardous waste prior to use, reuse or reclamation; or
 `(E) the use, reuse or reclamation of materials in a manner constituting
 disposal.
 `(10) The term `byproduct' means any toxic chemical (including fugitive
 emissions, process residues, or other nonproduct outputs that result from
 any manufacturing, extraction, servicing or other processing, including
 pollution control, or use of materials) other than a product that enters
 a waste stream or otherwise is released to the environment from a production
 unit prior to recycling, treatment, disposal, handling, or release.
 `(11) The term `facility' means all buildings, equipment, structures,
 and other items which are located on a single site or contiguous or
 adjacent sites and which are owned or operated by the same person or by
 a person which controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with
 such person.
 `(12) The term `production unit' means a production line, method, activity,
 or technique, or combination or series thereof, which is integral to
 and necessary for the production of a product including storage of raw
 materials, maintenance, and finished goods handling, and does not include
 any waste management activities or out-of-process recycling.
 `(13) The term `materials accounting' means a compilation of the annual
 input, accumulation, and output quantities of each toxic chemical at
 a facility or production unit, including quantities produced, used,
 generated as byproduct, consumed, recycled onsite but out-of-process,
 transferred as product, or transferred as constituents in products.'.
 (f)(1) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6004 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 as a new section 5004.
 (2) Section 5004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by adding the following new subsection prior to
 subsection (a) and by redesignating subsections (a) and (b) as subsections
 (b) and (c), respectively:
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator, in promulgating or issuing regulations,
 guidance or guidelines concerning any standard, policy or other requirement,
 or in taking any other action under this Act; the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (42 U.S.C. 9601
 et seq.); the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.);
 the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.); the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.); the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide
 and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.); the Safe Drinking Water Act (42
 U.S.C. 330f et seq.); the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
 Act (42 U.S.C. 11001 et seq.); and the Marine Protection, Research and
 Sanctuaries Act (33 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.), whether to be implemented by the
 Administrator, any other Federal department, agency or instrumentality, any
 State or municipality, or any other person and each State (and political
 subdivision, thereof) with responsibility for management of solid wastes
 under this Act, shall implement such authorities giving pollution prevention
 considerations the highest priority, consistent with the purposes of this
 Act to protect human health and the environment and other requirements
 of Federal law. Nothing in this section shall alter in any manner any
 otherwise legally applicable deadline or requirement established by law.'.
 (3) Section 5004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by striking `source reduction' wherever it occurs
 and inserting in lieu thereof `pollution prevention'.
 (4) Section 5004(c) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraphs (1) and (2), is amended by:
 (A) redesignating paragraph (8) through (13) as paragraphs (7) through
 (12), respectively; and
 (B) adding `, Federal departments and agencies, State departments and
 agencies, local governments and non-profit institutions' after `businesses'
 each time it appears.
 (g)(1) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6005 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 as a new section 5005.
 (2) Section 5005 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 subsection paragraph (1), is amended by:
 (A) striking `source reduction' wherever it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `pollution prevention'; and
 (B) by inserting `, State departments and agencies, local governments,
 and non-profit institutions' after `businesses' each time it appears.
 (h)(1) Substitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by
 redesignating section 6006 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public
 Law 101-508) as a new section 5006.
 (2) Section 5006 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by:
 (A) striking `source reduction' each time it appears and inserting
 `pollution prevention' in lieu thereof; and
 (B) striking `6605' and inserting in lieu thereof `5005'.
 (i) Section 6007 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 is repealed.
 (j)(1) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6008 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 as a new section 5007.
 (2) Section 5007 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 paragraph (1), is amended by:
 (A) striking `section 4(b)' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 5004(d)';
 (B) striking paragraphs (10 and (2) of subsection (b) and redesignating
 paragraphs (3) through (9) as paragraphs (1) through (7), respectively;
 (C) striking `source reduction' wherever it occurs and inserting lieu
 thereof `pollution prevention'; and
 (D) striking `subtitle' in the first sentence of subsection (a) and
 inserting in lieu thereof `the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990'.
 (k) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by redesignating
 section 6009 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508)
 as a new section 5008.
POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS
 SEC. 204. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 the following new section at the end thereof:
`POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS
 SEC. 5009. (a) IN GENERAL- The owner or operator of each facility for
 which a toxic chemical release form is required to be submitted pursuant
 to section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act
 of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) shall periodically prepare pollution prevention
 plans, pollution prevention plan summaries, and pollution prevention plan
 progress reports meeting the requirements of this section.
 `(b) SCHEDULE-
 `(1) A pollution prevention plan shall be prepared for each such facility
 not less often than every three years beginning for the third full calendar
 year after the date of enactment of this section or the third full calendar
 year after a facility is first subject to the requirements of section
 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986
 (42 U.S.C. 11023), whichever is later. The Administrator may phase in
 the planning requirement, provided that the initial pollution prevention
 plans for all facilities subject to the requirements of this section be
 completed for the year not later than the seventh full calendar year after
 the date of enactment of this section.
 `(2) A pollution prevention plan summary for each such facility shall be
 prepared according to the same schedule for pollution prevention plans
 set forth in paragraph (1).
 `(3) A pollution prevention plan progress report for each such facility
 shall be prepared annually according to the schedule for the submission
 of toxic release forms under section 313 of the Emergency Planning and
 Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023), beginning for
 the first full calendar year after a pollution prevention plan has been
 prepared pursuant to paragraph (1).
 `(c) CONTENTS OF PLAN- Each plan shall include--
 `(1) a statement of management policy for pollution prevention;
 `(2) pollution prevention goals for the subsequent three-year period,
 including, as appropriate, toxic use reduction goals, source reduction
 goals and in-process recycling goals for specific toxic chemicals used or
 generated as byproducts at the facility for the facility as a whole and
 for each of those production units which in the aggregate account for not
 less than 90 percent of the toxic chemicals used at the facility;
 `(3) a current and projected analysis (over the same three-year period)
 for each production unit covered by paragraph (2), including--
 `(A) materials accounting; and
 `(B) an assessment of the costs (including liabilities) associated with
 each toxic chemical used at or released or transferred from the facility
 and such production units;
 `(4) an evaluation of options for reducing the use and byproduct generation
 of toxic chemicals for each production unit covered by paragraph (2),
 including--
 `(A) a comprehensive search for pollution prevention options, including
 substitution of raw materials, reformulation or redesign of products,
 production unit modifications, improvements in operation and maintenance,
 and in-process recycling, but not including waste management activities;
 `(B) a materials accounting and economic impact analysis of selected
 technically feasible options for the purposes of comparison with the
 results of paragraph (3);
 `(C) any feasibility study required by the Administrator pursuant to
 section 5011;
 `(5) a description and implementation schedule for the pollution prevention
 measures and activities that have been selected;
 `(6) an analysis of the extent to which the plan will reduce risk of adverse
 effects on workers, consumers, the general public and the environment and
 affect production efficiencies including energy use;
 `(7) the results of any pollution prevention audits that have been
 conducted for the facility or unit; and
 `(8) for plans other than the first plan prepared under this section,
 a report on success at achieving past goals.
 `(d) CONTENTS OF SUMMARY- Each plan summary shall include for the facility
 as a whole and for each production unit for which a plan is required:
 `(1) a description of the facility or unit;
 `(2) the three-year pollution prevention goals for the facility of the unit;
 `(3) a description of the techniques and measures that will be implemented
 to reach the goal;
 `(4) such other information as the Administrator shall require.
 `(e) CONTENTS OF PROGRESS REPORTS- Each plan progress report shall include
 for the facility as a whole and for each production unit for which a plan
 is required the information described in section 313(g)(3) of the Emergency
 Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11023(g)).
 `(f) GUIDELINES- Not later than 24 months after the date of enactment
 of this section and after notice and opportunity for public comment, the
 Administrator shall publish guidelines for the preparation of pollution
 prevention plans, pollution prevention plan summaries and pollution
 prevention plan progress reports.
 `(g) AVAILABILITY OF PLANS, SUMMARIES AND REPORTS-
 `(1) The pollution prevention plan for each facility shall be retained
 at the facility and shall be available to the Administrator, the State
 in which the facility is located and any local government agency given
 authority by the State to inspect the plans.
 `(2) The pollution prevention plan summaries for each facility shall be
 submitted to the Administrator, to the State in which the facility is
 located and be made available to the public at the facility during normal
 business hours.
 `(3) The pollution prevention plan progress reports for each facility shall
 be submitted to the Administrator and to the State along with the toxic
 release forms required under section 313 of the Emergency Planning and
 Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) and shall be made
 available to the public at the facility during normal business hours.
 `(h) REVIEW AND MODIFICATION- The Administrator or a State may require the
 modification of pollution prevention plans and pollution prevention plan
 summaries to correct plan deficiencies. Any modification required by the
 Administrator or a State shall be completed by the owner or operator of
 the facility not later than 90 days after the Administrator or the State
 provides written notice that such modification is necessary.
 `(i) TRAINING- The Administrator may require that persons preparing plans
 for each facility or for facilities in particular industrial categories
 or subcategories receive training or attend seminars and workshops on the
 proper preparation of toxic release inventories and pollution prevention
 plans and on the pollution prevention measures that are available. The
 Administrator may contract with State or local government agencies, with
 colleges and universities, or with other institutions for higher education
 and research to provide training, seminars, workshops in the preparation of
 toxic release inventories and pollution prevention plans and on available
 pollution prevention measures.'.
REPORTS
 SEC. 205. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 the following new section at the end thereof:
`REPORTS
 `SEC. 5010. (a) POLLUTION PREVENTION REPORTS- The Administrator shall
 report to the President and to the Congress not less often than every
 three years describing the pollution prevention plans that have been
 prepared pursuant to section 5009. The report shall contain statistical
 information on production efficiencies and pollution prevention plans for
 each industrial category or subcategory containing facilities subject to
 the requirements of section 5009.
 `(b) INDUSTRIAL SECTOR REPORTS- The Administrator shall, after consultation
 with State and local officials and persons from industry, academia and
 public interest organizations, periodically prepare reports with respect to
 specific industrial categories or subcategories of facilities and production
 units at facilities for which a pollution prevention plan is required under
 section 5009. Such reports shall include a description of the pollution
 prevention plans and activities for facilities or units in the category or
 subcategory, including a description of the pollution prevention goals and
 objectives adopted in plans, a description of the pollution prevention
 measures and schedules that have been selected to meet such goals, a
 percentile ranking by name for each facility or production unit in the
 category or subcategory according to the efficiency of current production
 practices (measured as use and byproduct generation of toxic chemicals per
 unit of production). The report shall also include a description of the
 pollution prevention measures that are available to facilities and units
 in the category or subcategory including detailed technical and economic
 data and specifications for such measures. Beginning four years after the
 date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall publish reports
 for not less than 15 industrial categories and subcategories each year.'.
FEASIBILITY STUDIES
 SEC. 206. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new section:
`FEASIBILITY STUDIES
 `SEC. 5011. (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may require the owner or
 operator of each facility in a particular industrial category or subcategory
 required to file a pollution prevention plan under section 5009 to conduct
 a feasibility study with respect to--
 `(1) the attainment of a specific pollution prevention performance standard
 for the facility or a production unit at the facility (which may be expressed
 as use or byproduct generation of a toxic chemical per unit of production);
 `(2) the implementation of a particular pollution prevention measure at
 the facility or at a production unit within the facility; or
 `(3) the use of out-of-process recycling as a compliment to pollution
 prevention for facilities in such industrial category or subcategory.
Any feasibility study required by the Administrator under this subsection
shall be conducted according to a schedule established by the Administrator
and the results of such study shall be included in the subsequent pollution
prevention plan for the facility. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted,
construed or applied to authorize the Administrator to require that particular
pollution prevention measures be implemented or that pollution prevention
performance standards be achieved at such facilities or units.'.
RESEARCH
 SEC. 207. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new section:
`POLLUTION PREVENTION RESEARCH
 `SEC. 5012. The Administrator shall establish a research program to assist
 the Agency's Office of Pollution Prevention in performing its functions. The
 program shall include--
 `(a) basic research into technological barriers to reductions in the use
 of toxic chemicals and byproducts and the development of strategies for
 overcoming these barriers;
 `(b) basic research into social, economic and institutional barriers to
 reducing the reliance of society on toxic chemicals and the development
 of strategies for overcoming these barriers;
 `(c) developing, evaluating, and demonstrating methods to assess reductions
 resulting from toxic use of other source reduction methods; and
 `(d) research or pilot projects to develop and demonstrate innovative
 technologies for source reduction and toxic use reduction methods.
The research program established by this section shall be conducted in close
cooperation with the States and shall rely principally on grants and contracts
with colleges and universities.'.
INFORMATION GATHERING
 SEC. 208. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new section:
`INFORMATION GATHERING AND ACCESS
 `SEC. 5013. (a) ACTION AUTHORIZED- Any officer, employee or representative
 of the Administrator is authorized to take action under subsections (b),
 (c) or (d) (or any combination thereof) at any facility subject to the
 requirements of this subtitle or other location described in subsections
 (c) or (d). Any duly designated officer, employee or representative of a
 State carrying out the provisions of this subtitle is also authorized to
 take such action.
 `(b) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- Any officer, employee, or representative of
 the Administrator or a State described in subsection (a) may require any
 person who has or may have information relevant to the identification,
 nature and quantity of materials including toxic chemicals or other
 materials covered by this subtitle which may have been used, generated,
 treated, stored, disposed at or released or transferred from a facility
 subject to the requirements of this subtitle to furnish, upon reasonable
 request, information or documents pertaining to such matter. In addition,
 upon reasonable notice, such person either (1) shall grant any such
 officer, employee or representative access at all reasonable times to
 such facility or location to inspect and copy all documents and records
 relating to such matters or (2) shall copy and furnish to the officer,
 employee or representative all such documents or records, at the option
 and expense of such person.
 `(c) ENTRY- Any officer, employee or representative described in subsection
 (a) is authorized to enter at reasonable times--
 `(1) any facility subject to the requirements of this subtitle;
 `(2) any other facility, establishment, or other place or property owned
 or operated by any person owning or operating any facility subject to this
 subtitle where entry is needed to determine compliance with and enforce
 this subtitle.
 `(d) INSPECTION AND SAMPLES-
 `(1) INSPECTION- Any officer, employee or representative described in
 subsection (a) is authorized to inspect and obtain samples from any facility
 subject to the requirements of this subtitle or other location described in
 subsection (c). Any such officer, employee or representative is authorized
 to inspect and obtain samples of any containers of toxic chemicals or
 other materials maintained at such facility. Each such inspection shall
 be completed with reasonable promptness.
 `(2) SAMPLES- If the officer, employee or representative obtains samples,
 before leaving the premises such officer, employee or representative shall
 give to the owner or operator of such facility a receipt describing the
 sample obtained and, if requested, a portion of each sample. A copy of the
 results of any analysis made of such samples shall be furnished promptly
 to the owner or operator of the facility.
 `(e) COMPLIANCE ORDERS-
 `(1) ISSUANCE- If consent is not granted regarding any request made by
 an officer, employee or representative under subsections (a), (b), or
 (c), the Administrator may issue an order directing compliance with the
 request. The order may be issued after such notice and opportunity for
 consultation as is reasonably appropriate under the circumstances.
 `(2) COMPLIANCE- The Administrator may ask the Attorney General to commence
 a civil action to compel compliance with a request or order referred to
 in paragraph (1). Where there is a reasonable basis to believe there may
 be a violation of this subtitle, the court shall take the following actions:
 `(A) In the case of interference with entry or inspection, the court shall
 enjoin such interference or direct compliance with orders to prohibit
 interference with entry or inspection unless under the circumstances of
 the case the demand for entry or inspection is arbitrary and capricious,
 an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 `(B) In the case of information or document requests or orders, the court
 shall enjoin interference with such information or document requests or
 orders or direct compliance with the requests or orders to provide such
 information or documents unless under the circumstances of the case the
 demand for information or documents is arbitrary and capricious, an abuse
 of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
The court may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $25,000 for each day of
noncompliance against any person who unreasonably fails to comply with the
provisions of subsections (a), (b) or (c) or an order issued pursuant to
paragraph (1).
 `(f) OTHER AUTHORITY- Nothing in this section shall preclude the
 Administrator or a State from securing access or obtaining information in
 any other lawful manner'.
ENFORCEMENT
 SEC. 209. Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding
 the following new section at the end thereof:
`ENFORCEMENT
 `SEC. 5014. (a) COMPLIANCE ORDERS-
 `(1) Whenever on the basis of any information the Administrator determines
 that any person has violated, or is in violation of, any requirement or
 prohibition in effect under this subtitle (including any requirement
 or prohibition in effect under regulations under this subtitle), the
 Administrator may issue an order (A) assessing a civil penalty for any
 past or current violation, (B) requiring compliance immediately or within
 a specified time period, or (C) both, or the Administrator may commence a
 civil action in the United States district court in the district in which
 the violation occurred for appropriate relief, including a temporary or
 permanent injunction. Any order issued pursuant to this paragraph shall
 state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation.
 `(2) Any penalty assessed in an order under this section shall not exceed
 $25,000 per day of noncompliance for each violation of a requirement or
 prohibition in effect under this subtitle. In assessing such a penalty,
 the Administrator shall take into account the seriousness of the violation
 and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements.
 `(3) Any order issued under this subsection shall become final unless,
 not later than 30 days after the issuance of the order, the persons named
 therein request a public hearing. Upon such request, the Administrator shall
 promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any proceeding under
 this paragraph, the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the production
 of relevant papers, books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for
 discovery procedures.
 `(4) In the case of an order under this subsection requiring compliance
 with any requirement of or regulation under this subtitle, if a violator
 fails to take corrective action within the time specified in an order,
 the Administrator may assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for
 each day of continued noncompliance with the order.
 `(b) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who--
 `(1) knowingly violates the requirements of or regulations under this
 subtitle; or
 `(2) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any record, report, or other document
 filed, maintained, or used for purposes of compliance with this subtitle
 or regulations thereunder
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $50,000 for each
day of violation, or imprisonment not to exceed 2 years. If the conviction
is for a violation committed after a first conviction of such person under
this subsection, the maximum punishment shall be doubled with respect to
both the fine and imprisonment.
 `(c) CIVIL PENALTIES- Any person who violates any requirement of or
 regulation under this subtitle shall be liable to the United States
 for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each such
 violation. Each day of such violation shall, for purposes of this section,
 constitute a separate violation'.
AUTHORIZATIONS
 SEC. 210. (a) Subtitle E of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by
 redesignating section 6010 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1900 (Public
 Law 101-508) as a new section 5015.
 (b) Section 5015 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as redesignated by
 subsection (a), is amended by adding the following new sentence: `There
 is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator $25,000,000 for each
 of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997 for the functions carried out under
 this subtitle (other than State grants), and $10,000,000 for each of the
 fiscal years 1994 through 1997 for grant to the States made pursuant to
 section 5005.'.
TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS
 SEC. 211. (a) The table of contents for subtitle E of the Solid Waste
 Disposal Act is amended to read as follows:
`Subtitle E--Pollution Prevention
`5001. Short title.
`5002. Findings and policy.
`5003. Definitions.
`5004. EPA activities.
`5005. Grants to States for technical assistance programs.
`5006. Pollution prevention clearinghouse.
`5007. EPA report.
`5008. Savings provision.
`5009. Pollution prevention plans.
`5010. Reports.
`5011. Feasibility studies.
`5012. Research.
`5013. Information gathering.
`5014. Enforcement.
`5015. Authorizations.'.
 (b) The table of contents for subtitle F of the Solid Waste Disposal Act
 is amended:
 (1) by inserting after the title the following:
`Part 1--General Provisions';
and
 (2) by inserting the following at the end thereof:
`Part 2--Duties of the Secretary of Commerce
`6010. Functions.
`6011. Development of specification for secondary materials.
`6012. Development of market for recovered materials.
`6013. Technology promotion.
`6014. Nondiscrimination requirement.
`6015. Authorization of appropriations.'.