S 2595 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2595
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to reduce special
interest influence on elections, to increase competition in politics, to
reduce campaign costs, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 9 (legislative day, APRIL 18), 1990
Mr. MCCONNELL (for himself, Mr. DOLE, Mr. PACKWOOD, Mr. BOND, Mr. BOSCHWITZ,
Mr. BURNS, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr. COATS, Mr. COCHRAN, Mr. DOMENICI, Mr. GARN,
Mr. GORTON, Mr. GRAMM, Mr. GRASSLEY, Mr. HATCH, Mr. HATFIELD, Mr. HEINZ,
Mr. JEFFORDS, Mrs. KASSEBAUM, Mr. LOTT, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. MACK, Mr. MCCAIN,
Mr. MCCLURE, Mr. MURKOWSKI, Mr. NICKLES, Mr. ROTH, Mr. RUDMAN, Mr. SIMPSON,
Mr. SPECTER, Mr. SYMMS, Mr. THURMOND, Mr. WALLOP, and Mr. WILSON) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Rules and Administration
A BILL
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to reduce special
interest influence on elections, to increase competition in politics, to
reduce campaign costs, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF FECA; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Campaign
 Finance Reform Act of 1990'.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF FECA- When used in this Act, the term `FECA' means the
 Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.).
 (c) Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title; amendment of FECA; table of contents.
TITLE I--REDUCTION OF SPECIAL INTEREST INFLUENCE
Subtitle A--Elimination of Political Action Committees From Federal Election
Activities
Sec. 101. Ban on activities of political action committees in Federal
elections.
Subtitle B--Ban on Soft Money in Federal Elections
Sec. 111. Ban on soft money.
Sec. 112. Restrictions on party committees.
Sec. 113. Protections for employees.
Sec. 114. Restrictions on soft money activities of tax-exempt organizations.
Sec. 115. Denial of tax-exempt status for certain politically active
organizations.
Sec. 116. Contributions to certain political organizations maintained by
a candidate.
Subtitle C--Other Activities
Sec. 121. Modifications of contribution limits on individuals.
Sec. 122. Political parties.
Sec. 123. Contributions through intermediaries and conduits.
Sec. 124. Independent expenditures.
TITLE II--INCREASE OF COMPETITION IN POLITICS
Sec. 201. Seed money for challengers.
Sec. 202. Use of campaign funds.
Sec. 203. Candidate expenditures from personal funds.
Sec. 204. Franked communications.
Sec. 205. Limitations on gerrymandering.
Sec. 206. Election fraud, other public corruption, and fraud in interstate
commerce.
TITLE III--REDUCTION OF CAMPAIGN COSTS
Sec. 301. Broadcast discount.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subtitle A--Federal Election Commission Enforcement Authority
Sec. 401. Elimination of reason to believe standard.
Sec. 402. Injunctive authority.
Sec. 403. Time periods.
Sec. 404. Knowing violation penalties.
Sec. 405. Court resolved violations and penalties.
Sec. 406. Private civil actions.
Sec. 407. Knowing violations resolved in court.
Sec. 408. Action on complaint by Commission.
Sec. 409. Violation of confidentiality requirement.
Sec. 410. Penalty in Attorney General actions.
Sec. 411. Amendments relating to enforcement and judicial review.
Sec. 412. Tightening enforcement.
Subtitle B--Other Provisions
Sec. 421. Disclosure of debt settlement and loan security agreements.
Sec. 422. Contributions for draft and encouragement purposes with respect
to elections for Federal office.
Sec. 423. Severability.
Sec. 424. Effective date.
TITLE I--REDUCTION OF SPECIAL INTEREST INFLUENCE
Subtitle A--Elimination of Political Action Committees From Federal Election
Activities
SEC. 101. BAN ON ACTIVITIES OF POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES IN FEDERAL
ELECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title III of FECA (2 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`BAN ON FEDERAL ELECTION ACTIVITIES BY POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES
 `SEC. 324. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no person
 other than an individual or a political committee may make contributions,
 solicit or receive contributions, or make expenditures for the purpose of
 influencing an election for Federal office.'
 (b) DEFINITION OF POLITICAL COMMITTEE- (1) Paragraph (4) of section 301
 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 431(4)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) The term `political committee' means--
 `(A) the principal campaign committee of a candidate;
 `(B) any national, State, or district committee of a political party,
 including any subordinate committee thereof;
 `(C) any local committee of a political party which--
 `(i) receives contributions aggregating in excess of $5,000 during a
 calendar year;
 `(ii) makes payments exempted from the definition of contribution or
 expenditure under paragraph (8) or (9) aggregating in excess of $5,000
 during a calendar year; or
 `(iii) makes contributions or expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000
 during a calendar year; and
 `(D) any committee jointly established by a principal campaign committee
 and any committee described in subparagraph (B) or (C) for the purpose of
 conducting joint fundraising activities.'
 (2) Section 316(b)(2) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)(2)) is amended by striking
 subparagraphs (B) and (C).
 (c) CANDIDATE'S COMMITTEES- (1) Section 315(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(9) For the purposes of the limitations provided by paragraphs (1) and
 (2), any political committee which is established or financed or maintained
 or controlled by any candidate or Federal officeholder shall be deemed to
 be an authorized committee of such candidate or officeholder.'
 (2) Section 302(e)(3) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 432) is amended to read as follows:
 `(3) No political committee that supports or has supported more than one
 candidate may be designated as an authorized committee, except that--
 `(A) a candidate for the office of President nominated by a political
 party may designate the national committee of such political party as
 the candidate's principal campaign committee, but only if that national
 committee maintains separate books of account with respect to its functions
 as a principal campaign committee; and
 `(B) a candidate may designate a political committee established solely
 for the purpose of joint fundraising by such candidates as an authorized
 committee.'
 (d) RULES APPLICABLE WHEN BAN NOT IN EFFECT- For purposes of the Federal
 Election Campaign Act of 1971, during any period in which the limitation
 under section 324 of such Act (as added by subsection (a)) is not in effect--
 (1) the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall not be in effect;
 and
 (2) it shall be unlawful for any person that--
 (A) is treated as a political committee by reason of paragraph (1); and
 (B) is not directly or indirectly established, administered, or supported
 by a connected organization which is a corporation, labor organization,
 or trade association,
to make contributions to any candidate or the candidate's authorized committee
for any election aggregating in excess of $1,000.
Subtitle B--Ban on Soft Money in Federal Elections
SEC. 111. BAN ON SOFT MONEY.
 Section 315 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subsection:
 `(i) BAN ON SOFT MONEY- (1) It shall be unlawful for the purpose of
 influencing any election to Federal office--
 `(A) to solicit or receive any soft money; or
 `(B) to make any payments from soft money.
 `(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `soft money' means any amount--
 `(A) solicited or received from a source which is prohibited under section
 316(a);
 `(B) contributed, solicited, or received in excess of the contribution
 limits under section 315; or
 `(C) not subject to the recordkeeping, reporting, or disclosure requirements
 under section 304 or any other provision of this Act.'
SEC. 112. RESTRICTIONS ON PARTY COMMITTEES.
 (a) DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION BY POLITICAL COMMITTEE- (1) Subsection (c)
 of section 302 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 432(c)) is amended by striking `and' at
 the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph
 (5) and inserting `; and', and by adding at the end thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(6) each account maintained by a political committee of a political
 party (including Federal and non-Federal accounts), and deposits into,
 and disbursements from, each such account.'
 (2) Subsection (b) of section 304 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 434(b)) is amended
 by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (7), by striking the period at
 the end of paragraph (8) and inserting `; and', and by adding at the end
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(9) each account maintained by a political committee of a political
 party (including Federal and non-Federal accounts), and deposits into,
 and disbursements from, each such account.'
 (b) ALLOCATION OF EXPENDITURES FOR MIXED ACTIVITIES- Title III of FECA,
 as amended by section 101(a), is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new section:
`REQUIRED ALLOCATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES FOR MIXED ACTIVITIES
BY POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEES
 `SEC. 325. (a) REGULATIONS REQUIRING ALLOCATION FOR MIXED ACTIVITIES- Not
 later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the
 Commission shall issue regulations providing for a method for allocating
 the contributions and expenditures for any mixed activity between Federal
 and non-Federal accounts.
 `(b) GUIDELINES FOR ALLOCATION- (1) The regulations issued under subsection
 (a) shall--
 `(A) provide for the allocation of contributions and expenditures in
 accordance with this subsection; and
 `(B) require reporting under this Act of expenditures in connection with
 a mixed activity to disclose--
 `(i) the method and rationale used in allocating the cost of the mixed
 activity to Federal and non-Federal accounts; and
 `(ii) the amount and percentage of the cost of the mixed activity allocated
 to such accounts.
 `(2) In the case of a mixed activity that consists of a voter registration
 drive, get-out-the-vote drive, or other activity designed to contact
 voters (other than an activity to which paragraph (3) or (4) applies),
 amounts shall be allocated on the basis of the composition of the ballot
 for the political jurisdiction in which the activity occurs, except that
 in no event shall the amounts allocated to the Federal account be less than--
 `(A) 33 1/3 percent of the total amount in the case of the national
 committee of a political party; or
 `(B) 25 percent of the total amount in the case of a State or local
 committee of a political party or any subordinate committee thereof.
 `(3) In the case of a mixed activity that consists of preparing and
 distributing brochures, handbills, slate cards, or other printed materials
 identifying or seeking support of (or opposition to) candidates for both
 Federal offices and non-Federal offices, amounts shall be allocated on
 the basis of total space devoted to such candidates, except that in no
 event shall the amounts allocated to the Federal account be less than the
 percentages under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (2).
 `(4)(A) In the case of a mixed activity by a national committee of a
 political party that consists of broadcast media advertising (or any
 portion thereof) that promotes (or is in opposition to) a political party
 without mentioning the name of any individual candidate for Federal office
 or non-Federal office, amounts allocated to the Federal account shall not
 be less than--
 `(i) 50 percent of the total amount in the case of advertising in the
 national media market; and
 `(ii) 40 percent in the case of advertising in other than the national
 media market.
 `(B) In the case of a mixed activity by a State or local committee of
 a political party or any subordinate committee thereof that consists
 of broadcast media advertising (or any portion thereof) described in
 subparagraph (A), costs shall be allocated on the basis of the composition
 of the ballot for the political jurisdiction in which the activity occurs,
 except that in no event shall the amounts allocated to the Federal account
 be less than 33 1/3 percent of the total amount.
 `(5) Overhead and fundraising costs of a political committee of a political
 party for each 2-calendar year period ending with the calendar year in
 which a regularly scheduled election for Federal office occurs shall be
 allocated to the Federal account on the basis of the same ratio which--
 `(A) the aggregate amount of receipts and disbursements of such political
 committee during such period in connection with elections for Federal
 office, bears to
 `(B) the aggregate amount of receipts and disbursements of such political
 committee during such period.
 `(c) MIXED ACTIVITY- (1) For purposes of this section, the term `mixed
 activity' means an activity the expenditures in connection with which are
 required under this Act to be allocated between Federal and non-Federal
 accounts because such activity affects 1 or more elections for Federal
 office and 1 or more non-Federal elections.
 `(2) Activities under paragraph (1) include--
 `(A) voter registration drives, get-out-the-vote drives, telephone banks,
 and membership communications in connection with elections for Federal
 offices and elections for non-Federal offices;
 `(B) general political advertising, brochures, or other materials that
 include any reference (however incidental) to both a candidate for Federal
 office and a candidate for non-Federal office, or that urge support for
 or opposition to a political party or to all the candidates of a political
 party;
 `(C) overhead expenses; and
 `(D) activities described in clauses (v), (x), and (xii) of section
 301(8)(B).
 `(d) ACCOUNTS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `Federal account' means an account to which receipts and
 disbursements are allocated to elections for Federal offices; and
 `(2) the term `non-Federal account' means an account to which receipts
 and disbursements are allocated to elections other than non-Federal offices.'
SEC. 113. PROTECTION FOR EMPLOYEES.
 (a) CONTRIBUTIONS TO ALL POLITICAL COMMITTEES INCLUDED- Paragraph (2)
 of section 316(b) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)(2)) is amended by inserting
 `political committee,' after `campaign committee,'.
 (b) APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS TO LABOR ORGANIZATIONS- Section 316(b)
 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)) is amended by adding at the thereof the following
 new paragraph:
 `(8)(A) Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (2) shall not apply
 to a labor organization unless the organization meets the requirements of
 subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D).
 `(B) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if the labor
 organization provides, at least once annually, to all employees within
 the labor organization's bargaining unit or units (and to new employees
 within 30 days after commencement of their employment) written notification
 presented in a manner to inform any such employee--
 `(i) that an employee cannot be obligated to pay, through union dues or
 any other mandatory payment to a labor organization, for the political
 activities of the labor organization, including, but not limited to,
 the maintenance and operation of, or solicitation of contributions to,
 a political committee, political communications to members, and voter
 registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns;
 `(ii) that no employee may be required actually to join any labor
 organization, but if a collective bargaining agreement covering an employee
 purports to require membership or payment of dues or other fees to a labor
 organization as a condition of employment, the employee may elect instead
 to pay an agency fee to the labor organization;
 `(iii) that the amount of the agency fee shall be limited to the employee's
 pro rata share of the cost of the labor organization's exclusive
 representation services to the employee's collective bargaining unit,
 including collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance
 adjustment;
 `(iv) that an employee who elects to be a full member of the labor
 organization and pay membership dues is entitled to a reduction of those
 dues by the employee's pro rata share of the total spending by the labor
 organization for political activities;
 `(v) that the cost of the labor organization's exclusive representation
 services, and the amount of spending by such organization for political
 activities, shall be computed on the basis of such cost and spending for
 the immediately preceding fiscal year of such organization; and
 `(vi) of the amount of the labor organization's full membership dues,
 initiation fees, and assessments for the current year; the amount of the
 reduced membership dues, subtracting the employee's pro rata share of the
 organization's spending for political activities, for the current year;
 and the amount of the agency fee for the current year.
 `(C) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if, for purposes
 of verifying the cost of such labor organization's exclusive representation
 services, the labor organization provides all represented employees an annual
 examination by an independent certified public accountant of financial
 statements supplied by such organization which verify the cost of such
 services; except that such examination shall, at a minimum, constitute a
 `special report' as interpreted by the Association of Independent Certified
 Public Accountants.
 `(D) The requirements of this subparagraph are met only if the labor
 organization--
 `(i) maintains procedures to promptly determine the costs that may properly
 be charged to agency fee payors as costs of exclusive representation,
 and explains such procedures in the written notification required under
 subparagraph (B); and
 `(ii) if any person challenges the costs which may be properly charged as
 costs of exclusive representation--
 `(I) provides a mutually selected impartial decisionmaker to hear and decide
 such challenge pursuant to rules of discovery and evidence and subject to de
 novo review by the National Labor Relations Board or an applicable court; and
 `(II) places in escrow amounts reasonably in dispute pending the outcome
 of the challenge.
 `(E)(i) A labor organization that does not satisfy the requirements of
 subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) shall finance any expenditures specified
 in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (2) only with funds legally
 collected under this Act for its separate segregated fund.
 `(ii) For purposes of this paragraph, subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) shall
 apply only with respect to communications expressly advocating the election
 or defeat of any clearly identified candidate for elective public office.'
SEC. 114. RESTRICTIONS ON SOFT MONEY ACTIVITIES OF TAX-EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 exemption from tax) is amended by redesignating subsection (n) as subsection
 (o) and by inserting after subsection (m) the following new subsection:
 `(n) DENIAL OF TAX-EXEMPT STATUS FOR ACTIVITIES TO INFLUENCE A FEDERAL
 ELECTION- An organization shall not be treated as exempt from tax under
 subsection (a) if such organization participates or intervenes in any
 political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for
 Federal office.'
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 any participation or intervention by an organization on or after September
 1, 1990.
SEC. 115. DENIAL OF TAX-EXEMPT STATUS FOR CERTAIN POLITICALLY ACTIVE
ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 exemption from tax), as amended by section 114, is amended by redesignating
 subsection (o) as subsection (p) and by inserting after subsection (n)
 the following new subsection:
 `(o) Denial of Tax-Exempt Status for Certain Politically Active
 Organizations-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An organization shall not be treated as exempt from tax
 under subsection (a) if--
 `(A) such organization devotes any of its operating budget to--
 `(i) voter registration or get-out-the-vote campaigns; or
 `(ii) participation or intervention in any political campaign on behalf
 of or in opposition to any candidate for public office; and
 `(B) a candidate, or an authorized committee of a candidate, has--
 `(i) solicited contributions to, or on behalf of, such organization; and
 `(ii) the solicitation is made in cooperation, consultation, or concert
 with, or at the request or suggestion of, such organization.
 `(2) CANDIDATE DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `candidate' has the meaning given such term by
 paragraph (2) of section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 431(2)).
 `(B) MEMBERS OF CONGRESS- The term `candidate' shall include any Senator
 or Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress
 unless--
 `(i) the date for filing for nomination, or election to, such office has
 passed and such individual has not so filed, and
 `(ii) such individual is not otherwise a candidate described in subparagraph
 (A).'
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years ending after the date of enactment of this Act, but only
 with respect to solicitations or suggestions by candidates made after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 116. CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS MAINTAINED BY
A CANDIDATE.
 (a) CONTRIBUTIONS BY PERSONS IN GENERAL AND BY MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL
 COMMITTEES- (1) Section 315(a)(1)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(1)(A))
 is amended by striking `candidate and his authorized political committees'
 and inserting `candidate, a candidate's authorized political committees, and
 any political organizations (other than authorized committees) maintained
 by a candidate,'.
 (2) Section 315(a)(2)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(2)(A)) is amended by
 striking `candidate and his authorized political committees' and inserting
 `candidate, a candidate's authorized political committees, and any political
 organizations (other than authorized committees) maintained by a candidate,'.
 (3) Section 315(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)), as amended by section 101(c),
 is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(10) For the purposes of paragraphs (1)(A) and (2)(A), the term `political
 organization maintained by a candidate' means any non-Federal political
 action committee, non-Federal multicandidate political committee, or any
 other form of political organization regulated under State law which is
 not a political committee of a national, State, or local political party--
 `(A) that is set up by or on behalf of a candidate and engages in political
 activity which directly influences Federal elections; and
 `(B) for which that candidate has solicited a contribution.'
 (b) CONTRIBUTIONS BY NATIONAL BANKS, CORPORATIONS, AND LABOR ORGANIZATIONS-
 (1) Section 316(b)(2) of the FECA (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)(2)) is amended
 by striking `candidate, campaign committee' and inserting `candidate,
 political organization (other than an authorized committee) maintained by
 a candidate, campaign committee,'.
 (2) Section 316(b) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441b(b)), as amended by section 113(b),
 is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(9) For the purposes of paragraph (2), the term `political organization
 maintained by a candidate' means any non-Federal political action committee,
 non-Federal multicandidate political committee, or any other form of
 political organization regulated under State law which is not a political
 committee of a national, State, or local political party--
 `(A) that is set up by or on behalf of a candidate and engages in political
 activity which directly influences Federal elections; and
 `(B) for which that candidate has solicited a contribution.'
 (c) DATE OF APPLICATION- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b)
 shall apply to contributions described in sections 315 and 316 of FECA
 (2 U.S.C. 441a and 441b) made in response to solicitations made after
 January 24, 1990.
Subtitle C--Other Activities
SEC. 121. MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRIBUTION LIMITS ON INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) INCREASE IN CANDIDATE LIMIT- Subparagraph (A) of section 315(a)(1) of
 FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `$1,000' and inserting
 `the applicable amount'.
 (b) APPLICABLE AMOUNT DEFINED- Section 315(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)),
 as amended by section 116(a)(3), is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(11) For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)--
 `(A) The term `applicable amount' means--
 `(i) $1,000 in the case of contributions by a person to--
 `(I) a candidate for the office of President or Vice President or such
 candidate's authorized committees; or
 `(II) any other candidate or such candidate's authorized committees if,
 at the time such contributions are made, such person is a resident of the
 State with respect to which such candidate seeks Federal office; and
 `(ii) $500 in the case of contributions by any other person to a candidate
 described in clause (i)(II) or such candidate's authorized committees.
 `(B) At the beginning of 1991 and each odd-numbered calendar year thereafter,
 the Secretary of Labor shall certify in the same manner as under subsection
 (c)(1) the percent difference between the price index for the preceding
 calendar year and the price index for calendar year 1989. Each of the
 dollar limits under subparagraph (A) shall be increased by such percent
 difference and rounded to the nearest $100. Each amount so increased shall
 be the amount in effect for the calendar year for which determined and
 the succeeding calendar year.'
SEC. 122. POLITICAL PARTIES.
 (a) ITEMS NOT TREATED AS CONTRIBUTIONS OR EXPENDITURES- (1) Section 301(8)(B)
 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 431(8)(B)) is amended--
 (A) in clauses (x) and (xii), by inserting `national,' after `the payment
 by a'; and
 (B) in clause (xii), by inserting `general research activities,' after
 `the costs of'.
 (2) Section 301(9)(B) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 431(9)(B)) is amended--
 (A) in clauses (viii) and (ix), by inserting `national,' after `the payment
 by a'; and
 (B) in clause (ix), by inserting `general research activities,' after
 `the costs of'.
 (b) AGGREGATE LIMITS NOT TO APPLY TO PARTY COMMITTEES- Section 315(a)(3)
 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(3)) is amended by inserting `to political
 committees which are not established and maintained by a national, State,
 or local political party' after `$25,000 in any calendar year'.
SEC. 123. CONTRIBUTIONS THROUGH INTERMEDIARIES AND CONDUITS.
 Section 315(a)(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441a(a)(8)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(8) For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) Contributions made by a person, either directly or indirectly, to or
 on behalf of a particular candidate, including contributions which are in
 any way earmarked or otherwise directed through an intermediary or conduit
 to such candidate, shall be treated as contributions from such person to
 such candidate.
 `(B) If a contribution is made by a person either directly or indirectly
 to or on behalf of a particular candidate through an intermediary or
 conduit, the intermediary or conduit shall report the original source and
 the intended recipient of such contribution to the Commission and to the
 intended recipient.
 `(C) No conduit or intermediary shall deliver or arrange to have delivered
 contributions from more than 2 persons who are employees of the same employer
 or who are members of the same trade association, membership organization,
 or labor organization.
 `(D) No person required to register with the Clerk of the House of
 Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate under section 308 of
 the Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act (2 U.S.C. 267), or an officer,
 employee or agent of such a person, may act as an intermediary or conduit
 with respect to a contribution to a candidate for Federal office.'
SEC. 124. INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES.
 (a) ATTRIBUTION OF COMMUNICATIONS; REPORTS- (1) Section 318 of FECA
 (2 U.S.C. 441d) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(c)(1) If any person makes an independent expenditure through a broadcast
 communication on any television or radio station, the broadcast communication
 shall include a statement--
 `(A) in such television broadcast, that is clearly readable to the viewer
 and appears continuously during the entire length of such communication; or
 `(B) in such radio broadcast, that is clearly audible to the viewer and
 is aired at the beginning and ending of such broadcast,
setting forth the name of such person and, in the case of a political
committee, the name of any connected or affiliated organization.
 `(2) If any person makes an independent expenditure through a newspaper,
 magazine, outdoor advertising facility, direct mailing, or other type of
 general public political advertising, the communication shall include,
 in addition to the other information required by this section--
 `(A) the following sentence: `The cost of presenting this communication
 is not subject to any campaign contribution limits.'; and
 `(B) a statement setting forth the name of the person who paid for the
 communication and, in the case of a political committee, the name of any
 connected or affiliated organization, and the name of the president or
 treasurer of such organization.
 `(3) Any person making an independent expenditure described in paragraph
 (1) or (2) shall furnish, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the
 following information, to each candidate and to the Commission, not later
 than the date and time of the first public transmission of the communication:
 `(A) Effective notice that the person plans to make an independent
 expenditure for the purpose of financing a communication which expressly
 advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate.
 `(B) An exact copy of the intended communication, or a complete description
 of the contents of the intended communication, including the entirety of
 any texts to be used in conjunction with such communication, and a complete
 description of any photographs, films, or any other visual devices to be
 used in conjunction with such communication.
 `(C) All dates and times when such communication will be publicly
 transmitted.'
 (2) Section 318(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441d(a)) is amended by striking
 `Whenever' and inserting `Except as provided in subsection (c), whenever'.
 (b) DEFINITION OF INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURE- Paragraph (17) of section 301
 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 431(17)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `(17) The term' and inserting `(17)(A) The term'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(B) For the purpose of subparagraph (A), an expenditure shall be considered
 to be made in cooperation, consultation, or concert with, or at the
 request or suggestion of, a candidate, authorized committee, or agent,
 if there is any arrangement, coordination, or direction by the candidate
 or the candidate's agent prior to the publication, distribution, display,
 or broadcast of a communication, and it shall be presumed to be so made
 when it is--
 `(i) based on information about the candidate's plans, projects, or needs
 provided to the person making the expenditure by the candidate, or by the
 candidate's agents, with a view toward having an expenditure made; or
 `(ii) made by or through any person who is, or has been--
 `(I) authorized to raise or expend funds on behalf of the candidate or
 the candidate's authorized committees;
 `(II) serving as an officer of the candidate's authorized committees; or
 `(III) providing professional services to, or receiving any form of
 compensation or reimbursement from, the candidate, the candidate's committee,
 or agent.'
 (c) HEARINGS ON COMPLAINTS- Section 309(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(13) Within 3 days after the Commission receives a complaint filed pursuant
 to this section which alleges that an independent expenditure was made with
 the cooperation or consultation of a candidate, or an authorized committee
 or agent of such candidate, or was made in concert with or at the request
 or suggestion of an authorized committee or agent of such candidate,
 the Commission shall provide for a hearing to determine such matter.'
 (d) EXPEDITED JUDICIAL REVIEW- Section 310 of the FECA (2 U.S.C. 437h)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `It
 shall be the duty of the courts to advance on the docket and to expedite
 to the greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter relating to
 the making or alleged making of an independent expenditure.'
TITLE II--INCREASE OF COMPETITION IN POLITICS
SEC. 201. SEED MONEY FOR CHALLENGERS.
 Section 315 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a), as amended by section 111, is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2), the congressional campaign
 committee or the senatorial campaign committee of a national political party,
 whichever is applicable, may make contributions to an eligible candidate
 (and the candidate's authorized committees) which in the aggregate do not
 exceed the lesser of--
 `(A) $100,000; or
 `(B) the aggregate qualified matching contributions received by such
 candidate and the candidate's authorized committees.
 `(2) Any contribution under paragraph (1) shall not be treated as an
 expenditure for purposes of subsection (d)(3).
 `(3) For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified matching
 contributions' means contributions made during the period of the election
 cycle preceding the primary election by an individual who, at the time such
 contributions are made, is a resident of the State in which the election
 with respect to which such contributions are made is to be held.
 `(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `eligible candidate' means
 a candidate for Federal office (other than President or Vice President)
 who does not hold Federal office.'
SEC. 202. USE OF CAMPAIGN FUNDS.
 Section 313 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 439a) is amended by inserting `(a)' before
 `Amounts' and inserting at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), a holder of Federal office may not
 transfer any amounts received as contributions or other campaign funds to
 any account maintained for purposes of defraying ordinary and necessary
 expenses in connection with the duties of such Federal office.'
SEC. 203. CANDIDATE EXPENDITURES FROM PERSONAL FUNDS.
 (a) Section 315 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a), as amended by section 201, is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1)(A) Not less than 15 days after a candidate qualifies for a
 primary election ballot under State law, the candidate shall file with the
 Commission, and each other candidate who has qualified for that ballot,
 a declaration stating whether the candidate intends to expend for the
 primary and general election an amount exceeding $250,000 from--
 `(i) the candidate's personal funds;
 `(ii) the funds of the candidate's immediate family; and
 `(iii) personal loans incurred by the candidate and the candidate's
 immediate family in connection with the candidate's election campaign.
 `(B) The declaration required by subparagraph (A) shall be in such form
 and contain such information as the Commission may require by regulation.
 `(2) Notwithstanding subsection (a), if a candidate--
 `(A) declares under paragraph (1) that the candidate intends to expend
 for the primary and general election funds described in such paragraph an
 amount exceeding $250,000;
 `(B) expends such funds in the primary and general election an amount
 exceeding $250,000; or
 `(C) fails to file the declaration required by paragraph (1),
the limitations on contributions under subsection (a), and the limitations
on expenditures under subsection (d), shall be modified as provided under
paragraph (3) with respect to other candidates for the same office who are
not described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).
 `(3) For purposes of paragraph (2)--
 `(A) the limitation under subsection (a)(1)(A) shall be increased to
 $5,000; and
 `(B) if a candidate described in paragraph (2)(B) expends more than
 $1,000,000 of funds described in paragraph (1) in the primary and general
 election--
 `(i) the limitation under subsection (a)(1)(A) shall not apply;
 `(ii) the limitation under subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to any
 political committee of a political party; and
 `(iii) the limitation under subsection (d)(3) shall not apply.
The $5,000 amount under subparagraph (A) shall be adjusted each calendar
year in the same manner as amounts are adjusted under subsection (a)(11)(B).
 `(4) If--
 `(A) the modifications under paragraph (3) apply for a convention or a
 primary election by reason of 1 or more candidates taking (or failing to
 take) any action described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph
 (2); and
 `(B) such candidates are not candidates in any subsequent election in the
 same election campaign, including the general election,
paragraph (3) shall cease to apply to the other candidates in such campaign.
 `(5) A candidate who--
 `(A) declares, pursuant to paragraph (1), that the candidate does not
 intend to expend funds described in paragraph (1) in excess of $250,000; and
 `(B) subsequently changes such declaration or expends such funds in excess
 of that amount,
shall file an amended declaration with the Commission and notify all other
candidates for the same office within 24 hours after changing such declaration
or exceeding such limits, whichever first occurs, by sending a notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
 `(6) Contributions to a candidate or a candidate's authorized committees
 may be used to repay any expenditure or personal loan incurred in connection
 with the candidate's election to Federal office by a candidate or a member
 of the candidate's immediate family only to the extent that such repayment--
 `(A) is limited to the amount of such expenditure or the principal amount
 of such loan (and no interest is paid); and
 `(B) is not made from any such contributions received after the date of
 the general election to which such expenditure or loan relates.
 `(7) For purposes of this subsection, the term `immediate family' means--
 `(A) a candidate's spouse;
 `(B) any child, stepchild, parent, grandparent, brother, half-brother,
 sister, or half-sister of the candidate or the candidate's spouse; and
 `(C) the spouse of a person described in subparagraph (B).
 `(8) The Commission shall take such action as it deems necessary under
 the enforcement provisions of this Act to ensure compliance with this
 subsection.'
SEC. 204. FRANKED COMMUNICATIONS.
 (a) AMENDMENT OF TITLE 39, UNITED STATES CODE- (1) Section 3210(a)(6)(A)
 of title 39, United States Code is amended--
 (A) by striking clause (i) and inserting the following new clause:
 `(i) if the mass mailing is mailed during the calendar year of any primary
 or general election (whether regular or runoff) in which the Member is a
 candidate for reelection; or'; and
 (B) in clause (ii)(II), by striking `fewer than 60 days immediately before
 the date' and inserting `during the year'.
 (2) Section 3210(a)(6)(C) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by
 striking `fewer than 60 days immediately before the date' and inserting
 `during the year'.
 (3) Section 3210(a)(6) of title 39, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F) as subparagraphs (E),
 (F), and (G), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
 `(D)(i)(I) When a Member of the Senate disseminates information under
 the frank by a mass mailing, the Member shall register annually with the
 Secretary of the Senate such mass mailings. Such registration shall be made
 by filing with the Secretary of the Senate a copy of the matter mailed and
 providing, on a form supplied by the Secretary of the Senate, a description
 of the group or groups of persons to whom the mass mailing was mailed.
 `(II) The Secretary of the Senate shall promptly make available for public
 inspection and copying a copy of the mail matter registered and a description
 of the group or groups of persons to whom the mass mailing was mailed.'
 `(ii)(I) When a Member of the House of Representatives disseminates
 information under the frank by a mass mailing, the Member shall register
 annually with the Clerk of the House of Representatives such mass
 mailings. Such registration shall be made by filing with the Clerk of the
 House of Representatives a copy of the matter mailed and providing, on a
 form supplied by the Clerk of the House of Representatives, a description
 of the group or groups of persons to whom the mass mailing was mailed.
 `(II) The Clerk of the House of Representatives shall promptly make available
 for public inspection and copying a copy of the mail matter registered and
 a description of the group or groups of persons to whom the mass mailing
 was mailed.'
 (b) AMENDMENT OF STANDING RULES OF THE SENATE- (1) Paragraph 1 of Rule
 XL of the Standing Rules of the Senate is amended by striking `less than
 sixty days immediately before the date' and inserting `during the year'.
 (2) This subsection is enacted--
 (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate; and
 (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of the Senate to
 change the rules at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent
 as in the case of any other rule of the Senate.
SEC. 205. LIMITATIONS ON GERRYMANDERING.
 (a) REAPPORTIONMENT OF REPRESENTATIVES- Section 22 of the Act entitled
 `An Act to provide for the fifteenth and subsequent decennial censuses
 and to provide for apportionment of Representatives in Congress,' approved
 June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a), is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (c); and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections:
 `(c)(1) In each State entitled in the One Hundred Third Congress or in any
 subsequent Congress to more than one Representative under an apportionment
 made pursuant to the second paragraph of the Act entitled `An Act for the
 relief of Doctor Ricardo Vallejo Samala and to provide for congressional
 redistricting', approved December 14, 1967 (2 U.S.C. 2c), as in effect prior
 to the date of enactment of this subsection, there shall be established in
 the manner provided by the law of the State a number of districts equal
 to the number of Representatives to which such State is so entitled, and
 Representatives shall be elected only by eligible voters from districts
 so established, no district to elect more than 1 Representative.
 `(2) Such districts shall be established in accordance with the provisions of
 this Act as soon as practicable after the decennial census date established
 in section 141(a) of title 13, United States Code, but in no case later
 than such time as is reasonably sufficient for their use in the elections
 for the One Hundred Third Congress and in each fifth Congress thereafter.
 `(d)(1) The number of persons in congressional districts within each State
 shall be as nearly equal as is practicable, as determined under the then
 most recent decennial census.
 `(2) The enumeration established according to the Federal decennial census
 pursuant to article I, section II, United States Constitution, shall be the
 sole basis of population for the establishment of congressional districts.
 `(e) Congressional districts shall be comprised of contiguous territory,
 including adjoining insular territory.
 `(f) Congressional districts shall not be established with the intent or
 effect of diluting the voting strength of any person, group of persons,
 or members of any political party.
 `(g) Congressional districts shall be compact in form. In establishing
 such districts, nearby population shall not be bypassed in favor of more
 distant population.
 `(h) Congressional district boundaries shall avoid the unnecessary division
 of counties or their equivalent in any State.
 `(i) Congressional district boundaries shall be established in such a
 manner so as to minimize the division of cities, towns, villages, and
 other political subdivisions.
 `(j)(1) It is the intent of the Congress that congressional districts
 established pursuant to this section be subject to reasonable public
 scrutiny and comment prior to their establishment.
 `(2) At the same time that Federal decennial census tabulations data,
 reports, maps, or other material or information produced or obtained using
 Federal funds and associated with the congressional reapportionment and
 redistricting process are made available to any officer or public body in
 any State, those materials shall be made available by the State at the cost
 of duplication to any person from that State meeting the qualifications
 for voting in an election of a Member of the House of Representatives.
 `(k) Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede any provision
 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 1973 et seq.).
 `(l)(1) A State may establish by law criteria for implementing the standards
 set forth in this section.
 `(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the power of
 a State to strengthen or add to the standards set forth in this section,
 or to interpret those standards in a manner consistent with the law of
 the State, to the extent that any additional criteria or interpretations
 are not in conflict with this section.'
 `(m)(1) The district courts of the United States shall have exclusive
 jurisdiction to hear and determine any action to enforce subsections (c)
 through (l).
 `(2) A person who meets a State's qualifications for voting in an election
 of a Member of the House of Representatives from the State may bring an
 action in the district court for the district in which the person resides
 to enforce subsections (c) through (l) with regard to the State in which
 the person resides.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the district
 courts of the United States shall have authority to issue all judgments,
 orders, and decrees necessary to ensure that any criteria established by
 State law pursuant to this section are not in conflict with this section.
 `(4) With the exception of actions brought for the relief described in
 paragraph (3), the district court for the purposes of this section shall
 be a three-judge district court pursuant to section 2284 of title 28,
 United States Code.
 `(5) On motion of any party in accordance with section 1657 of title 28,
 United States Code, it shall be the duty of the district court to assign
 the case for briefing and hearing at the earliest practicable date, and
 to cause the case to be in every way expedited. The district court shall
 have authority to enter all judgments, orders and decrees necessary to
 bring a State into compliance with this Act.
 `(6) An action to challenge the establishment of a congressional district
 in a State after a Federal decennial census may not be brought after the
 end of the 9-month period beginning on the date on which the last such
 district is so established.
 `(7) For the purposes of this section, an order dismissing a complaint for
 failure to state a cause of action shall be appealable in accordance with
 section 1253 of title 28, United States Code.
 `(8) If a district court fails to establish a briefing and hearing schedule
 that will permit resolution of the case prior to the next general election,
 any party may seek a writ of mandamus from the United States Court of
 Appeals for the circuit in which the district court sits. The court of
 appeals shall have jurisdiction over the motion for a writ of mandamus and
 shall establish an expedited briefing and hearing schedule for resolution of
 the motion. Such a motion shall not stay proceedings in the district court.
 `(9) If a district court determines that the congressional districts
 established by a State's redistricting authority pursuant to this Act are
 not in compliance with this Act, the court shall remand the plan to the
 State's redistricting authority to establish new districts consistent with
 subsections (c) through (l). The district court shall retain jurisdiction
 over the case after remand.
 `(10) If, after a remand under paragraph (9), the district court determines
 that the congressional districts established by a State's redistricting
 authority under the remand order are not consistent with subsections (c)
 through (l), the district court shall enter an order establishing districts
 that are consistent with subsections (c) through (l) for the next general
 congressional election.
 `(11) If any question of State law arises in a case under this section that
 would require abstention, the district court shall not abstain. However,
 in any State permitting certification of such questions, the district court
 shall certify the question to the highest court of the State whose law is in
 question. Such certification shall not stay the proceedings in the district
 court or delay the court's determination of the question of State law.
 `(12) With the exception of actions brought for the relief described
 in paragraph (3), an appeal from a decision of the district court under
 this section shall be taken in accordance with section 1253 of title 28,
 United States Code. An appeal under this paragraph shall be noticed in
 the district court and perfected by docketing in the Supreme Court within
 thirty days of the entry of judgment below. Appeals brought to the Supreme
 Court under this paragraph shall be heard as soon as practicable.
 `(13) For purposes of this section, the term `redistricting authority'
 means the officer or public body having initial responsibility for the
 congressional redistricting of a State.'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS AND REPEALER- (1) The first sentence of section
 1657 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking `chapter 153
 or' and inserting `chapter 153, any action under subsection (m) through
 (l) of section 22 of the Act entitled `An Act to provide for the fifteenth
 and subsequent censuses and to provide for apportionment of Representatives
 in Congress,' approved June 18, 1929 (2 U.S.C. 2a), or'.
 (2) Section 141(c) of title 13, United States Code, is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following: `In circumstances in which this subsection
 requires that the Secretary provide criteria to, consult with, or report
 tabulations of population to (or if the Secretary for any reason provides
 material or information to) the public bodies having responsibility for
 the legislative apportionment or districting of a State, the Secretary
 shall provide, without cost, such criteria, consultations, tabulations,
 or other material or information simultaneously to the leadership of each
 political party represented on such public bodies. For purposes of this
 subsection, the term `political party' means any political party whose
 candidates for Representatives to Congress received, as the candidates
 of such party, 5 percent or more of the total number of votes received
 statewide by all candidates for such office in any of the 5 most recent
 general congressional elections. Such materials may include those developed
 by the Census Bureau for redistricting purposes for the 1990 Census.'
 (3) The second paragraph of the Act entitled `An Act for the relief of Doctor
 Ricardo Vallejo Samala and to provide for congressional redistricting',
 approved December 14, 1967 (2 U.S.C. 2c), is repealed.
SEC. 206. ELECTION FRAUD, OTHER PUBLIC CORRUPTION, AND FRAUD IN INTERSTATE
COMMERCE.
 (a) ELECTION FRAUD AND OTHER PUBLIC CORRUPTION- (1) Chapter 11 of title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
` 225. Public corruption
 `(a) Whoever, in a circumstance described in subsection (d), deprives or
 defrauds, or endeavors to deprive or to defraud, by any scheme or artifice,
 the inhabitants of a State or political subdivision of a State of the honest
 services of an official or employee of such State, political subdivision,
 or Indian tribal government shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned
 for not more than 10 years, or both.
 `(b) Whoever, in a circumstance described in subsection (d), deprives or
 defrauds, or endeavors to deprive or to defraud, by any scheme or artifice,
 the inhabitants of a State or political subdivision of a State of a fair
 and impartially conducted election process in any primary, runoff, special,
 or general election--
 `(1) through the procurement, casting, or tabulation of ballots that are
 materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent or that are invalid, under
 the laws of the State in which the election is held;
 `(2) through paying or offering to pay any person for voting;
 `(3) through the procurement or submission of voter registrations that
 contain false material information, or omit material information; or
 `(4) through the filing of any report required to be filed under State law
 regarding an election campaign that contains false material information
 or omits material information,
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than 10 years,
or both.
 `(c) Whoever, being a public official or an official or employee of a
 State, political subdivision of a State, or Indian tribal government, in a
 circumstance described in subsection (d), deprives or defrauds, or endeavors
 to deprive or to defraud, by any scheme or artifice, the inhabitants of a
 State or political subdivision of a State of the right to have the affairs
 of the State, political subdivision, or Indian tribal government conducted
 on the basis of complete, true, and accurate material information, shall
 be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both.
 `(d) The circumstances referred to in subsections (a), (b), and (c)
 are that--
 `(1) for the purpose of executing or concealing such scheme or artifice
 or attempting to do so, the person so doing--
 `(A) places in any post office or authorized depository for mail matter,
 any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by the Postal Service,
 or takes or receives therefrom, any such matter or thing, or knowingly
 causes to be delivered by mail according to the direction thereon, or at
 the place at which it is directed to be delivered by the person to whom
 it is addressed, any such matter or thing;
 `(B) transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire, radio, or
 television communication in interstate or foreign commerce any writings,
 signs, signals, pictures, or sounds;
 `(C) transports or causes to be transported any person or thing, or induces
 any person to travel in or to be transported in, interstate or foreign
 commerce; or
 `(D) uses or causes to use of any facility of interstate or foreign commerce;
 `(2) the scheme or artifice affects or constitutes an attempt to affect
 in any manner or degree, or would if executed or concealed so affect,
 interstate or foreign commerce; or
 `(3) as applied to an offense under subsection (b), an objective of the
 scheme or artifice is to secure the election of an official who, if elected,
 would have some authority over the administration of funds derived from
 an Act of Congress totaling $10,000 or more during the twelve-month period
 immediately preceding or following the election or date of the offense.
 `(e) Whoever deprives or defrauds, or endeavors to deprive or to defraud,
 by any scheme or artifice, the inhabitants of the United States of the
 honest services of a public official or person who has been selected to
 be a public official shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for
 not more than 10 years, or both.
 `(f) Whoever, being an official, public official, or person who has been
 selected to be a public official, directly or indirectly discharges,
 demotes, suspends, threatens, harasses, or in any manner discriminates
 against an employee or official of the United States or any State or
 political subdivision of a State, or endeavors to do so, in order to carry
 out or to conceal any scheme or artifice described in this section, shall be
 fined under this title or subject to imprisonment of up to 5 years or both.
 `(g)(1) An employee or official of the United States or any State or
 political subdivision of such State who is discharged, demoted, suspended,
 threatened, harassed, or in any other manner discriminated against because
 of lawful acts done by the employee as a result of a violation of subsection
 (e) or because of actions by the employee or official on behalf of himself
 or others in furtherance of a prosecution under this section (including
 investigation for, initiation of, testimony for, or assistance in such a
 prosecution) may bring a civil action and shall be entitled to all relief
 necessary to make such employee or official whole. Such relief shall include
 reinstatement with the same seniority status that the employee or official
 would have had but for the discrimination, 3 times the amount of back pay,
 interest on the back pay, and compensation for any special damages sustained
 as a result of the discrimination, including reasonable litigation costs
 and reasonable attorney's fees.
 `(2) An individual shall not be entitled to relief under paragraph (1) if
 the individual participated in the violation of this section with respect
 to which relief is sought.
 `(3) A civil action brought under paragraph (1) shall be stayed by a court
 upon the certification of an attorney for the Government, stating that the
 action may adversely affect the interests of the Government in a current
 criminal investigation or proceeding. The attorney for the Government
 shall promptly notify the court when the stay may be lifted without such
 adverse effects.
 `(h) For purposes of this section--
 `(1) the term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of
 Columbia, Puerto Rico, and any other commonwealth, territory, or possession
 of the United States;
 `(2) the terms `public official' and `person who has been selected to be a
 public official' have the meaning set forth in section 201 and shall also
 include any person acting or pretending to act under color of official
 authority;
 `(3) the term `official' includes--
 `(A) any person employed by, exercising any authority derived from, or
 holding any position in an Indian tribal government or the government of
 a State or any subdivision of the executive, legislative, judicial, or
 other branch of government thereof, including a department, independent
 establishment, commission, administration, authority, board, and bureau,
 and a corporation or other legal entity established and subject to control
 by a government or governments for the execution of a governmental or
 intergovernmental program;
 `(B) any person acting or pretending to act under color of official
 authority; and
 `(C) includes any person who has been nominated, appointed or selected to
 be an official or who has been officially informed that he or she will be
 so nominated, appointed or selected;
 `(4) the term `under color of official authority' includes any person who
 represents that the person controls, is an agent of, or otherwise acts on
 behalf of an official, public official, and person who has been selected
 to be a public official; and
 `(5) the term `uses any facility of interstate or foreign commerce' includes
 the intrastate use of any facility that may also be used in interstate or
 foreign commerce.'
 (2)(A) The table of sections for chapter 11 of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following item:
`225. Public Corruption.'.
 (B) Section 1961(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting
 `section 225 (relating to public corruption),' after `section 224 (relating
 to sports bribery),'.
 (C) Section 2516(1)(c) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by
 inserting `section 225 (relating to public corruption),' after `section 224
 (bribery in sporting contests),'.
 (b) FRAUD IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE- (1) Section 1343 of title 18, United
 States Code, is amended--
 (A) by striking `transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire,
 radio, or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce,
 any writings, signs, signals, pictures, or sounds' and inserting `uses or
 causes to be used any facility of interstate or foreign commerce'; and
 (B) by inserting `or attempting to do so' after `for the purpose of
 executing such scheme or artifice'.
 (2)(A) The heading of section 1343 of title 18, United States Code, is
 amended to read as follows:
` 1343. Fraud by use of facility of interstate commerce'.
 (B) The chapter analysis for chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by striking the analysis for section 1343 and inserting the
 following:
`1343. Fraud by use of facility of interstate commerce.'.
TITLE III--REDUCTION OF CAMPAIGN COSTS
SEC. 301. BROADCAST DISCOUNT.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) in the 45 days preceding a primary election, and in the 60 days preceding
 a general election, candidates for political office need to be able to buy,
 at the lowest unit charge, nonpreemptible advertising spots from broadcast
 stations and cable television stations to ensure that their messages reach
 the intended audience and that the voting public has an opportunity to
 make informed decisions;
 (2) since the Communications Act of 1934 was amended in 1972 to guarantee
 the lowest unit charge for candidates during these important preelection
 periods, the method by which advertising spots are sold in the broadcast
 and cable industries has changed significantly;
 (3) changes in the method for selling advertising spots have made the
 interpretation and enforcement of the lowest unit charge provision difficult
 and complex;
 (4) clarification and simplification of the lowest unit charge provision
 in the Communications Act of 1934 is necessary to ensure compliance with
 the original intent of the provision; and
 (5) in granting discounts and setting charges for advertising time,
 broadcasters and cable operators should treat candidates for political
 office at least as well as the most favored commercial advertisers.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS ACT- Section 315 of the Communications
 Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 315) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by striking `class and';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e),
 respectively; and
 (3) by inserting immediately after subsection (b) the following new
 subsection:
 `(c) A licensee shall not preempt the use, during any period specified in
 subsection (b)(1), of a broadcasting station by a legally qualified candidate
 for public office who has purchased such use pursuant to subsection (b)(1).'
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subtitle A--Federal Election Commission Enforcement Authority
SEC. 401. ELIMINATION OF REASON TO BELIEVE STANDARD.
 Section 309(a)(2) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(A)' after '(2)'; and
 (2) by striking the first sentence and inserting the following: `Except as
 otherwise provided in subparagraph (B), if the Commission, upon receiving
 a complaint under paragraph (1) or on the basis of information ascertained
 in the normal course of carrying out its supervisory responsibilities
 determines, by an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, that an allegation
 of a violation or from pending violation of this Act or chapter 95 or 96
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 states a claim of violation that would
 be sufficient under the standard applicable to a motion under rule 12(b)(6)
 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Commission shall, through its
 chairman or vice chairman, notify the person of the alleged violation. Such
 vote shall occur within 90 days after receipt of such complaint.'
SEC. 402. INJUNCTIVE AUTHORITY.
 Section 309(a)(2) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(2)), as amended by section 401,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(B) The Commission may petition the appropriate court for an injunction if--
 `(i) the Commission believes that there is a substantial likelihood that a
 violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or 96 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 is occurring or is about to occur;
 `(ii) the failure to act expeditiously will result in irreparable harm to
 a party affected by the potential violation;
 `(iii) such expeditious action will not cause undue harm or prejudice to
 the interests of others; and
 `(iv) the public interest would be best served by the issuance of an
 injunction.'
SEC. 403. TIME PERIODS.
 Section 309(a)(4)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(4)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i) by--
 (A) striking `, for a period of at least 30 days,'; and
 (B) striking `90 days' and inserting `60 days'; and
 (2) in clause (ii) by striking `at least' and inserting `no more than'.
SEC. 404. KNOWING VIOLATION PENALTIES.
 Section 309(a)(5)(B) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(5)(B)) is amended by striking
 `may require that the person involved in such conciliation agreement shall
 pay a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $10,000 or an
 amount equal to 200 percent of any contribution or expenditure involved in
 such violation' and inserting `shall require that the person involved in
 such conciliation agreement shall pay a civil penalty which is not less than
 the greater of $5,000 or an amount equal to any contribution or expenditure
 involved in such violation, except that if the Commission believes that a
 knowing and willful violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 has been committed during the 15-day
 period immediately preceding any election, a conciliation agreement entered
 into by the Commission under paragraph (4)(A) shall require that the person
 involved in such conciliation agreement shall pay a civil penalty which
 is not less than the greater of $10,000 or an amount equal to 200 percent
 of any contribution or expenditure involved in such violation.'
SEC. 405. COURT RESOLVED VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
 Section 309(a)(6) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 437g(a)(6)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A) by--
 (A) striking `Commission may' and inserting `Commission shall';
 (B) striking `including' and inserting `which shall include'; and
 (C) striking `which does not exceed the greater of $5,000 or an amount
 equal to any' and inserting `which equals the greater of $10,000 or an
 amount equal to 200 percent of any'; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B) by--
 (A) striking `court may' and inserting `court shall'; and
 (B) striking `, including' and inserting `which shall include'; and
 (C) striking `which does not exceed the greater of $5,000 or an amount
 equal to any' and inserting `which equals the greater of $10,000 or an
 amount equal to 200 percent of any'.
SEC. 406. PRIVATE CIVIL ACTIONS.
 Section 309(a)(6)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(6)(A)), as amended by
 section 405, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(i)' after `(6)(A)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(ii) If, by a tie vote, the Commission does not vote to institute a civil
 action pursuant to clause (i), the candidate involved in such election,
 or an individual authorized to act on behalf of such candidate, may file
 an action for appropriate relief in the district court for the district
 in which the respondent is found, resides, or transacts business. If the
 court determines that a violation has occurred, the court shall impose the
 appropriate civil penalty. Any such award of a civil penalty made under
 this paragraph shall be made in favor of the United States. In addition
 to any such civil penalty, the court shall award to the prevailing party
 in any action under this paragraph, all attorneys' fees and actual costs
 reasonably incurred in the investigation and pursuit of any such action,
 including those attorneys' fees and costs reasonably incurred in bringing
 or defending the proceeding before the Commission.'
SEC. 407. KNOWING VIOLATIONS RESOLVED IN COURT.
 Section 309(a)(6)(C) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(6)(C)) is amended by striking
 `may impose a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $10,000 or
 an amount equal to 200 percent of any contribution or expenditure involved
 in such violation' and inserting `shall impose a civil penalty which is
 not less than the greater of $10,000 or an amount equal to 200 percent
 of any contribution or expenditure involved in such violation, except
 that if such violation was committed during the 15-day period immediately
 preceding the election, the court shall impose a civil penalty which is
 not less than the greater of $15,000 or an amount equal to 300 percent of
 any contribution or expenditure involved in such violation'.
SEC. 408. ACTION ON COMPLAINT BY COMMISSION.
 Section 309(a)(8)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(8)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `act on' and inserting `reasonably pursue';
 (2) by striking `120-day' and inserting `60-day'; and
 (3) by striking `United States District Court for the District of Columbia'
 and inserting `appropriate court'.
SEC. 409. VIOLATION OF CONFIDENTIALITY REQUIREMENT.
 Section 309(a)(12)(B) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(12)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `$2,000' and inserting `$5,000'; and
 (2) by striking `$5,000' and inserting `$10,000'.
SEC. 410. PENALTY IN ATTORNEY GENERAL ACTIONS.
 Section 309(d)(1)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(d)(1)(A)) is amended by striking
 `exceed' and inserting `be less than'.
SEC. 411. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.
 (a) TIME LIMITATIONS FOR AND INDEX OF INVESTIGATIONS- Section 309(a) of
 FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)), as amended by section 124, is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(14) The Commission shall establish time limitations for investigations
 under this subsection.
 `(15) The Commission shall publish an index of all investigations under
 this section and shall update the index quarterly.'
 (b) PROCEDURE ON INITIAL DETERMINATION- Section 309(a)(2) of FECA (2
 U.S.C. 437g(a)(2)), as amended by section 402, is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following: `Before a vote based on information ascertained in
 the normal course of carrying out supervisory responsibilities, the person
 alleged to have committed the violation shall be notified of the allegation
 and shall have the opportunity to demonstrate, in writing, to the Commission
 within 15 days after notification that no action should be taken against
 such person on the basis of the information. Prior to any determination,
 the Commission may request voluntary responses to questions from any person
 who may become the subject of an investigation. A determination under this
 paragraph shall be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for
 the determination.'
 (c) PROCEDURE ON PROBABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION- (1) Section 309(a)(3) of FECA
 (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(3)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `The Commission shall make available to a respondent any documentary or
 other evidence relied on by the general counsel in making a recommendation
 under this subsection. Any brief or report by the general counsel that
 replies to the respondent's brief shall be provided to the respondent.'
 (2) Section 309(a)(4)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(4)(A)) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new clauses:
 `(iii) A determination under clause (i) shall be made only after opportunity
 for a hearing upon request of the respondent and shall be accompanied by
 a statement of the reasons for the determination.
 `(iv) The Commission shall not require that any conciliation agreement
 under this paragraph contain an admission by the respondent of a violation
 of this Act or any other law.'
 (d) ELIMINATION OF EN BANC HEARING REQUIREMENT- Section 310 of FECA (2
 U.S.C. 437h), as amended by section 124(d), is amended by striking `,
 which shall hear the matter sitting en banc'.
SEC. 412. TIGHTENING ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) REPEAL OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION- Section 406 of FECA (2 U.S.C. 455)
 is repealed.
 (b) SUPPLYING OF INFORMATION TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL- Section 309(a)(12)
 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 437g(a)(12)(A))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or prevent the
 Commission from making information contained in compliance files available
 to the Attorney General, at the Attorney General's request, in connection
 with an investigation or trial.'
Subtitle B--Other Provisions
SEC. 421. DISCLOSURE OF DEBT SETTLEMENT AND LOAN SECURITY AGREEMENTS.
 Section 304(b) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 434(b)), as amended by section 112,
 is amended by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (8), by striking the
 period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding
 at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(10) for the reporting period, the terms of any settlement agreement
 entered into with respect to a loan or other debt, as evidenced by a copy
 of such agreement filed as part of the report; and
 `(11) for the reporting period, the terms of any security or collateral
 agreement entered into with respect to a loan, as evidenced by a copy of
 such agreement filed as part of the report.'
SEC. 422. CONTRIBUTIONS FOR DRAFT AND ENCOURAGEMENT PURPOSES WITH RESPECT
TO ELECTIONS FOR FEDERAL OFFICE.
 (a) DEFINITION- Section 301(8)(A) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 431(8)(A)) is amended
 by striking `or' after the semicolon at the end of clause (i), by striking
 the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting `; and', and by adding
 at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(iii) any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or
 anything of value made by any person for the purpose of drafting a clearly
 identified individual as a candidate for Federal office or encouraging a
 clearly identified individual to become a candidate for Federal office.'
 (b) DRAFT AND ENCOURAGEMENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO BE TREATED AS CANDIDATE
 CONTRIBUTIONS- Section 315(a) of FECA (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)), as amended by this
 Act, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(12) For purposes of paragraph (1)(A) and paragraph (2)(A), any contribution
 described in section 301(8)(A)(iii) shall be treated, with respect to the
 individual involved, as a contribution to a candidate, whether or not the
 individual becomes a candidate.'
SEC. 423. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act or any amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of any such provision to any person or circumstance is held
 invalid, the validity of any other such provision, and the application of
 such provision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected
 thereby.
SEC. 424. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Except as otherwise provided in this Act, this Act and the amendments made
 by this Act shall become effective on November 7, 1990 and shall apply to
 all contributions and expenditures made after that date.