[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 5158 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

117th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 5158

To strengthen civil rights protections against harassment based on sex, 
 race, color, national origin, disability, or age.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 December 1, 2022

Mr. Casey (for himself, Ms. Hirono, Mr. Booker, Mr. Whitehouse, and Ms. 
 Baldwin) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To strengthen civil rights protections against harassment based on sex, 
 race, color, national origin, disability, or age.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Students' Access 
to Freedom and Educational Rights Act of 2022''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.
 TITLE I--PROHIBITION ON HARASSMENT

Sec. 101. Amendments to title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
Sec. 102. Amendments to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
Sec. 103. Amendments to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Sec. 104. Amendments to the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
 TITLE II--TRANSPARENCY, TRAINING, AND SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS

Sec. 201. Department of Education enforcement.
Sec. 202. Disclosure of religious exemptions from title IX of the 
 Education Amendments of 1972.
Sec. 203. Climate surveys for k-12 schools.
Sec. 204. Civil Rights Data Collection.
Sec. 205. Support for students.
Sec. 206. Title IX coordinators and training requirements.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) During a decade of civil rights reforms, Congress 
 passed title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
 2000d et seq.) (referred to in this section as ``title VI''), 
 which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, or 
 national origin in federally funded programs and activities; 
 title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
 seq.) (referred to in this section as ``title IX''), which 
 prohibits sex discrimination in federally funded education 
 programs and activities; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
 of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) (referred to in this section as 
 ``section 504''), which prohibits discrimination based on 
 disability in federally funded programs and activities; and the 
 Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), which 
 prohibits discrimination based on age in federally funded 
 programs and activities. Half a century after their passage, 
 still more needs to be done to ensure that students enjoy 
 protections consistent with the spirit, intent, and promise of 
 these groundbreaking civil rights laws.
 (2) Schools are still failing to take necessary steps to 
 prevent harassment on the basis of sex, race, national origin, 
 color, and disability and provide survivors of sexual assault 
 and other forms of harassment--especially women and girls, 
 students of color, LGBTQI+ students, and students with 
 disabilities--the support and services they need to feel safe 
 and learn in school, denying them equal educational 
 opportunities.
 (3) As the Supreme Court has held in Franklin v. Gwinnett 
 County Public Schools, 503 U.S. 60 (1992), and Davis v. Monroe 
 County Board of Education, 526 U.S. 629 (1999), covered 
 entities are responsible for preventing and addressing 
 harassment on the basis of sex in their education programs and 
 activities under title IX. Following this principle, courts 
 have similarly required funding recipients to address 
 harassment based on race, color, national origin, and 
 disability in their education programs and activities.
 (4) Perpetrators of harassment based on sex, race, color, 
 national origin, or disability at school are not limited to 
 students, nor are the victims of such harassment. Incidents 
 have also involved faculty, administrators, coaches, 
 volunteers, other staff members, and visitors.
 (5) Sexual harassment of students, especially of women and 
 girls, students of color, students with disabilities, and 
 LGBTQI+ students, is widely prevalent in K-12 and higher 
 education. For example--
 (A) 1 in 5 girls ages 14 through 18 have been 
 kissed or touched without their consent, 58 percent of 
 LGBTQI+ youth ages 13 through 21 have been sexually 
 harassed, and disabled children are 2.9 times more 
 likely than their peers to be sexually assaulted;
 (B) women and girls of color are more likely to 
 experience sexual harassment in school than their White 
 peers; and
 (C) in college--
 (i) more than 1 in 4 women, more than 1 in 
 15 men, and nearly 1 in 4 transgender, 
 nonbinary, and gender-nonconforming students 
 are sexually assaulted during their time as 
 undergraduates;
 (ii) 1 in 7 women, 1 in 10 men, and 1 in 5 
 transgender, nonbinary, and gender-
 nonconforming students experience dating 
 violence or domestic violence as 
 undergraduates; and
 (iii) 1 in 10 women, 1 in 33 men, and 1 in 
 7 transgender, nonbinary, and gender-
 nonconforming students experience stalking as 
 undergraduates.
 (6) Students also experience forms of sex-based harassment 
 beyond sexual harassment, such as harassment based on sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, sex characteristics (including 
 intersex status), pregnancy, childbirth, medical conditions 
 related to pregnancy or childbirth, and sex stereotypes.
 (A) For example, according to one study, 86.3 
 percent of LGBTQI+ students experienced harassment or 
 assault based on personal characteristics, 77.6 percent 
 reported avoiding school functions, and 71.8 percent 
 reported avoiding extracurricular activities because 
 they felt unsafe or uncomfortable.
 (B) According to another study, 64 percent of girls 
 who were pregnant or parenting reported not feeling 
 safe at school as a barrier to attending school 
 compared to 32 percent of girls overall.
 (7) Like sex-based harassment, harassment based on race, 
 color, national origin, and disability remains a problem at 
 educational institutions.
 (A) Between 2011 and 2016, the National Center for 
 Education Statistics documented a 40-percent increase 
 in college campus hate incidents. According to the 
 Bureau of Justice Statistics, racial bias is the most 
 common motivation behind these hate incidents.
 (B) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 has agreed that racism has a profound and negative 
 impact on the mental and physical health of people of 
 color. As such, racist incidents can take a serious 
 toll on students' overall health and well-being, even 
 affecting their academic performance. A 2021 UCLA study 
 found that young adults who experience discrimination 
 are at higher risk for both short and long-term 
 behavioral and mental health problems that are 
 exacerbated with each incident.
 (C) According to the Department of Justice, the 
 rate of violence victimization against persons with 
 disabilities is nearly 4 times the rate for nondisabled 
 persons. Nearly \1/3\ of children and adolescents with 
 disabilities have experienced violence. Corporal 
 punishment is almost twice as high in schools with a 
 higher proportion of students with disabilities 
 receiving special education services as in other 
 schools. Girls with disabilities are also at higher 
 risk of sexual violence perpetrated by their peers than 
 nondisabled girls.
 (8) The Government Accountability Office estimated that 
 about 1 in 4 students aged 12-18 saw hate words or symbols 
 written at schools in 2014-2015, 2016-2017, and 2018-2019.
 (9) Students also often experience intersectional forms of 
 harassment that, for example, may include sexual harassment 
 that is racialized or harassment based on having a disability 
 and being transgender, among other types of intersectional 
 harassment.
 (10) Few students report harassment to their schools, often 
 because of shame or self-blame, fear of retaliation, fear of 
 being ignored or disciplined, fear of police or immigration 
 officials, or lack of knowledge of services schools can offer 
 to help. In particular, women and girls of color, women and 
 girls with disabilities, pregnant and parenting students, and 
 LGBTQI+ students are too often disbelieved and met with 
 unsupportive responses, including retaliation, after reporting 
 sexual harassment because of stereotypes that label them as 
 less credible. Men and boys, too, are often disbelieved or 
 dismissed when they report sexual harassment.
 (11) Failure of a school to comply with title IX, title VI, 
 and section 504 may limit or deny the ability of students, 
 employees, and others to participate in or benefit from the 
 school's education programs or activities leading to 
 discrimination by creating a hostile learning environment that 
 impedes educational attainment, damages rights to equal 
 educational opportunities, and undermines learning for all.
 (12) When schools fail to protect student victims of 
 harassment, including by failing to offer supportive measures 
 that are designed to preserve and restore the educational 
 opportunities of the victim, students often suffer in the form 
 of emotional distress, mental health consequences, lower 
 academic achievement, lost scholarships and financial aid, poor 
 school attendance, and decreased school completion rates. 
 Moreover, many schools may respond negatively to harassment by 
 creating additional trauma and harm for the student victim 
 (often by, for example, blaming the student for their 
 victimization or by refusing to help them), which is also known 
 as ``institutional betrayal''. Harm may also be caused by the 
 Title IX coordinators having a conflict of interest, such as 
 serving within school leadership or local educational agency 
 leadership (including serving as a principal, vice principal, 
 headmaster, superintendent, board member, general counsel, 
 athletics director, coach, or dean of students, or on a 
 judicial hearing board or in a position to whom an appeal might 
 be made).
 (13) The language of title IX is broad and sweeping, making 
 clear that the intent of Congress is to provide avenues of 
 redress for opening the courthouse doors to victims of a wide 
 range of sex discrimination in schools. However, since the 
 passage of title IX, courts have created barriers that make it 
 extraordinarily difficult for survivors to obtain redress from 
 schools through private litigation.
 (14) In a 5 to 4 opinion in Gebser v. Lago Vista 
 Independent School District, 524 U.S. 274 (1998), the Supreme 
 Court held that students subjected to sex-based harassment by 
 their teachers may receive a damages remedy in private 
 litigation under title IX only when school officials with 
 ``authority to institute correct measures'' on the recipient's 
 behalf have ``actual notice'' of the harassment and are 
 ``deliberately indifferent'', or respond in a clearly 
 unreasonable manner, to it. A year later, in Davis v. Monroe 
 County Board of Education, 526 U.S. 629 (1999), the Supreme 
 Court held that in order to receive money damages under title 
 IX, students who experience sex-based harassment by their 
 peers, must additionally show that the harassment is ``so 
 severe, pervasive, and objectively offensive that it can be 
 said to deprive the victims of access to the educational 
 opportunities or benefits provided by the school.'' Courts have 
 applied the same standards in requiring funding recipients to 
 address harassment based on race, color, national origin, or 
 disability.
 (15) In contrast, in the workplace, under title VII of the 
 Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) (referred to 
 in this section as ``title VII''), a plaintiff experiencing 
 harassment based on sex, race, color, national origin, or 
 religion by a coworker or other non-supervisor need only show 
 their employer reacted negligently in response to severe or 
 pervasive harassment of which the employer knew or should have 
 known. And sometimes--such as when a supervisor fires someone 
 because they refuse to submit to sexual advances--title VII 
 automatically holds an employer liable.
 (16) Although they do not affect the relevant standards for 
 individuals to obtain injunctive and equitable relief for 
 harassment on the basis of race, color, sex, national origin, 
 age, or disability under covered programs and activities, the 
 Supreme Court's decisions in Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent 
 School District and Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education 
 and lower court opinions severely limit the availability of 
 remedies for such individuals by imposing more stringent 
 standards for recovery of damages. Yet in many cases, damages 
 are the only remedy that would effectively rectify past 
 harassment. Further, in 2022, in Cummings v. Premier Rehab 
 Keller PLLC, 142 S. Ct. 1562 (2022), the Supreme Court limited 
 the ability of plaintiffs bringing disability discrimination 
 claims under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
 (Public Law 111-148) and section 504 to recover emotional 
 distress damages, which are often the sole or primary remedy 
 for survivors of harassment. The dissenting Justices in 
 Cummings warned that this ruling upset Congressional intent and 
 longstanding precedent under these and other statues, 
 suggesting the possibility that its logic might be extended in 
 the future to other laws such as title IX and title VI. Some 
 lower courts have added additional onerous barriers, such as 
 one under which a school is liable for its failure to address 
 known sexual harassment only if the victim later experiences 
 further sexual harassment as a result of this failure.
 (17) These limitations thwart the purpose of Congress to 
 protect students from harassment and ensure non-discriminatory 
 educational environments. They create prohibitively high 
 standards for the lawsuits of students regarding harassment 
 based on sex, race, color, national origin, and disability 
 under title IX, title VI, and section 504 that are more onerous 
 than those applicable to workplace harassment lawsuits under 
 title VII. As a result, schools may do less to address 
 harassment against their students than to address the same 
 harassment of their employees. This means that students, who 
 are often children and young adults, must suffer worse 
 harassment than adult employees before they are entitled to a 
 remedy in court.
 (18) Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent School District, 
 Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education, and subsequent 
 opinions create an incentive for covered entities to insulate 
 themselves from knowledge of harassment rather than adopting 
 and enforcing practices that will minimize the danger of such 
 harassment. These opinions thus undermine the purpose of 
 prohibitions on discrimination in the civil rights laws, which 
 is to induce covered programs or activities to adopt and 
 enforce practices that will minimize the danger that vulnerable 
 students or other persons will be exposed to such odious 
 behavior.
 (19) Current title IX regulations issued by the Department 
 of Education in 2020 entitled ``Nondiscrimination on the Basis 
 of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal 
 Financial Assistance'' (part 106 of title 34, Code of Federal 
 Regulations), have made it more difficult for student survivors 
 to report harassment to schools and receive help, including by, 
 for example, only allowing schools to respond to title IX 
 complaints of sexual harassment that is so severe, pervasive, 
 and objectively offensive that it effectively denies a person 
 equal access to a school program or activity--meaning students 
 will have to endure repeated and escalating levels of 
 harassment before their complaint can even be investigated. 
 These regulations also pose uniquely burdensome procedures for 
 cases of sexual harassment that are not required for any other 
 type of student or staff misconduct, further sweeping sexual 
 violence under the rug.
 (20) Department of Education guidance explains the 
 requirement under title VI and section 504 for institutions to 
 respond to harassment based on disability, race, color, or 
 national origin that is sufficiently serious to deny or limit 
 the ability of a student to participate in or benefit from the 
 education programs and activities of the recipient.
 (21) Schools with affirming and welcoming environments that 
 provide support and protection against all forms of harassment 
 and discrimination ensure that students have better social, 
 behavioral, academic, and mental health outcomes.
 (22) Legislative action is necessary and appropriate to 
 restore the access to the courts that was sharply limited by 
 Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent School District, Davis v. 
 Monroe County Board of Education, Cummings v. Premier Rehab, 
 and other court opinions, restore the availability of a full 
 range of remedies for harassment based on sex, race, color, 
 national origin, disability, or age, and prevent discriminatory 
 harassment in schools. Any action needs to take into full 
 account the intersectionality of incidents of harassment in 
 educational programs or activities. Sex-based violence and 
 harassment often harms those populations already most 
 vulnerable at education institutions.
 (23) In landmark rulings in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins 490 
 U.S. 228 (1989) and Bostock v. Clayton County, Ga. (2020), the 
 Supreme Court correctly interpreted title VII to hold that 
 discrimination on the basis of sex stereotypes, sexual 
 orientation, or gender identity necessarily constitute 
 discrimination ``because of sex''. To date, Federal courts of 
 appeal have held uniformly that these holdings apply equally to 
 title IX. Legislative action is necessary and appropriate to 
 codify these established interpretations of title IX law and 
 ensure support and protection for LGBTQI+ students against 
 severe and widespread discriminatory harassment.
 (24) Discrimination by State and local governments on the 
 basis of sex, race, color, national origin, age, or disability 
 in education programs and activities receiving Federal 
 financial assistance violates the Equal Protection Clause of 
 the 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. In 
 many circumstances, such discrimination also violates other 
 constitutional rights such as those of liberty and privacy 
 under the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment. Congress 
 may validly invoke its powers under the 14th Amendment to 
 provide a full range of remedies in response to discrimination 
 by both private and government actors.
 (25) In enacting the protections of the amendments made by 
 this Act, Congress is acting pursuant to its authority under 
 section 5 of the 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the 
 United States, the Commerce Clause of section 8 of article I of 
 the Constitution of the United States, and the Spending Clause 
 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution of the United 
 States.
 (26) Members of Congress have long been advocating for 
 substantive reforms that support student survivors and ensure 
 gender equity in schools, including the HALT on Campus Sexual 
 Violence Act, the Supporting Survivors of Sexual Harassment in 
 Schools Act of 2020, the Patsy T. Mink and Louise M. Slaughter 
 Gender Equity in Education Act, the Stop Sexual Harassment in 
 K-12 Act, and the Exposing Discrimination in Higher Education 
 Act. Provisions from these groundbreaking pieces of legislation 
 serve as the foundation on which any larger comprehensive 
 reform must be built.
 (27) Restoring the availability of a full range of remedies 
 for harassment will--
 (A) ensure that students and other persons 
 participating or attempting to participate in federally 
 funded programs and activities have protection from 
 harassment on the basis of sex (including sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, sex characteristics, 
 pregnancy, childbirth, a medical condition related to 
 pregnancy or childbirth, and sex stereotypes), race, 
 color, national origin, disability, or age;
 (B) encourage covered entities to adopt and enforce 
 meaningful policies and procedures to prevent and 
 remedy harassment;
 (C) deter incidents of harassment; and
 (D) provide appropriate remedies for harassment.
 (28) Schools do not harass students on the basis of race, 
 gender, or sex when they teach or incorporate anti-racism 
 principles, diversity, equity and inclusion practices, 
 culturally relevant curriculum and culturally responsive 
 teaching, critical race theory, or otherwise focus the 
 experiences of students of color, women and girls, and LGBTQI+ 
 students. Indeed, such teaching and training, when implemented 
 appropriately, may often further the purposes of the mandate of 
 title VI to prohibit discrimination based on race, color, and 
 national origin and the mandate of title IX to prohibit 
 discrimination based on sex, while also ensuring that schools 
 are advancing equity.

 TITLE I--PROHIBITION ON HARASSMENT

SEC. 101. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE IX OF THE EDUCATION AMENDMENTS OF 1972.

 Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 901, by adding at end the following:
 ``(d) Liability for Sex-Based Harassment.--
 ``(1) Harassment by agents, employees, and other persons 
 authorized by the recipient to provide aid, benefit, or 
 service.--Subject to subsection (e), a recipient shall be 
 liable if its agent, employee, or other person authorized by 
 the recipient to provide aid, benefit, or service under the 
 recipient's program or activity, engages in sex-based 
 harassment against a person who participates in or receives any 
 benefit, service, or opportunity from such program or activity, 
 or who attempts to receive such benefit, service, or 
 opportunity, regardless of where the harassment occurs, if--
 ``(A) the harassment is enabled or assisted by the 
 authority exercised as an agent, employee, or other 
 authorized person of the recipient; or
 ``(B) the recipient receives notice of the 
 harassment.
 ``(2) Harassment by non-agents, non-employees, and other 
 non-authorized persons.--Subject to subsection (e), a recipient 
 is liable for sex-based harassment if a person who is not its 
 agent, employee, or other authorized person, engages in sex-
 based harassment against a person who is participating in or 
 receiving any benefit, service, or opportunity from such 
 program or activity, or who is attempting to do so, regardless 
 of where the harassment occurs, if the recipient receives 
 notice of the harassment.
 ``(e) Affirmative Defense.--
 ``(1) In general.--A recipient is not liable in a private 
 action for damages under subsection (d) for sex-based 
 harassment, if the recipient demonstrates that it exercised 
 reasonable care to prevent sex-based harassment and to promptly 
 remedy the effects of the sex-based harassment at issue, 
 including through a demonstration by the recipient that it--
 ``(A) established, adequately publicized, and 
 enforced an effective and comprehensive sex-based 
 harassment prevention policy, training, and complaint 
 procedure that is likely to provide redress and to 
 avoid harm without exposing the person subjected to 
 such harassment to undue risk, effort, or expense;
 ``(B) if requested by an aggrieved person subjected 
 to sex-based harassment (or the parent or guardian of 
 such person, if such person is a minor), or otherwise 
 necessary to protect such person or other persons in 
 such program or activity from a significant ongoing 
 threat of harm, undertook a prompt, thorough, and 
 impartial investigation of such harassment;
 ``(C) provided supportive measures that have the 
 purpose and effect of preserving and restoring a person 
 subjected to sex-based harassment's equal access to the 
 recipient's education program or activity, regardless 
 of whether such person requests an investigation; and
 ``(D) took other necessary, immediate, and 
 appropriate corrective action designed to stop such 
 harassment and remedy its effects.
 ``(2) Not establishing reasonable care.--A showing that the 
 harassment did not recur after the recipient received notice of 
 the harassment does not establish reasonable care absent the 
 demonstration required by subparagraphs (A) through (D) of 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(f) Notice.--A recipient receives notice of sex-based harassment 
if an agent, employee, or other authorized person of the recipient, or 
in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about the 
harassment and--
 ``(1) has the authority to take action to redress the 
 harassment;
 ``(2) has the responsibility to report to an administrator 
 harassment or similar misconduct by others; or
 ``(3) receives a report of such harassment from an 
 individual who could reasonably believe that the agent, 
 employee, or other authorized person is as described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2).'';
 (2) in section 903--
 (A) in the 1st sentence by inserting ``(a)'' before 
 ``Any''; and
 (B) by adding at the end of the following:
 ``(b) Any person aggrieved by the failure of a recipient to comply 
with section 901, or a rule issued under this title, may bring a civil 
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
 ``(c) In a civil action brought for a violation of section 901 by 
or on behalf of a person aggrieved by a violation of section 901, such 
person may recover equitable and legal relief (such as compensatory 
damages, including for emotional distress, and punitive damages), and 
attorney's fees (including expert fees).''; and
 (3) by inserting after section 908 the following:

``SEC. 908A. DEFINITIONS.

 ``For purposes of this title--
 ``(1) the term `gender identity'--
 ``(A) means a person's internal sense of gender, 
 which could be female, male, or another gender;
 ``(B) includes a person's gender expression, which 
 is how they present their gender identity outwardly, 
 including through appearance, mannerisms, dress, or 
 other gender-related characteristics; and
 ``(C) may or may not match their designated sex at 
 birth;
 ``(2) the term `on the basis of sex' includes, inter alia, 
 on the basis of, perceived or actual--
 ``(A) sex stereotypes;
 ``(B) pregnancy or related conditions, including--
 ``(i) childbirth, termination of pregnancy, 
 or lactation;
 ``(ii) medical conditions related to 
 pregnancy, childbirth, termination of 
 pregnancy, or lactation; or
 ``(iii) recovery from pregnancy, 
 childbirth, termination of pregnancy, 
 lactation, or their related medical conditions;
 ``(C) sexual orientation;
 ``(D) gender identity; or
 ``(E) sex characteristics, including inter-sex 
 traits;
 ``(3) the term `recipient' means an entity described in any 
 of paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 908 and includes any 
 entity that exercises controlling authority over such 
 recipient;
 ``(4) the term `sex-based harassment'--
 ``(A) means conduct on the basis of sex, including 
 conduct of a sexual nature, that unreasonably alters a 
 person's ability to participate in or receive any 
 benefit, service, or opportunity from an education 
 program or activity that receives Federal financial 
 assistance, including by creating an intimidating, 
 hostile, or offensive environment; and
 ``(B) includes an employee, agent, or other person 
 authorized by the recipient to provide an aid, benefit, 
 or service under the recipient's education program or 
 activity, explicitly or impliedly conditioning the 
 provision of such an aid, benefit, or service on a 
 person's participation in sexual conduct; and
 ``(5) the term `sexual orientation' includes homosexuality, 
 heterosexuality, bisexuality, pansexuality, and asexuality.''.

SEC. 102. AMENDMENTS TO THE REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973.

 (a) Nondiscrimination Under Federal Grants and Programs.--Section 
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Prohibition of Harassment on the Basis of Disability.--
 ``(1) Liability for disability-based harassment.--Subject 
 to paragraph (2), in an action pursuant to section 505(a)(2), a 
 recipient receiving Federal financial assistance under any 
 program or activity or any program or activity conducted by any 
 Executive agency or by the United States Postal Service shall 
 be liable for harassment on the basis of disability as follows:
 ``(A) Harassment by agents, employees, and other 
 persons authorized by the recipient to provide aid, 
 benefits, or services under the recipient's programs or 
 activities.--A recipient is liable if its agent, 
 employee, or other person authorized by the recipient 
 to provide aid, benefit, or service under the 
 recipient's program or activity, engages in harassment 
 on the basis of disability against a person who 
 participates in or receives any benefit, service, or 
 opportunity from such program or activity, or who 
 attempts to receive such benefit, service, or activity, 
 regardless of where the harassment occurs, if--
 ``(i) the harassment is enabled or assisted 
 by the authority exercised as an agent, 
 employee, or other authorized person of the 
 recipient; or
 ``(ii) the recipient receives notice of the 
 harassment.
 ``(B) Harassment by non-agents, non-employees, and 
 other non-authorized persons.--A recipient is liable 
 for harassment on the basis of disability if a person 
 who is not its agent, employee, or other authorized 
 person, engages in harassment on the basis of 
 disability against a person who is participating in or 
 receiving any benefit, service, or opportunity under 
 such program or activity, or who is attempting to do 
 so, regardless of where the harassment occurs, if the 
 recipient receives notice of the harassment.
 ``(2) Affirmative defense.--
 ``(A) In general.--A recipient is not liable in a 
 private action for damages under paragraph (1) for 
 harassment on the basis of disability, if the recipient 
 demonstrates that it exercised reasonable care to 
 prevent harassment on the basis of disability, and 
 promptly remedy the effects of the harassment at issue, 
 including through a demonstration by the recipient that 
 it--
 ``(i) established, adequately publicized, 
 and enforced an effective and comprehensive 
 harassment prevention policy, training, and 
 complaint procedure that is likely to provide 
 redress and avoid harm without exposing the 
 person subjected to the harassment to undue 
 risk, effort, or expense;
 ``(ii) if requested by such person, third 
 party, or otherwise necessary to protect that 
 person or other persons within the program or 
 activity from a significant ongoing threat, 
 undertook a prompt, thorough, and impartial 
 investigation of the harassment at issue;
 ``(iii) provided supportive measures that 
 had the purpose and effect of preserving and 
 restoring the aggrieved person's equal access 
 to the benefits or opportunities of the program 
 or activity, regardless of whether the 
 aggrieved person requested an investigation; 
 and
 ``(iv) took other necessary, immediate, and 
 appropriate corrective action designed to stop 
 the harassment and remedy its effects.
 ``(B) Not establishing reasonable care.--A showing 
 that the harassment did not recur after the recipient 
 received notice of the harassment does not establish 
 reasonable care absent the demonstration required by 
 clauses (i) through (iv) of subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) Notice.--A recipient receives notice of harassment on 
 the basis of disability when any of the following individuals 
 knew or, in the exercise of reasonable care, should have known 
 about the harassment:
 ``(A) An agent, employee, or other authorized 
 person of the recipient who has the authority to take 
 action to redress the harassment.
 ``(B) An agent, employee, or other authorized 
 person of the recipient who has the responsibility to 
 report to an administrator harassment or similar 
 misconduct by others.
 ``(C) An agent, employee, or other authorized 
 person of the recipient to whom an individual has made 
 a report of harassment based on the reasonable belief 
 that the agent, employee, or other authorized person is 
 an individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B).
 ``(4) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Harassment on the basis of disability.--The 
 term `harassment on the basis of disability' means a 
 form of discrimination on the basis of disability that 
 alters a person's ability to participate in or receive 
 any benefit, service, or opportunity under a program or 
 activity receiving Federal financial assistance or any 
 program or activity conducted by any Executive agency 
 or by the United States Postal Service, including by 
 creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive 
 environment.
 ``(B) Recipient.--The term `recipient' means an 
 entity described in any of paragraphs (1) through (4) 
 of subsection (b), any entity that exercises 
 controlling authority over such an entity, and any 
 Executive agency or the United States Postal 
 Service.''.
 (b) Remedies and Right of Action.--Section 505 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by inserting at the end the 
 following: ``Any person aggrieved by the failure of a recipient 
 to comply with section 504, including any regulation 
 promulgated pursuant to such section, may bring a civil action 
 in any court of competent jurisdiction.''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Attorney and Expert Fees and Right of Recovery.--
 ``(1) In general.--In any action or proceeding to enforce 
 or charge a violation of a provision of this title, including 
 any regulation promulgated pursuant to this title, the court, 
 in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than 
 the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee and expert fees 
 as part of the costs.
 ``(2) Right of recovery.--In an action brought against a 
 recipient by (including on behalf of) an aggrieved person, the 
 aggrieved person may recover equitable and legal relief (such 
 as compensatory damages, including for emotional distress, and 
 punitive damages), and attorney's fees (including expert 
 fees).''.

SEC. 103. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.

 Section 602 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``Each Federal department'' inserting the 
 following subsection:
 ``(a) In General.--Each Federal department''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Prohibition of Harassment as Discrimination.--
 ``(1) Liability for harassment based on race, color, or 
 national origin.--In an action pursuant to subsection (c) of 
 this section, a recipient shall be liable for harassment on the 
 basis of race, color, or national origin as follows:
 ``(A) Harassment by agents, employees, and other 
 persons authorized by the recipient to provide aid, 
 benefits, or services under the recipient's programs or 
 activities.--Subject to subparagraph (C), a recipient 
 is liable if its agent, employee, or other person 
 authorized by the recipient to provide aid, benefit, or 
 service under the recipient's program or activity, 
 engages in harassment on the basis of race, color, or 
 national origin against a person who participates in or 
 receives any benefit, service, or opportunity from such 
 program or activity, or who attempts to receive such 
 benefit, service, or opportunity, regardless of where 
 the harassment occurs, if--
 ``(i) the harassment is enabled or assisted 
 by the authority exercised as an employee, 
 agent, or other authorized person of the 
 recipient; or
 ``(ii) the recipient receives notice of the 
 harassment.
 ``(B) Harassment by non-agents, non-employees, and 
 other non-authorized persons.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (C), a recipient is liable for harassment on the basis 
 of race, color, or national origin if a person who is 
 not its agent, employee, or other authorized person, 
 engages in harassment on the basis of race, color, or 
 national origin against a person who is participating 
 in or receiving any benefit, service, or opportunity 
 from a program or activity receiving Federal financial 
 assistance, or who is attempting to do so, regardless 
 of where the harassment occurs, if the recipient 
 receives notice of the harassment.
 ``(C) Affirmative defense.--
 ``(i) In general.--A recipient is not 
 liable in a private action for damages under 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) for harassment on the 
 basis of race, color, or national origin, if 
 the recipient demonstrates that it exercised 
 reasonable care to prevent harassment on the 
 basis of race, color, or national origin, and 
 promptly remedied the effects of the harassment 
 at issue, including through a demonstration by 
 the recipient that it--
 ``(I) established, adequately 
 publicized, and enforced an effective 
 and comprehensive harassment prevention 
 policy, training, and complaint 
 procedure that is likely to provide 
 redress and avoid harm without exposing 
 the person subjected to the harassment 
 to undue risk, effort, or expense;
 ``(II) if requested by such person, 
 or otherwise necessary to protect that 
 person or other persons within the 
 program or activity from a significant 
 ongoing threat, undertook a prompt, 
 thorough, and impartial investigation 
 of the harassment at issue;
 ``(III) provided supportive 
 measures that had the purpose and 
 effect of preserving and restoring the 
 aggrieved person's equal access to the 
 benefits or opportunities of the 
 program or activity receiving Federal 
 financial assistance, regardless of 
 whether the aggrieved person requested 
 an investigation; and
 ``(IV) took other necessary, 
 prompt, and appropriate corrective 
 action designed to stop the harassment 
 and remedy its effects.
 ``(ii) Not establishing reasonable care.--A 
 showing that the harassment did not recur after 
 the recipient received notice of the harassment 
 does not establish reasonable care absent the 
 demonstration required by subclauses (I), (II), 
 (III), and (IV) of clause (i).
 ``(D) Notice.--A recipient receives notice of 
 harassment on the basis of race, color, or national 
 origin when any of the following individuals knew or, 
 in the exercise of reasonable care, should have known 
 about the harassment:
 ``(i) An agent, employee, or other 
 authorized person of the recipient who has the 
 authority to take action to redress the 
 harassment.
 ``(ii) An agent, employee, or other 
 authorized person of the recipient who has the 
 responsibility to report to an administrator 
 harassment or similar misconduct by others.
 ``(iii) An agent, employee, or other 
 authorized person of the recipient to whom an 
 individual has made a report of harassment 
 based on the reasonable belief that the agent, 
 employee, or other authorized person is an 
 individual described in clause (i) or (ii).
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(A) Harassment on the basis of race, color, or 
 national origin.--The term `harassment on the basis of 
 race, color, or national origin' means a form of 
 discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national 
 origin that alters a person's ability to participate in 
 or receive any benefit, service, or opportunity from a 
 program or activity receiving Federal financial 
 assistance, including by creating an intimidating, 
 hostile, or offensive environment.
 ``(B) Recipient.--The term `recipient' means an 
 entity described in any of paragraphs (1) through (4) 
 of section 606, and any entity that exercises 
 controlling authority over such entities.
 ``(c) Remedies and Right of Action.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any person aggrieved by the failure of a 
 recipient to comply with this title, including any regulation 
 promulgated pursuant to this title, may bring a civil action in 
 any court of competent jurisdiction.
 ``(2) Right of recovery.--In an action brought against a 
 recipient by or on behalf of an aggrieved person, the aggrieved 
 person may recover equitable and legal relief (such as 
 compensatory damages, including for emotional distress, and 
 punitive damages), and attorney's fees (including expert 
 fees).''.

SEC. 104. AMENDMENTS TO THE AGE DISCRIMINATION ACT OF 1975.

 (a) In General.--Section 303 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
(42 U.S.C. 6102) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.-- '' before 
 ``Pursuant''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Liability.--
 ``(1) Harassment by agents, employees, and other persons 
 authorized by the recipient to provide aid, benefits, or 
 services under the recipient's programs and activities.--
 Subject to subsection (c), a recipient that receives Federal 
 financial assistance for a program or activity is liable if its 
 agent, employee, or other person authorized by the recipient to 
 provide aid, benefit, or service under the recipient's program 
 or activity, engages in age-based harassment against a person 
 who participates in or receives any benefit, service, or 
 opportunity from such program or activity, or who attempts to 
 receive such benefit, service, or opportunity, regardless of 
 where the harassment occurs, if--
 ``(A) the harassment is enabled or assisted by the 
 authority exercised as an employee, agent, or other 
 authorized person of the recipient; or
 ``(B) the recipient receives notice of the 
 harassment.
 ``(2) Harassment by non-agents, non-employees, and other 
 non-authorized persons.--Subject to subsection (c), a recipient 
 that receives Federal financial assistance for a program or 
 activity is liable for age-based harassment if a person who is 
 not its agent, employee, or other authorized person, engages in 
 age-based harassment against a person who is participating in 
 or receiving any benefit, service, or opportunity from such 
 program or activity, or who is attempting to do so, regardless 
 of where the harassment occurs, if the recipient receives 
 notice of the harassment.
 ``(c) Affirmative Defense.--
 ``(1) In general.--A recipient is not liable in a private 
 action for damages under subsection (b) for age-based 
 harassment if it demonstrates that it exercised reasonable care 
 to prevent age-based harassment and to promptly remedy the 
 effects of the age-based harassment at issue, including through 
 a demonstration by the recipient that it--
 ``(A) established, adequately publicized, and 
 enforced an effective and comprehensive age-based 
 harassment prevention policy, training, and complaint 
 procedure that is likely to provide redress and to 
 avoid harm without exposing the person subjected to 
 such harassment to undue risk, effort, or expense;
 ``(B) if requested by the aggrieved person, or 
 otherwise necessary to protect such person or other 
 persons in such program or activity from a significant 
 ongoing threat of harm, undertook a prompt, thorough, 
 and impartial investigation of such harassment;
 ``(C) provided supportive measures that have the 
 purpose and effect of preserving and restoring an 
 aggrieved person's equal access to the benefits, 
 services, or opportunities of the program or activity 
 involved, regardless of whether such person requests an 
 investigation; and
 ``(D) took other necessary, immediate, and 
 appropriate corrective action designed to stop such 
 harassment and remedy its effects.
 ``(2) Not establishing reasonable care.--A showing that the 
 harassment did not recur after the recipient receives notice of 
 the harassment does not establish reasonable care absent the 
 demonstration required by subparagraphs (A) through (D) of 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(d) Notice.--A recipient receives notice of age-based harassment 
if an agent, employee, or other authorized person of the recipient 
knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, about 
the harassment and--
 ``(1) has the authority to take action to redress the 
 harassment;
 ``(2) has the responsibility to report to an administrator 
 harassment or similar misconduct by others; or
 ``(3) receives a report of such harassment from an 
 individual who could reasonably believe that the agent, 
 employee, or other authorized person is as described in 
 paragraph (1) or (2).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 304(b) of the Age Discrimination 
Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6103(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``It shall'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to section 305(h)(3), it shall''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``The provisions'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to section 305(h)(3), the provisions''.
 (c) Remedies and Right of Action.--Section 305 of the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6104) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(g) Any person aggrieved by the failure of a recipient to comply 
with this title, or a rule issued under this title--
 ``(1) may bring a civil action in any court of competent 
 jurisdiction; and
 ``(2) notwithstanding subsection (e), may recover equitable 
 and legal relief (such as compensatory damages, including for 
 emotional distress, and punitive damages), and attorney's fees 
 (including expert fees).
 ``(h) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the 
case of alleged age-based harassment in a program or activity of an 
entity described in subparagraph (B) of section 309(4)--
 ``(1) an aggrieved person shall not be required to exhaust 
 administrative remedies;
 ``(2) the relief described in subsection (g)(2) shall be 
 available; and
 ``(3) the provisions of paragraph (1) and (2) of section 
 304(b) shall not apply.''.
 (d) Definitions.--Section 309 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
(42 U.S.C. 6107) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting 
 a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at end the following:
 ``(5) the term `age-based harassment' means a form of 
 prohibited discrimination on the basis of an individual's age 
 that alters a person's ability to participate in or receive any 
 benefit, service, or opportunity from a program or activity 
 receiving Federal financial assistance; and
 ``(6) the term `recipient' means an entity described in any 
 of subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (4), and 
 includes any entity that exercises controlling authority over 
 such entity.''.

 TITLE II--TRANSPARENCY, TRAINING, AND SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS

SEC. 201. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Disclosure of Enforcement Actions.--
 (1) Amendment.--The Department of Education Organization 
 Act (20 U.S.C. 3401 et seq.) is amended--
 (A) in section 203(b), by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraphs:
 ``(3) The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights shall make 
 publicly available on the Department's website a list of each 
 recipient of Federal financial assistance from the Department 
 that is under investigation for a possible violation of any 
 civil rights law that the Department enforces, the sanctions 
 (if any) or findings issued pursuant to such investigation, and 
 a copy of the final resolution letter, including resolution 
 agreements, entered into by such recipient with the Secretary 
 under any of the civil rights laws enforced by the Department. 
 Any document made publicly available shall have personally 
 identifiable information redacted from it.
 ``(4) Not later than 30 days after the termination of any 
 resolution agreement described in paragraph (3), the Assistant 
 Secretary for Civil Rights shall transmit to the President and 
 the Congress, and make publicly available on the Department's 
 website, the letter terminating the Department of Education's 
 monitoring of such agreement.''; and
 (B) in section 205, by adding at the end the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) Notwithstanding section 498A(b)(8) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965, the Assistant Secretary for Postsecondary Education shall 
make publicly available on the Department's website a list of each 
institution under investigation for a possible violation of section 
485(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965, the sanctions (if any) or 
findings issued pursuant to such investigation, and a copy of program 
reviews and resolution agreements entered into by such institution with 
the Secretary. Any document made publicly available shall have 
personally identifiable information redacted from it.''.
 (2) Inspector general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the 
 Department of Education shall submit to Congress and make 
 publicly available a report reviewing compliance with 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 203(b) of the Department of 
 Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 3413(b)) and subsection 
 (c) of section 205 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 3415), as added by 
 paragraph (1).
 (b) Authority To Levy Fines.--Section 203(c) of the Department of 
Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 3413(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) to impose a civil penalty to be paid by a recipient 
 of Federal funds that has violated a law under the jurisdiction 
 of the Office for Civil Rights, the amount of which shall be 
 determined by the gravity and magnitude of the violation, and 
 the imposition of which shall not preclude other remedies 
 available under Federal law.''.

SEC. 202. DISCLOSURE OF RELIGIOUS EXEMPTIONS FROM TITLE IX OF THE 
 EDUCATION AMENDMENTS OF 1972.

 (a) Amendment to Higher Education Act of 1965.--Section 485 of the 
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1092) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(n) Disclosure of Religious Exemptions From Title IX of the 
Education Amendments of 1972.--Each institution of higher education 
receiving Federal funds participating in any program under this title 
that claims or intends to exercise a religious exemption to the 
requirements of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 shall 
submit in writing to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights a 
statement by the highest ranking official of the institution of higher 
education, identifying the provisions of part 106 of title 34, Code of 
Federal Regulations, the application of which may conflict with a 
specific tenet of the religious organization that controls the 
institutions of higher education and shall publish on its website, in a 
prominent location, the following:
 ``(1) Request letter.--Each letter submitted by the 
 institution to the Department to request such an exemption.
 ``(2) Exemption letter.--Each letter from the Department to 
 the institution that responds to a request for assurance of 
 such an exemption.
 ``(3) Notice of request.--Notice that the institution has 
 requested acknowledgment of such an exemption under section 
 901(a)(3) of the Education Amendments of 1972.
 ``(4) Notice of exemption.--If applicable, notice that the 
 institution has received acknowledgment of such an exemption 
 under section 901(a)(3) of the Education Amendments of 1972.
 ``(5) Covered applications.--A list of the specific 
 applications of statutory or regulatory provisions for which 
 there is an applicable requested or granted exemption, 
 including any personal characteristics or behaviors to which 
 each requested or granted exemption applies.
 ``(6) Scope of exemption.--A list of each statutory and 
 regulatory provision with respect to which there is an 
 application from which the institution has claimed an exemption 
 and the scope of such exemption.''.
 (b) Disclosures of Requests for Exemptions.--Section 203 of the 
Department of Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 3413) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights shall publish, on 
the Department's website, in a prominent location, information 
regarding religious exemptions to the requirements of title IX of the 
Education Amendments of 1972, including the name of each recipient of 
Federal financial assistance from the Department that claims an 
exemption, whether that recipient received an acknowledgment of such 
exemption from the Assistant Secretary, and a description of the nature 
and scope of that exemption (including each provision of the statute or 
regulations with respect to which there is an application from which 
the recipient has claimed an exemption, the scope of applications for 
which the exemption was claimed, and justification for the 
exemption).''.

SEC. 203. CLIMATE SURVEYS FOR K-12 SCHOOLS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney 
General, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and experts in 
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, disability, sexual 
harassment, and stalking, shall, in accordance with applicable privacy 
laws, develop, design, and make available through a secure and 
accessible online portal, a standardized online survey tool regarding 
the experience of elementary school and secondary school students with 
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, 
and stalking.
 (b) Development of Survey Tool.--In developing the survey tool 
required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 (1) use best practices from peer-reviewed research 
 measuring domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
 sexual harassment, and stalking;
 (2) consult with the education community, experts in survey 
 research related to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, and stalking, and organizations 
 engaged in the prevention of and response to, and advocacy on 
 behalf of victims of, domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, and stalking regarding the 
 development and design of such survey tool and the methodology 
 for administration of such survey tool;
 (3) provide opportunity for stakeholder feedback through 
 public listening sessions or a 30-day open comment period;
 (4) ensure that the survey tool is readily accessible to 
 and usable by individuals with disabilities and publicly 
 accessible in multiple languages, accessibility formats, and 
 provided in a language that parents, family, and community 
 members can understand; and
 (5) ensure that the survey questions are different for 
 staff and students and for different age groups in order to 
 ensure that the questions are developmentally appropriate.
 (c) Elements.--
 (1) In general.--The survey tool developed pursuant to this 
 section shall be fair and unbiased, be scientifically valid and 
 reliable, and meet the highest standards of survey research.
 (2) Survey questions.--Survey questions included in the 
 survey tool developed pursuant to this section shall--
 (A) be designed to gather information on student 
 experiences with domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, and stalking, 
 including the experiences of victims of such incidents;
 (B) use trauma-informed language to prevent 
 retraumatization; and
 (C) include age-appropriate questions--
 (i) that give students the option to report 
 their demographic information;
 (ii) designed to determine the incidence 
 and prevalence of domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, 
 and stalking whether the incident occurred on 
 or off campus, and whether carried out in whole 
 or in part through the use of electronic 
 messaging services, commercial mobile services, 
 electronic communications, or other technology;
 (iii) regarding whether students know about 
 institutional policies and procedures related 
 to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, and stalking;
 (iv) designed to determine, if complainants 
 reported domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, or 
 stalking--
 (I) to whom the incident was 
 reported and what response, including 
 any supportive measures, the 
 complainant may have received;
 (II) whether the complainant was 
 informed of, or referred to, national, 
 State, local, or on-site resources; and
 (III) whether the entity to whom 
 the complainant reported the incident 
 conducted an investigation and the 
 duration and final resolution of such 
 an investigation;
 (v) regarding contextual factors, such as 
 whether force, incapacitation, or coercion was 
 involved;
 (vi) to determine whether an accused 
 individual was a student, faculty, staff, 
 administrator, or third-party vendor at the 
 elementary school or secondary school in which 
 the complainant is enrolled or another school 
 served by the local educational agency that 
 serves the elementary school or secondary 
 school;
 (vii) to determine whether a complainant 
 reported an incident to State, local, or 
 school-based law enforcement;
 (viii) to determine why the complainant 
 chose to report or not report an incident to 
 the school or local educational agency or State 
 or local law enforcement;
 (ix) to determine the impact of domestic 
 violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
 sexual harassment, and stalking on the 
 complainant's education, including diminished 
 grades, dropped classes, leaves of absence, and 
 negative financial consequences (including 
 costs associated with counseling, medical 
 services, or housing changes);
 (x) to determine if a complainant was 
 punished in connection with reporting the 
 incident or for ancillary behavior related to 
 the incident (such as punishment for missing 
 class because of mental health impacts for fear 
 of perpetrator, being placed on academic 
 probation for declining grades related to 
 trauma following incident, and more);
 (xi) to determine the impact and 
 effectiveness of prevention and awareness 
 programs and complaints processes for the 
 overall student body and different student 
 populations, including--
 (I) students of color;
 (II) LGBTQI+ students;
 (III) immigrant students;
 (IV) pregnant, expectant, or 
 parenting students; or
 (V) students with disabilities; and
 (xii) to determine attitudes toward sexual 
 violence and harassment, including the 
 willingness of individuals to intervene as a 
 bystander of sex-based (including on the basis 
 of sex stereotypes, pregnancy, childbirth or a 
 related medical condition, sexual orientation 
 and gender identity, or sex characteristics), 
 race-based, national origin-based, and 
 disability-based discrimination, harassment, 
 assault, domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, and 
 stalking.
 (3) Additional topics.--States and local educational 
 agencies may add additional questions to the survey tool 
 developed pursuant to this section as they determine 
 appropriate.
 (d) Additional Elements.--In addition to the standardized questions 
developed by the Secretary under subsection (c), an elementary school 
or secondary school may request additional information from students 
that would increase the documentation, through qualitative and 
quantitative evidence of the elementary school or secondary school of 
school climate factors unique to the school.
 (e) Responses.--The responses to the survey questions described in 
subsection (c) shall--
 (1) be submitted confidentially; and
 (2) in the case of such responses being included in a 
 report described in subsection (g), not include personally 
 identifiable information.
 (f) Administration of Survey.--
 (1) Federal administration.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Attorney General, the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention, and Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services, shall develop a mechanism by which local 
 educational agencies may, with respect to the survey tool 
 developed pursuant to this section--
 (A) administer such survey tool in compliance with 
 applicable privacy laws; and
 (B) modify such survey tool to include additional 
 elements or requirements, as determined by the 
 elementary school or secondary school.
 (2) Costs.--The Secretary may not require a local 
 educational agency to pay to modify the survey tool in 
 accordance with paragraph (1)(B).
 (3) Accessibility.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
 survey tool is administered in such a way as to be readily 
 accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
 (4) Administration.--Beginning not later than 1 year after 
 the date on which the Secretary makes available to local 
 educational agencies the mechanism described in paragraph (1), 
 and every 2 years thereafter, each local educational agency 
 that receives Federal financial assistance (as such term is 
 defined in section 7501(a)(5) of title 31, United States Code) 
 shall administer the survey tool developed pursuant to this 
 section.
 (5) Completed surveys.--The Secretary shall require each 
 local educational agency that receives Federal financial 
 assistance (as such term is defined in section 7501(a)(5) of 
 title 31, United States Code) to ensure, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, that an adequate, random, and representative 
 sample size of students (as determined by the Secretary) 
 enrolled in the local educational agency complete the survey 
 tool developed pursuant to this section.
 (6) Personally identifiable information.--Information from 
 the survey tool shall not be disaggregated or reported if the 
 number of students in a category is insufficient to yield 
 statistically reliable information or the results would reveal 
 personally identifiable information about an individual 
 student.
 (g) Report.--Beginning not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary 
shall, in accordance with applicable privacy laws and in accordance 
with subsection (f)(6)--
 (1) prepare a 2-year report on the information gained from 
 the standardized elements of the survey under this section, 
 which shall include school-level data that permits comparisons 
 across elementary schools and secondary schools;
 (2) publish such report in an accessible format on the 
 website of the Department of Education; and
 (3) submit such report to Congress.
 (h) Publication.--Each elementary school or secondary school shall 
publish, in accordance with applicable privacy laws and with subsection 
(f)(6) and in a manner that is readily accessible and usable by 
individuals, including individuals with disabilities--
 (1) the results of the standardized elements of the survey 
 under this section on the website of the elementary school or 
 secondary school; and
 (2) the results of the additional elements modifying the 
 survey by the elementary school or secondary school, if any, on 
 the school's website.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) ESEA terms.--The terms ``elementary school'', ``local 
 educational agency'', and ``secondary school'' have the 
 meanings given the terms in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 (2) Personally identifiable information.--The term 
 ``personally identifiable information'' means, with respect to 
 a student--
 (A) the student's name, whether given at birth or 
 time of adoption, or resulting from a lawful change of 
 name;
 (B) the name of the student's parent or another 
 family member;
 (C) the address of the student or another family 
 member;
 (D) a personal identifier, such as the student's 
 social security number, student number, or biometric 
 record;
 (E) another indirect identifier, such as the 
 student's date of birth, place of birth, or mother's 
 maiden name; and
 (F) other information that, alone or in 
 combination, is linked or linkable to the student that 
 would allow a reasonable person in the school 
 community, who does not have personal knowledge of the 
 relevant circumstances, to identify the student with 
 reasonable certainty.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.
 (4) Sexual harassment.--The term ``sexual harassment'' 
 means any unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, regardless of 
 whether it is direct or indirect, or verbal or nonverbal 
 (including conduct that is undertaken in whole or in part, 
 through the use of electronic messaging services, commercial 
 mobile services, electronic communications, or other 
 technology), that unreasonably alters an individual's terms, 
 benefits, or privileges of an education program or activity, 
 including by creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive 
 environment, which takes the form of--
 (A) a sexual advance;
 (B) a request for sexual favors;
 (C) a sexual act, where such submission is made 
 either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of 
 a program or activity at a school or school activity, 
 regardless of a student's submission to or rejection of 
 such sexual act;
 (D) a sexual act, where such submission or 
 rejection is used as the basis for a decision affecting 
 a term or condition of a program or activity at a 
 school or school activity, regardless of a student's 
 submission to or rejection of such sexual act;
 (E) other conduct of a sexual nature; or
 (F) domestic violence, intimate partner violence 
 (dating violence), and sex-based stalking.

SEC. 204. CIVIL RIGHTS DATA COLLECTION.

 The Assistant Secretary of Education for Civil Rights shall collect 
and publish within the Civil Rights Data Collection, in addition to 
data already collected and in accordance with section 444 of the 
General Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g) (commonly known as 
the ``Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974'') and section 
203(c)(1) of the Department of Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 
3413(c)(1)), data addressing--
 (1) the prevalence of harassment based on race, color, 
 national origin, sex, and disability, as determined through 
 reports made in schools; and
 (2) the results of complaint procedures related to such 
 harassment in schools.

SEC. 205. SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS.

 (a) Student Victim Support and Resources.--The Secretary of 
Education shall require Title IX Coordinators and school 
administrators, upon receiving notice of possible sex-based harassment, 
to notify the complainant in writing and orally, about available 
assistance to support the complainant of sexual harassment and ensure 
the complainant's continued and equal access to education, regardless 
of the location of the harassment, including--
 (1) academic adjustment or other accommodations, such as 
 adapting course schedules, assignments, or tests, issuing no-
 contact orders, altering housing, or taking other measures to 
 ensure the complainant's access to educational opportunities is 
 not interrupted after a report has been made or during a 
 grievance process;
 (2) information about and access to support services for 
 the complainant, such as counseling, mental health and other 
 health services, and disability accommodations;
 (3) providing increased monitoring or supervision at 
 locations or activities where the misconduct occurred or may 
 have occurred; and
 (4) reasonable accommodations for complainants and 
 respondents with disabilities, including pre-existing 
 disabilities and disabilities arising out of sex-based 
 harassment, consistent with laws that protect students with 
 disabilities, including section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
 of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.), and the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.).
 (b) Protection for Student Victims and Reporting Parties.--Working 
in collaboration with the Title IX Coordinator, institutions of higher 
education and local educational agencies shall issue guidance and 
disseminate guidance that explicitly address protections for students 
from punishment or retaliation when making reports of sexual 
harassment. Guidance shall be issued to all persons who participate in 
or receive any benefit, service, or opportunity from the issuing 
institution of higher education or local educational agency. Such 
guidance shall apply to all reports of harassment, including in the 
context of a same-gender relationship or encounter, and ensure that for 
all reports of sexual harassment--
 (1) the school will not take disciplinary action against 
 individuals, including witnesses, disclosing code-of-conduct 
 offenses that are related to the reported incident, including 
 the use of intoxicating substances occurring at or around the 
 time of a reported incident, reasonable actions taken to defend 
 against harassment, or actions taken to avoid contact with the 
 respondent;
 (2) if a school's code-of-conduct prohibits sexual activity 
 (or certain forms of sexual activity), the school will not take 
 disciplinary action against individuals disclosing in good 
 faith (including witnesses) non-harassing sexual activity 
 related to the reported incident, or for other non-harassing 
 sexual activity discovered during an investigation into the 
 reported incident;
 (3) the Title IX Coordinator shall review any disciplinary 
 actions related to a complaint of harassment to ensure that 
 such actions do not further discriminate or harass a 
 complainant (such as requiring therapy or participation in 
 programming focused on altering a student's sexual orientation 
 or gender identity);
 (4) a party who reports harassment shall not be disciplined 
 for a ``false report'' or for prohibited sexual conduct solely 
 because the school has decided there is insufficient evidence 
 for a finding of responsibility or because the respondent is 
 found not responsible; and
 (5) the school will address reports of retaliation against 
 complainants, which may include investigation or discipline for 
 retaliation.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) ESEA terms.--The terms ``elementary school'', ``local 
 educational agency'', and ``secondary school'' have the 
 meanings given the terms in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 (2) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1002).
 (3) Sexual harassment.--The term ``sexual harassment'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 203(i).
 (4) Title ix coordinator.--The term ``Title IX 
 Coordinator'' means the employee of a recipient of Federal 
 financial assistance (as such term is defined in section 
 7501(a)(5) of title 31, United States Code) from the Department 
 of Education, designated or authorized to coordinate the 
 recipient's efforts to comply with its obligations under title 
 IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
 seq.).

SEC. 206. TITLE IX COORDINATORS AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Duties and Scope of Title IX Coordinators.--
 (1) In general.--For each local educational agency or 
 institution of higher education that receives Federal financial 
 assistance from the Department of Education, the following 
 requirements shall apply as a condition on continued receipt of 
 such assistance:
 (A) The recipient shall designate at least one 
 full-time equivalent employee to serve as a Title IX 
 Coordinator per institution of higher education, per 
 75,000 students in 7th grade or above served by the 
 local educational agency, and per 150,000 students in 
 6th grade or below served by the local educational 
 agency.
 (B) The local educational agency or institution of 
 higher education shall ensure students and staff are 
 made aware of the Title IX Coordinator, the role of the 
 Title IX Coordinator, and the time at which the Title 
 IX Coordinator is available to meet.
 (C) The Title IX Coordinator shall not have any 
 other school-related responsibilities that may create a 
 conflict of interest.
 (2) Duties.--Each Title IX Coordinator for a local 
 educational agency or institution of higher education shall 
 ensure compliance under Federal, State, and local laws and 
 policies against sex discrimination, including title IX of the 
 Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), by doing 
 the following:
 (A) Ensuring that every individual affected by the 
 operations of the local educational agency or 
 institution of higher education, including students, 
 employees, and applicants for admission or employment, 
 and where appropriate, parents and guardians, are aware 
 of their rights under Federal, State, and local laws 
 and policies against sex discrimination, including 
 under title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, and 
 that the local educational agency or institution of 
 higher education and its employees comply with those 
 laws and policies, including receiving training on the 
 laws and policies.
 (B) Ensuring that notices of nondiscrimination, 
 relevant policies and grievance procedures, and current 
 contact information of all Title IX Coordinators are 
 disseminated broadly and in an age-appropriate and 
 accessible manner to all students, employees, and 
 applicants for admission or employment, and where 
 appropriate, parents and guardians, including on school 
 websites and in school handbooks.
 (C) Monitoring complaints alleging harassment, 
 including sexual harassment, and other forms of 
 discrimination based on sex (including sexual 
 orientation, gender identity, sex characteristics, 
 pregnancy, childbirth, a medical condition related to 
 pregnancy or childbirth, and sex stereotypes), 
 including supportive measures offered to complainants, 
 reasonable accommodations for complainants and 
 respondents with disabilities, and the outcomes of 
 complaints.
 (D) Identifying patterns of sex discrimination from 
 complaints and addressing their impact on the 
 educational community.
 (E) Monitoring the education program or activity 
 for barriers to reporting information about conduct 
 that may constitute sex discrimination under title IX 
 of the Education Amendments of 1972 and taking steps 
 reasonably calculated to address such barriers.
 (F) Coordinating dissemination, collection, and 
 analysis of climate surveys described in section 203, 
 and identifying and proactively addressing sex 
 discrimination in the local educational agency or 
 institution of higher education based on the results of 
 climate surveys.
 (G) Overseeing age-appropriate, accessible, and 
 trauma-informed sexual harassment prevention education 
 and training provided to school employees and students 
 at least once per school year and ensuring that such 
 prevention education and training include diverse 
 communities and identities, informed by research, and 
 conducted in partnership with local rape crisis 
 centers, State sexual assault coalitions, or community 
 organizations that work on addressing sex 
 discrimination, including sexual harassment in schools.
 (3) Waiver authorized for local educational agencies.--
 (A) In general.--
 (i) Requesting a waiver.--A local 
 educational agency described in paragraph (1) 
 may request a waiver from the Secretary of one 
 or more of the requirements of such paragraph 
 on the basis that the requirement poses an 
 insurmountable financial burden to the agency 
 and the agency has been unable to secure 
 sufficient grants under paragraph (4).
 (ii) Alternative plan.--
 (I) In general.--The waiver process 
 shall include requiring the local 
 educational agency to submit an 
 alternative plan for ensuring that 
 students are aware of their rights 
 under title IX of the Education 
 Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
 seq.) and have access to a Title IX 
 Coordinator.
 (II) Alternative plan.--An 
 alternative plan submitted under 
 subclause (I) shall include, at a 
 minimum, a demonstration that the local 
 educational agency has entered into a 
 partnership with a local rape crisis 
 center or a national or community-based 
 organization that specializes in trauma 
 or crisis management and support. Such 
 a plan shall establish a clear 
 delineation of the roles and 
 responsibilities of the center or 
 organization with the local educational 
 agency, which also includes providing 
 preventative training and supporting 
 measures when addressing reports of 
 sex-based harassment.
 (B) Withholding assistance.--If a local educational 
 agency has a waiver approved under this paragraph but 
 does not follow the alternative plan, or the Secretary 
 determines the plan was insufficient to prevent and 
 respond to sexual harassment and assault, the Secretary 
 shall attempt a voluntary resolution. If a voluntary 
 resolution is not possible during a reasonable period 
 of time, the Secretary shall take such action as may be 
 appropriate to withhold Federal financial assistance.
 (C) Length of waiver.--A waiver granted under this 
 paragraph shall be valid for 2 years.
 (4) Authorization of funds for grants.--
 (A) In general.--To carry out this subsection, 
 there are authorized to be appropriated to the 
 Secretary $100,000,000 for grants to local educational 
 agencies and institutions of higher education described 
 in paragraph (1) to offset the financial burden of 
 satisfying the requirements of this subsection. In 
 making grants under this paragraph, the Secretary shall 
 give priority to local educational agencies and 
 institutions of higher education that otherwise would 
 face a high financial burden in fulfilling such 
 requirements.
 (B) Definition of institution of higher 
 education.--In this paragraph, the term ``institution 
 of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (b) Training Requirements.--
 (1) Training program.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in 
 coordination with the Attorney General and in 
 consultation with national, State, or local victim 
 services organizations, local educational agencies, and 
 institutions of higher education, shall develop a 
 training program, which may include online training 
 modules, for training each individual who is involved 
 in implementing student grievance procedures at an 
 institution of higher education or local educational 
 agency that receives Federal financial assistance from 
 the Department of Education, including each individual 
 who is responsible for resolving complaints of reported 
 sex-based harassment, including domestic violence, 
 dating violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, 
 stalking, or sexual misconduct policy violations, such 
 as an investigator, decision-maker, informal resolution 
 facilitator, or Title IX Coordinator.
 (B) Contents.--The training described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall include the following:
 (i) The role and responsibility of Title IX 
 Coordinators.
 (ii) Information and evidence-based best 
 practices for increasing awareness about rights 
 and obligations under title IX of the Education 
 Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.).
 (iii) Information and evidence-based best 
 practices for investigating and responding to 
 claims of violations of title IX of the 
 Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et 
 seq.), including--
 (I) information on working with and 
 interviewing persons subjected to sex-
 based harassment, including domestic 
 violence, dating violence, sexual 
 assault, sexual harassment, or 
 stalking;
 (II) information on particular 
 types of conduct that would constitute 
 sex-based harassment, including 
 domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, or 
 stalking, regardless of gender, 
 including same-sex incidents of 
 domestic violence, dating violence, 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, or 
 stalking;
 (III) information on consent, and 
 what factors, including power dynamics, 
 may impact whether consent is 
 voluntarily given, including the effect 
 that drugs or alcohol may have on an 
 individual's ability to consent and 
 information on consent for individuals 
 with disabilities or individuals who 
 are neurodivergent;
 (IV) the effects of trauma, 
 including the neurobiology of trauma;
 (V) training regarding the use of 
 trauma-informed interview techniques, 
 and reasonable accommodations for 
 interviewees with disabilities;
 (VI) cultural awareness training 
 regarding how sex-based harassment, 
 including domestic violence, dating 
 violence, sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, or stalking may impact 
 students differently depending on their 
 cultural background;
 (VII) information on sexual assault 
 dynamics, sexual assault perpetrator 
 behavior, and barriers to reporting;
 (VIII) the dynamics of power and 
 control within intimate partner 
 violence and reactive abuse;
 (IX) safety risks for victims 
 associated with reporting abuse or 
 seeking help;
 (X) information on harassment and 
 abuse of LGBTQI+ students; and
 (XI) information on harassment and 
 abuse of disabled students.
 (iv) For Title IX Coordinators, additional 
 training on information and evidence-based best 
 practices for identifying and preventing 
 implicit and explicit sex discrimination in all 
 areas and at all levels of education, 
 including--
 (I) recruitment and admissions;
 (II) teaching practices, textbooks, 
 and curricula;
 (III) campus safety and security;
 (IV) financial assistance;
 (V) access to facilities, 
 resources, and housing;
 (VI) access to course offerings;
 (VII) student health services and 
 insurance benefits;
 (VIII) counseling and career 
 guidance;
 (IX) athletics;
 (X) discipline policies;
 (XI) employment; and
 (XII) other areas that the 
 Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights of 
 the Department of Education determines 
 are relevant for such purposes.
 (2) Institutional training.--Each institution of higher 
 education or local educational agency that receives Federal 
 financial assistance from the Department of Education, shall 
 ensure that the individuals and employees described in 
 paragraph (1)(A) receive the training described in this 
 subsection not later than the first July 15 following the date 
 that is 1 year after the date on which the Secretary completes 
 the development of the training, and annually thereafter.
 (3) Authorization of funds for grants for training for 
 local educational agencies.--There are authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary $50,000,000 for grants to local 
 educational agencies to train elementary school and secondary 
 school teachers and other school staff on how to prevent, 
 recognize, and respond to signs of sexual harassment and 
 assault among students or between students and adults, as well 
 as grooming behaviors of adults toward students at school.
 (4) Authorization of funds for grants for training for 
 institutions of higher education.--
 (A) In general.--There are authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary $50,000,000 for grants to 
 institutions of higher education to train faculty, 
 staff, and administrators on how to prevent, recognize, 
 and respond to signs of sexual harassment and assault 
 among students or between students and employees, as 
 well as grooming behaviors of adults toward students.
 (B) Definition of institution of higher 
 education.--In this paragraph, the term ``institution 
 of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) ESEA terms.--The terms ``elementary school'', ``local 
 educational agency'', and ``secondary school'' have the 
 meanings given the terms in section 8101 of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 (2) Grooming.--The term ``grooming'', used with respect to 
 a behavior, means a method used by an adult to build trust with 
 a student in an effort to both maintain control over the 
 student and gain access to time alone with the student for the 
 purposes of sexual harassment, as defined in section 203(i).
 (3) Institution of higher education.--Except as otherwise 
 provided, the term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 102 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002).
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.
 (5) Sexual harassment.--The term ``sexual harassment'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 203(i).
 (6) Title ix coordinator.--The term ``Title IX 
 Coordinator'' has the meaning given the term in section 205(c).
 <all>