S 1061 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1061
To prohibit the distribution, sale, or use of daminozide for food use, to
cancel the registration for daminozide for food use, to revoke the tolerance
for daminozide in or on food, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 18 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. WARNER (for himself, Mr. REID, Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. CHAFEE, and Mr. RIEGLE)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
A BILL
To prohibit the distribution, sale, or use of daminozide for food use, to
cancel the registration for daminozide for food use, to revoke the tolerance
for daminozide in or on food, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency has determined
 that the use of the pesticide daminozide on food or food products may pose
 an unreasonable risk to human health;
 (2) the Administrator has proposed to cancel daminozide, however, such
 cancellation may take as long as 18 months;
 (3) publicity over the continued use of daminozide has resulted in public
 fear of consuming certain agricultural crops;
 (4) growers and producers of certain agricultural products have suffered
 significant economic losses due to diminished sales; and
 (5) unless action is taken immediately to prohibit the use of daminozide
 on agricultural products, consumers may be subject to continued health
 risk and public confidence in certain agricultural products may continue
 to erode, resulting in even further economic losses.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) ADMINISTRATOR- The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) DAMINOZIDE- The term `daminozide' means butanedioic acid mono
 (2,2-dimethylhydrazide), including its degradate and metabolite,
 unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine.
 (3) OTHER TERMS- The terms `person', `State', and `to distribute or sell'
 shall have the same meaning given such terms in section 2 of the Federal
 Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136).
SEC. 3. DISTRIBUTION, SALE, AND USE OF DAMINOZIDE FOR FOOD USE.
 (a) PROHIBITION- No person in any State may distribute or sell to any person,
 or use, any pesticide containing daminozide that is labeled for food use.
 (b) CANCELLATION- The registration under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
 and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.) of a pesticide that is subject
 to subsection (a) shall be treated as canceled.
 (c) RECALL, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall issue an order that requires the
 registrant of a pesticide that is subject to subsection (a) to--
 (A) conduct a recall of the pesticide from dealers, distributors, and
 end-users; and
 (B) provide for the proper storage and disposal of the pesticide.
 (2) CONTENTS- Such order shall--
 (A) apply to storage and disposal of the pesticide, any container holding
 the pesticide, any rinsate containing the pesticide, or any other material
 used to contain or collect excess or spilled quantities of the pesticide;
 (B) specify recall procedures that are consistent with section 15(b)(4)
 of such Act (7 U.S.C. 136q(b)(4)); and
 (C) prescribe the means to be used to verify the effectiveness of the recall.
 (3) VIOLATIONS- A violation of an order issued under this subsection shall
 be considered a violation of section 12 of such Act (7 U.S.C. 136j).
 (d) REIMBURSEMENT-
 (1) REQUIREMENT- A person who holds a registration of a pesticide containing
 daminozide immediately before the date of enactment of this Act shall
 reimburse any person who holds any quantity of a pesticide that is subject
 to subsection (a).
 (2) AMOUNT- The amount of such reimbursement shall be the prevailing sale
 price for such pesticide, at the time the pesticide came into possession
 of the person seeking reimbursement.
SEC. 4. REVOCATION OF TOLERANCES FOR DAMINOZIDE.
 (a) REVOCATION- All existing tolerances and food additive regulations for
 daminozide established under section 408 or 409 of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 346a or 348) shall be treated as revoked.
 (b) ACTION LEVELS-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- Following revocation of a tolerance or food additive
 regulation under subsection (a), the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 in consultation with the Administrator, shall, by order, as part of the
 enforcement of such Act, establish an action level, as necessary, to permit
 distribution in commerce of food that bears a residue of daminozide that
 is the result of--
 (A) the use of a pesticide containing daminozide before the date of the
 enactment of this Act; or
 (B) unavoidable residual environmental contamination that occurs before
 such date.
 (2) REDUCTION OR REVOCATION- The Secretary, in consultation with the
 Administrator, shall periodically reduce or revoke an action level
 established under paragraph (1) to account for the expected reduction of
 daminozide in the food supply.