HR 3443 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3443
To encourage employers to extend greater job-related benefits to employees,
and to provide job security for certain employees who take leave for a
legitimate personal purpose.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 1, 1991
Mr. BILIRAKIS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Education and Labor and Ways and Means
A BILL
To encourage employers to extend greater job-related benefits to employees,
and to provide job security for certain employees who take leave for a
legitimate personal purpose.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Employee Benefits and Job Security Act
 of 1991'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) COMMERCE- The terms `commerce' and `industry or activity affecting
 commerce' have the meaning given the terms in paragraphs (3) and (1),
 respectively, of section 120 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947
 (29 U.S.C. 142 (3) and (1)).
 (2) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' means an individual
 who meets the criteria established in paragraphs (1) through (5) of
 section 3(a).
 (3) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' has the meaning given the term in section
 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)).
 (4) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' means any person engaged in commerce or
 in any industry or activity affecting commerce.
 (5) IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER- The term `immediate family member' means--
 (A) a child of a parent;
 (B) a current, legally recognized spouse; or
 (C) a parent.
 (6) LEGITIMATE PERSONAL PURPOSE- The term `legitimate personal purpose'
 means a purpose described in section 3(c).
 (7) ORIGINAL POSITION- The term `original position' means the position
 described in section 3(a)(2).
 (8) PARENT- The term `parent' means a biological, foster, or adoptive
 parent, a parent-in-law, a stepparent, or a legal guardian.
 (9) QUALIFIED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM- The term `qualified educational program'
 means a course of instruction, the cost of which is deductible by the
 employee under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (10) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
 (11) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- The term `serious health condition' means--
 (A) a condition caused by an accident, a disease, or another physical
 condition that--
 (i) poses an imminent danger of death; or
 (ii) requires hospice care or hospitalization; or
 (B) a mental or physical condition that requires constant in-home care.
 (12) SIMILAR POSITION- The term `similar position' means a position
 at the same location as the original position and with like duties and
 responsibilities and equivalent pay.
SEC. 3. REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS LEAVING EMPLOYMENT FOR
LEGITIMATE PERSONAL PURPOSES.
 (a) REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS- An individual shall be entitled to reemployment
 as described in subsection (b) if the individual--
 (1) was an employee of the employer from whom reemployment is sought for
 not less than 2,000 hours of continuous employment during the 14-month
 period preceding the provision of notice under subsection (d);
 (2) left a currently held position with the employer for a period of
 time for a legitimate personal purpose, as described in subsection (c)
 and before leaving such position exhausted all available leave;
 (3) did not accept intervening employment exceeding 17.5 hours per week
 with any employer during the period unless the individual has applied for
 reemployment under subsection (e) and has been notified under paragraph
 (2) of subsection (b) that the original or a similar position is not
 currently available;
 (4) has provided the notice and documentation described in subsection (d);
 (5) has applied for reemployment as described in subsection (e); and
 (6) was not subject to formal or informal disciplinary action by the
 employer before delivery of the notice described in subsection (d).
 (b) REEMPLOYMENT-
 (1) AVAILABLE EMPLOYMENT- Except as provided in subsections (f) through
 (h), an employer shall restore an eligible individual to employment in the
 original or a similar position, if available at the time the individual
 applies for reemployment under subsection (e).
 (2) SUBSEQUENTLY AVAILABLE EMPLOYMENT-
 (A) NOTIFICATION BY EMPLOYER TO EMPLOYEE- Except as provided in subsections
 (f) through (h), if the original or a similar position is not available
 when an eligible individual applies for reemployment under subsection (e),
 an employer shall so notify the individual and subsequently shall notify
 the individual of the availability of a similar position that becomes
 available not later than 1 year after the date the individual applies for
 reemployment under subsection (e) and restore the individual to employment.
 (B) MANNER OF NOTIFICATION-
 (i) PROVISION OF ADDRESS BY EMPLOYEE TO EMPLOYER- An eligible individual
 who changes address prior to the date described in subparagraph (A) shall
 submit the new address to the employer by certified letter.
 (ii) DELIVERY OF NOTIFICATION BY EMPLOYER TO EMPLOYEE- An employer shall
 make the notification described in subparagraph (A) by a certified letter
 delivered to the last address provided to the employer by an eligible
 individual.
 (C) TIMING OF NOTIFICATION-
 (i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (ii), an employer shall allow
 an eligible individual, in order to respond to the notification described
 in subparagraph (A), not fewer than 15 days after the date that the employer
 relinquishes formal control of the certified letter described in subparagraph
 (B)(ii) to the postal service or other bona fide delivery system.
 (ii) ECONOMIC REASONS- If economic necessity requires an employer to fill
 a similar position earlier than 15 days after the date described in clause
 (i), the employer shall--
 (I) allow an eligible individual not fewer than 5 days after the date to
 respond to the notification described in subparagraph (A); and
 (II) notify the individual of reasonable time limitations within which
 the individual must accept the offer contained in the notification and
 commence performance of the duties of the position.
 (iii) AVAILABLE ALTERNATIVE EMPLOYMENT- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of this section, if the same or a similar position is not available when
 an eligible individual applies for reemployment under subsection (e), the
 employer and eligible individual may agree that the eligible individual
 shall be employed in any available position of lesser status, benefits,
 or pay until the same or similar position becomes available.'
 (c) PERIOD OF TIME FOR A LEGITIMATE PERSONAL PURPOSE- For the purposes
 of this section, a period of time for a legitimate personal purpose shall
 include a period of time--
 (1) that precedes the birth of a child--
 (A) because of a serious health condition or on the advice of a physician;
 and
 (B) for purposes directly related to the birth of the child;
 (2) not to exceed 6 years and taken by a parent following the birth of a
 child for the purpose of caring for and nurturing the child;
 (3) not to exceed 6 years after placement of a child with the employee
 for adoption or foster care;
 (4) not to exceed 2 years and taken because of a serious health condition
 of the employee, or because of a serious health condition of an immediate
 family member of the employee for the purpose of providing necessary
 medical and personal care to the family member; or
 (5) not to exceed one year and taken by an employee for the purpose of
 enrolling in a qualified educational program.
 (d) NOTICE AND DOCUMENTATION- In order to be eligible for reemployment
 under this section, an individual shall--
 (1) provide to the employer a minimum of 30 days written notice that the
 individual desires, or finds it necessary, to leave the position for a
 legitimate personal purpose, unless under the totality of the circumstances
 it is impossible for the individual to provide such notice; and
 (2) promptly furnish such reasonable documentation as the employer may
 request of the legitimate personal purpose that prompted the provision of
 notice under paragraph (1), unless under the totality of the circumstances
 it is impossible for the individual to promptly furnish the documentation.
 (e) APPLICATION- In order to be eligible for reemployment under this
 section, an individual shall submit a written application to the employer
 that demonstrates that the individual remains qualified to perform the
 duties and responsibilities of the original position that existed at the
 time the individual gave the notice described in subsection (d)(1).
 (f) PRIOR RIGHT OF REEMPLOYMENT- If two or more eligible individuals seek to
 exercise reemployment rights established under this section in conflict,
 the individual who first made application for reemployment shall have
 the prior right to be restored to employment. Restoration of an eligible
 individual to employment shall not otherwise affect the reemployment rights
 of other eligible individuals wishing to be similarly restored.
 (g) EXEMPTION CONCERNING CERTAIN HIGHLY COMPENSATED EMPLOYEES-
 (1) An employer may deny restoration under this subsection to any eligible
 individual described in paragraph (2) if--
 (A) such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic
 harm to the employer's operations;
 (B) the employer has employed 50 or more employees for each working day
 during each of 20 or more workweeks in the current or preceding calendar
 year;
 (C) the employer notifies the employee of the employer's intent to deny
 restoration on such basis at the time the employer determines that such
 economic injury would occur; and
 (D) in any case in which the leave has commenced, the employee elects not
 to return to employment after receiving notice under subparagraph (C).
 (2) An eligible employee referred to in paragraph (1) is a salaried eligible
 employee who is among the--
 (A) highest paid 10 percent of employees; or
 (B) 5 highest paid employees;
whichever is greater, of the employees employed by the employer within 75
miles of the facility at which the employee is employed.
 (h) EXEMPTION- An employer shall not be subject to this section with respect
 to an eligible individual if circumstances have so changed, between the
 time that the employer received the notice described in subsection (d)(1)
 and the time the individual applies for reemployment under subsection (e),
 as to make reemployment unreasonable.
 (i) WAIVER-
 (1) AVAILABILITY- Absent coercion by either party, an employer and
 an employee of the employer may jointly agree, in writing, to vary the
 requirements and conditions of the reemployment rights provided under this
 section or substitute another arrangement or employment benefit or package
 of benefits for the reemployment rights provided under this section.
 (2) EXPLANATION-
 (A) REQUIREMENT OF RECEIPT- In order for the agreement described in paragraph
 (1) to have effect, the employee described in paragraph (1) must receive a
 written explanation of the rights and remedies provided under this section
 before signing the agreement and must enter the agreement knowingly.
 (B) MODEL EXPLANATION- The Secretary shall prepare and publish in the
 Federal Register a model written explanation of the rights and remedies
 provided under this section. An employer may legibly reproduce the model
 explanation and generally distribute the explanation annually, or post the
 explanation permanently in a conspicuous place in the workplace in order
 to satisfy the requirement described in subparagraph (A).
SEC. 4. ADDITIONAL DEDUCTION FOR COSTS OF EMPLOYEE LEAVE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Part IV of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals
 and corporations) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`SEC. 197. ADDITIONAL DEDUCTION FOR COSTS OF PROVIDING EMPLOYEE LEAVE.
 `(a) ALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION- In the case of an employer, in addition
 to the amount otherwise allowable as a deduction under this chapter,
 there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to 50 percent of
 the qualified employee leave expenses paid or incurred by such employer
 during such taxable year.
 `(b) QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE LEAVE EXPENSES- For purposes of this section,
 the term `qualified employee leave expenses' means--
 `(1) salary or wages (or amounts in lieu of salary or wages) for any period
 during which the employee is on qualified employee leave, and
 `(2) employee benefit costs with respect to any employee to the extent
 allocable to any period during which the employee is on qualified employee
 leave.
 `(c) QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE LEAVE- For purposes of this section, the term
 `qualified employee leave' means any period during which the employee
 is temporarily absent from work on account of the birth of a child of
 the employee, the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or
 foster care, a serious health condition of the employee or an immediate
 family member of the employee, or enrollment by the employee in a qualified
 educational program, but only if--
 `(1) the leave is in addition to any sick leave, annual leave, or vacation
 leave to which the employee is otherwise entitled,
 `(2) before taking the leave, the employee has exhausted all other
 available leave,
 `(3) the employee provides assurances satisfactory to the employer that
 such employee will return to work for the employer,
 `(4) the leave is pursuant to a written plan of the employer which is
 reasonably expected to be in effect for at least 1 taxable year, and
 `(5) such written plan meets the restoration requirements of subsection
 (d) and the certification requirements of subsection (e).
 `(d) RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A plan meets the restoration requirements of this
 subsection if--
 `(A) it provides that any employee taking leave under such plan shall be
 entitled, upon return from such leave--
 `(i) to be restored by the employer to the position of employment held by
 the employee when the leave began, or
 `(ii) to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employee
 benefits, pay, and other items and conditions of employment; and
 `(B) taking of leave under such plan does not result in the loss of any
 employment benefit earned before the date on which the leave begins.
 `(2) CERTAIN BENEFITS NOT REQUIRED- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be
 construed to entitle any restored employee to--
 `(A) the accrual of any seniority or employment benefits during any period
 of leave, or
 `(B) any right, benefit, or position of employment other than any right,
 benefit, or position to which the employee would have been entitled had
 the employee not taken leave.
 `(3) CERTAIN EMPLOYEES NOT COVERED- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be
 construed to prevent an employer from denying restoration to an employee
 who--
 `(A) was an employee of the employer from whom reemployment is sought for
 less than 2,000 hours of continuous employment during the 14-month period
 preceding the leave;
 `(B) was subject to formal or informal disciplinary action by the employer
 before taking leave; or
 `(C) is a salaried employee who is among the highest paid 10 percent of
 employees or the 5 highest paid employees, whichever is greater, of the
 employees employed by the employer within 75 miles of the facility at
 which the employee is employed, if--
 `(i) such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic
 harm to the employer's operations;
 `(ii) the employer has employed 50 or more employees for each working day
 during each of 20 or more workweeks in the current or preceding calendar
 year;
 `(iii) the employer notifies the employee of the employer's intent to deny
 restoration on such basis at the time the employer determines that such
 economic injury would occur; and
 `(iv) in any case in which the leave has commenced, the employee elects
 not to return to employment after receiving notice under clause (iii).
 `(e) CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A plan meets the certification requirements of this
 subsection if such plan requires that each request for leave under such plan
 on account of the serious health condition of an individual be supported
 by a certification issued by a physician licensed under State law who is
 providing care to the individual.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS OF CERTIFICATION- A certification shall be sufficient
 for purposes of paragraph (1) if it states--
 `(A) the extent to which the health condition is a serious health condition,
 `(B) the date on which the serious health condition commenced,
 `(C) the probable duration of the condition, and
 `(D) the appropriate medical facts within the physician's knowledge
 regarding the condition.
 `(f) EMPLOYEE BENEFIT COSTS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `employee benefit costs' means amounts paid or
 incurred by the employer for employee benefits.
 `(2) EMPLOYEE BENEFITS- The term `employee benefits' means all benefits
 provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group life
 insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave,
 educational benefits, salaries, and pensions, regardless of whether such
 benefits are provided by a policy or practice of an employee or through an
 employee benefit plan as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)).
 `(g) GROUP HEALTH PLAN- For purposes of this section, the term `group
 health plan' means any plan of, or contributed to by, an employer to
 provide medical care (as defined in section 213(d)) to his employees,
 former employees, or the families of such employees or former employees,
 directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
 `(h) SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION- The term `serious health condition' means--
 `(1) a condition caused by an accident, a disease, or another physical
 condition that--
 `(A) poses an imminent danger of death; or
 `(B) requires hospice care or hospitalization; or
 `(2) a mental or physical condition that requires constant in-home care.
 `(i) QUALIFIED EDUCATION PROGRAM- The term `qualified educational program'
 means a course of instruction, the cost of which is deductible by the
 employee under this title.
 `(j) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may
 be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for part VI of subchapter
 B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new item:
`Sec. 197. Additional deduction for costs of providing employee leave.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act in
 taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 5. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) ENFORCEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-
 (1) CHARGE- In order to obtain enforcement of section 3 any eligible
 individual who believes that an employer has failed or has refused to
 comply with the provisions of such section shall file a charge with the
 Secretary within 180 days of the failure or refusal. Upon receipt, the
 Secretary shall investigate the charge to determine if a reasonable basis
 exists for the charge.
 (2) DISMISSAL OF CHARGE- If the Secretary determines that there is no
 reasonable basis for the charge, the Secretary shall dismiss the charge
 and promptly notify the eligible individual and the employer named in the
 charge of the dismissal.
 (3) ISSUANCE OF COMPLAINT- If the Secretary determines that there is a
 reasonable basis for the charge, the Secretary shall issue a complaint
 based upon the charge and shall promptly notify the eligible individual
 of the issuance.
 (4) ACTION- If the Secretary issues a complaint under paragraph (3),
 the Secretary shall attempt to resolve the complaint with the employer
 through an informal conference. If the Secretary is unable to resolve the
 complaint as a result of such informal conference the Secretary may--
 (A) file a civil action in the United States district court for the
 district in which the eligible individual described in paragraph (1)
 sought reemployment; or
 (B) dismiss the complaint with notice to the individual and the employer
 named in the charge.
 (5) BURDEN OF PERSUASION- In any civil action brought under paragraph (4)
 with respect to an eligible individual, the Secretary shall have the burden
 of persuasion that the individual--
 (A) has satisfied the requirements in paragraphs (1) through (6) of section
 3(a); and
 (B) is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities described in
 section 3(e).
 (6) REMEDY- If a court finds, in an action brought under this subsection,
 that the employer has failed to comply with section 3 with respect to an
 eligible individual, the court may order an employer to comply with the
 provisions of such section and to compensate the individual for any loss
 of wages or benefits caused by the failure of the employer to comply with
 such section.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT BY AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL-
 (1) ACTION- If the Secretary issues a notice of dismissal to an eligible
 individual under subsection (a)(4)(B), the individual may bring a civil
 action in the United States district court for the district in which the
 individual sought reemployment.
 (2) BURDEN OF PERSUASION- An eligible individual who brings a civil action
 under this subsection shall have the burden of persuasion regarding the
 elements described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (a)(5).
 (3) REMEDY-
 (A) COMPLIANCE OR COMPENSATION- If a court finds, in an action brought
 under this subsection, that an employer has failed to comply with section
 3, the court may order the employer to comply with the provisions of such
 section and to compensate the individual for any loss of wages or benefits
 caused by the failure of the employer to comply with such section.
 (B) ATTORNEY'S FEES- A court may award attorney's fees to the prevailing
 party in an action brought under this subsection, if the court determines
 that the award is appropriate.
SEC. 6. CONSTRUCTION.
 Section 3 shall not be construed--
 (1) to grant an eligible individual any rights to seniority, status,
 benefits, or rates of pay beyond the rights possessed by the individual
 at the time the individual presented a notice to an employer under section
 3(d)(1); or
 (2) to impose on an employer any nonvoluntary obligation to provide training
 of any type, or to offer reemployment in any position, or at any other
 location, than that specifically stated in this Act.
SEC. 7. COVERAGE OF CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES.
 The rights, protections, and requirements contained in this Act shall apply
 to any employee in an employment position in any agency of the Congress or
 in the House of Representatives and shall apply to any employing authority
 of any agency of Congress or of the House of Representatives.