HR 3508 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3508
To expand the inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture of the Nation's food
supply to ensure the safety and wholesomeness of the Nation's supply of fish,
shellfish, and other marine and freshwater aquatic food.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 23, 1989
Mr. DE LA GARZA (for himself, Mr. JONES of North Carolina, Mr. MADIGAN,
Mr. BROWN of California, Mr. ROBERTS, Mr. STENHOLM, Mr. GLICKMAN, Mr. MORRISON
of Washington, Mr. ENGLISH, Mr. COLEMAN of Missouri, Mr. HUCKABY, Mr. EMERSON,
Mr. STALLINGS, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. OLIN, Mr. ROBERT F. SMITH, Mr. ESPY, Mr. JOHNSON
of South Dakota, Mr. SCHUETTE, Mr. HATCHER, Mr. TALLON, Mr. DORGAN of North
Dakota, and Mr. LANCASTER) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Agriculture and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
A BILL
To expand the inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture of the Nation's food
supply to ensure the safety and wholesomeness of the Nation's supply of fish,
shellfish, and other marine and freshwater aquatic food.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress hereby finds and declares that--
 (1) seafood and seafood products are an important and growing source of
 the Nation's total supply of food;
 (2) unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded seafood or seafood products
 destroy markets for wholesome, not adulterated, and properly labeled
 and packaged seafood and seafood products and result in sundry losses
 to the public and seafood and seafood products producers and processors,
 including the Nation's farmers engaged in aquacultural operations;
 (3) unwholesome, adulterated, mislabeled or deceptively packaged articles
 can be sold at lower prices and compete unfairly with the wholesome, not
 adulterated, and properly labeled and packaged articles, to the detriment
 of the public and seafood and seafood products producers and processors,
 including the Nation's farmers engaged in aquacultural operations;
 (4) the inspection operations provided for under the Agricultural
 Marketing Act of 1946 are in part designed to generally address these
 types of concerns;
 (5) it is necessary and appropriate to strengthen the Agricultural Marketing
 Act of 1946 to better effectuate the purposes of that Act with respect
 to seafood and seafood products, including those produced by the Nation's
 farmers through aquacultural operations.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are to--
 (1) improve the Nation's dietary and nutritional standards by promoting
 wholesome, nutritious seafood and seafood products, including those produced
 by the Nation's farmers through aquacultural operations;
 (2) promote the orderly marketing of agricultural products by providing a
 comprehensive system of inspection of seafood and seafood products, including
 those produced by the Nation's farmers through aquacultural operations;
 (3) aid the distribution of agricultural products through regulatory
 activities concerning seafood and seafood products, including those produced
 by the Nation's farmers through aquacultural operations, such that marketing
 methods and facilities may be improved; and
 (4) aid in the development of new and wider markets for American agricultural
 products, both in the United States and in other countries, through assuring
 the quality and wholesomeness of seafood and seafood products, including
 those produced by the Nation's farmers through aquacultural operations.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
 Sec. 1. Finding, purposes, and table of contents.
 Sec. 2. Amendments to the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946.
 Sec. 3. Regulations.
 Sec. 4. Reports by Secretary.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO THE AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ACT OF 1946.
 The Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 (7 U.S.C. 1621 et seq.) is amended
 by--
 (1) inserting immediately after `Title II' the heading:
`Subtitle A';
 (2) inserting at the end the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle B
`SEC. 210. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Federal Inspection for Seafood
 Healthfulness Act of 1989'.
`TABLE OF CONTENTS
`Sec. 210. Short title and table of contents.
`Sec. 211. Definitions.
`Sec. 212. Federal inspection program.
`Sec. 213. Registration.
`Sec. 214. Labeling, package, and marking.
`Sec. 215. Records and reports.
`Sec. 216. Powers of inspectors.
`Sec. 217. Production areas.
`Sec. 218. Imports.
`Sec. 219. Exports.
`Sec. 220. State programs.
`Sec. 221. Federal pre-emption.
`Sec. 222. Prohibited acts and penalties.
`Sec. 223. Hearings and subpoenas.
`Sec. 224. Exemptions and exclusions.
`Sec. 225. Employee protection.
`Sec. 226. Education.
`Sec. 227. Regulations.
`Sec. 228. Authorization of Appropriations.
`SEC. 211. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle--
 `(1) the term `adulterated' means with respect to any seafood or seafood
 product that it--
 `(A) bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance which may
 render it injurious to human health, as determined by the Secretary, but
 in case the substance is not an added substance, such seafood or seafood
 product shall not be considered adulterated if the quantity of such substance
 it bears or contains does not ordinarily render it injurious to human health;
 `(B) consists, in whole or part, of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance or is for any other reason, unsound, unhealthful, unwholesome,
 or otherwise unfit for human food;
 `(C) has been processed under unsanitary conditions in which it may have
 become contaminated with filth or rendered injurious to health;
 `(D) has been made or derived in whole or in part from seafood harvested
 in a production area that the Secretary determines contains substances
 that will cause such seafood to be injurious to health;
 `(E) has been imported from a country that does not utilize a seafood and
 seafood products safety program that is approved by the Secretary;
 `(F) has died otherwise than by harvesting;
 `(G) is or has been contained in a package that is composed in whole or
 in part of any poisonous or deleterious substance that may render the
 contents injurious to health;
 `(H) has any valuable constituent in whole or in part omitted or abstracted
 therefrom; any substance substituted, wholly or in part therefor; damage or
 inferiority concealed in any manner; or any substance added thereto or mixed
 or packed therewith so as to increase its bulk or weight, reduce its quality
 or strength, or make it appear better or of greater value than it is; or
 `(I) has not been processed in accordance with this subtitle or regulations
 promulgated pursuant to this subtitle;
 `(2) the term `capable of use as human food' applies to any seafood
 or seafood product, unless it is denatured or otherwise identified by
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary to deter its use as human food,
 or unless it is naturally inedible by humans;
 `(3) the term `commerce' means commerce between or within any State, any
 territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia, and any place
 outside thereof;
 `(4) the term `establishment' means any premises, building, structure,
 facility, or equipment (including any vehicle other than a vessel) used
 in the processing of seafood or seafood products;
 `(5) the term `inspector' means an individual appointed or authorized by
 the Secretary to make inspections under any authority of this subtitle;
 `(6) the term `label' means a display of written printed or graphic matter
 upon the immediate package (not including package liners) of any article;
 `(7) the term `labeling' means all labels and other written, printed,
 or graphic matter upon any article or any of its packages or wrappers,
 or accompanying such article;
 `(8) the term `misbranded' means with respect to any seafood or seafood
 product that--
 `(A) its labeling is false or misleading in any particular;
 `(B) it is offered for sale under the name of another food;
 `(C) its package is so made, formed, or filled as to be misleading;
 `(D) any word, statement, or other information required by or under authority
 of this subtitle to appear on the label or other labeling is not prominently
 placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as compared with other words,
 statements, designs, or devices, in the labeling) and in such terms as
 to render it likely to be read and understood by the ordinary individual
 under customary conditions of purchase and use; or
 `(E) purports to be, or is represented as, a food for which a definition
 and standard of identity or composition has been prescribed by regulation
 under this subtitle unless--
 `(i) it conforms to such definition and standard, and
 `(ii) its label bears the name of the food specified in the definition
 and standard;
 `(9) the term `official mark' means any symbol prescribed by regulations
 promulgated pursuant to this subtitle to identify the status of any seafood
 or seafood product;
 `(10) the term `owner or operator' means any person who owns, operates,
 leases, charters, or otherwise controls in whole or in part any establishment
 or vessel;
 `(11) the term `package' includes any box, can, tin, cloth, plastic,
 or other receptacle, wrapper, or cover;
 `(12) the term `person' means any individual, partnership, corporation,
 association, or other legal entity;
 `(13) the term `process' means, with respect to seafood or seafood products,
 to harvest, handle, store, prepare, produce, manufacture, preserve, pack,
 transport, or hold such seafood or seafood products, but does not include
 to raise such seafood;
 `(14) the term `program' means the inspection program provided for under
 section 212;
 `(15) the term `seafood' means any aquatic plant or animal, including
 amphibians, or part thereof, whether from wild or cultured sources,
 capable of use as human food, that is not subject to the Poultry Products
 Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 451 et seq.) or Federal Meat Inspection Act
 (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 `(16) the term `seafood product' means any product capable of use as
 human food made in whole or part from any seafood, or portion thereof,
 including unprocessed seafood, except any product--
 `(A) that contains seafood in a relatively small proportion or historically
 has not been considered by consumers as a product of the seafood industry,
 and
 `(B) that is exempted from the definition of seafood product by the
 Secretary under such conditions as the Secretary may prescribe to assure
 that the seafood contained in such product is not adulterated and that
 such product is not represented as a seafood product;
 `(17) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture or the
 designee of the Secretary of Agriculture;
 `(18) the term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the American Virgin Islands,
 Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands, or any
 other territory or possession of the United States; and
 `(19) the term `vessel' means a water-going vessel that is engaged in the
 processing of seafood or seafood products.
`SEC. 212. FEDERAL INSPECTION PROGRAM.
 `The Secretary shall develop and administer a comprehensive and efficient
 inspection program for seafood and seafood products that protects the
 consuming public from seafood and seafood products that are adulterated
 or misbranded. Such program shall--
 `(1) be specifically designed to take into consideration the special
 characteristics of seafood and seafood products and of the processing of
 seafood and seafood products;
 `(2) be based upon a comprehensive assessment of seafood and seafood products
 and their processing that identifies the hazards and assesses the severity
 of hazards and risks, that determines critical control points required
 to control the hazards, and that establishes and implements monitoring
 procedures to determine that each critical control point is under control;
 `(3) assure that the processing of seafood and seafood products complies
 with the standards prescribed pursuant to this subtitle;
 `(4) provide for the periodic registration and the inspection of
 establishments and vessels; and
 `(5) provide for the inspection of seafood and seafood products and the
 processing of them at such points, in such manner and with such frequency
 as the Secretary deems necessary based on the assessment required under
 paragraph (2), a consideration of the nature and frequency of operations,
 adequacy of monitoring programs, history of compliance with this subtitle,
 and such other factors as the Secretary may deem appropriate.
`SEC. 213. REGISTRATION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- No establishment or vessel may process any seafood or
 seafood product unless such establishment or vessel is registered under the
 program. The registration of an establishment or vessel shall include the
 assigning of a unique number to such establishment or vessel to identify
 such establishment or vessel.
 `(b) APPLICATIONS- Applications for registration under the program shall
 be made to the Secretary using such forms and containing such matter as
 the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation.
 `(c) APPROVAL- The Secretary shall approve an application under this
 section unless, on the basis of such application and an inspection of such
 establishment or vessel, the Secretary determines that the establishment or
 vessel is unfit to engage in the processing of seafood or seafood products.
 `(d) DISAPPROVAL- (1) If the Secretary does not approve an application
 for registration, the Secretary shall promptly notify the applicant in
 writing of the disapproval and the reasons therefor.
 `(2) Any applicant whose application for registration has not been
 approved by the Secretary may at any time make another application for
 registration. The Secretary shall approve such application if the Secretary
 finds that the establishment or vessel is no longer unfit to engage in
 the processing of seafood or seafood products.
 `(e) REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION- If an establishment or vessel registered
 under the program fails to comply with any requirement of this subtitle
 or regulations promulgated under this subtitle, the Secretary may, after
 notice and an opportunity for a hearing--
 `(1) revoke the registration;
 `(2) suspend the registration for a period of time; or
 `(3) impose conditions and restrictions on the registration as the Secretary
 determines are necessary and appropriate.
 `(f) REINSTATEMENT- (1) The holder of a registration that has been revoked
 or suspended may at any time apply for reinstatement thereof. The Secretary
 shall immediately grant reinstatement of the registration if the Secretary
 finds that the establishment or vessel is no longer unfit to engage in
 the processing of seafood or seafood products.
 `(2) The holder of a registration that is conditional or restricted may
 at any time apply for the removal of such conditions or restrictions. The
 Secretary shall immediately remove such conditions or restrictions if the
 Secretary finds that adequate measures have been taken to comply with this
 subtitle or regulations promulgated under this subtitle.
`SEC. 214. LABELING, PACKAGE, AND MARKING.
 `(a)(1) LABELING AND PACKAGE- Each owner or operator shall, subject to
 terms and conditions determined by the Secretary, submit to the Secretary,
 prior to use, any labeling or package of seafood or seafood products to
 be used by establishments and vessels registered under the program. The
 Secretary shall review such labeling and package for compliance with the
 standards established under this subtitle. No such labeling or package
 may be used unless it has been approved by the Secretary.
 `(2)(A) The Secretary shall approve any labeling unless the Secretary
 determines that such labeling is false or misleading.
 `(B) The Secretary shall approve any package unless the Secretary determines
 that such package does not comply with the standards established under
 this subtitle.
 `(3)(A) If the Secretary does not approve any labeling or package, the
 Secretary shall promptly notify the owner or operator of the establishment
 or vessel proposing such labeling or package in writing of the disapproval
 and the reasons therefor.
 `(B) Any owner or operator whose labeling or package has not been approved
 by the Secretary may at any time propose another labeling or package
 for approval. The Secretary shall approve the revised labeling unless the
 Secretary determines that such labeling is false or misleading. The Secretary
 shall approve the revised package unless the Secretary determines that such
 package does not comply with the standards established under this subtitle.
 `(b) MARKING- (1) The Secretary shall require the owner or operator of any
 establishment or vessel registered under this subtitle to cause each package
 of seafood and seafood product that is processed in such establishment or
 vessel to be marked at the time the package leaves the establishment or
 vessel with--
 `(A) the appropriate registration numbers issued under this subtitle; and
 `(B) a labeling that bears or contains an official mark.
 `(2) The Secretary shall ensure that the official mark is available only
 for seafood and seafood products that are processed in establishments or
 vessels registered under this subtitle.
`SEC. 215. RECORDS AND REPORTS.
 `Establishments and vessels registered under the program shall--
 `(1) maintain accurate records regarding--
 `(A) the receipt, delivery, sale, movement, or disposition of seafood or
 seafood products,
 `(B) matters reasonably related to whether seafood or seafood products
 are adulterated or misbranded, including the geographic area or fishery
 from which such seafood was harvested, and
 `(C) other activities relevant to food safety and sanitation;
 `(2) permit the Secretary, upon request, at reasonable times to have access
 and copy any such records; and
 `(3) make such reports to the Secretary relating to such matters as the
 Secretary may require.
`SEC. 216. POWERS OF INSPECTORS.
 `(a) INSPECTIONS- An inspector may, in administering the provisions of
 this subtitle and upon presenting appropriate credentials to the owner
 or operator--
 `(1) enter any part of an establishment or vessel registered under the
 program, at all times, by day or night, and without regard to whether such
 establishment or vessel is being operated;
 `(2) inspect such establishment or vessel and all pertinent seafood or
 seafood products, packages, labeling, conditions, and equipment therein
 or on, and all records required under this subtitle to be maintained and
 made available for inspection;
 `(3) sample any seafood or seafood products;
 `(4) detain seafood or seafood products that are adulterated or misbranded;
 and
 `(5) condemn any seafood or seafood products in accordance with subsection
 (b).
 `(b) CONDEMNED SEAFOOD AND SEAFOOD PRODUCTS- (1) Subject to paragraph (2),
 all seafood and seafood products found by the Secretary to be adulterated
 or misbranded shall be immediately segregated and, if objection is not
 made within 48 hours, condemned. If objection is made, such seafood or
 seafood product that are in perishable form may be processed to the extent
 necessary to prevent spoilage pending hearing and judicial review.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that an adulterated or misbranded seafood
 or seafood product can, by relabeling or other action, be brought into
 compliance with this subtitle or regulations promulgated under this
 subtitle, final determination as to the condemnation of such seafood or
 seafood product may be deferred pending the performance by the applicant
 within a time period specified by the Secretary of such relabeling or other
 action as the Secretary may authorize. If after such action is performed,
 the Secretary determines that the seafood or seafood product has been
 brought into compliance with this subtitle, the Secretary shall permit
 its entry into commerce.
 `(3) Any seafood or seafood product condemned by the Secretary without
 objection, or after hearing and judicial review, shall be destroyed for
 human food purposes under the supervision of the Secretary.
 `(c) NOTICE- Upon completion of any inspection and before leaving the
 establishment or vessel, the Secretary shall give to the owner or operator
 a report in writing describing the results of the inspection.
`SEC. 217. PRODUCTION AREAS.
 `(a) MONITORING- The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of
 Commerce, shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system to sample and
 test seafood and seafood products to identify and designate geographical
 areas from which significant quantities of seafood or seafood products
 not in compliance with this subtitle are, or may in the near future be
 reasonably expected to be, harvested.
 `(b) DESIGNATED AREAS- The Secretary may, by regulation, prohibit or
 restrict the sale, or other disposition in commerce, of any seafood or
 seafood products from an area designated under subsection (a).
 `(c) REVIEW- The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Commerce,
 shall periodically review the areas designated under subsection (a) to
 determine whether any such area should no longer be so designated.
 `(d) PUBLIC NOTICE- The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, give
 reasonable public notice before any action is taken under this section.
 `(e) MATCHING GRANTS- The Secretary shall annually grant to each State
 operating a production area monitoring program 50 percent of the cost of
 operating such program.
`SEC. 218. IMPORTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- (1) No seafood or seafood product may be entered, or
 withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption in the United States unless such
 seafood or seafood product--
 `(A) is not adulterated or misbranded;
 `(B) complies with all standards applicable to seafood and seafood products
 in commerce in the United States;
 `(C) is marked and labeled as required by regulations for imported
 articles; and
 `(D) complies with the requirements of this section.
 `(2) Upon entry into the United States, any seafood or seafood product
 satisfying the requirements of paragraph (1) shall be deemed and treated
 as domestic seafood and seafood products.
 `(b) INSPECTION OF IMPORTS- The Secretary shall enforce this section
 through random inspections and sampling of seafood and seafood products
 that are offered for importation or entered, or withdrawn from warehouse,
 for consumption in the United States, and through any other procedures
 the Secretary deems necessary to ensure compliance with this subtitle.
 `(c) CORRECTIVE ACTIONS- All seafood and seafood products that are refused
 entry pursuant to subsection (a) or that are entered, or withdrawn from
 warehouse, for consumption in the United States in violation of this
 section shall, pursuant to regulations, be destroyed unless--
 `(1) such seafood and seafood products are exported within a time fixed
 therefor by the Secretary, or
 `(2) the Secretary determines that such seafood or seafood product can
 be brought into compliance with this subtitle by relabeling or other
 action. If the Secretary so determines, then the destruction of such
 seafood or seafood product may be deferred pending filing of a written
 application by the owner or consignee and the execution by the applicant of
 a bond within a time period specified by the Secretary. Upon such filing
 and execution of a bond, the Secretary may authorize the applicant to
 perform such relabeling or other actions specified by the Secretary. If
 after such action is performed, the Secretary determines that such seafood
 or seafood product has been brought into compliance with this subtitle,
 the Secretary shall permit its entry into commerce.
 `(d) COSTS- Storage, cartage, labor, and other costs resulting from the
 denial of entry, or withdrawal from warehouse, of any seafood or seafood
 product shall be paid by the owner or consignee, and nonpayment of such
 costs shall constitute a lien against such seafood or seafood product and
 any other seafood or seafood product thereafter entered, or withdrawn from
 warehouse, for consumption in the United States by such owner or consignee.
 `(e) FOREIGN SEAFOOD INSPECTION PROGRAM- (1) Upon request, the Secretary
 shall review the seafood inspection program of each country desiring to
 export seafood or seafood products into the United States to determine
 if such program is at least equal to the program established under this
 subtitle.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that a country desiring to export seafood
 or seafood products to the United States has a seafood inspection program
 at least equal to the program established under this subtitle and that
 such country will permit the enforcement measures deemed necessary pursuant
 to paragraph (5), the Secretary shall issue a certificate to such country
 stating that the country maintains such a program.
 `(3) No seafood or seafood product shall be permitted entry into the United
 States from a country that does not have such a current, valid certificate.
 `(4) The Secretary shall periodically review such certificates and shall
 revoke any certificate if the Secretary determines that the country
 involved is not maintaining a seafood inspection program at least equal
 to the program established under this subtitle.
 `(5) The Secretary shall enforce this subsection through the imposition of
 random inspections, sampling, and testing at such stages in the processing
 of seafood or seafood products, and such other actions, as the Secretary
 deems necessary to ensure compliance with this subtitle.
`SEC. 219. EXPORTS.
 `(a) STANDARDS- Seafood or seafood products intended for export to a
 foreign country shall not be deemed to be adulterated or misbranded under
 this subtitle if they--
 `(1) accord to the specifications of the foreign purchaser;
 `(2) are not in conflict with the laws of the country to which they are
 intended for export;
 `(3) are labeled on the outside of the shipping package that they are
 intended for export; and
 `(4) are not sold, offered for sale, or otherwise disposed of in commerce
 within the United States
except that such seafood or seafood product shall be deemed to be adulterated
if the Secretary determines it represents a significant threat to the health
of the eventual consumer.
 `(b) INSPECTION- The Secretary shall inspect seafood or seafood products
 intended to be exported to foreign countries at such times and places and
 in such manner as the Secretary deems necessary to ensure compliance with
 this subtitle.
 `(c) CERTIFICATES- The Secretary shall, upon request, provide a certificate
 for exporting stating the condition of seafood or seafood products inspected
 under this section.
`SEC. 220. STATE PROGRAMS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall encourage States to establish seafood
 inspection programs at least equal to the program established under this
 subtitle.
 `(b) ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide to a State, in planning and
 developing such seafood inspection program--
 `(1) advisory assistance;
 `(2) technical and laboratory assistance and training (including necessary
 materials and equipment); and
 `(3) financial and other aid.
 `(c) DESIGNATION OF STATES- (1) Upon request, the Secretary shall review the
 seafood inspection program of a State to determine if the State seafood
 inspection program is at least equal to the program established under
 this subtitle.
 `(2) If the Secretary determines that a State seafood inspection program
 is at least equal to the program established under this subtitle, the
 Secretary shall--
 `(A) designate such State as one in which the Federal seafood inspection
 program established under this subtitle shall not apply to shipments of
 seafood and seafood product in commerce within that State; and
 `(B) annually grant to each such State 50 percent of the cost of operating
 such State seafood inspection program.
 `(3) If the Secretary determines that a State seafood inspection program is
 not at least equal to the program established under this subtitle or that
 a designated State has failed to maintain or is not enforcing a seafood
 inspection program at least equal to the program established under this
 subtitle, the Secretary shall promptly notify the Governor of the State
 of such determination.
 `(4) After the notification required by paragraph (3), consultation with
 the State, and providing any assistance described in subsection (b), if the
 Secretary determines that a State seafood inspection program does not have
 standards that are at least equal to those under this subtitle or that a
 designated State has failed to maintain or is not enforcing a program having
 standards at least equal to those under this subtitle, the Secretary shall--
 `(A) promptly notify the Governor of the State of such determination;
 `(B) designate such State as one in which the Federal inspection program
 established under this subtitle shall apply to the processing of seafood
 or seafood products within such State for shipment in commerce within that
 State; and
 `(C) cease providing any financial assistance to such State under paragraph
 (2).
`SEC. 221. FEDERAL PREEMPTION.
 `(a) PROHIBITION- A State may not--
 `(1) impose requirements within the scope of this subtitle with respect
 to any establishment or vessel registered under the program which are in
 addition to, or different than, those imposed pursuant to this subtitle; or
 `(2) impose marking, labeling, package, or ingredient requirements for
 seafood and seafood products processed at any establishment or vessel
 registered under the program in addition to, or different than, those
 imposed pursuant to this subtitle.
 `(b) AUTHORIZED ACTIONS- A State may, consistent with the requirements
 under this subtitle--
 `(1) impose recordkeeping and other requirements within the scope of section
 215 with respect to any establishment or vessel registered under the program;
 `(2) exercise concurrent jurisdiction with the Secretary over seafood and
 seafood products for the purpose of preventing the distribution for human
 food purposes of adulterated or misbranded seafood and seafood products
 that are outside an establishment or vessel registered under the program; and
 `(3) in the case of imported seafood and seafood products that are not at an
 establishment or vessel registered under the program, exercise concurrent
 jurisdiction with the Secretary after their entry, or withdrawal from
 warehouse, into the United States.
 `(c) NO PRECLUSION- This subtitle shall not preclude any State from
 establishing requirements or taking other action, consistent with this
 subtitle, with respect to any other matters regulated under this subtitle.
`SEC. 222. PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES.
 `(a) PROHIBITED ACTS- No person shall--
 `(1) process any seafood or seafood product at any establishment or vessel,
 except in compliance with this subtitle or any regulations promulgated
 thereunder;
 `(2) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in commerce--
 `(A) any seafood or seafood product that is adulterated or misbranded at
 the time of such sale, transportation, offer for sale or transportation,
 receipt for transportation, or disposal; or
 `(B) any seafood or seafood product required to be inspected under this
 subtitle unless it has been so inspected;
 `(3) commit, with respect to any seafood or seafood product, any act
 while it is being transported in commerce or held for sale after such
 transportation, which is intended to cause or has the effect of causing
 such product to be adulterated or misbranded;
 `(4) sell, transport, offer for sale or transportation, receive for
 transportation, or otherwise dispose of, in commerce any seafood or seafood
 product that is not processed in accordance with the requirements of this
 subtitle or any regulations promulgated thereunder;
 `(5) forge, counterfeit, simulate or falsely represent any official mark
 or registration;
 `(6) without authorization from the Secretary, use any official mark, or
 registration, or simulation thereof, or alter, detach, deface, or destroy
 any official mark or registration;
 `(7) refuse to permit entry or inspection to or on any establishment or
 vessel, or otherwise interfere with any person in carrying out the duties
 required under this subtitle; or
 `(8) create or maintain records that are false either by content or omission,
 or destroy records containing information required under this subtitle or
 any regulations promulgated thereunder.
 `(b) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Any person who, after notice and opportunity
 for a hearing, violates subsection (a) shall be liable to the United
 States for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each
 violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
 offense. In determining the amount of such penalty, the Secretary shall
 take into account the gravity of the violations and, with respect to
 the violator, the degree of culpability, and history of prior violations
 (including violations resolved by written warnings), and such other matters
 as justice may require.
 `(2) The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or without
 conditions, any civil penalty that is subject to imposition or that has
 been imposed under this section.
 `(c) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who violates subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000, or imprisoned for not
 more than one year, or both; and
 `(2) if such violation involves intent to defraud, or any distribution of
 any seafood or seafood product that is adulterated, be fined in an amount
 not to exceed $10,000, or imprisoned for not more than three years, or both.
 `(d) CARRIERS- No carrier shall be subject to penalties under this section
 for the receipt, carriage, holding, or delivery, in the usual course of
 business, as a carrier, of any adulterated or misbranded seafood or seafood
 product owned by another person, unless--
 `(1) the carrier has knowledge, or is in possession of facts that would
 cause a reasonable person to believe that the seafood or seafood product were
 adulterated or misbranded or were otherwise not eligible for transportation
 under this act, or
 `(2) the carrier refuses to furnish on request of the Secretary the name
 and address of the person from whom the carrier received the adulterated
 or misbranded seafood or seafood product, and copies of all documents
 pertaining to the delivery of such seafood or seafood product.
 `(e) MINOR VIOLATIONS- The Secretary may decline to report for prosecution
 minor violations of this subtitle whenever the Secretary believes that the
 public interest will be adequately served by a suitable written notice of
 warning. In determining whether the public interest could be adequately
 served by a written notice of warning, the Secretary shall consider,
 among other factors--
 `(1) the compliance history of such person;
 `(2) the magnitude of the violation;
 `(3) whether compliance with this subtitle would likely be obtained as a
 result of such notice; and
 `(4) whether such violation is of a minor or technical nature.
 `(f) NOTICE- Unless the Secretary by regulation provides otherwise, before
 any violation is reported by the Secretary for prosecution under this
 subtitle, the Secretary shall give the person alleged to have committed
 such violation--
 `(1) reasonable notice that the Secretary intends to report such violation
 for prosecution; and
 `(2) an opportunity to present to the Secretary, orally or in writing,
 views with respect to such proceeding.
`SEC. 223. HEARINGS AND SUBPOENAS.
 `(a) ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS- The Secretary shall afford an opportunity
 for a written hearing to any person adversely affected by the action or
 inaction of the Secretary under this subtitle. As soon as practicable
 after such hearing the Secretary shall take appropriate action.
 `(b) SUBPOENAS- (1) For the purposes of any hearing or investigation under
 this subtitle, the Secretary may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of any documentation or
 other evidence that relates to any matter under investigation or in dispute
 before the Secretary and to administer oaths or affirmations.
 `(2) The Secretary shall pay witnesses subpoenaed under this subsection
 customary reasonable fees and mileage.
 `(3) In case of contempt or refusal to obey a subpoena served upon any person
 pursuant to this subsection, the District Court of the United States for
 the district in which such person is found, resides, or transacts business,
 upon application by the Secretary and after notice to such person, shall
 have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear and
 give testimony before the Secretary or to appear and produce documents
 before the Secretary or both, and any failure to obey such order of the
 court may be punished by such court as a contempt thereof.
`SEC. 224. EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- This subtitle shall not apply to--
 `(1) the processing by any person of seafood and seafood products of that
 person's own raising or harvesting exclusively for use by that person,
 members of that person's household, that person's nonpaying guests,
 and employees;
 `(2) operations of types traditionally and usually conducted at retail
 stores and restaurants, when conducted at any retail store or restaurant
 or similar retail-type establishment for sale in normal retail quantities
 of seafood and seafood products to consumers at such establishments, if
 the Secretary determines that such exemption will have no adverse effect
 on protecting the consuming public from adulterated or misbranded seafood
 and seafood products;
 `(3) the custom processing in any establishment or vessel of seafood or
 seafood products that the owner of such seafood or seafood products will
 exclusively use, in the household of the owner, for the owner, members of
 the owner's household, nonpaying guests, and employees, if--
 `(A) such establishment or vessel ensures that such seafood or seafood
 products are segregated at all times from seafood and seafood products
 processed for sale,
 `(B) such seafood and seafood prodcuts are plainly marked `Not for Sale', and
 `(C) such establishments and vessels are maintained and operated in a
 sanitary manner;
 `(4) any person engaged in the processing of seafood or seafood products
 and the seafood or seafood products that are processed by such person
 for such period of time, if the Secretary determines that it would
 be impracticable to provide inspection, the exemption will aid in the
 effective administration of this subtitle, and the exemption will have
 no adverse effect on protecting the consuming public from adulterated or
 misbranded seafood and seafood products;
 `(5) any seafood or seafood product, other than fish and shellfish, if
 the Secretary determines that such exemption will have no adverse effect
 on protecting the consuming public from adulterated or misbranded seafood
 and seafood products;
 `(6) except as provided in subsection (c), vessels that harvest or
 commercially prepare seafood or seafood products unless they prepare seafood
 or seafood products other than by qutting, decapitating, gilling, skinning,
 shucking, icing, freezing, or brine chilling, as determined by the Secretary;
 `(7) any vessel processing seafood or seafood products solely for shipment
 to foreign countries; and
 `(8) the entry, or withdrawal from warehouse, for consumption in the United
 States of any seafood or seafood product acquired outside the United States
 for consumption by the person entering or withdrawing it if--
 `(A) the total amount of such seafood or seafood product does not exceed
 such weight as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation; or
 `(B) it is exempted by regulation because it was caught for other than
 commercial purposes in waters outside the United States.
 `(b) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS- This subtitle shall not apply to any establishment
 or vessel solely processing seafood or seafood products not intended for
 use as human food, but such seafood and seafood products shall, before
 their offer for sale or other disposition in commerce, not be capable of
 use as human food.
 `(c) STUDY- (1)(A) The Secretary together with the Secretary of Commerce
 shall, not later than one year after the date of enactment of this subtitle,
 complete and conduct a study of--
 `(i) the role of vessels exempted under subsection (a)(6) in providing
 seafood and seafood products; and
 `(ii) based on a scientific analysis conducted pursuant to the principles
 listed in section 212, the necessity of including any particular type
 or class of such vessels in the inspection program conducted pursuant to
 this subtitle.
The Secretary, together with the Secretary of Commerce, may from time to
time update any such study.
 `(B) The Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce shall immediately submit to
 the Committees on Agriculture and on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and
 Forestry of the Senate the results of the study required under subparagraph
 (A) and the results of any update of such study.
 `(2) If as a result of the study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) or
 any update of such study the Secretary recommends that any type or class
 of vessel exempted pursuant to subsection (a)(6) should be included in the
 inspection program conducted pursuant to this subtitle, the Secretary shall,
 after public notice and an opportunity for comment, promulgate regulations
 to include any such type or class of vessel in such inspection program.
`SEC. 225. EMPLOYEE PROTECTION.
 `No employer may discharge any employee or otherwise discriminate against
 any employee with respect to the employee's compensation, terms, conditions,
 or privileges of employment because such employee has assisted or in any
 way participated in the implementing of the provisions of this subtitle
 or who is about to implement any activity protected by this provision.
`SEC. 226. EDUCATION.
 `The Secretary shall, in consultation with other federal agencies and
 with the States, design and implement a national program for seafood and
 seafood products safety education.
`SEC. 227. REGULATIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may promulgate regulations to carry out
 this subtitle.
 `(b) REQUIRED REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall prescribe regulations
 establishing--
 `(A) good processing practices for establishments and vessels;
 `(B) standards for the wholesomeness, nomenclature, quantity, package,
 and labeling of seafood and seafood products;
 `(C) procedures for the inspections provided for in this subtitle; and
 `(D) standards for the monitoring, classification, and control of production
 areas for seafood.
`SEC. 228. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to
 carry out this subtitle to remain available without fiscal year limitation.'
SEC. 3. REGULATIONS.
 (A) INITIAL REGULATIONS- The Secretary of Agriculture (hereafter referred to
 as the `Secretary') shall promulgate the initial regulations required under
 section 227 of the Federal Inspection for Seafood Healthfulness Act of 1989
 not later than 1 year after the effective date of this Act. Such initial
 regulations shall be effective on the date prescribed by the Secretary,
 but not later than 1 year after the date on which such regulations are
 promulgated. However, if the Secretary finds that additional time, not
 in excess of 1 year, is necessary to put into effect all or any part of
 such regulations, then the Secretary may delay the effective date of such
 regulations accordingly. The Secretary shall report to the Committee
 on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on
 Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate the reasons for any
 delay in the effective date of such regulations.
 (b) REGULATIONS REGARDING VESSELS- (1) Any regulations promulgated as
 a result of the initial study conducted pursuant to section 224(c) of
 the Federal Inspection for Seafood Healthfulness Act of 1989 shall be
 effective no later than the effective date of the regulations specified
 under subsection (a).
 (2) The Secretary shall submit any regulations promulgated pursuant to
 section 224(c)(2) of the Federal Inspection for Seafood Healthfulness Act
 of 1989 to the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Merchant
 Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives and the Committee
 on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate prior to their
 effective date. Any such regulations shall become effective no earlier
 than 60 calendar days after the date of submission to such committees,
 except that if the House of Representatives is not in session for at least
 30 of the 60 days, then such regulations shall become effective no earlier
 than 30 legislative days after the date of such submission.
SEC. 4. REPORTS BY SECRETARY.
 The Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of
 the Senate in January of each year a report containing a full and complete
 description of the Secretary's activities under the Federal Inspection
 for Seafood Healthfulness Act of 1989 in the preceding fiscal year.