[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 2700 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>

116th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 2700

 To incentivize low-cost drug options and generic competition, and to 
provide extensions for community health centers and the National Health 
 Service Corps, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 May 14, 2019

 Mr. Burgess (for himself, Mr. Walden, Mr. Upton, Mr. McKinley, Mr. 
Carter of Georgia, Mr. Bucshon, Mr. Bilirakis, Mr. Mullin, Mrs. Rodgers 
 of Washington, Mr. Long, Mr. Flores, Mr. Hudson, Mr. Shimkus, Mr. 
 Walberg, Mr. Kinzinger, Mr. Olson, Mr. Johnson of Ohio, Mr. Guthrie, 
 Mr. Griffith, Mr. Duncan, Mrs. Brooks of Indiana, Mr. Gianforte, Mr. 
 Latta, Mr. Scalise, Mr. Sensenbrenner, Mr. Collins of Georgia, Mr. 
 Stivers, Mr. Hill of Arkansas, Mr. Mitchell, and Mr. Hurd of Texas) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on the Judiciary, 
for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case 
for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of 
 the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To incentivize low-cost drug options and generic competition, and to 
provide extensions for community health centers and the National Health 
 Service Corps, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Lowering Prescription Drug Costs and 
Extending Community Health Centers and Other Public Health Priorities 
Act''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents of this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--LOWERING PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS

 Subtitle A--Bringing Low-Cost Options and Competition While Keeping 
 Incentives for New Generics

Sec. 101. Change conditions of first generic exclusivity to spur access 
 and competition.
 Subtitle B--Protecting Consumer Access to Generic Drugs

Sec. 111. Unlawful agreements.
Sec. 112. Notice and certification of agreements.
Sec. 113. Forfeiture of 180-day exclusivity period.
Sec. 114. Commission litigation authority.
Sec. 115. Statute of limitations.
 Subtitle C--Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples

Sec. 121. Actions for delays of generic drugs and biosimilar biological 
 products.
Sec. 122. REMS approval process for subsequent filers.
Sec. 123. Rule of construction.
 TITLE II--EXTENSION OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS

Sec. 201. Extension for community health centers, the National Health 
 Service Corps, and teaching health centers 
 that operate GME programs.
Sec. 202. Extension for special diabetes programs.
Sec. 203. Extension for family-to-family health information centers.
Sec. 204. Extension for sexual risk avoidance education and personal 
 responsibility education.

 TITLE I--LOWERING PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS

 Subtitle A--Bringing Low-Cost Options and Competition While Keeping 
 Incentives for New Generics

SEC. 101. CHANGE CONDITIONS OF FIRST GENERIC EXCLUSIVITY TO SPUR ACCESS 
 AND COMPETITION.

 Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(5)(B)(iv)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``180 days after'' and 
 all that follows through the period at the end and inserting 
 the following: ``180 days after the earlier of--
 ``(aa) the date of the first 
 commercial marketing of the drug 
 (including the commercial marketing of 
 the listed drug) by any first 
 applicant; or
 ``(bb) the applicable date 
 specified in subclause (III).''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subclause:
 ``(III) Applicable date.--The applicable 
 date specified in this subclause, with respect 
 to an application for a drug described in 
 subclause (I), is the date on which each of the 
 following conditions is first met:
 ``(aa) The approval of such an 
 application could be made effective, 
 but for the eligibility of a first 
 applicant for 180-day exclusivity under 
 this clause.
 ``(bb) At least 30 months have 
 passed since the date of submission of 
 an application for the drug by at least 
 one first applicant.
 ``(cc) Approval of an application 
 for the drug submitted by at least one 
 first applicant is not precluded under 
 clause (iii).
 ``(dd) No application for the drug 
 submitted by any first applicant is 
 approved at the time the conditions 
 under items (aa), (bb), and (cc) are 
 all met, regardless of whether such an 
 application is subsequently 
 approved.''.

 Subtitle B--Protecting Consumer Access to Generic Drugs

SEC. 111. UNLAWFUL AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Agreements Prohibited.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), it 
shall be unlawful for an NDA or BLA holder and a subsequent filer (or 
for two subsequent filers) to enter into, or carry out, an agreement 
resolving or settling a covered patent infringement claim on a final or 
interim basis if under such agreement--
 (1) a subsequent filer directly or indirectly receives from 
 such holder (or in the case of such an agreement between two 
 subsequent filers, the other subsequent filer) anything of 
 value, including a license; and
 (2) the subsequent filer agrees to limit or forego research 
 on, or development, manufacturing, marketing, or sales, for any 
 period of time, of the covered product that is the subject of 
 the application described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 subsection (g)(8).
 (b) Exclusion.--It shall not be unlawful under subsection (a) if a 
party to an agreement described in such subsection demonstrates by 
clear and convincing evidence that the value described in subsection 
(a)(1) is compensation solely for other goods or services that the 
subsequent filer has promised to provide.
 (c) Limitation.--Nothing in this section shall prohibit an 
agreement resolving or settling a covered patent infringement claim in 
which the consideration granted by the NDA or BLA holder to the 
subsequent filer (or from one subsequent filer to another) as part of 
the resolution or settlement includes only one or more of the 
following:
 (1) The right to market the covered product that is the 
 subject of the application described in subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 of subsection (g)(8) in the United States before the expiration 
 of--
 (A) any patent that is the basis of the covered 
 patent infringement claim; or
 (B) any patent right or other statutory exclusivity 
 that would prevent the marketing of such covered 
 product.
 (2) A payment for reasonable litigation expenses not to 
 exceed $7,500,000 in the aggregate.
 (3) A covenant not to sue on any claim that such covered 
 product infringes a patent.
 (d) Enforcement by Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) General application.--The requirements of this section 
 apply, according to their terms, to an NDA or BLA holder or 
 subsequent filer that is--
 (A) a person, partnership, or corporation over 
 which the Commission has authority pursuant to section 
 5(a)(2) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 
 45(a)(2)); or
 (B) a person, partnership, or corporation over 
 which the Commission would have authority pursuant to 
 such section but for the fact that such person, 
 partnership, or corporation is not organized to carry 
 on business for its own profit or that of its members.
 (2) Unfair or deceptive acts or practices enforcement 
 authority.--
 (A) In general.--A violation of this section shall 
 be treated as an unfair or deceptive act or practice in 
 violation of section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1)).
 (B) Powers of commission.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (C) and paragraphs (1)(B) and (3)--
 (i) the Commission shall enforce this 
 section in the same manner, by the same means, 
 and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and 
 duties as though all applicable terms and 
 provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated into 
 and made a part of this section; and
 (ii) any NDA or BLA holder or subsequent 
 filer that violates this section shall be 
 subject to the penalties and entitled to the 
 privileges and immunities provided in the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act.
 (C) Judicial review.--In the case of a cease and 
 desist order issued by the Commission under section 5 
 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) for 
 violation of this section, a party to such order may 
 obtain judicial review of such order as provided in 
 such section 5, except that--
 (i) such review may only be obtained in--
 (I) the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the District of Columbia 
 Circuit;
 (II) the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the circuit in which the 
 ultimate parent entity, as defined in 
 section 801.1(a)(3) of title 16, Code 
 of Federal Regulations, or any 
 successor thereto, of the NDA or BLA 
 holder (if any such holder is a party 
 to such order) is incorporated as of 
 the date that the application described 
 in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
 subsection (g)(8) or an approved 
 application that is deemed to be a 
 license for a biological product under 
 section 351(k) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(k)) pursuant 
 to section 7002(e)(4) of the Biologics 
 Price Competition and Innovation Act of 
 2009 (Public Law 111-148; 124 Stat. 
 817) is submitted to the Commissioner 
 of Food and Drugs; or
 (III) the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the circuit in which the 
 ultimate parent entity, as so defined, 
 of any subsequent filer that is a party 
 to such order is incorporated as of the 
 date that the application described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection 
 (g)(8) is submitted to the Commissioner 
 of Food and Drugs; and
 (ii) the petition for review shall be filed 
 in the court not later than 30 days after such 
 order is served on the party seeking review.
 (3) Additional enforcement authority.--
 (A) Civil penalty.--The Commission may commence a 
 civil action to recover a civil penalty in a district 
 court of the United States against any NDA or BLA 
 holder or subsequent filer that violates this section.
 (B) Special rule for recovery of penalty if cease 
 and desist order issued.--
 (i) In general.--If the Commission has 
 issued a cease and desist order in a proceeding 
 under section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 45) for violation of this 
 section--
 (I) the Commission may commence a 
 civil action under subparagraph (A) to 
 recover a civil penalty against any 
 party to such order at any time before 
 the expiration of the 1-year period 
 beginning on the date on which such 
 order becomes final under section 5(g) 
 of such Act (15 U.S.C. 45(g)); and
 (II) in such civil action, the 
 findings of the Commission as to the 
 material facts in such proceeding shall 
 be conclusive, unless--
 (aa) the terms of such 
 order expressly provide that 
 the Commission's findings shall 
 not be conclusive; or
 (bb) such order became 
 final by reason of section 
 5(g)(1) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 
 45(g)(1)), in which case such 
 findings shall be conclusive if 
 supported by evidence.
 (ii) Relationship to penalty for violation 
 of an order.--The penalty provided in clause 
 (i) for violation of this section is separate 
 from and in addition to any penalty that may be 
 incurred for violation of an order of the 
 Commission under section 5(l) of the Federal 
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(l)).
 (C) Amount of penalty.--
 (i) In general.--The amount of a civil 
 penalty imposed in a civil action under 
 subparagraph (A) on a party to an agreement 
 described in subsection (a) shall be sufficient 
 to deter violations of this section, but in no 
 event greater than--
 (I) if such party is the NDA or BLA 
 holder (or, in the case of an agreement 
 between two subsequent filers, the 
 subsequent filer who gave the value 
 described in subsection (a)(1)), the 
 greater of--
 (aa) 3 times the value 
 received by such NDA or BLA 
 holder (or by such subsequent 
 filer) that is reasonably 
 attributable to the violation 
 of this section; or
 (bb) 3 times the value 
 given to the subsequent filer 
 (or to the other subsequent 
 filer) reasonably attributable 
 to the violation of this 
 section; and
 (II) if such party is the 
 subsequent filer (or, in the case of an 
 agreement between two subsequent 
 filers, the subsequent filer who 
 received the value described in 
 subsection (a)(1)), 3 times the value 
 received by such subsequent filer that 
 is reasonably attributable to the 
 violation of this section.
 (ii) Factors for consideration.--In 
 determining such amount, the court shall take 
 into account--
 (I) the nature, circumstances, 
 extent, and gravity of the violation;
 (II) with respect to the violator, 
 the degree of culpability, any history 
 of violations, the ability to pay, any 
 effect on the ability to continue doing 
 business, profits earned by the NDA or 
 BLA holder (or, in the case of an 
 agreement between two subsequent 
 filers, the subsequent filer who gave 
 the value described in subsection 
 (a)(1)), compensation received by the 
 subsequent filer (or, in the case of an 
 agreement between two subsequent 
 filers, the subsequent filer who 
 received the value described in 
 subsection (a)(1)), and the amount of 
 commerce affected; and
 (III) other matters that justice 
 requires.
 (D) Injunctions and other equitable relief.--In a 
 civil action under subparagraph (A), the United States 
 district courts are empowered to grant mandatory 
 injunctions and such other and further equitable relief 
 as they deem appropriate.
 (4) Remedies in addition.--Remedies provided in this 
 subsection are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other 
 remedy provided by Federal law.
 (5) Preservation of authority of commission.--Nothing in 
 this section shall be construed to affect any authority of the 
 Commission under any other provision of law.
 (e) Federal Trade Commission Rulemaking.--The Commission may, in 
its discretion, by rule promulgated under section 553 of title 5, 
United States Code, exempt from this section certain agreements 
described in subsection (a) if the Commission finds such agreements to 
be in furtherance of market competition and for the benefit of 
consumers.
 (f) Antitrust Laws.--Nothing in this section shall modify, impair, 
limit, or supersede the applicability of the antitrust laws as defined 
in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 
12(a)), and of section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 
45) to the extent that such section 5 applies to unfair methods of 
competition. Nothing in this section shall modify, impair, limit, or 
supersede the right of a subsequent filer to assert claims or 
counterclaims against any person, under the antitrust laws or other 
laws relating to unfair competition.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Agreement resolving or settling a covered patent 
 infringement claim.--The term ``agreement resolving or settling 
 a covered patent infringement claim'' means any agreement 
 that--
 (A) resolves or settles a covered patent 
 infringement claim; or
 (B) is contingent upon, provides for a contingent 
 condition for, or is otherwise related to the 
 resolution or settlement of a covered patent 
 infringement claim.
 (2) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
 Trade Commission.
 (3) Covered patent infringement claim.--The term ``covered 
 patent infringement claim'' means an allegation made by the NDA 
 or BLA holder to a subsequent filer (or, in the case of an 
 agreement between two subsequent filers, by one subsequent 
 filer to another), whether or not included in a complaint filed 
 with a court of law, that--
 (A) the submission of the application described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (9), or the 
 manufacture, use, offering for sale, sale, or 
 importation into the United States of a covered product 
 that is the subject of such an application--
 (i) in the case of an agreement between an 
 NDA or BLA holder and a subsequent filer, 
 infringes any patent owned by, or exclusively 
 licensed to, the NDA or BLA holder of the 
 covered product; or
 (ii) in the case of an agreement between 
 two subsequent filers, infringes any patent 
 owned by the subsequent filer; or
 (B) in the case of an agreement between an NDA or 
 BLA holder and a subsequent filer, the covered product 
 to be manufactured under such application uses a 
 covered product as claimed in a published patent 
 application.
 (4) Covered product.--The term ``covered product'' means a 
 drug (as defined in section 201(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g))), including a biological 
 product (as defined in section 351(i) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(i)).
 (5) NDA or bla holder.--The term ``NDA or BLA holder'' 
 means--
 (A) the holder of--
 (i) an approved new drug application filed 
 under section 505(b)(1) of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)(1)) 
 for a covered product; or
 (ii) a biologics license application filed 
 under section 351(a) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(a)) with respect to 
 a biological product;
 (B) a person owning or controlling enforcement of 
 the patent on--
 (i) the list published under section 
 505(j)(7) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(7)) in 
 connection with the application described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i); or
 (ii) any list published under section 351 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 262) comprised of patents associated with 
 biologics license applications filed under 
 section 351(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 262(a)); 
 or
 (C) the predecessors, subsidiaries, divisions, 
 groups, and affiliates controlled by, controlling, or 
 under common control with any entity described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) (such control to be presumed by 
 direct or indirect share ownership of 50 percent or 
 greater), as well as the licensees, licensors, 
 successors, and assigns of each of the entities.
 (6) Patent.--The term ``patent'' means a patent issued by 
 the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
 (7) Statutory exclusivity.--The term ``statutory 
 exclusivity'' means those prohibitions on the submission or 
 approval of drug applications under clauses (ii) through (iv) 
 of section 505(c)(3)(E) (5- and 3-year exclusivity), clauses 
 (ii) through (iv) of section 505(j)(5)(F) (5-year and 3-year 
 exclusivity), section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) (180-day exclusivity), 
 section 527 (orphan drug exclusivity), section 505A (pediatric 
 exclusivity), or section 505E (qualified infectious disease 
 product exclusivity) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 355(c)(3)(E), 355(j)(5)(B)(iv), 355(j)(5)(F), 
 360cc, 355a, 355f), or prohibitions on the submission or 
 licensing of biologics license applications under section 
 351(k)(6) (interchangeable biological product exclusivity) or 
 section 351(k)(7) (biological product reference product 
 exclusivity) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 262(k)(6), (7)).
 (8) Subsequent filer.--The term ``subsequent filer'' 
 means--
 (A) in the case of a drug, a party that owns or 
 controls an abbreviated new drug application submitted 
 pursuant to section 505(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)) or a new drug 
 application submitted pursuant to section 505(b)(2) of 
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21U.S.C. 
 355(b)(2)) and filed under section 505(b)(1) of such 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)(1)) or has the exclusive rights 
 to distribute the covered product that is the subject 
 of such application; or
 (B) in the case of a biological product, a party 
 that owns or controls an application filed with the 
 Food and Drug Administration under section 351(k) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(k)) or has 
 the exclusive rights to distribute the biological 
 product that is the subject of such application.
 (h) Effective Date.--This section applies with respect to 
agreements described in subsection (a) entered into on or after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 112. NOTICE AND CERTIFICATION OF AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Notice of All Agreements.--Section 1111(7) of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (21 
U.S.C. 355 note) is amended by inserting ``or the owner of a patent for 
which a claim of infringement could reasonably be asserted against any 
person for making, using, offering to sell, selling, or importing into 
the United States a biological product that is the subject of a 
biosimilar biological product application'' before the period at the 
end.
 (b) Certification of Agreements.--Section 1112 of such Act (21 
U.S.C. 355 note) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Certification.--The Chief Executive Officer or the company 
official responsible for negotiating any agreement under subsection (a) 
or (b) that is required to be filed under subsection (c) shall, within 
30 days of such filing, execute and file with the Assistant Attorney 
General and the Commission a certification as follows: `I declare that 
the following is true, correct, and complete to the best of my 
knowledge: The materials filed with the Federal Trade Commission and 
the Department of Justice under section 1112 of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003, with 
respect to the agreement referenced in this certification--
 ```(1) represent the complete, final, and exclusive 
 agreement between the parties;
 ```(2) include any ancillary agreements that are contingent 
 upon, provide a contingent condition for, were entered into 
 within 30 days of, or are otherwise related to, the referenced 
 agreement; and
 ```(3) include written descriptions of any oral agreements, 
 representations, commitments, or promises between the parties 
 that are responsive to subsection (a) or (b) of such section 
 1112 and have not been reduced to writing.'.''.

SEC. 113. FORFEITURE OF 180-DAY EXCLUSIVITY PERIOD.

 Section 505(j)(5)(D)(i)(V) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(5)(D)(i)(V)) is amended by inserting ``section 
111 of the Lowering Prescription Drug Costs and Extending Community 
Health Centers and Other Public Health Priorities Act or'' after ``that 
the agreement has violated''.

SEC. 114. COMMISSION LITIGATION AUTHORITY.

 Section 16(a)(2) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 
56(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``or'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by inserting ``or'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following:
 ``(F) under section 111(d)(3)(A) of the Lowering 
 Prescription Drug Costs and Extending Community Health 
 Centers and Other Public Health Priorities Act;''.

SEC. 115. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
Commission shall commence any administrative proceeding or civil action 
to enforce section 111 of this Act not later than 6 years after the 
date on which the parties to the agreement file the Notice of Agreement 
as provided by section 1112(c)(2) and (d) of the Medicare Prescription 
Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (21 U.S.C. 355 note).
 (b) Civil Action After Issuance of Cease and Desist Order.--If the 
Commission has issued a cease and desist order under section 5 of the 
Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) for violation of section 
111 of this Act and the proceeding for the issuance of such order was 
commenced within the period required by subsection (a) of this section, 
such subsection does not prohibit the commencement, after such period, 
of a civil action under section 111(d)(3)(A) against a party to such 
order or a civil action under subsection (l) of such section 5 for 
violation of such order.

 Subtitle C--Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples

SEC. 121. ACTIONS FOR DELAYS OF GENERIC DRUGS AND BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL 
 PRODUCTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``commercially reasonable, market-based 
 terms'' means--
 (A) a nondiscriminatory price for the sale of the 
 covered product at or below, but not greater than, the 
 most recent wholesale acquisition cost for the drug, as 
 defined in section 1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3a(c)(6)(B));
 (B) a schedule for delivery that results in the 
 transfer of the covered product to the eligible product 
 developer consistent with the timing under subsection 
 (b)(2)(A)(iv); and
 (C) no additional conditions are imposed on the 
 sale of the covered product;
 (2) the term ``covered product''--
 (A) means--
 (i) any drug approved under subsection (c) 
 or (j) of section 505 of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) or 
 biological product licensed under subsection 
 (a) or (k) of section 351 of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262);
 (ii) any combination of a drug or 
 biological product described in clause (i); or
 (iii) when reasonably necessary to support 
 approval of an application under section 505 of 
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 355), or section 351 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as 
 applicable, or otherwise meet the requirements 
 for approval under either such section, any 
 product, including any device, that is marketed 
 or intended for use with such a drug or 
 biological product; and
 (B) does not include any drug or biological product 
 that appears on the drug shortage list in effect under 
 section 506E of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act (21 U.S.C. 356e), unless--
 (i) the drug or biological product has been 
 on the drug shortage list in effect under such 
 section 506E continuously for more than 6 
 months; or
 (ii) the Secretary determines that 
 inclusion of the drug or biological product as 
 a covered product is likely to contribute to 
 alleviating or preventing a shortage.
 (3) the term ``device'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 321);
 (4) the term ``eligible product developer'' means a person 
 that seeks to develop a product for approval pursuant to an 
 application for approval under subsection (b)(2) or (j) of 
 section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 355) or for licensing pursuant to an application under 
 section 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
 262(k));
 (5) the term ``license holder'' means the holder of an 
 application approved under subsection (c) or (j) of section 505 
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) or 
 the holder of a license under subsection (a) or (k) of section 
 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) for a 
 covered product;
 (6) the term ``REMS'' means a risk evaluation and 
 mitigation strategy under section 505-1 of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1);
 (7) the term ``REMS with ETASU'' means a REMS that contains 
 elements to assure safe use under section 505-1(f) of the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1(f));
 (8) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services;
 (9) the term ``single, shared system of elements to assure 
 safe use'' means a single, shared system of elements to assure 
 safe use under section 505-1(f) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1(f)); and
 (10) the term ``sufficient quantities'' means an amount of 
 a covered product that the eligible product developer 
 determines allows it to--
 (A) conduct testing to support an application 
 under--
 (i) subsection (b)(2) or (j) of section 505 
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 355); or
 (ii) section 351(k) of the Public Health 
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(k)); and
 (B) fulfill any regulatory requirements relating to 
 approval of such an application.
 (b) Civil Action for Failure To Provide Sufficient Quantities of a 
Covered Product.--
 (1) In general.--An eligible product developer may bring a 
 civil action against the license holder for a covered product 
 seeking relief under this subsection in an appropriate district 
 court of the United States alleging that the license holder has 
 declined to provide sufficient quantities of the covered 
 product to the eligible product developer on commercially 
 reasonable, market-based terms.
 (2) Elements.--
 (A) In general.--To prevail in a civil action 
 brought under paragraph (1), an eligible product 
 developer shall prove, by a preponderance of the 
 evidence--
 (i) that--
 (I) the covered product is not 
 subject to a REMS with ETASU; or
 (II) if the covered product is 
 subject to a REMS with ETASU--
 (aa) the eligible product 
 developer has obtained a 
 covered product authorization 
 from the Secretary in 
 accordance with subparagraph 
 (B); and
 (bb) the eligible product 
 developer has provided a copy 
 of the covered product 
 authorization to the license 
 holder;
 (ii) that, as of the date on which the 
 civil action is filed, the product developer 
 has not obtained sufficient quantities of the 
 covered product on commercially reasonable, 
 market-based terms;
 (iii) that the eligible product developer 
 has submitted a written request to purchase 
 sufficient quantities of the covered product to 
 the license holder and such request--
 (I) was sent to a named corporate 
 officer of the license holder;
 (II) was made by certified or 
 registered mail with return receipt 
 requested;
 (III) specified an individual as 
 the point of contact for the license 
 holder to direct communications related 
 to the sale of the covered product to 
 the eligible product developer and a 
 means for electronic and written 
 communications with that individual; 
 and
 (IV) specified an address to which 
 the covered product was to be shipped 
 upon reaching an agreement to transfer 
 the covered product; and
 (iv) that the license holder has not 
 delivered to the eligible product developer 
 sufficient quantities of the covered product on 
 commercially reasonable, market-based terms--
 (I) for a covered product that is 
 not subject to a REMS with ETASU, by 
 the date that is 31 days after the date 
 on which the license holder received 
 the request for the covered product; 
 and
 (II) for a covered product that is 
 subject to a REMS with ETASU, by 31 
 days after the later of--
 (aa) the date on which the 
 license holder received the 
 request for the covered 
 product; or
 (bb) the date on which the 
 license holder received a copy 
 of the covered product 
 authorization issued by the 
 Secretary in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Authorization for covered product subject to a 
 rems with etasu.--
 (i) Request.--An eligible product developer 
 may submit to the Secretary a written request 
 for the eligible product developer to be 
 authorized to obtain sufficient quantities of 
 an individual covered product subject to a REMS 
 with ETASU.
 (ii) Authorization.--Not later than 120 
 days after the date on which a request under 
 clause (i) is received, the Secretary shall, by 
 written notice, authorize the eligible product 
 developer to obtain sufficient quantities of an 
 individual covered product subject to a REMS 
 with ETASU for purposes of--
 (I) development and testing that 
 does not involve human clinical trials, 
 if the eligible product developer has 
 agreed to comply with any conditions 
 the Secretary determines necessary; or
 (II) development and testing that 
 involves human clinical trials, if the 
 eligible product developer has--
 (aa)(AA) submitted 
 protocols, informed consent 
 documents, and informational 
 materials for testing that 
 include protections that 
 provide safety protections 
 comparable to those provided by 
 the REMS for the covered 
 product; or
 (BB) otherwise satisfied 
 the Secretary that such 
 protections will be provided; 
 and
 (bb) met any other 
 requirements the Secretary may 
 establish.
 (iii) Notice.--A covered product 
 authorization issued under this subparagraph 
 shall state that the provision of the covered 
 product by the license holder under the terms 
 of the authorization will not be a violation of 
 the REMS for the covered product.
 (3) Affirmative defense.--In a civil action brought under 
 paragraph (1), it shall be an affirmative defense, on which the 
 defendant has the burden of persuasion by a preponderance of 
 the evidence--
 (A) that, on the date on which the eligible product 
 developer requested to purchase sufficient quantities 
 of the covered product from the license holder--
 (i) neither the license holder nor any of 
 its agents, wholesalers, or distributors was 
 engaged in the manufacturing or commercial 
 marketing of the covered product; and
 (ii) neither the license holder nor any of 
 its agents, wholesalers, or distributors 
 otherwise had access to inventory of the 
 covered product to supply to the eligible 
 product developer on commercially reasonable, 
 market-based terms;
 (B) that--
 (i) the license holder sells the covered 
 product through agents, distributors, or 
 wholesalers;
 (ii) the license holder has placed no 
 restrictions, explicit or implicit, on its 
 agents, distributors, or wholesalers to sell 
 covered products to eligible product 
 developers; and
 (iii) the covered product can be purchased 
 by the eligible product developer in sufficient 
 quantities on commercially reasonable, market-
 based terms from the agents, distributors, or 
 wholesalers of the license holder; or
 (C) that the license holder made an offer to the 
 individual specified pursuant to paragraph 
 (2)(A)(iii)(III), by a means of communication 
 (electronic, written, or both) specified pursuant to 
 such paragraph, to sell sufficient quantities of the 
 covered product to the eligible product developer at 
 commercially reasonable market-based terms--
 (i) for a covered product that is not 
 subject to a REMS with ETASU, by the date that 
 is 14 days after the date on which the license 
 holder received the request for the covered 
 product, and the eligible product developer did 
 not accept such offer by the date that is 7 
 days after the date on which the eligible 
 product developer received such offer from the 
 license holder; or
 (ii) for a covered product that is subject 
 to a REMS with ETASU, by the date that is 20 
 days after the date on which the license holder 
 received the request for the covered product, 
 and the eligible product developer did not 
 accept such offer by the date that is 10 days 
 after the date on which the eligible product 
 developer received such offer from the license 
 holder.
 (4) Remedies.--
 (A) In general.--If an eligible product developer 
 prevails in a civil action brought under paragraph (1), 
 the court shall--
 (i) order the license holder to provide to 
 the eligible product developer without delay 
 sufficient quantities of the covered product on 
 commercially reasonable, market-based terms;
 (ii) award to the eligible product 
 developer reasonable attorney's fees and costs 
 of the civil action; and
 (iii) award to the eligible product 
 developer a monetary amount sufficient to deter 
 the license holder from failing to provide 
 eligible product developers with sufficient 
 quantities of a covered product on commercially 
 reasonable, market-based terms, if the court 
 finds, by a preponderance of the evidence--
 (I) that the license holder delayed 
 providing sufficient quantities of the 
 covered product to the eligible product 
 developer without a legitimate business 
 justification; or
 (II) that the license holder failed 
 to comply with an order issued under 
 clause (i).
 (B) Maximum monetary amount.--A monetary amount 
 awarded under subparagraph (A)(iii) shall not be 
 greater than the revenue that the license holder earned 
 on the covered product during the period--
 (i) beginning on--
 (I) for a covered product that is 
 not subject to a REMS with ETASU, the 
 date that is 31 days after the date on 
 which the license holder received the 
 request; or
 (II) for a covered product that is 
 subject to a REMS with ETASU, the date 
 that is 31 days after the later of--
 (aa) the date on which the 
 license holder received the 
 request; or
 (bb) the date on which the 
 license holder received a copy 
 of the covered product 
 authorization issued by the 
 Secretary in accordance with 
 paragraph (2)(B); and
 (ii) ending on the date on which the 
 eligible product developer received sufficient 
 quantities of the covered product.
 (C) Avoidance of delay.--The court may issue an 
 order under subparagraph (A)(i) before conducting 
 further proceedings that may be necessary to determine 
 whether the eligible product developer is entitled to 
 an award under clause (ii) or (iii) of subparagraph 
 (A), or the amount of any such award.
 (c) Limitation of Liability.--A license holder for a covered 
product shall not be liable for any claim under Federal, State, or 
local law arising out of the failure of an eligible product developer 
to follow adequate safeguards to assure safe use of the covered product 
during development or testing activities described in this section, 
including transportation, handling, use, or disposal of the covered 
product by the eligible product developer.
 (d) No Violation of REMS.--Section 505-1 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(l) Provision of Samples Not a Violation of Strategy.--The 
provision of samples of a covered product to an eligible product 
developer (as those terms are defined in section 121(a) of the Lowering 
Prescription Drug Costs and Extending Community Health Centers and 
Other Public Health Priorities Act) shall not be considered a violation 
of the requirements of any risk evaluation and mitigation strategy that 
may be in place under this section for such drug.''.
 (e) Rule of Construction.--
 (1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``antitrust 
 laws''--
 (A) has the meaning given the term in subsection 
 (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 
 12); and
 (B) includes section 5 of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) to the extent that such 
 section applies to unfair methods of competition.
 (2) Antitrust laws.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to limit the operation of any provision of the 
 antitrust laws.

SEC. 122. REMS APPROVAL PROCESS FOR SUBSEQUENT FILERS.

 Section 505-1 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 355-1), as amended by section 121, is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (g)(4)(B)--
 (A) in clause (i) by striking ``or'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in clause (ii) by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) accommodate different, comparable 
 aspects of the elements to assure safe use for 
 a drug that is the subject of an application 
 under section 505(j), and the applicable listed 
 drug.'';
 (2) in subsection (i)(1), by striking subparagraph (C) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(C)(i) Elements to assure safe use, if required 
 under subsection (f) for the listed drug, which, 
 subject to clause (ii), for a drug that is the subject 
 of an application under section 505(j) may use--
 ``(I) a single, shared system with the 
 listed drug under subsection (f); or
 ``(II) a different, comparable aspect of 
 the elements to assure safe use under 
 subsection (f).
 ``(ii) The Secretary may require a drug that is the 
 subject of an application under section 505(j) and the 
 listed drug to use a single, shared system under 
 subsection (f), if the Secretary determines that no 
 different, comparable aspect of the elements to assure 
 safe use could satisfy the requirements of subsection 
 (f).'';
 (3) in subsection (i), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Shared rems.--If the Secretary approves, in 
 accordance with paragraph (1)(C)(i)(II), a different, 
 comparable aspect of the elements to assure safe use under 
 subsection (f) for a drug that is the subject of an abbreviated 
 new drug application under section 505(j), the Secretary may 
 require that such different comparable aspect of the elements 
 to assure safe use can be used with respect to any other drug 
 that is the subject of an application under section 505(j) or 
 505(b) that references the same listed drug.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(m) Separate REMS.--When used in this section, the terms 
`different, comparable aspect of the elements to assure safe use' or 
`different, comparable approved risk evaluation and mitigation 
strategies' means a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy for a drug 
that is the subject of an application under section 505(j) that uses 
different methods or operational means than the strategy required under 
subsection (a) for the applicable listed drug, or other application 
under section 505(j) with the same such listed drug, but achieves the 
same level of safety as such strategy.''.

SEC. 123. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) In General.--Nothing in this subtitle, the amendments made by 
this subtitle, or in section 505-1 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1), shall be construed as--
 (1) prohibiting a license holder from providing an eligible 
 product developer access to a covered product in the absence of 
 an authorization under this subtitle; or
 (2) in any way negating the applicability of a REMS with 
 ETASU, as otherwise required under such section 505-1, with 
 respect to such covered product.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``covered product'', 
``eligible product developer'', ``license holder'', and ``REMS with 
ETASU'' have the meanings given such terms in section 121(a).

 TITLE II--EXTENSION OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS

SEC. 201. EXTENSION FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS, THE NATIONAL HEALTH 
 SERVICE CORPS, AND TEACHING HEALTH CENTERS THAT OPERATE 
 GME PROGRAMS.

 (a) Community Health Centers Funding.--Section 10503(b)(1)(F) of 
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-
2(b)(1)(F)) is amended by striking ``fiscal year 2019'' and inserting 
``each of fiscal years 2019 and 2020''.
 (b) National Health Service Corps.--Section 10503(b)(2)(F) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-2(b)(2)(F)) 
is amended by striking ``2018 and 2019'' and inserting ``2018, 2019, 
and 2020''.
 (c) Teaching Health Centers That Operate Graduate Medical Education 
Programs.--Section 340H(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 256h(g)(1)) is amended by striking ``2018 and 2019'' and 
inserting ``2018, 2019, and 2020''.
 (d) Application.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to this section for 
fiscal year 2020 are subject to the requirements contained in Public 
Law 115-245 for funds for programs authorized under sections 330 
through 340 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-256).
 (e) Conforming Amendment.--Section 3014(h)(4) of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended by striking ``and section 50901(e) of the 
Advancing Chronic Care, Extenders, and Social Services Act'' and 
inserting ``, section 50901(e) of the Advancing Chronic Care, 
Extenders, and Social Services Act, and section 201(d) of the Lowering 
Prescription Drug Costs and Extending Community Health Centers and 
Other Public Health Priorities Act''.

SEC. 202. EXTENSION FOR SPECIAL DIABETES PROGRAMS.

 (a) Special Diabetes Program for Type I Diabetes.--Section 
330B(b)(2)(D) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-
2(b)(2)(D)) is amended by striking ``2018 and 2019'' and inserting 
``2018, 2019, and 2020''.
 (b) Special Diabetes Program for Indians.--Section 330C(c)(2)(D) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-3(c)(2)(D)) is amended by 
striking ``2018 and 2019'' and inserting ``2018, 2019, and 2020''.

SEC. 203. EXTENSION FOR FAMILY-TO-FAMILY HEALTH INFORMATION CENTERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 501(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 701(c)(1)(A)(vii)) is amended by striking ``2018 and 2019'' and 
inserting ``2018, 2019, and 2020''.
 (b) Conforming Change.--Section 501(c)(3)(C) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 701(c)(3)(C)) is amended by striking ``2018 and 2019'' 
and inserting ``2018, 2019, and 2020''.

SEC. 204. EXTENSION FOR SEXUAL RISK AVOIDANCE EDUCATION AND PERSONAL 
 RESPONSIBILITY EDUCATION.

 (a) Sexual Risk Avoidance Education.--Subsections (a) and (f) of 
section 510 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 710) are amended by 
striking ``2018 and 2019'' each place it appears and inserting ``2018, 
2019, and 2020''.
 (b) Personal Responsibility Education.--Section 513 of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 713) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking ``2019'' and 
 inserting ``2020''; and
 (2) in subsection (a)(4), by striking ``2019'' each place 
 it appears and inserting ``2020''; and
 (3) in subsection (f), by striking ``2019'' and inserting 
 ``2020''.
 <all>