S 2063 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 2063
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to require cable television operators
to provide notice and options to consumers regarding the use of converter
boxes, remote control devices, and multiport technology.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
November 26 (legislative day, NOVEMBER 23), 1991
Mr. LEAHY introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to require cable television operators
to provide notice and options to consumers regarding the use of converter
boxes, remote control devices, and multiport technology.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. NOTICE AND OPTIONS TO CONSUMERS REGARDING CABLE READY EQUIPMENT.
 The Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) is amended by adding
 after section 624 the following new section:
`SEC. 624A. NOTICE AND OPTIONS TO CONSUMERS REGARDING CABLE READY EQUIPMENT.
 `(a) SHORT TITLE- This section may be cited as the `Cable Ready Equipment
 Act of 1991'.
 `(b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 `(1) the use of converter boxes to receive cable television may disable
 certain features of cable ready televisions and VCRs, including, for example,
 the ability to--
 `(A) watch a program on one channel while simultaneously using a VCR to
 tape a different program on another channel;
 `(B) use a VCR to tape two consecutive programs that appear on different
 channels; or
 `(C) use certain special features of a television such as a `picture in
 a picture' feature; and
 `(2) cable operators should, to the fullest extent possible, employ
 technology that allows cable television subscribers to enjoy the full
 benefit of the features available on cable ready televisions and VCRs.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 `(1) The term `cable ready', when used to describe a television or VCR, means
 that the television or VCR is equipped with adequate channel capacity to
 receive the service offered by cable operators without the use of a converter
 box, except insofar as a converter box is needed to decode scrambled signals.
 `(2) The term `Commission' means the Federal Communications Commission.
 `(3) The term `converter box' means a device that--
 `(A) allows televisions that are not cable ready to receive the service
 offered by cable operators; and
 `(B) decodes signals that cable operators deliver to subscribers in
 scrambled form.
 `(4) The term `multiport' means an apparatus that is built into a television
 according to the EIA/ANSI 563 standard, or any successor standard accepted
 by the Commission, into which is fitted a cable system decoder that performs
 only a descrambling function, while other functions, such as tuning and
 remote control, are carried out by the television.
 `(5) The term `VCR' means a videocassette recorder.
 `(d) SCRAMBLED SIGNALS- Cable operators shall not scramble or otherwise
 encrypt any signal that is offered as part of basic cable service, as that
 term is defined in section 602(2).
 `(e) CONVERTER BOXES- Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this
 section, the Commission shall promulgate regulations requiring a cable
 operator offering channels the reception of which requires a converter
 box to--
 `(1) notify a subscriber that if a subscriber's cable service is delivered
 through a converter box, rather than delivered directly to the subscriber's
 cable ready television or VCR, the subscriber may be unable to enjoy
 certain features of his television or VCR, including the ability to--
 `(A) watch a program on one channel while simultaneously using a VCR to
 tape a different program on another channel;
 `(B) use a VCR to tape two consecutive programs that appear on different
 channels; or
 `(C) use certain special features of the subscriber's television such as a
 `picture in a picture' feature;
 `(2) offer any subscriber with a cable ready television who does not receive
 channels the reception of which requires a converter box, the option of
 having his cable service installed, or reinstalled, at the cable operator's
 expense, by direct hookup to the subscriber's television or VCR; and
 `(3) offer any subscriber with a cable ready television who receives or
 wishes to receive channels the reception of which requires a converter
 box, the option of having his cable service installed, or reinstalled,
 at the cable operator's expense, in such a way that those channels whose
 reception does not require a converter box are delivered directly to the
 subscriber's television or VCR.
 `(f) REMOTE CONTROL DEVICES- Within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Commission shall promulgate regulations relating to
 the use of remote control devices that shall--
 `(1) require a cable operator who offers subscribers the option of renting
 a remote control unit--
 `(A) to notify subscribers that they may purchase from any source a remote
 control device rather than renting it; and
 `(B) to specify the types of remote control units that are compatible with
 the converter box supplied by the cable operator; and
 `(2) prohibit a cable operator from taking any action that prevents or
 in any way disables the converter box supplied by the cable operator from
 operating compatibly with commercially available remote control units.
 `(g) MULTIPORT TECHNOLOGY- Within 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this section, the Commission shall promulgate regulations relating to the
 installation of multiport technology on new televisions and the supplying
 by cable operators of descrambling units that are compatible with such
 technology. Such regulations shall require that--
 `(1) all televisions with a picture screen of 13 inches or greater in
 size sold in the United States on or after the earliest feasible date to
 be fixed by the Commission, shall be equipped with multiport technology;
 `(2) no later than the date fixed by the Commission in paragraph (1),
 a cable operator who provides channels the reception of which requires
 the use of a converter box shall, for a subscriber who receives or wishes
 to receive such channels and who owns a cable ready television equipped
 with multiport technology, offer to replace the converter box at the cable
 operator's expense, with a descrambling unit that is compatible with the
 multiport technology; and
 `(3) an offer made pursuant to paragraph (2) to replace a converter box with
 a descrambling unit shall fully inform the subscriber that the use of the
 descrambling unit will enable the subscriber to enjoy features available on
 a cable ready television and any VCR that is connected to the television.'.