HR 1916 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 1916
To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to establish Federal standards
for long-term care insurance policies.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 17, 1991
Mr. WYDEN (for himself, Mrs. COLLINS of Illinois, Mr. ROYBAL, Mr. MARKEY,
Mr. RANGEL, Mr. BEREUTER, and Mr. MCCLOSKEY) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
May 19, 1992
Additional sponsors: Mr. DEFAZIO, Mr. ESPY, Mr. VENTO, Mr. BACCHUS,
Mr. JOHNSTON of Florida, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. SERRANO, Ms. PELOSI, Mrs. UNSOELD,
Mr. VOLKMER, Mr. WHEAT, Mr. ABERCROMBIE, Ms. MOLINARI, Mr. HUTTO, Mr. CONDIT,
Mr. JEFFERSON, Mr. TAUZIN, Mr. FISH, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mrs. BOXER,
Mr. DIXON, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. KILDEE, Ms. DELAURO, Ms. SLAUGHTER,
Mr. KOSTMAYER, Mr. SAXTON, Mr. FROST, Mr. CARPER, Mr. STUDDS, Ms. KAPTUR,
Mr. COX of Illinois, Mr. PETERSON of Minnesota, Mr. YATES, Mr. SANDERS,
Mr. TOWNS, Mr. RINALDO, Mr. LIPINSKI, Mr. TORRICELLI, Mrs. MINK, Ms. SNOWE,
Mrs. MORELLA, Mr. WISE, and Ms. Horn
Deleted sponsor: Mr. ZELIFF (added July 30, 1991; deleted January 3, 1992)
A BILL
To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to establish Federal standards
for long-term care insurance policies.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Long-Term Care Insurance Consumer Protection
 Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE
POLICIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XIX of the Social Security Act is amended by adding
 at the end the following new section:
`LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS
 `SEC. 1931. (a) Implementation of Policy Standards-
 `(1) In general-
 `(A) NEW ISSUES- No long-term care insurance policy (as defined in subsection
 (i)) may be issued, sold, or offered for sale in a State on or after the
 date specified in paragraph (4) unless--
 `(i) the Secretary determines that the State has established a regulatory
 program that--
 `(I) provides for the application and enforcement of the standards
 established under paragraph (3), and
 `(II) complies with the requirements of paragraph (5),
by the date specified in paragraph (4), and the policy has been approved by
the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance under such program; or
 `(ii) if the State has not established such a program, the policy has
 been certified by the Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the
 Secretary establishes) as meeting the standards established under paragraph
 (3).
For purposes of this paragraph, the advertising or soliciting with respect
to a policy, directly or indirectly, shall be deemed the offering for sale
of the policy.
 `(B) REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The Secretary periodically shall
 review regulatory programs described in subparagraph (A)(i) to determine
 if they continue to provide for the application and enforcement of the
 standards established under paragraph (3).
 `(2) SANCTIONS- Any person who issues or renews a policy, on or after
 the date specified in paragraph (4), in violation of paragraph (1), is
 subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $25,000 for each such
 violation. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence
 of subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil
 money penalty under this paragraph in the same manner as such provisions
 apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(3) Promulgation of standards-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If, within 12 months after the date of the enactment
 of this section, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
 (in this section referred to as the `NAIC') promulgates model standards
 that incorporate the requirements of subsections (d) through (h), such
 standards shall apply under paragraph (1).
 `(B) DEFAULT- If the NAIC does not promulgate the model standards under
 subparagraph (A) by the deadline established in that paragraph, the Secretary
 shall promulgate, within 12 months after such deadline, a regulation that
 provides standards that incorporate the requirements of subsections (d)
 through (h) and such standards shall be applied under paragraph (1).
 `(C) CONSULTATION- In establishing standards under this paragraph, the NAIC
 or Secretary shall consult with a working group composed of representatives
 of issuers of long-term care insurance policies, consumer groups, and other
 qualified individuals. Such representatives shall be selected in a manner
 so as to assure balanced representation among the interested groups.
 `(D) RELATION TO STATE LAW- Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 preventing a State from applying standards that provide greater protection
 to policyholders of long-term care insurance policies.
 `(4) DEADLINE FOR APPLICATION OF STANDARDS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), the date specified in this
 paragraph for a State is--
 `(i) the date the State adopts the standards established under paragraph
 (3), or
 `(ii) 1 year after the date such standards are first established,
whichever is earlier.
 `(B) STATE REQUIRING LEGISLATION- In the case of a State which the Secretary
 identifies, in consultation with the NAIC, as--
 `(i) requiring State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds)
 in order for the standards established under paragraph (3) to be applied, but
 `(ii) having a legislature which is not scheduled to meet in 1993 in a
 legislative session in which such legislation may be considered,
the date specified in this paragraph is the first day of the first calendar
quarter beginning after the close of the first legislative session of the
State legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1993. For purposes of
the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative
session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular
session of the State legislature.
 `(5) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS-
 For purposes of paragraph (1)(A)(i)(II), the requirements of this paragraph
 for a State regulatory program are as follows:
 `(A) CONSUMER ACCESS TO COMPLIANCE INFORMATION-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The program must provide for consumer access to complaints
 filed with the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance with
 respect to long-term care insurance policies.
 `(ii) CONFIDENTIALITY- The access provided under clause (i) shall be limited
 to the extent required to protect the confidentiality of the identity of
 individual policyholders.
 `(B) ACCESS TO OTHER INFORMATION- The program must provide for consumer
 access to information reported under subsection (c)(4).
 `(C) PROCESS FOR APPROVAL OF PREMIUMS- The program must provide for a
 process for approving or disapproving proposed premium increases with
 respect to long-term care insurance policies and must establish a policy
 for the holding of public hearings prior to approval of such a premium
 increase. No such premium increase shall be approved (or deemed approved)
 unless the proposed increase is accompanied by an actuarial memorandum
 which supports the increase and which contains such information as may be
 required under the standards under subsection (a)(3).
 `(b) REGULATION OF SALES PRACTICES-
 `(1) DUTY OF GOOD FAITH AND FAIR DEALING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each individual who is selling or offering for sale
 a long-term care insurance policy has the duty of good faith and fair
 dealing to the purchaser or potential purchaser of such a policy.
 `(B) PROHIBITED PRACTICES- An individual is considered to have violated
 subparagraph (A) if the individual engages in any of the following practices:
 `(i) TWISTING- Knowingly making any misleading representation or incomplete
 or fraudulent comparison of any health care insurance policy or insurers
 for the purpose of inducing, or tending to induce, any person to retain
 or effect a change with respect to a long-term care insurance policy.
 `(ii) HIGH PRESSURE TACTICS- Employing any method of marketing having the
 effect of, or intending to, induce the purchase of long-term care insurance
 policy through undue pressure.
 `(iii) COLD LEAD ADVERTISING- Making use directly or indirectly of any
 method of marketing which fails to disclose in a conspicuous manner that
 a purpose of the method of marketing is solicitation of insurance and that
 contact will be made by an insurance agent or insurance company.
 `(2) COMPLETION OF MEDICAL HISTORIES PROHIBITED- A person who is selling
 or offering for sale a long-term care insurance policy may not complete
 the medical history portion of an application.
 `(3) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE TO MEDICAID BENEFICIARIES- A person
 may not knowingly sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy to an
 individual who is eligible for medical assistance (other than only as a
 qualified medicare beneficiary) under this title.
 `(4) PROHIBITION OF SALE OR ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE SERVICE BENEFIT POLICIES-
 A person may not sell or issue a service-benefit long-term care insurance
 policy--
 `(A) knowing that the policy provides for coverage that duplicates coverage
 already provided in another service-benefit long-term care insurance policy
 (unless the policy is intended to replace such other policy), or
 `(B) for the benefit of an individual unless the individual (or
 a representative of the individual) provides a written statement to
 the effect that the coverage (i) does not duplicate other coverage in
 effect under a service-benefit long-term care insurance policy or (ii)
 will replace another service-benefit long-term care insurance policy.
In this paragraph, the term `service-benefit long-term care insurance policy'
means a long-term care insurance policy which provides for benefits based
on the amount of expenses incurred, rather than on an indemnity basis.
 `(5) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- No person may sell or offer for a
 sale a long-term care insurance policy without providing to the purchaser
 or potential purchaser (or representative) an outline of coverage that
 complies with the standards established under subsection (a)(3).
 `(6) INFORMATION ON FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH GROUPS- No person may sell or
 offer for sale a long-term care insurance policy with respect to a member
 of an organization with which the person (or the issuer of the policy)
 has a financial arrangement of any type unless the person discloses (in
 accordance with standards established under subsection (a)(3)) the nature
 of the financial arrangement.
 `(7) PENALTIES- Any person who sells, offers for sale, or issues a long-term
 care insurance policy in violation of this subsection may be imprisoned not
 more than 5 years, or fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code,
 and, in addition, is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed
 $25,000 for each such violation. The provisions of section 1128A (other
 than the first sentence of subsection (a) and other than subsection (b))
 shall apply to a civil money penalty under this paragraph in the same manner
 as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(c) ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF ISSUERS-
 `(1) REFUND OF PREMIUMS- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care insurance policy)
 is denied or an applicant returns a policy or certificate within 30 days
 of the date of its issuance pursuant to subsection (h), the issuer shall
 refund to the applicant, not later than 30 days after the date of the
 denial or return, any premiums paid with respect to such a policy.
 `(2) MAILING OF POLICY- If an application for a long-term care insurance
 policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care insurance policy)
 is approved, the issuer shall transmit to the applicant the policy (or
 certificate) of insurance not later than 30 days after the date of the
 approval.
 `(3) INFORMATION ON DENIALS OF CLAIMS- If a claim under a long-term
 care insurance policy is denied, the issuer shall, within 60 days of
 the date of a written request by the policyholder or certificateholder
 (or representative)--
 `(A) provide a written explanation of the reasons for the denial, and
 `(B) make available all information directly relating to such denial.
No claim under such a policy may be denied on the basis of a failure to
disclose a condition at the time of issuance of the policy if the application
for the policy failed to request information respecting the condition.
 `(4) REPORTING OF INFORMATION- The issuer of a long-term care insurance
 policy shall periodically (not less often than annually) report to the
 Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State in which the
 policy is sold, and shall make available to the Secretary, upon request,
 information respecting--
 `(A) the long-term care insurance policies of the issuer that are in force,
 `(B) the most recent premiums for such policies and the premiums imposed
 for such policies during the previous 5-year period,
 `(C) the lapse rates, replacement rates, and rescission rates for policies
 (by agent), and
 `(D) the claims denied (as a percentage of claims submitted) for such
 policies.
Information under this paragraph shall be reported in a format specified
in the standards established under subsection (a)(3) to carry out this
subsection. For purposes of subparagraph (C), there shall not be included
as a lapse of policy such a lapse due to the death of the policyholder. For
purposes of subparagraph (D), there shall not be included as a denied claim
that is denied solely because of the failure to meet a deductible, waiting
period, or exclusionary period.
 `(5) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- Each such issuer shall provide the Secretary
 and the Commissioner or superintendent of insurance of each State in
 which the policy is sold such information as the Secretary, Commissioner,
 or superintendent, may request.
 `(6) PROVISION OF OUTLINE OF COVERAGE FOR RENEWALS- Each issuer of a
 long-term care insurance policy shall provide, at the time of renewal of
 such a policy, an outline of coverge that meets the applicable standards
 established pursuant to this section.
 `(7) MEDICAL ASSESSMENTS FOR THE ELDERLY- Before issuing a long-term care
 insurance policy to an applicant who is 75 years of age or older, if the
 policy is not guaranteed issue the issuer shall obtain one of the following:
 `(A) A report of a physical examination.
 `(B) An assessment of functional capacity.
 `(C) Copies of medical records.
 `(8) Limits on compensation for sale of policies-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The issuer of a long-term care insurance policy may
 not provide a commission or other compensation to an agent or other
 representative for the sale of such a policy in an amount that exceeds
 200 percent of the commission or other compensation paid for selling or
 servicing such a policy in the second or subsequent year.
 `(B) COMPENSATION DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `compensation'
 includes pecuniary or nonpecuniary remuneration of any kind relating to
 the sale or renewal of the policy or certification, including deferred
 compensation, bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders fees.
 `(9) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- Any issuer of a long-term care insurance policy
 who--
 `(A) fails to make a refund in accordance with paragraph (1),
 `(B) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with paragraph (2),
 `(C) fails to provide, make available, or report information in accordance
 with paragraph (3), (4), or (5),
 `(D) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation of paragraph
 (6), or
 `(E) issues a policy without obtaining certain information in violation
 of paragraph (7), or
 `(F) provides a commission or compensation in violation of paragraph (8),
is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $25,000 for each such
violation. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of
subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money
penalty under this paragraph in the same manner as such provisions apply to
a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(d) Requirements Relating to Renewability-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No long-term care insurance policy may be canceled or
 nonrenewed for any reason other than nonpayment of premium or material
 misrepresentation.
 `(2) Continuation and conversion rights for group policies-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each group long-term care insurance policy shall provide
 covered individuals with a basis for continuation or conversion in accordance
 with this paragraph.
 `(B) BASIS FOR CONTINUATION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for continuation of coverage if the policy maintains
 coverage under the existing group policy when such coverage would otherwise
 terminate and which is subject only to the continued timely payment of
 premium when due. A group policy which restricts provision of benefits and
 services to or contains incentives to use certain providers or facility,
 may provide continuation benefits which are substantially equivalent to
 the benefits of the existing group policy.
 `(C) BASIS FOR CONVERSION- For purposes of subparagraph (A), a policy
 provides a basis for conversion of coverage if the policy entitles each
 individual--
 `(i) whose coverage under the group policy would otherwise be terminated
 for any reason, and
 `(ii) who has been continuously insured under the policy (or group policy
 which was replaced) for at least 6 months before the date of the termination,
to issuance of a policy providing benefits identical to, substantially
equivalent to, or in excess of, those of the policy being terminated,
without evidence of insurability.
 `(D) TREATMENT OF SUBSTANTIAL EQUIVALENCE- In determining under this
 paragraph whether benefits are substantially equivalent, there shall be
 taken into consideration the difference between managed care and non-managed
 care plans.
 `(E) GROUP REPLACEMENT OF POLICIES- If a group long-term care insurance
 policy is replaced by another long-term care insurance policy purchased
 by the same policyholder, the succeeding issuer shall offer coverage
 to all persons covered under the old group policy on its date of
 termination. Coverage under the new group policy shall not result in any
 exclusion for preexisting conditions that would have been covered under
 the group policy being replaced.
 `(3) UPGRADE FOR CURRENT POLICIES- Each long-term care insurance policy
 in effect as of the effective date of the standards established under
 subsection (a)(3) shall permit the policyholder to purchase a policy that
 meets all such standards. In offering such a policy, the issuer may impose
 additional underwriting restrictions only for benefits not held under the
 previously issued policy.
 `(e) BENEFIT STANDARDS-
 `(1) USE OF STANDARD DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY AND UNIFORM FORMAT- Each
 long-term care insurance policy shall, pursuant to standards established
 under subsection (a)(3)--
 `(A) use uniform language and definitions, and
 `(B) use a uniform format for presenting the outline of coverage under
 such a policy.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE-
 `(A) OUTLINE OF COVERAGE- The outline of coverage for each long-term care
 insurance policy shall include at least the following:
 `(i) A description of the principal benefits and coverage under the policy.
 `(ii) A statement of the principal exclusions, reductions, and limitations
 contained in the policy.
 `(iii) A statement of the terms under which the policy (or certificate)
 may be continued in force or discontinued, the terms for continuation or
 conversion, and any reservation in the policy of a right to change premiums.
 `(iv) A statement that the outline of coverage is a summary only, not a
 contract of insurance, and that the policy (or master policy) contains
 the contractual provisions that govern.
 `(v) A statement of the value of the policy (determined in accordance with
 standard established to carry out this subparagraph).
 `(vii) A description of the terms, specified in subsection (h), under
 which a policy or certificate may be returned and premium refunded.
 `(viii) Information on national average costs for nursing facility and
 home health care and information (in graphic form) on the relationship
 of the value of the benefits provided under the policy to such national
 average costs.
 `(ix) A statement of the percentage limit on annual premium increases that
 is provided under the policy pursuant to paragraph (8).
 `(x) Information (in graphic form) on the projected effect of inflation
 on the value of benefits provided under the policy during a period of at
 least 20 years.
 `(B) CERTIFICATES- A certificate issued pursuant to a group long-term care
 insurance policy shall include--
 `(i) a description of the principal benefits and coverage provided in
 the policy;
 `(ii) a statement of the principal exclusions, reductions, and limitations
 contained in the policy; and
 `(iii) A statement that the group master policy determines governing
 contractual provisions.
 `(C) LONG-TERM CARE AS PART OF LIFE INSURANCE- In the case of a long-term
 care insurance policy issued as a part of or a rider on a life insurance
 policy, at the time of policy delivery there shall be provided a policy
 summary that includes--
 `(i) an explanation of how the long-term care benefits interact with other
 components of the policy (including deductions from death benefits);
 `(ii) an illustration of the amount of benefits, the length of benefit,
 and the guaranteed lifetime benefits (if any) for each covered person; and
 `(iii) any exclusions, reductions, and limitations on benefits of long-term
 care.
 `(3) Limiting conditions on benefits; minimum benefits-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A long-term care insurance policy may not condition or
 limit eligibility--
 `(i) for benefits for a type of services to the need for or receipt of
 any other services,
 `(ii) for any noninstitutional benefit on the medical necessity for such
 benefit,
 `(iii) for benefits furnished by licensed providers on compliance with
 conditions which are in addition to those required for licensure under
 State law, or
 `(iv) for custodial care (if covered under the policy) only (I) to care
 provided in facilities which provide a higher level of care or (II) to
 care provided in facilities which provide for 24-hour or other nursing
 care not required in order to be licensed by the State.
 `(B) HOME HEALTH CARE SERVICES- If a long-term care insurance policy
 provides benefits for home health care services, the policy--
 `(i) may not limit such benefits to services provided by registered nurses
 or licensed practical nurses;
 `(ii) may not require benefits for such services to be provided by a nurse
 or therapist that can be provided by a home health aide or other licensed
 or certified home care worker acting within the scope of the worker's
 licensure or certification;
 `(iii) may not limit such benefits to services provided by agencies or
 providers certified under title XVIII; and
 `(iv) must provide benefits for custodial care, personal care services
 (including home health aide and homemaker services), home health services,
 and respite care in an individual's home.
 `(C) NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- If a long-term care insurance policy
 provides benefits for nursing facility services, the policy must provide
 such benefits with respect to all nursing facilities (as defined in section
 1919(a)) in the State.
 `(D) MINIMUM PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Each long-term care insurance policy
 shall provide benefits over a period of at least 12 consecutive months.
 `(4) PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION- A long-term care insurance policy
 may not treat benefits under the policy in the case of an individual with
 Alzheimer's disease, with any related progressive degenerative dementia
 of an organic origin, or with any organic or inorganic mental illness
 differently from an individual having another medical condition for which
 benefits may be made available.
 `(5) Limitation on use of preexisting condition limits-
 `(A) Initial issuance-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), a long-term care insurance policy
 may not exclude or condition benefits based on a medical condition for which
 the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed before the
 issuance of the policy.
 `(ii) 6-MONTH LIMIT- A long-term care insurance policy may exclude benefits
 under a policy, during its first 6 months, based on a condition for which
 the policyholder received treatment or was otherwise diagnosed during the
 6 months before the policy became effective.
 `(B) REPLACEMENT POLICIES- If a long-term care insurance policy replaces
 another long-term care insurance policy, the issuer of the replacing policy
 shall waive any time periods applicable to preexisting conditions, waiting
 period, elimination periods and probationary periods in the new policy for
 similar benefits to the extent such time was spent under the original policy.
 `(6) Use of functional assessment-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each long-term care insurance policy--
 `(i) shall determine eligibility for, and level of, benefits (other than
 for nursing facility services) available under the policy based on a
 professional assessment of the policyholder's functional ability, and
 `(ii) shall specify the level (or levels) of functional impairment required
 under such an assessment to obtain benefits other than for nursing facility
 services) under the policy.
Such assessment may not be conducted by an individual who has a direct or
indirect ownership or control interest, or direct or indirect affiliation or
relationship with, the issuer of the policy or an entity that provides services
for which benefits are available under the long-term care insurance policy.
 `(B) APPEALS PROCESS- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide for
 an appeals process, meeting standards established under this subsection,
 for individuals who dispute the results of an assessment conducted under
 this paragraph.
 `(7) INFLATION PROTECTION- Each long-term care insurance policy shall
 provide, at the time of each annual renewal, for an increase of a specified
 percentage (but not less than 5 percent) in the dollar payment levels and
 the maximum payment limit on benefit coverage above the levels or limit
 in effect during the previous policy year. In applying this paragraph,
 the increases shall be compounded annually and the policy may provide for
 rounding such an increase to the nearest multiple of $1 (in the case of
 dollar payment levels) or $100 (in the case of the maximum payment limit).
 `(8) SPECIFICATION OF LIMITS ON PREMIUM INCREASES- Each long-term care
 insurance policy shall specify a limit on the percentage increase in
 premiums for a policy that may be made in any between one policy year and
 the subsequent policy year.
 `(f) NONFORFEITURE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each long-term care insurance policy shall provide that if
 the policy lapses after the policy has been in effect for a minimum period
 (specified under the standards under subsection (a)(3)), the policy will
 provide without payment of any additional premiums benefits equal to--
 `(A) a percentage (specified under such standards) of the benefits otherwise
 available at term, or
 `(B) such other type of benefits as such standards may provide.
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS- The standards under subsection (a)(3)--
 `(A) may not provide more than 2 additional types of benefits under paragraph
 (1)(B), and
 `(B) may provide that the percentage or amount of benefits under paragraph
 (1) must increase based upon the period of time in which the policy was
 in effect.
 `(g) LIMIT OF PERIOD OF CONTESTABILITY- The issuer of a long-term care
 insurance policy may not cancel such a policy or deny a claim under the
 policy based on fraud or misrepresentation relating to the issuance of
 the policy unless notice of such fraud or misrepresentation is provided
 within 6 months after the date of the issuance of the policy.
 `(h) RIGHT TO RETURN (FREE LOOK)- Each applicant for a long-term care
 insurance policy shall have the right to return the policy (or certificate)
 within 30 days of the date of its delivery (and to have the premium refunded)
 if, after examination of the policy or certificate, the applicant is not
 satisfied for any reason.
 `(i) LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this section, except as otherwise provided in this
 subsection, the term `long-term care insurance policy' means any insurance
 policy, certificate, or rider advertised, marketed, offered, or designed to
 provide coverage for each covered person on an expense incurred, indemnity,
 prepaid, or other basis, for one or more diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic,
 rehabilitative, maintenance or personal care services, provided in a
 setting other than an acute care unit of a hospital. Such term includes
 a group or individual annuity or life insurance policy or rider which
 provides directly (or which supplements) long-term care insurance.
 `(2) POLICIES EXCLUDED- Except as provided in paragraph (4), the term
 `long-term care insurance policy' does not include any medicare supplemental
 policy (as defined in section 1882(g)) and any insurance which is offered
 primarily to provide--
 `(A) basic hospital expense coverage, basic medical-surgical expense
 coverage, hospital confinement indemnity coverage, or major medical
 expense coverage,
 `(B) disability income or related asset-protection coverage,
 `(C) accident only coverage,
 `(D) specified disease or specified accident coverage, or
 `(E) limited benefit health coverage.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES- Except as provided in
 paragraph (4), the term `long-term care insurance policy' does not include
 life insurance policies--
 `(A) which accelerate the death benefit specifically for--
 `(i) one or more of the qualifying events of terminal illness,
 `(ii) medical conditions requiring extraordinary medical intervention, or
 `(iii) permanent institutional confinement;
 `(B) which provide the option of a lump-sum payment for those benefits; and
 `(C) in which neither the benefits nor the eligibility for the benefits
 is conditioned upon the receipt of long-term care.
 `(4) INCLUSION OF POLICIES MARKETED AS LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE- The term
 `long-term care insurance policy' also means any product which is advertised,
 marketed, or offered as long-term care insurance.'.
 (b) STATE MEDICAID REQUIREMENT FOR REGULATORY PROGRAM- Section 1902(a)
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (54);
 (2) in the paragraph (55) inserted by section 4602(a)(3) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking the period at the end and
 inserting a semicolon;
 (3) by redesignating the paragraph (55) inserted by section 4604(b)(3) of the
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (56), by transferring
 and inserting it after the paragraph (55) inserted by section 4602(a)(3)
 of such Act, and by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (4) by placing paragraphs (57) and (58), inserted by section 4751(a)(1)(C)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, immediately after paragraph
 (56), as redesignated by paragraph (3);
 (5) in the paragraph (58) inserted by section 4751(a)(1)(C) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking the period at the end and
 inserting a semicolon;
 (6) by redesignating the paragraph (58) inserted by section 4752(c)(1)(C)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (59),
 by transferring and inserting it after the paragraph (58) inserted by
 section 4751(a)(1)(C) of such Act, and by striking the period at the end
 and inserting `; and'; and
 (7) by inserting after paragraph (59), as so redesignated, the following
 new paragraph:
 `(60) establish, by the date specified in section 1931(a)(4), a
 State regulatory program, that meets the requirements of section
 1931(a)(1)(A)(i).'.
 (c) DENIAL OF MEDICAID FUNDS FOR FAILURE TO ESTABLISH REGULATORY PROGRAM-
 Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)) is amended--
 (1) in the paragraph (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking all that follows `1927(g)'
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (2) by redesignating the paragraph (10) added by section 4701(b)(2) as
 paragraph (11), by transferring and inserting it after the paragraph (10)
 inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, and by striking all that follows `with respect to hospitals
 or facilities' and inserting a semicolon;
 (3) by transferring and inserting the paragraph (12) inserted by section
 4752(a)(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 after paragraph
 (11), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), and by striking the period at
 the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (4) by redesignating the paragraph (14) inserted by section 4752(e)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (13), by
 transferring and inserting it after paragraph (12), and by striking the
 period at the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (5) by redesignating the paragraph (11) inserted by section 4801(e)(16)(A)
 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (14), by
 transferring and inserting it after paragraph (13), and by striking the
 period at the end and inserting `; or'; and
 (6) by inserting after paragraph (14), as so redesignated, the following
 new paragraph.
 `(15) with respect to any amount expended for medical assistance for
 nursing facility services (furnished on and after the date specified in
 section 1931(a)(4)) during such period as the state has failed to establish
 and maintain a regulatory program that meets the requirements of section
 1931(a)(1)(A)(i).'.
 (d) REPORT ON ASSESSMENT METHODS FOR FUNCTIONAL ABILITY- Within 2 years
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall submit to Congress a report on the different methods
 that may be used to conduct assessments of functional ability described
 in section 1931(e)(6)(A) of the Social Security Act (including the methods
 used under section 1929(c) of such Act) and the relative effectiveness of
 each of such methods.
 (e) REPORT ON SOLVENCY PROTECTION- Within 2 years after the date of the
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 submit to Congress a report on standards that may be applied to assure
 the solvency of insurers with respect to long-term care insurance policies.
 (f) STUDY OF STANDARD MEASURE OF VALUE FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE
 POLICIES- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for a
 study to develop a standard measure of value for long-term care insurance
 policies. Within 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on such study.
SEC. 3. FUNDING FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE INFORMATION, COUNSELING,
AND ASSISTANCE.
 There are authorized to be appropriated to provide information, counseling,
 and assistance relating to the procurement of adequate and appropriate
 long-term care insurance, $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1993, 1994,
 and 1995.